Are mental states nonlocal?
Ovidiu Cristinel Stoica
Dept.
of Theoretical Physics, NIPNE—HH, Bucharest, Romania.
Email: cristi.stoica@theory.nipne.ro, holotronix@gmail.com
(Dated: January 7, 2021)
I show that if mental states are function of physical states, then they are nonlocal, in a sense
that will be explained. I argue that, if mental states are reducible to brain physics, and if they are
integrated experiences, this nonlocality implies that Classical Physics is not enough, in particular
the computationalist thesis does not hold. I illustrate the argument with a thought experiment.
The proof of nonlocality is straightforward and general, but the result is counterintuitive, so I spend
a large part of the article discussing possible objections, alternatives, and implications. I discuss
the possibility that Quantum Physics allows this kind of nonlocality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modern Science can be seen as the quest to reduce
all natural phenomena to explanations based on micro-
physics. This position emerged because progress in Sci-
ence often coincided with new reductionist explanations.
By inductive and reductionist arguments one expects
that all mental processes will eventually be reduced to
microphysics [21, 25, 26, 42, 65].
There are probably
as many views on what mental states are as there are
authors, so I will not even attempt to elucidate this or
give a deﬁnition that would satisfy everybody. I will fo-
cus on physicalist or materialist approaches, that claim
to reduce mind to physics or matter. Various types of
physicalism include functionalism, behaviorism, compu-
tationalism etc.
The general, common feature of all physicalist ap-
proaches, can be summarized as the following:
Claim R (of physicalism). Mental processes reduce to
and are determined by brain physics.1
The apparent lack of essential contribution from quan-
tum eﬀects in the brain’s functionality motivated many
researchers to consider as true the following strengthen-
ing of Claim R,
Claim R+ (of classical physicalism). Mental processes
reduce to Classical Physics (in the sense that Quantum
Physics is not relevant for the mental processes).
Logical, but also informal thinking, as well as the func-
tional description of the mental processes, can be mod-
eled computationally, as information processing, neural
network processing, machine learning etc. For this rea-
son, probably most researchers take as true an even
stronger claim [26, 33, 54, 62, 65–67, 79, 81],
1 Throughout this paper I will approximate the physical support
of the mind with the brain, although it is known that other parts
of the body play important role, e.g. the enteric nervous system.
The position of externalism with regard to mental content con-
sider that mental states require the environment too (see Reply
1), so in this case we can include it as well.
Claim R++ (of classical computationalism). Mental
processes reduce to classical computing.2
In this article, I argue that mental states have a prop-
erty that is not present in the physical states supposed
to ground them. The diﬀerence is that mental states are
integrated, or uniﬁed experiences, in a sense in which
classical physical states are not.
I will show that if we assume physicalism and that
mental states are integrated experiences (cf. Observation
3), then mental states are nonlocal, in the sense that they
depend instantaneously on spacelike separated events.
Since this nonlocality seems diﬀerent from other forms
of nonlocality encountered in physics, I will call it O-
nonlocality (cf. Deﬁnition 5).
We will see that O-nonlocality seems to be in tension
with relativistic locality, which grounds the very causality
of physical processes. I will argue that O-nonlocality is
not supported by Classical Physics, contradicting Claims
R+ and R++. Therefore, this is a problem that has to
be addressed by any physicalist program that aims to
include the mental processes.
O-nonlocality suggests a sense in which a mental state
is more than the sum of its parts, if these parts are the lo-
cal physical quantities at each point in the relevant region
of space. This may seem as preventing the reduction-
ism of mental processes to physical ones. On the other
hand, O-nonlocality is strikingly similar to quantum en-
tanglement (entanglement is not nonlocality per se, but it
encodes nonlocal correlations that can be objectively ac-
cessed only by measurements). Therefore, O-nonlocality
may still be consistent with the physicalist Claim R, if
we allow for quantum eﬀects.
While the proof is very simple, even tautological, its
implications may be counterintuitive, so I start by de-
scribing a thought experiment that may bring more in-
tuition in Sec. §II. The more formal proof, given in Sec.
2 While it is possible to computationally simulate with any desired
approximation both classical and quantum systems, Claims R+
and R++ are not considered by all researchers to be the same,
some insisting that the biological substrate is essential for con-
sciousness [70].
arXiv:2010.03389v3  [physics.hist-ph]  6 Jan 2021

2
§III, is independent of the fundamental theory of the mi-
crophysical level. In Sec. §IV I argue that the best option
is Quantum Physics, and analyze the soundness of this
identiﬁcation. In Sec. §V I discuss possible implications
of these results. In Appendix §A I try to anticipate and
address possible objections. In Appendix §B I explore
possible alternative ways out.
II.
THE THOUGHT EXPERIMENT
The proof, given in Sec.
§III, is pretty straightfor-
ward. But since its conclusion may be counterintuitive to
the reader trained to project mental states on computer
states or physical states in general, let us ﬁrst consider
the argument in a thought experiment that should make
its essential points clearer, and bring an intuition of what
kind of nonlocality I am talking about. For this, I will
amplify the elements of the argument to a cosmic scale.
In §II A I discuss a version of the thought experiment
which assumes Claim R++. Claim R++ is stronger than
Claim R+, but it simpliﬁes the argument showing that
mental states involve a certain kind of nonlocality. An-
other reason to focus separately on Claim R++ is that it
is supported by various researchers.
Then, in §II B, I propose and discuss a version of the
thought experiment which involves a biological brain, sat-
isfying the more general Claim R+.
A.
The cosmic computer thought experiment
Consider a hypothetical classical computer supporting
mental states. Let us spread its components throughout
our galaxy, or even across more galaxies, by placing each
one of them on a separate space station orbiting a diﬀer-
ent star. Suppose we also arrange that the space stations
storing these small parts exchange electromagnetic sig-
nals across the galaxy, to ensure the ﬂow of information
necessary for the functioning of the computer.
It can be arranged, in principle, that our cosmic com-
puter is fragmented into very small parts, storing or pro-
cessing the smallest numbers of bits each. Two bits on
each star should suﬃce, because any logical gate can be
made of two-bit gates, as explained in Reply 9.
The mental states of this cosmic mind change really
slowly, each bit requiring thousands or maybe millions of
years to be processed. But if we assume that a computer
can have mental states, then it should be possible for
this cosmic contraption to have mental states too. There
should be a mapping of the computer’s states to mental
states.
We can even replace the bits with humans who repre-
sent the bit by wearing or not a hat, and passing the hat
from generation to generation to compensate for their too
short lives compared to the duration of the processing.
We can obtain in this way cosmic versions of the thought
experiments from the Chinese nation argument [14, 23]
or of Searle’s Chinese room argument [69].
But, compared to these well-known arguments, there
is a plot twist here: the aim is to show that mental states
are nonlocal in a certain sense. And if this may not be
so obvious when we are talking about the brain, which
appears to our senses pretty much localized in space, this
cosmic version should, hopefully, make this nonlocality
evident even to the most skeptic readers, because the bits
supporting the mental states are isolated and separated
by spacelike intervals.
Several questions become natural at this point. Does
this cosmic mental process take place continuously, or
only when one of the bits ﬂips its state? Are there mental
states associated to the thousands of years of stagnation
of the bits, time in which electromagnetic signals travel
across the universe from one star to another?
Regardless of the answer to these questions, the cor-
responding mental states are nevertheless nonlocal, in
the sense that any such state depends on bits located
across very distant stars, maybe galaxies apart from one
another, separated by spacelike intervals. Let us make
these problems more obvious.
Classical serial computers process one bit at a time (see
Reply 11). Even if we make the computer parallel, there
still is a central unit that breaks the task into smaller
tasks, and then centralizes the results, and it does so
one bit at a time.
If the mental states are supported
exclusively when the bits are ﬂipped, and if we arrange
that the computer processes one bit at a time, it seems
unlikely for a bit to support complex mental states like
happiness or sadness. So maybe the states of the other
bits matter too, even if they are not ﬂipped right at that
time. But this raises other problems.
Problem 1. If the mental states are supported exclu-
sively by the states of the bits, then how is the instanta-
neous mental state grounded in the conﬁguration of the
bits spread across the galaxy, separated by spacelike inter-
vals? How does this grounding manage to yield a uniﬁed,
integrated, instantaneous mental state, from these appar-
ently disorganized zeroes and ones?
Problem 2. If there are other space stations contain-
ing bits that are not part of the same computer, then
how is the right subset of these bits selected out of them
to ground the instantaneous mental state of our com-
puter, and yield integrated experience? What discrimi-
nates which subset of these bits belong to the computer
that supports this mental state and which do not?
We may hope that if we assume that not only the bit
conﬁguration supports mental states, but also the signals
traveling on their way between diﬀerent space stations,
this would help discriminate the bits from the same con-
ﬁguration, and also help the mental state to integrate the
conﬁguration. But Problems 1 and 2 remain, they only
extend to include the traveling signals.
On top of these problems, we have another one.

3
Problem 3. There is no rule that the bits are stored in a
certain way on the space stations. One can invent com-
plicated contraptions to store the bits as coins on a table,
or in the position of any object on the space station, or in
whatever states any kind of object can have. Important is
to have a way to read and write the bits by analyzing and
rearranging these objects, and there are inﬁnitely many
diﬀerent ways to do this. How is then a mental state able
to emerge out of such a conﬁguration camouﬂaged in such
a way in the state of the universe? If we insist on sup-
porting Claim R++, then there seem to be only a way out:
accept that more possible subsets of the conﬁguration of
the universe support independent potential mental states!
Are diﬀerent possible subsets of the state of the universe
able to support, provided that their instantaneous conﬁg-
uration can be identiﬁed with the state of an appropriate
machine, independent mental states?
These Problems are not necessarily of computation-
alism, but of classical computationalism under the as-
sumption of locality. These arguments do not necessarily
refute quantum computationalism, only the classical one
from Claim R++.
If we assume that mental states exist and are grounded
at every instant in the conﬁguration of the physical state,
then these questions suggest that there must be some-
thing nonlocal about the mental states. The reader who
denies that mental states exist instantaneously can try
to escape the necessity of nonlocality, by assuming that
they have an extended duration.
This possibility will
be discussed, particularly in Objection 12 and Implica-
tion 4. The reader can also deny that mental states even
exist at all, and conclude that therefore the problems
mentioned here don’t exist. This will come in Option 2.
Another way out is the position that one should not dis-
cuss about what we cannot objectively observe, as in Op-
tion 1. There is nothing I can do about these positions.
But for the reader who takes mental states as real and
grounded in the physical state at every instant, I hope
this thought experiment suggest that if we claim that in-
stantaneous mental processes are determined by the com-
putational processes of our cosmic computer, then there
is an essential sense in which these mental states have to
be nonlocal. This is what I mean by O-nonlocality. And
this thought experiment suggests that classicality cannot
accommodate this O-nonlocality.
B.
The biological brain thought experiment
There are several signiﬁcant diﬀerences between how
brains and computers work. Brains employ neural net-
works, but at least artiﬁcial neural networks can be sim-
ulated on Turing-type computers. The brain seems to
be analog, but we can make the case that even if it is
analog, it can be approximated with a digital one to any
desired degree, because what matters is the distinguisha-
bility of the states, which is limited. In addition, Quan-
tum Physics implies that a localized system like the brain
can only have a discrete, or even a ﬁnite number of dis-
tinguishable states, and this is true even if the brain’s
relevant functionality is quasiclassical. These arguments
support the idea that the functionality of the brain can be
simulated on a computer how closely we desire, a version
of the Church-Turing thesis. And if we believe that only
the behavior matters, since the behavior of the mind can
be simulated, the mind should be like a Turing machine.
However, maybe not only the computational or be-
havioral aspects of the brain are relevant for the mental
processes, but also the fact that it is biological, its ma-
terial substrate.
This is could make Claim R++ to be
stronger than Claim R+. So we need to see if we can
make the thought experiment from §II A more general,
by including the material substrate.
A possible way to adapt the cosmic computer thought
experiment to the biological brain is to try to divide the
brain into the smallest units for which the substrate is
important. Maybe it is possible to divide it into neurons,
or maybe into smaller parts of the neurons, which are
made of the relevant substrate. Then, it is conceivable
that we can replace the connections that allow signals to
be exchanged between these parts, and the parts whose
substrate is irrelevant, with other mechanisms that al-
low us to separate them throughout the galaxy, in a way
similar to the cosmic computer thought experiment. But
this requires an understanding of the brain that we do
not currently have.
Another way, which will be used here, is to zoom-in, in
a way similar to Lebniz’s Mill argument. Leibniz imag-
ined zooming-in a brain until one can walk inside of it and
see its machinery like inside a mill [48]. Imagine that we
zoomed-in, so that the brain appears as large as a galaxy.
This would make its constitutive atoms of planetary sizes.
Now we can see the problem, it is similar to the case of
the cosmic computer thought experiment. While we no
longer have bits, we have instead the states of the atoms,
and their relative conﬁgurations. But the states of an
atom are discrete, and the possible ways atoms combine
into molecules are discrete too. So the biological brain
version of the thought experiment is similar to the cos-
mic computer one in its essential aspects, except that in
addition one assumes that the substrate is relevant too.
In this case, the substrate is provided by the atoms and
their arrangements, or even by the conﬁgurations of the
electrons and the nucleons composing the atoms. At this
level where Atomic and Molecular Physics and Chemistry
become relevant, Quantum Physics becomes relevant too.
But if we want to abide to Claim R+, we have to assume
that only the classical limit of the conﬁgurations of atoms
and molecules is relevant.
At this point, we can see that even if we assume that
the substrate is important for the mental states, this can-
not avoid the problems that arise if we assume locality.
In particular, this thought experiment reveals problems
similar to Problems 1 and 2, with the amendment that
instead of states of bits we are talking about quasiclas-
sical approximations of states consisting of atoms and

4
molecules.
Note that zooming-in to increase the apparent size of
the brain did not actually change the way it works. The
purpose of zooming-in was not to “destroy” the mental
states, but only to make clearer the problem introduced
by locality and spacelike separation between the atoms.
So the O-nonlocality of mental states is manifest in the
case of the biological brain too. Not the classical com-
putationalist Claim R++ was the cause of the problems,
but the assumption of locality.
III.
THE PROOFS
I will now formalize the argument. To allow the reader
to see where possible objections ﬁt better, I will try to
identify and highlight all of the assumptions and steps
in the proofs and the arguments, no matter how obvious
they may be. Hopefully I will also correct some assump-
tions we may be tempted to make.
For theoretical-independence and generality (to pro-
tect the arguments from objections appealing to un-
known physics), I rely in my arguments only on a com-
mon structure of most, if not all theories discovered so
far: the representation of processes as temporal succes-
sions of physical states. This mathematical structure is
called dynamical system, and it is common to classical
and quantum, nonrelativistic and relativistic (even Gen-
eral Relativity [4]), continuous and discrete and in fact
to all more or less successful theories conceived so far.
Very generally, but not more formally than needed for
the argument, a dynamical system can be deﬁned as
1. A state space S, which is the set of all possible
states of the system allowed by the theory.
2. A set H of subsets of S, called histories, so that for
each history h ∈H there is a surjective function
t : T →h from a totally ordered set T to h.
The totally ordered set T represents the time3. Each
history represents a process, and speciﬁes the state of the
system for each instant t ∈T. The dynamical system
can be given by specifying a dynamical law governing
the temporal evolution of states, which is equivalent to
specifying all possible histories4.
We do not know the ﬁnal theory that can completely
describe all natural phenomena, but all we know so far
is consistent with the following
3 In general, T also has a group or semigroup structure compatible
with the order relation, but we do not need it here.
4 In Newtonian Mechanics a state consists of the positions and mo-
menta of all particles. The possible histories are summarized by
Hamilton’s equations. In Standard Quantum Physics, a state is
represented by a vector from a Hilbert space. The histories are
given by Schr¨odinger’s equation, interrupted during measure-
ments by jumps whose probabilities are given by Born’s rule.
Metaprinciple DS (dynamical system). The physical
world is described by a dynamical system.
A partial function from a set A to a set B is a function
f : A′ →B, where A′ ⊆A. For simplicity, I often called
the partial function a function on A, even if it is partial,
when it is clear from the context what I mean5.
Deﬁnition 1 (Properties). A property of a system or
a subsystem is a (partial) function of the state of the
system, valued in some set (usually the real numbers R).
For example, in Classical Mechanics, properties are
functions on the state space. In Quantum Physics, they
are often not functions, but partial functions. For exam-
ple, most state vectors don’t have a deﬁnite position or
momentum.
Because any process is a succession of states, Claim
R implies that mental states are properties of physical
states. This can be formalized as a Principle (Fig. 1):
Principle PM (physical-mental correspondence). A
function Ψ associates to (some of the) physical states the
corresponding mental states that they determine,
mental state = Ψ (physical state)
(1)
FIG. 1.
Schematic representation of a network of neurons
whose state evolves in time, determining a succession of men-
tal states via the function Ψ from Principle PM.
I detail how the major physicalist positions about the
mental processes satisfy Principle PM in the Reply to
Objection 1.
A very trivial assumption is the following
Observation 1. The physical states underlying mental
states are extended in space.
This was already observed by William James, who
wrote “[t]here is no cell or group of cells in the brain
of such anatomical or functional preeminence as to ap-
pear to be the keystone or center of gravity of the whole
system” ([44], p. 180). Likewise, Dennett ([25], p. 102)
states that “[t]here is no single point in the brain where
all information funnels in”, and “[t]he idea of a special
5 The more exigent reader can interpret f as a function on A,
where f(a) = d for a ∈A \ A′, d /∈B being a “dummy” element.

5
center in the brain is the most tenacious bad idea bedev-
iling our attempts to think about consciousness”.
This can be related to Damasio’s statement “[w]hat
we experience as mental states corresponds not just to
activity in a discrete brain area but rather to the result
of massive recursive signaling involving multiple regions”
[24]. Damasio expresses the complexity of mental states
Even with the help of neuroscience techniques
more powerful than are available today, we
are unlikely ever to chart the full scope of
neural phenomena associated with a mental
state, even a simple one.
I will discuss more evidence for this observation in the
replies to the objections in §A 3.
I now introduce some deﬁnitions that will be used in
the argument.
Deﬁnition 2 (Records). Recording is the act of chang-
ing the state of a system, called recorder, by bringing
it, according to the physical laws, into a state that cor-
responds to the state of another system, called recorded
system, so that distinct states of the recorder correspond
to distinct states of the recorded system. The resulting
distinct possible states of the recorder are called records.
A recorder can be recorded in its turn. When the records
can be interpreted numerically, the act of recording is
called measurement, and the recorder is called measuring
apparatus.
Deﬁnition 3 (Direct records). When the recorder and
the recorded system coincide or overlap, or are the coarse
grainings of more fundamental states that coincide or
overlap, we say that the recorder has direct access to the
recorded system. Otherwise we say that the recorder has
indirect access to the recorded system.
Since mental states can discriminate between various
observables, Deﬁnition 2 and Principle PM justify the
following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 4 (Observer). When the physical state un-
derlying a mental state can distinguish the properties of a
system as in Deﬁnition 2, it acts like a recorder. If in ad-
dition Ψ from eq. (1) has diﬀerent values for these prop-
erties, is also acts like a recorder, which we call observer,
and we call its act of recording observation. Records that
can be distinguished by an observer are called observ-
ables.
Observation 2 (Direct observations). Since by Deﬁni-
tion 4 observations are those recordings made by mental
states, the only directly observable properties are observ-
able properties of the physical system underlying the very
mental state observing them. In other words, properties
distinguished by the function Ψ from eq. (1).
All observations, including the scientiﬁc ones, are made
by recording systems that have mental states, called ob-
servers. While the position that there is something fun-
damental about the consciousness of the observers is con-
sidered controversial, the fact that they have memories in
which they record information about the data, and that
appeal to each other’s memories, even when conducting
scientiﬁc research, is generally accepted. However, the
role of Deﬁnition 4 is not to introduce mental states as
something fundamental, but merely to distinguish those
recording systems endowed with mental states.
But what is the minimal feature that distinguishes
mental states among other recorders? I propose that this
is the Integration Property deﬁned below, which is the
central assumption that I require the reader to accept
about mental states.
Observation 3 (Integration Property). Conscious men-
tal states are integrated experiences.
Here by “integrated” I mean the simple fact that, de-
spite Observation 1, the mental state experience is uni-
ﬁed, even if only partially, rather than completely scat-
tered in disconnected elementary parts. What is a com-
bination or integration of multiple factors, appears to us
as a single, uniﬁed experience, which is the very men-
tal state. A conscious mental state is the awareness of
a combination of the multiple facets, of all of the struc-
tural parts making that very mental state. For a particu-
lar mental state there may be an experience that merely
looks like a uniﬁed self, which is largely an illusion and
folk psychology, see e.g. [21, 24, 25], but the experience of
that illusion is nevertheless integrated, at least to some
degree. Many illusions are involved here, but even these
illusions are an integrated experience. If only a subset
of the totality of the brain state can be experienced as a
whole, like a draft if the reader wishes [25], I refer only
to such a subset as being integrated. I do not assume the
widely discredited Cartesian Theater or a homunculus, as
Dennett says people do by default [26, 27], although I sus-
pect that in many cases people don’t really assume such
a homunculus, but rather that their experiences are inte-
grated. It can be objected that the only evidence for this
integration comes through introspection, known in Psy-
chology and Neuroscience to be an unreliable tool due to
its subjectivity, while science is about objectively veriﬁ-
able evidence. But the only lesson I am taking here from
introspection and self-inquiry is that the mental states
exist and their experience is integrated, even if they are
not what they seem to us to be. The researchers who
consider that the only evidence that counts scientiﬁcally
should be objectively veriﬁable, and for whom even sub-
jective experiments that can be repeated independently
are invalid because each instance of these experiments
is a diﬀerent mind, can take as an exit route out of my
arguments the alternative Option 1 or Option 2 from Ap-
pendix §B.
I do not require from the reader any ontological
commitments or a particular position with respect to
the Hard Problem of consciousness [19]. According to
Chalmers [20], “a mental state is conscious if there is
something it is like to be in that mental state. [...] This
is the really hard part of the mind-body problem.” Al-
though some authors deny the very existence of such a

6
problem [26], I tried to argue elsewhere [75] that the prob-
lem is real and hard. However, I consider that the argu-
ments in this paper should be seen as independent of the
Hard Problem, so I avoided discussing it in this paper,
and I only assume that mental states have the Integration
Property.
We can now deﬁne the type of nonlocality that we will
prove to be associated to mental states.
Deﬁnition 5 (O-nonlocality). A property of a system is
called O-nonlocal if it is directly observable (as in Deﬁ-
nition 2) and depends instantaneously on spacelike sepa-
rated events.
Remark 1. Let us consider a mental state having the Inte-
gration Property. Suppose that this mental state involves
awareness, and that its physical correlates are located in
a region of space R. Consider two disjoint subsets A and
B of R, i.e. A ∩B = ∅, so that A ∪B = R, as in Fig. 2.
FIG. 2.
Illustration of the O-nonlocality associated to the
Integration Property and Remark 1. The Figure represents
a mental state grounded on a physical state that has two
subsystems restricted to two disjoint regions A and B of space
(the green regions).
Since the mental state is grounded on region A ∪B,
it depends on the state of the subsystem contained in
A, but also on the state of the subsystem contained in
B. This dependency of the mental state on the physical
correlates in these regions, which are spacelike separated,
is an essential feature of O-nonlocality. The other one is
direct observability, as in Observation 2.
We are now ready for the proof of O-nonlocality, and
the arguments that mental states are not consistent with
Claim R+ (and implicitly neither with Claim R++).
Theorem 1 (of O-nonlocality). If Principle PM is true,
then mental states are O-nonlocal.
Proof. I assume as obvious that the physical states under-
lying mental states are extended in space (Observation
1). An immediate consequence of Metaprinciple DS (dy-
namical system) – which is assumed by Principle PM – is
that a system cannot directly access other states in the
state space, not even its own previous states! It can only
have indirect access, as in Deﬁnition 3.
Observation 4 (Instantism). Any system can have di-
rect access only to its present state (Fig. 3).
FIG. 3. A physical system can access directly only its present
state. Consequently, a mental state can access the past only
indirectly, as records of the past physical states that exist in
the present physical state underlying that mental state.
At ﬁrst sight, this is a very trivial observation. But
in fact its implications are too often overlooked. Even if
it is trivially true, the reader may object that, if we can
only access our present state, then how is it even possible
to remember the past? I will come back to this known
issue in Appendix §A, Objection 14.
In a local theory, an event – which consists of its po-
sition and moment of time – can have direct access only
to itself. In relativistic theories, even indirect access is
limited to current records of the events from the past
lightcones of the current event, as shown in Fig. 3. Si-
multaneous events (with respect to a reference frame) are
isolated, “blind” to one another. This leads to
Observation 5 (Locality). In a local theory, any event
can have direct access only to the physical quantities lo-
cated at that event.
Fig.
4 illustrates Observation 5 and shows how the
events composing the present state of a brain are isolated
from one another in this sense.
FIG. 4. Illustration of Observation 5, which shows that in
a local theory, any event can have direct access only to the
physical quantities located at that event.
Let us now collect all the observation. The physical
state underlying a mental state is, according to Obser-
vations 1 and 4, extended in space in a spacelike way.
By Observation 5 its parts cannot, directly or indirectly,
access other parts.
Due to Principle PM, the mental
state is a coarse graining of the underlying physical state
or coincides with it (in the case when Ψ is the identigy
function). By Deﬁnition 3, the mental state has direct
access to its underlying physical state, and by Deﬁnition
4, this is a direct observation. Since the mental state di-
rectly observes its underlying physical state and depends
instantaneously on its spacelike separated events, Deﬁ-
nition 5 is satisﬁed, and mental states turn out to be
O-nonlocal.

7
Some possible objection to the idea that O-nonlocality
may be nonclassical are discussed in §A 2. They all point
out towards the idea that O-nonlocality may be actually
a very classical property, and the replies appeal to the
Integration Property to explain the diﬀerence.
Remark 2. Nothing can stop the reader to simply reject
the Integration Property. Nothing can stop the reader, if
she or he wishes, to imagine that there is no connection
between regions A and B from Remark 1, or between
any two distinct points from region R, and then to claim
that we can still have experience somehow without the
need of some nonclassical O-nonlocality. I think this pre-
sumed experience is in fact a projection of the experience
we have when we mentally simulate, in our own mental
states, such a possibility.
Since Classical Physics is local, Theorem 1 implies
Corollary 1. Assuming Observation 3, Claim R+ can-
not be true (unless, of course, Classical Physics is up-
dated with a certain nonlocality able to yield the inte-
grated experience associated to the mental state).
Proof. I also assume Observation 1 as obvious. I consider
each of two cases.
Case I: Metaprinciple DS is false for the brain physics.
Since Metaprinciple DS is true in Classical Physics, this
case is inconsistent with Claim R+.
Case II: Metaprinciple DS is true.
Since Claim R+
implies Principle PM, we can apply Theorem 1, according
to which mental states are O-nonlocal.
This is again
inconsistent with Claim R+, which requires locality.
Since Claim R++ implies Claim R+, Corollary 1 also
rejects Claim R++.
Corollary 2. In a world where the only nonlocality is
quantum, the Integration Property and Claim R require
that any system supporting mental states has to use quan-
tum eﬀects.
Proof. Follows directly from Theorem 1.
The reader who wants to save Claims R+ and R++
can try to reject the Integration Property, and assume
therefore that mental states are as scattered and spacelike
separated like the physical states grounding them are.
Some proposed alternatives allowing this are discussed
in Appendix §B.
IV.
CAN THE NONLOCALITY OF MENTAL
STATES BE QUANTUM?
In this section I discuss the possibility that the kind
of nonlocality revealed in Sections §III and §II may be of
quantum origin. This possibility is justiﬁed by the fact
that we do not know of other nonlocal physics than that
of quantum origin, see Corollary 2.
For reasons independent from Theorem 1, the idea that
Quantum Physics has something to do with conscious-
ness is nearly as old as Quantum Physics itself, the main
attractive features being
1. the violation of determinism by the wavefunction
collapse, considered by incompatibilists to be nec-
essary for free-will,
2. the apparent necessity of mentioning an observer
even in the fundamental postulates of Standard
Quantum Physics (but see [77] for a version of Stan-
dard Quantum Physics without observers),
3. advantages of quantum computability over the clas-
sical one, by using superposition and entanglement.
Numerous ideas connecting consciousness with Quan-
tum Physics were put forward, in particular by Lon-
don and Bauer [53], Heisenberg [40], von Neumann [82],
Wigner [86], Penrose and Hameroﬀ[38], Stapp [71, 72],
and others [6].
The idea that quantum eﬀects in the brain may be rel-
evant for the mind was criticized in [78] and [41, 45]. The
decoherence times in a “warm, wet and noisy” environ-
ment like the brain was estimated to less than 10−21 sec-
onds [78], but in [36, 37] it was argued that the corrected
version gave 10 −100 microseconds, with a possibility of
going up to 10 −100 milliseconds. Moreover, evidence
for maintained quantum coherence in a “warm, wet and
noisy” environment was found later, although for photo-
synthesis [30, 57]. A simple “recoherence” mechanisms
able to maintain coherence in an “open and noisy” quan-
tum system like the brain was found in [39, 50]. Other
quantum features, expected to be associated to macro-
scopic quantum systems, were found in microtubules [68].
But the jury is still out.
If we accept the conditions leading to Corollary 2 from
Sec. §III, we have to accept that the O-nonlocality of
mental states is due to Quantum Physics. Alternatively,
we can seek for other explanations of O-nonlocality. We
may consider new physics or even something nonphys-
ical that does not aim to explain sentient experience,
but merely O-nonlocality. But whatever that “something
nonphysical” may be, if the way it provides O-nonlocality
can be consistently described by a set of propositions, it
can be described mathematically, and can be very well
incorporated into physicalism [73, 75]. And the resulting
physicalism will not be classical.
So let us see what quantum eﬀects can support the
O-nonlocality of mental states. Quantum nonlocality is
the result of the conjunction of quantum entanglement
with the projection that seems to take place during mea-
surements. Nonlocal correlations like those violating the
Bell inequality are the consequence of the conjunction of
these two features of Quantum Physics.
I will ﬁrst describe a sense in which the O-nonlocality
of the function Ψ from eq. (1), required by Principle PM
in conjunction with the Integration Property, is analo-

8
gous to quantum entanglement. I will also explain that
this analogy does not seem to be perfect.
Nonrelativistic Quantum Physics is obtained from a
classical dynamical system by quantization. While the
state of the classical system is a point in its state space,
in the quantized theory it is a function deﬁned on the
classical state space, so a function of the possible classi-
cal states. For example, if the classical system consists of
n (point-)particles, its state space is the phase space R6n,
whose points are (x, p) = (x1, . . . , xn, p1 . . . , pn), where
xj is the position of the j-th particle, and pj its mo-
mentum. A quantum state is then represented by a real
function W on the phase space R6n, called Wigner func-
tion [8, 85]. But the more commonly used representation
is as a complex function ψ, called wavefunction, deﬁned
on the classical conﬁguration space R3n of all possible
positions x of n particles. The quantization procedure
also replaces the classical evolution law with a quantum
one, so the Hamilton equations satisﬁed by the classical
system are replaced with a Schr¨odinger equation satis-
ﬁed by ψ. The wavefunction ψ depends on the position
x, but it also depends implicitly on the momentum p, as
we can see by applying the Fourier transform.
Entanglement is due to the fact that ψ is a func-
tion of the positions of all particles, and it cannot be
seen as more functions of the position of each particle
ψ1(x1), . . . , ψn(xn), except in special cases. In general,
it is a linear combination of possibly inﬁnitely many such
products.
The analogy between the function Ψ from eq. (1) and
the wavefunction ψ, or its Wigner transform W(ψ), is
that both depend on the arrangements of the particles
in space. Let us represent this analogy in an admittedly
quite vague way,
Ψ (physical state) is like ψ (physical state)
(2)
This analogy suggests a possible relation between the
O-nonlocality of the mental states, which we just in-
ferred from Theorem 1, and quantum nonlocality. But we
should be careful that there are some diﬀerences. First,
the argument of Ψ, physical state, represents a phys-
ical state in our world, which is quantum. This state is
not classical. Even if under Claim R+ we assume it to
be quasiclassical, it is not the same as the classical state
which is the argument of the wavefunction ψ. However,
it is considered plausible that the classical states emerge
approximately as a limit of the quantum states in regimes
where entanglement is almost absent and the wavefunc-
tion ψ is concentrated mostly around, and highly peaked
at a point x in the conﬁguration space. This relation ac-
tually makes some sense, for the following reason. First,
the classical state space R6n on which the wavefunction
is deﬁned assumes the classical particles to be pointlike.
But in Quantum Field Theory (QFT), this state space
has to be replaced with a space of classical ﬁelds. A way
to obtain QFT is by the so-called “second quantization”,
which takes the wavefunction and quantizes it similarly
to how classical systems of point-particles are quantized.
This improves the analogy expressed vaguely in eq. (2).
There is also a diﬀerence in the values the two functions
Ψ and ψ can take. The values of ψ are complex numbers.
The real number |ψ(x)|2 represents “how much” of ψ is
concentrated at the point x in the conﬁguration space.
When a measurement of the positions of all particles is
performed, this “how much” becomes6 the probability
that the wavefunction collapses, as a result of the mea-
surement, at the position x in the conﬁguration space.
On the other hand, the value of Ψ is a mental state.
Therefore, if there is a relation like in eq. (2) between
the values of ψ and those of Ψ, it is evidently a serious
open problem how to interpret it.
In Quantum Physics, nonlocal correlations are made
possible by entanglement, but they become manifest only
through quantum measurements, because these correla-
tions are between possible outcomes of the measurements
of entangled systems. In general we can not directly ob-
serve the quantum state. We observe by making quantum
measurements, which involve a collapse of the wavefunc-
tion, so we can at best learn the collapsed state, not the
original one.
On the other hand, for mental states to aﬀect objec-
tively observable physical states, or to extract informa-
tion about these states, some mechanism is required to
endow the mental state with causal powers. If eq. (2)
reﬂects a true relation between the mental states and
the wavefunction, then one may speculate that mental
states aﬀect objectively observable physical states by the
same wavefunction collapse. Maybe the collapse of the
wavefunction, which is postulated to explain both the
outcomes of quantum measurements, and the emergence
of the classical world, is the way. But, in the absence
of an understanding of consciousness, these analogies are
wild speculations.
However, even if the relation from eq.
(2) remains
unclear, the analogies between the O-nonlocality of Ψ
and the entanglement of ψ (and the nonlocal correlations
encoded in it) invite us to experiment in this direction.
A ﬁrst necessary step is to search the possible places in
the brain that can maintain coherence, so that, when the
wavefunction collapse happens, this can be ampliﬁed well
enough to result in observable diﬀerences in the states of
the neurons.
If quantum eﬀects play a role in the brain is still an
open question, but they better play a signiﬁcant one, able
to support O-nonlocality, because otherwise we will have
to ﬁnd other ways to support it. And it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd
other ways, because we will also have to make sure that
these ways do not allow faster than light or back in time
signaling. In Quantum Physics there are theorems that
prevent these kinds of signaling, so assuming that the O-
nonlocality of mental states is quantum seems a better
6 This “metamorphosis” of the squared amplitude into probabil-
ities is one of the foundational problems of Quantum Physics
which various interpretations try to solve.

9
choice than assuming additional physical laws, and then
trying to enforce on them no-signaling.
Regardless of the solution, this by itself does not nec-
essarily solve the Hard Problem of consciousness.
V.
IMPLICATIONS
The purpose of this article is to discuss the topic of
mental states being O-nonlocal. Whatever its implica-
tions are, they are not yet developed. So I try though to
discuss some possible consequences.
The ﬁrst implication pertains quantum nonlocality.
Implication 1 (quantum in the brain). To avoid postulat-
ing new physics, it is reasonable to explore the possibility
that Quantum Physics is important for the brain’s func-
tioning, and that it may be related to consciousness. This
was discussed in Sec. §IV. If the nature of O-nonlocality
is quantum, it should have physical eﬀects, in principle
detectable in the brain (see Objection 4 and the reply).
A possible type of experiment, admittedly not within
the reach of present technology, would be to shut down
all quantum eﬀects in the brain, e.g. entanglement, and
see how this aﬀects the mental states. If the classical is
all that is needed, one should be able to do this without
aﬀecting the mental states. Possible false negatives can
be obtained if epiphenomenalism is true, but I think this
position is not interesting, as explained in the reply to
Objection 4. I am completely unable to indicate where
these quantum eﬀects are to be found in the brain, and
what we can do to stop them without aﬀecting the clas-
sical approximation of the brain, but I think that by the
advance of technology we will be able to learn more about
the brain and how to make such experiments.
But maybe some evidence is already present. Quan-
tum probability turns out to be more appropriate to
model decision making, reasoning, similarity, categoriza-
tion, and other cognitive processes, which are harder to
reconcile with classical (Bayesian) probability, as shown
in the extensive review [61]. According to the authors,
“all these characteristics appear perplexing from a clas-
sical perspective.
Yet our thesis is that they provide
a more accurate and powerful account of certain cog-
nitive processes.“ A way to test for violations of gen-
eralized Bell inequalities in human decision making was
reported in [18]. According to the authors, “unambigu-
ous experimental evidence for (quantum-like) probabilis-
tic contextuality in psychology” was found (although in
[7] a loophole is identiﬁed). Follow-up research was pre-
sented in [9] and references therein, where contextuality
was used. The authors report “a series of crowdsourc-
ing experiments that exhibit true contextuality in simple
decision making”. All these results show that quantum
probability of the type exhibited in entangled systems
are more appropriate to model cognitive processes. How-
ever, until they are supplemented by a detailed analysis
of the mechanisms implementing contextuality and other
aspects of quantum probability, which is a very diﬃcult
task, I would speculate too much by assuming that its
origin is quantum and that they count as evidence for
the arguments presented in this article. It seems more
plausible that correlations of the same type are due to
the shared functionality of the weights of the neural net-
work (although the results are very interesting even if
this is the case).
More direct evidence of quantum eﬀects is needed,
and promising results are reported in the study of mi-
crotubules, as shown in Hameroﬀand Penrose’s review
article [38]. Their suggestion that anesthesia can shut
down consciousness by reducing the quantum eﬀects is
strikingly along the lines of the type of experimental re-
sults advocated earlier in this Implication to be expected
from the arguments in this article.
Despite apparently decisive theoretical arguments that
decoherence would prevent any relevant superposition in
“warm, wet and noisy” systems [78], new evidence shows
that quantum coherennce can be maintained in such en-
vironments, at least for photosynthesis [30, 57]. In the
case of the brain, the possibility that nuclear spin quan-
tum processing is possible, by using entangled Posner
molecules, was proposed in [32, 56, 84].
Nevertheless, even if the quantum will turn out to be
necessary for mental states, I think that classical compu-
tationalism will still remain very useful in the way Clas-
sical Physics is still useful.
While most biological cells, including neurons, do not
seem to base their functionality essentially on quantum
eﬀects, if this is the case for neurons, it may as well be
the case for other types of cells, given that neurons them-
selves, like the other cells, appeared by specializing from
the same original cell.
Another implication is related to “objective measures”
of consciousness, deﬁned for physical systems.
Implication 2 (Integrated Information Theory). In [80],
it was proposed that consciousness arises from integrated
information, which is measured by a function Φ (not the
same as Ψ or ψ). This is a measure of how much addi-
tional information a system has compared to its subsys-
tems, under certain conditions that are considered rel-
evant to distinguish consciousness from other forms of
information. The particular deﬁnition was criticized, for
example in [1].
But integrated information per se is an abstract no-
tion, as long as it is not experienced subjectively, “from
within”. It is a property that we, conscious beings, at-
tribute to systems, based on how we assign information
to these systems. Theorem 1 shows that mental states
are O-nonlocal, so there has to be a (likely) physical way
to connect the parts of the system, in order to really
integrate them.
The implication is that integrated in-
formation, to be associated to mental states, requires O-
nonlocality.
Another implication is for the strong AI thesis, accord-
ing to which consciousness is purely computational, and
we can create it artiﬁcially, on classical computers.

10
Implication 3 (no classical strong AI). It is no doubt
that a simulation of the behavior or functionality of men-
tal processes is possible, in principle. What seem to re-
main outside this possibility are the intrinsic, experien-
tial aspects, although many consider that somehow these
should “emerge” if we merely simulate the functionality.
However, since Claim R++ is refuted by Corollary 1, and
by the thought experiment from §II A, consciousness can-
not be reduced to classical computation. Hence, it can-
not be simulated classically, and the strong AI thesis is
challenged. And if epiphenomenalism is false (Objection
4) and even the simulation of mental processes require
quantum eﬀects, it may be possible to refute the Strong
AI thesis. But these results leave open the possibility to
simulate mental states on quantum computers.
Implication 4 (block-world mental states). Let us go back
to the thought experiment from Sec. §II. Since mental
states are O-nonlocal, then they depend on the observer,
because of the relativity of simultaneity. Two observers
ﬂying in diﬀerent directions or with diﬀerent velocities
will have diﬀerent simultaneity spaces, and in each of
them the conﬁgurations of bits across the cosmic brain
are diﬀerent, so the associated mental states are observer-
dependent. This is a problem. Indeed, by applying Ψ to
the succession of physical states as expressed in diﬀerent
reference frames one expects to obtain distinct succes-
sions of mental states. This seems to lead to the strange
conclusion that there have to be potentially inﬁnitely
many subjective successions of mental states, possibly
one for each possible reference frame. Of course, men-
tal states are private, only their physical correlates are
objectively veriﬁable. And if a person reports her own
mental states to observers in diﬀerent reference frames,
they will receive the same report, and will agree about
it. The private experience is of the person whose brain is
observed, and not of the other observers, but the inter-
pretation of the ﬁrings of neurons by diﬀerent observers
suggests diﬀerent successions of mental states.
One can consider that there is a preferred reference
frame, most naturally brain’s frame.
But the thought
experiment in §II A, in which the space stations are in
relative motion with respect to one another, suggests that
there is no such frame. However, it is not inconceivable
that there is a preferred way to slice spacetime into three-
dimensional spaces, which is not objectively manifest.
Another possibility, consistent with Relativity, is that
the changes in the mental states are slow enough so that
in any reference frame the story will appear essentially
the same. This requires that all changes of the mind state
are in causal relation, i.e. they are ordered so that each
change is in the future lightcone of any past change. This
total ordering is the situation from Reply 11, which leads
to the nonlocality in time from Reply 12.
Or maybe there is a kind of timeless block-world expe-
rience, a four-dimensional “metamental state”, and slic-
ing it in one reference frame or another yields usual men-
tal experiences, related to the physical states by a func-
tion Ψ which depends on time and on the reference frame.
Truth is, I do not have an answer to this problem. The
situation is complicated by the fact that the subjective
perception of time is very diﬀerent from the objective
measures of time.
We have diﬀerent perception of si-
multaneity, of durations, and even of ordering of events.
The mind seems to revise the perceptual data to con-
struct a representation that makes sense to it, even if it
deﬁes the objective notion of time, as explained e.g. in
[25], and shown very convincingly in [83]. This by itself
may be a challenge to Principle PM. I am not sure how
strong a challenge is, because I distinguish between how
we perceive our own experiences, and the fact that we
have them, as I extensively explained in the discussion
following Observation 3. Because of this distinction, I
am also not sure if we can use the data about our illu-
sionary perception and representation of time to decide
among the possibilities discussed in this Implication.
These are some immediate and more relevant implica-
tions of the O-nonlocality of mental states. The purpose
of this article was only to point out this O-nonlocality,
but further research is required to reﬁne our understand-
ing of both the O-nonlocality of mental states and pro-
cesses, and of its consequences.
Acknowledgement
The author thanks Igor Salom, Iulian Toader, Jo-
hannes Kleiner, Larry Schulman, Cosmin Vis,an, Jochen
Szangolies, Per Arve, David Chalmers, and the anony-
mous reviewers, for their valuable feedback, which was
not always of agreement, oﬀered to previous versions of
the manuscript. The author bares full responsibility for
the article.
Appendix A: Possible objections
Here I will discuss some of the possible objections
raised by myself or others against my arguments. I hope
that by this I anticipate the most important objections
the reader may have, and address them convincingly.
1.
Basic objections
Objection 1. The problem is that the argument starts
from Principle PM. Why is this assumption justiﬁed?
Reply 1. Principle PM is simply the reductionist claim
that mental states are function of the physical states. It
is the minimal assumption about mental states, it does
not claim anything about their nature, only that they
are function of the physical states. Even if one is not
a reductionist, even if one is a dualist, one cannot deny
that mental states have physical correlates, so one cannot
deny Principle PM at least for those properties of the
mental states that have physical correlates. And by this,

11
according to Theorem 1, follows that mental states are
O-nonlocal, even if one tries to escape physicalism.
Let us verify that the major physicalist positions about
the mental processes satisfy Principle PM. Blackmore
and Tro´scianko say “Materialism includes identity theory
(which makes mental states identical with brain states)
and functionalism (which equates mental states with
functional states)“ [13].
We start with functionalism, the position that only the
function and the causal relations matter, and the partic-
ular implementation is irrelevant. More precisely, “func-
tionalist theories take the identity of a mental state to
be determined by its causal relations to sensory stimula-
tion, other mental states, and behavior” [49]. According
to Piccinini, “[t]o a ﬁrst approximation, functionalism
is the metaphysical view that mental states are individ-
uated by their functional relations with mental inputs,
outputs, and other mental states” [60]. Searle character-
izes it brieﬂy as “Mental states are deﬁned by their causal
relations” [70]. According to Goﬀ[34], “[b]ehaviorists or
functionalists believe that the nature of a mental state
can be completely captured in causal terms.
Causal
structuralists generalize this model to the whole of re-
ality, resulting in a kind of metaphysical behaviorism.
Things are not so much beings as doings. Pure physi-
calism is a form of this view.” If we can represent the
functions and causal relations like the ﬂowchart of an al-
gorithm or a process, we treat each block and even the
algorithm or the process itself as a black box. But any
implementation of the functions and the causal relations
is done in practice as a process, so Principle PM holds
for functionalism. Moreover, functionalism relies only on
classical relations and functions, so it supports Claim R+.
Computationalism asserts, in addition, that the rela-
tions between inputs and outputs are computational [60].
Searle describes the strong Artiﬁcial Intelligence thesis as
“Mental states are computational states” [70]. Piccinini
[60] says that “[c]omputationalism [...] is precisely the
hypothesis that the functional relations between mental
inputs, outputs, and internal states are computational.
Computationalism per se is neutral on whether those
computational relations constitute the nature of men-
tal states.”
Here, for simplicity and because this be-
came the general usage, by computationalism I under-
stand only the “strong” version of computationalism, ac-
cording to which mental states reduce to computation.
This strong computationalism can therefore be charac-
terized as the position supporting Claim R++. Since we
focus on physicalism, according to Claim R, function-
ality is implemented as a physical process, which is a
succession of states, and a function like (1) relates the
underlying physical state to the mental state.
Hence,
both functionalism and computationalism admit a rela-
tion between the physical correlate and the correspond-
ing mental state like in eq. (1). This should not be a
surprise, since from Metaprinciple DS follows that any
physicalist theory of mind has to imply such a relation.
A trending position is that of externalism with regard
to mental content, according to which “in order to have
certain types of intentional mental states (e.g. beliefs),
it is necessary to be related to the environment in the
right way” [47], and “[e]xternalism in the philosophy of
mind contends that the meaning or content of a thought
is partly determined by the environment” [58]. This po-
sition extends the physical state underlying the mental
state, but this does not aﬀect Principle PM. It is correct
at least that the interpretation of the relations between
the mental representations and the outside objects re-
quire, well, these objects, the environment, to be taken
into account, as illustrated by Putnam’s Twin Earth
thought experiment [63].
This does not imply though
that the mental states themselves, as experienced, and
not as interpreted in relation with the environment by
a third person who tries to give them an intentional or
relational meaning in the context of the outside world,
have to depend on the environment. But even if it would
be true, it is hard to see how externalism can be a phys-
icalist position and at the same time remain local, and
some argue that it is not (see e.g. [28], Ch. 5). How-
ever, the proof in this paper applies to externalism too,
and makes it clear that it has to be nonlocal, endorsing
a possible externalist position which requires nonlocality.
Other positions that advocate for nonlocality are known
in the literature [22, 35, 38, 46, 52, 64], and they can ﬁnd
additional support in the proof I gave here.
In the most general types of physicalism, the function
Ψ identiﬁes mental states with coarse-grainings of phys-
ical states, i.e. with states, possible macro states, that
may ignore diﬀerences of the microphysical or funda-
mental states that grounds those mental states.
More
precisely, two physical states physical state 1 and
physical state 2 are not distinguished by the function
Ψ, if Ψ (physical state 1) = Ψ (physical state 2).
The position identifying mental states with physical
states is a particular case, where Ψ is the identity func-
tion.
Other possible objections to Principle PM can make
use of the fact that consciousness integrates visual and
auditory stimuli by delaying them to compensate for the
diﬀerent durations of transmissions through the nervous
system, and that we are unable to distinguish them in-
stantaneously.
But regardless of the particular imple-
mentation, Principle PM refers to the current mental
state, even if it emerges with a delay with respect to
the stimuli, and even if it does not have a very good
resolution of time.
Objection 2. Are you claiming that mental states are
paranormal?
Reply 2. There is no paranormal assumption or claim
here.
Such misunderstandings are common, and they
prompted for example Searle [70] to write
I have, personally speaking, been accused of
holding some crazy doctrine of “property du-
alism” and “privileged access,” or believing
in “introspection” or “neovitalism” or even

12
“mysticism,” even though I have never, im-
plicitly or explicitly, endorsed any of these
views. [...] They think the only real choices
available are between some form of material-
ism and some form of dualism.
But I do not even reject here the physicalist Claim R,
only the classical physicalist Claims R+ and R++.
Theorem 1 is not a claim I made out of thin air, it is
simply the straightforward conclusion of the reductionist
Principle PM. It is not a claim, but a proof that mental
states are O-nonlocal, and I explained in what sense and
under what condition this O-nonlocality is nonclassical –
that the Integration Property holds, which the reader is
free to reject. Like in the case of quantum nonlocality,
the argument itself does not imply that O-nonlocality can
be used for faster-than-light signaling or back-in-time sig-
naling. When a mental state is reported by the subject,
the resulting message is encoded in a physical state. The
physical system arrives in that state through interactions
according to the laws of physics. So nothing “paranor-
mal”, nothing “supernatural” is predicted to be observed.
Objection 3. Can you explain the role of this O-
nonlocality in the mental states? Can you show where
in the brain O-nonlocality enters to produce the mental
states?
Reply 3. Theorem 1 proves O-nonlocality, but not how
it works to yield the mental states, neither where and
how to look for nonlocality in the brain. This can be the
objective of future research. For the moment, it is im-
portant to know that O-nonlocality is needed for mental
states, but how and why it contributes to mental states
remains to be investigated.
The following Objection comes from a Reviewer.
Objection 4 (Epiphenomenalism). Even if we grant
that mental states exist and are integrated (hence non-
local), they are not necessarily causal. Therefore there is
no challenge to physicalism or computationalism, which
by deﬁnition hold that the physical aspects of thought and
behavior are all that matter.
Reply 4. In my argument, I did not make use of the
causal powers of the mental states, only of their deter-
mination by the underlying physical states. For this rea-
son, I think these arguments apply even if we assume
epiphenomenalism. This being said, it is indeed logically
possible that quantum eﬀects exist in the brain with the
only reason to allow the integrated experience of mental
states. The functional and computational approaches to
mind would not be aﬀected, because the measurable out-
puts would be the same. The absence of causal powers
of the O-nonlocality involved would make it epiphenom-
enal, in the sense of lacking causal powers. If we take
the reporting of the integration of subjective experience
as evidence for O-nonlocality, and if the nature of this
nonlocality is quantum, it should be able to make em-
pirical predictions. Such eﬀects should be, in principle,
detectable by experiments, even if the same functional or
computational models can be implemented alternatively
based on Classical Physics.
A possible type of exper-
iment, deﬁnitely too advanced for the current state of
technology, can use the elimination of all possibilities of
entanglement in the brain in order to see how this aﬀects
the mental states.
On a personal note, I think that arguments like the
ones in this paper could have led us to the idea of nonlo-
cality even before the discovery of quantum nonlocality.
In this case, quantum nonlocality would have appeared to
some as an empirical corroboration of Theorem 1, to be
further conﬁrmed by discovering relevant quantum phe-
nomena in the brain. On the other hand, quantum in-
determinacy also appeared to some as a conﬁrmation of
the thesis of libertarian free-will, yet there is no consen-
sus in the scientiﬁc and philosophical communities that
this indeed is the case.
Objection 5. Physicalism, in particular computational-
ism, deﬁne mental states as the states of the underlying
physical systems. This gives a counterexample to your
arguments.
Reply 5. My argument relies on the assumption that
mental states have the Integration Property 3.
Their
conclusion can be avoided by rejecting this assumption,
and two alternatives are Options 1 and 2, discussed in
Appendix §B. By contrast, people who consider mental
states real may reach the opposite conclusion, and see
my arguments as a counterexample to the theories from
Objection 5.
2.
Objections related to extension in space
Objection 6. Why should O-nonlocality necessarily be
nonclassical? After all, there are nonlocal properties, in
the sense that they depend on spacelike separated sub-
systems, even in local theories. For example, the total
charge, mass, energy, and momentum of a system depend
on all the constituents of the system, or on the values of
its ﬁelds at all points it occupies in space. Similarly, the
center of mass. Temperature is proportional to the av-
erage molecular kinetic energy over a large number of
particles constituting the gas or liquid or solid.
Before replying to Objection 6, let us deﬁne “classical
nonlocality”,
Deﬁnition 6 (C-nonlocality). A property of a system
is called C-nonlocal if it depends on spacelike separated
subsystems.
Remark 3. We see from Deﬁnitions 6 and 5 that an O-
nonlocal property is a directly observable C-property.
Reply 6 (to Objection 6). Local theories allow C-nonlocal
properties, but such theories are still local, because their
processes can be fully described in terms of the local prop-
erties, without ever mentioning the C-nonlocal ones.

13
From the examples given in Objection 6, let us discuss
temperature, which is observable, though not directly ob-
servable.
It is hard to see how temperature, which is
successfully described in a reductionist way in terms of
Newtonian Mechanics, is a sort of illusion. It is real, and
since the average is taken over a large volume, it is C-
nonlocal. But in fact its eﬀects, in particular on the skin
of a human being who may feel burnt, or on the mercury
rising in a thermometer, are completely local eﬀects. It
is only in our mind that these eﬀects are integrated and
uniﬁed, cf. Observation 3. The skin is really burnt, but
this eﬀect is local. The mercury indicating the temper-
ature rises in the thermometer, but everything happens
through local interactions, including the perception of
the level of the mercury we may have. The only inte-
gration of this information into the idea of temperature
takes place in our minds. Mind only has indirect access
to quantities like total charge or temperature. But mind
experiences directly its own state, and this is where the
diﬀerence becomes relevant. Therefore, ultimately, ac-
cording to Deﬁnition 4, even in these examples, mental
states are the O-nonlocal ones.
It is hard to say that for the total mass there is an
experience of awareness of that mass, unless that mass
is measured somehow and the result communicated to
a sentient observer. But in the case of a mental state
grounded on region R, because of Observation 3, there
is instantaneous integrated experience determined by the
physical state from R. This experience has the Integra-
tion Property, and it is instantaneous, according to Prin-
ciple PM. And we know directly our own mental states,
we have the direct integrated experience of them, they
are this very experience.
Even if we fall for folk psy-
chology, even if our mental state is not exactly how we
imagine it to be, even if we are silly enough to imagine it
as a homunculus, what is for sure is that the experience
is there, and this is what I mean by mental state. And
this depends on the spacelike separated regions A and
B. It is not scattered in a separate, independent way,
in regions A and B. If we would have to admit such a
scattering, we would have in fact to admit that the ex-
perience is divided in all points of the region R, and this
would mean no experience at all. Because we know that
experience is present, we conclude that the mental state
is O-nonlocal, unlike the classical C-nonlocal properties.
Objection 7. Consider a chair in Classical Mechanics,
or any other rigid object extended in space, or even a soft
one like a brain. This does not make it O-nonlocal, so
why would mental states be O-nonlocal?
Reply 7. An extended object like a chair is made of parti-
cles that interact locally, and these interactions maintain
the chair’s conﬁguration stable enough in time. There is
nothing O-nonlocal here, except our notion of rigid ob-
ject like a chair. Being extended in space is a C-nonlocal
property, and the laws of Classical Physics are local. If
we move the chair, we apply forces that propagate lo-
cally within the chair, and make all of its parts move in
an apparently rigid way. If we sit on the chair, it sup-
ports our weight again by local interaction between its
atoms. No O-nonlocality is required for it to exist as an
approximately rigid object. The chair exists as a uniﬁed
simultaneous conﬁguration only in our minds, cf. Obser-
vation 3, and this mental representation in our mental
states is O-nonlocal, but not the chair.
Objection 8. A classical computer is extended in space,
and is able to process information, independently of our
mental representations, contrary to the claims made in
Reply 7.
Reply 8. In fact, this is a good example for Reply 7. A
classical computer is just a system that evolves in time
according to the laws of physics. Its discrete states are
physical states. They are seen as carrying information
only by us, the users of the computer. We are the ones
who interpret the inputs and outputs as information, but
for the computer as a physical system they are merely
initial and ﬁnal states. We are the ones who interpret
its time evolution as information processing. This com-
putation seems objective, and is objective, in the sense
that diﬀerent users will agree that the same information
processing takes place in the same computer. But this
kind of objectivity arises from the fact that the underly-
ing physical processes are objectively the same for all of
us, and from the fact that we share the same conventions
about the information that goes in and out of the com-
puter. Ultimately the attribution of experience to such
a scattered, disconnected physical state is an illusion, a
feature imagined in the very mental state entertaining
this possibility, perhaps correlated to the activity of the
mirror neurons.
We see from the Replies to Objections 6, 7, and 8,
and from Remark 3, that the diﬀerence between O-
nonlocality and C-nonlocality is due to the Integration
Property.
3.
Can locality be enforced?
In this subsection I discuss some objections suggesting
ways to prevent O-nonlocality by enforcing locality.
Objection 9. I think that an actual computer, especially
if it is supposed to simulate human-like brains, is more
complicated, and cannot be spread around the galaxy the
way you claim in §II A, a small number of bits on a sep-
arate space station gravitating a diﬀerent star.
Reply 9. It is known that the NAND gate is function-
ally complete, i.e. any logical circuit can be made of such
gates. You can realize a fully functional computer using
only NAND gates, like the one built by Kevin Horton
[43]. The NAND logical operation takes as input two
bits p and q, and outputs the negation of their conjunc-
tion, p · q (see Fig. 5).
Let us place a single NAND gate on a diﬀerent space
station, orbiting a separate star. One may object that

14
p
q
p · q
p q p · q
0 0
1
0 1
1
1 0
1
1 1
0
FIG. 5. The NAND gate, which is an inverted AND gate.
it is diﬃcult to synchronize the timings when the bits p
and q are received by the NAND gate, given the large
distances between the stars. This is possible, and I will
explain how it can be done y allowing each space station
to store two bits, b1 and b2.
Suppose the bits p and
q come in sequence. It does not matter which of them
comes ﬁrst, because the operation p · q is commutative.
We use the bit b1 to store the information that only one
of the two bits p and q is collected. So when b1 = 0, it
means that no bit was collected. As soon as one of the
two bits p and q, say bit p arrives, it is copied in b2, and
we make b1 = 1. When the bit q arrives, if b1 = 1, we
send both bits p and q through the NAND gate, and
send the resulting output, by using an electromagnetic
signal, to the next star in the circuit. Then we reset b1
to 0, indicating that the setup is ready for the next logical
operation. If b1 = 0 when the bit q arrives, it means that
the bit p did not arrive yet, so we copy q in b2 and make
b1 = 1, then wait for p. Therefore, two-bit components
are suﬃcient. But we can go even deeper, considering
that each logical gate is made of several diodes, resistors,
and transistors7.
They usually are part of integrated
circuits, but the computation is the same even if we place
these electronic components on separate space stations
around diﬀerent stars.
We may prefer, of course, to use more bits to take care
of the exchanged signals, to send them, maybe to receive
conﬁrmation that they arrived, maybe to send them re-
peatedly to implement error correction etc, but it can be
assumed that this is not part of the computation itself.
But regardless of these details, the point is that it can
be arranged so that no space station does a computation
suﬃciently complex to allow us to attribute a human-
like mental state to that station alone. And let us not
ignore the fact that even if the two bits b1 and b2 are very
close to each other on the space station, the simultaneous
events that they can support are spacelike separated.
Objection 10. Maybe a computer like in Reply 9 can-
not support local mental states.
But such a computer
was considered with the purpose to be maximally spread-
able in space. What if we consider instead one that has
components that are not so spreadable? Wouldn’t such a
computer be immune to the argument from §II A?
7 Diodes and transistors use quantum eﬀects, but the logic gates
can, in principle be implemented using Classical Mechanics.
Reply 10. This would not help, and here is why. The
point of spreading the parts of the computer across the
galaxy was not to “destroy” its mental states, but to
show that they require O-nonlocality.
It is not neces-
sary to build it out of NAND gates to show this. First,
any computer can be realized like this. Any computer
is Turing equivalent to one made solely out of NAND
gates.
Second, its components are already spread in
space.
One can try to miniaturize the computer how
much you want, its parts will still be spacelike separated.
Spacelike separation does not depend on the scale. No
matter how close they are in space, two simultaneous
events are spacelike separated. The thought experiment
from §II A just emphasizes this separation, but it does
not introduce it. So no matter how complicated logical
gates one will use, they will always execute bit operations
separated in space.
Objection 11. Since Theorem 1 assumes Observation
1, before accepting O-nonlocality, I think we should try
more and see if it is possible to avoid this assumption, by
constructing a centralized, and therefore local, model of
mental states. As long as we did not exclude without a
shred of doubt this possibility, the conclusion of Theorem
1 is not justiﬁed.
Reply 11. This is a good point, and I will do my best to
make the case for enforced locality, before replying.
Let us start by using a classical computer architec-
ture as a very rudimentary model of the brain, according
to Claim R++. I will use for reference the Harvard ar-
chitecture (see Fig.
6), rather than the von Neumann
architecture, because it appears to be more centralized.
FIG. 6. Harvard computer architecture.
Can we take the existence of a centralizing unit, the
control unit, as a model of true centralization?
Har-
vard’s Mark I, the ﬁrst computer to use this architec-
ture, weighed 4300 kg. Its sequence-control unit read a
24-bit wide punched paper tape and followed the instruc-
tions to operate the shafts. So it seems that even this
one required more than one bit, but, given that a Turing
machine can operate with one bit wide tapes, maybe it
did not require, maybe it was just for practical reasons.
Is it possible to have something like a central or control
unit, or whatever unit one may assume to be associated
to the mental states, that requires only one bit of mem-
ory? Given that a serial computer operates only one bit

15
for each clock cycle, we can take this bit as underlying the
mental state. This is an extreme claim, but let us pursue
this line of reasoning anyway. A one-bit unit supporting
mental states would eliminate the option of distributed,
decentralized storage of that unit by using more stars.
And we seem to be lucky with this one, because recently
researchers achieved presumably the most local way to
store a bit, by using a single atom [55]. They were able
to store a bit in the state of a Holmium atom, invert
that bit, and even store diﬀerent bits independently in
diﬀerent Holmium atoms placed at one nanometer apart,
which makes this kind of storage scalable.
In this way, we can try to build a model in which the
physical correlate underlying the mental state at a given
time is that particular single bit that is operated at that
particular instant of time. Whatever a serial computer
does, it does it as a sequence of one-bit binary operations.
The brain is diﬀerent from a computer, in at least two
major ways. First, the brain does not seem to operate
logical gates, it is a neural network, one that can change
itself. But such neural networks can be simulated by digi-
tal computers to any degree of approximation. The other
diﬀerence is that the brain operates in parallel. But par-
allel computing exists too, and it still requires a central
unit that breaks the task into smaller tasks, and then
centralizes the results. And that unit operates sequen-
tially, one-bit-at-a-time. Hence, we can still assume that
a one-bit-at-a-time model of the brain is not excluded, at
least if we assume independence of the substrate.
We can therefore imagine that something like one-bit-
at-a-time processing can happen in the brain, as illus-
trated very schematically in Fig.
7.
We do not have
evidence that this is the case, but it worth entertaining
this hypothesis, if the gain is the avoidance of O-nonlocal
mental states from Theorem 1.
FIG. 7. An attempt to make mental states local.
Let us now assume that each bit operated in this se-
quence is encoded into a precisely localized physical sys-
tem. True, Quantum Physics prevents it to be localized
at a precise position.
Apparently, Heisenberg’s uncer-
tainty principle allows it to have a precise position, but
the price for this is a completely uncertain momentum.
This uncertainty of the momentum will make the immedi-
ately next position completely uncertain too. But maybe
our system can be made to collapse periodically in a pre-
cise place. If we go in this direction, we invoke quantum
eﬀects for merely storing a classical bit!
And even if
our computer is classical, invoking quantum mechanical
collapse in order to obtained localized consciousness
1. violates Claim R+, by appealing to quantum eﬀects
to allow the existence of mental states,
2. appeals to quantum nonlocality, in an attempt to
avoid O-nonlocality.
So our bit has to be stored in a small region, but not a
precisely localized one. A Holmium atom in a relatively
stable state should do it. And we can be happy with the
situation, because such an atom is approximately local.
But it is not quite local, while the wavefunctions of its
particles are concentrated around the nucleus, they in
fact extend in space to inﬁnity! Flipping a bit encoded
in an atom involves changes of the wavefunction that ex-
tend to inﬁnite distances. Therefore, this “approximate
locality” is still nonlocal. Even if in practice there is no
way to probe this nonlocality, because our instruments
are also quantum, and the wavefunction collapses, and
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle kicks in.
But we can try to do even more, and assume an in-
terpretation of Quantum Physics which allows point-
particles – the Pilot-Wave Theory. This way, the bit can
be stored in the state of one of the well-localized point-
electrons of the Holmium atom. But the Pilot-Wave The-
ory is a paradigmatic example of nonlocal theory [12]:
the point-particles are guided by the pilot-wave, in a way
that depends on the positions of other point-particles in
a nonlocal way!
In addition, there is a severe limit of the amount of
information one can store and extract from a region of
space, the Bekenstein bound [10, 11, 15, 17]. And it turns
out that the information that can be stored at a point of
space is basically zero. No matter how eﬃcient we do it,
suppose we can reduce the implementation of the bits to
the Plank scale, we will always need an extended region
of space to store even a single bit.
So it appears that we cannot get rid of nonlocality,
even if we assume that mental states are determined by
a single bit!
It is true, this type of nonlocality may seem weaker,
and it is weaker, it doesn’t even contradict Claims R+
and R++. But the price is that we are limited to one-
bit mental states only! And what kind of mental state,
what kind of experience requires only one bit?
Is our
experience so simple, that a single bit is enough to sup-
port or describe it? What solution would be more crazy,
that mental states are O-nonlocal, or that they can be
stored in an electron (in a still nonlocal way)? Subjective
empirical observations show the following (conﬁrmed by
Damasio’s quote given in support of Observation 1):
Observation 6 (diversity of mental states). Our mental
states are complex and diverse, and there are deﬁnitely
more than two possible mental states.

16
Note that even if we take the position that the sub-
strate, the material of the brain, is essential to support
mental states, we still have to localize it at the level of
a single atom or a particle, and Quantum Physics still
does not allow true locality, just like I explained above,
and this kind of “localized homunculus” does not seem
plausible.
4.
Objections related to time
It remains a possible way out of the problem of di-
versity of mental states posed by Observation 6: assume
that mental states are as diverse as needed, but they are
not determined by a single bit, or by the state of a sin-
gle particle or even an atom, but are determined by a
sequence in time of the values that bit can have.
Objection 12. Even if assuming that mental states are
instantaneous implies that they are O-nonlocal, maybe
they are not instantaneous, maybe they are in fact ex-
tended in time. This violates both Principle PM and Ob-
servation 4, and therefore prevents you from reaching the
conclusion of Theorem 1.
Reply 12. The claim that mental states are not instanta-
neous contradicts Metaprinciple DS, according to which
the physical world is described by a dynamical system. It
is hard to see how denying this Metaprinciple can allow
someone to still hold a materialist, or even a physicalist
position. But let us go this way, for the sake of the ar-
gument, and suppose that mental states can only exist
extended in time, as in Fig. 8.
FIG. 8. If mental states are extended in time, then they are
nonlocal in time.
Then, Eq.
(1) should be replaced with an equation
that expresses a dependency of mental states of the phys-
ical states at diﬀerent times, for example in an interval
[ti, ti+1] ⊂R,
mental state(ti) = Ψ
 physical state|[ti,ti+1]

(A1)
But this would only make mental states be nonlocal in
time. To better understand this, it may help to apply
the thought experiment from Sec. §II to this argument
of temporal extension of mental states.
Objection 13. I cannot accept your argument because
my philosophical position about time is eternalism (or
by contrary, presentism), which is in contradiction with
Observation 4.
Reply 13. Instantism is neutral to the dispute between
presentism (the position that only the present time ex-
ists, and the world changes in time) vs. eternalism (the
position that all instants of time are equally real and
immutable, but each instance of ourselves experiences its
own instant as the present). Instantism is consistent with
both of these positions, being simply a direct consequence
of the possibility to express the physical laws in terms of
dynamical systems, which is consistent with both presen-
tism and eternalism.
Moreover, a common argument raised by some presen-
tists against eternalism is that there can be no experience
of time in the block universe of eternalism. But instan-
tism shows that whatever explains our experience of time,
the explanation has to apply to each instant, so the very
reason that is assumed to allow the experience of time in
presentism has to remain the same in eternalism.
Objection 14. If Observation 4 is true and we can only
access our present state, then how is it even possible to
remember the past? How is it even possible to do Science?
Reply 14. Observation 4 is trivially correct, denying it
is out of discussion, but Objection 14 is nevertheless im-
portant. The problem that the present state can access
directly only itself is well-known and not speciﬁc to my
arguments, but a general problem of physics. The expla-
nation is related to the arrow of time. The hypothesis
that the universe was in a very special, low-entropy state
(presumably at the Big Bang), sometimes called the Past
Hypothesis, explains the overall increase of entropy in one
direction of time (which by deﬁnition is called future),
and other arrows of time.
This hypothesis is required by the understanding of
Thermodynamics in terms of Statistical Mechanics, and
solves several problems. In particular, it is thought to
explain that we know much more about the past com-
pared to the future because the present contains records
of past events. These records appear as patterns in the
macro states, and they would be indistinguishable or am-
biguous if the Past Hypothesis would not be true. This
is so because we would not know to interpret them as
memories of the past events; they could as well indicate
future events or be mere statistical ﬂuctuations.
There is plenty of literature addressing this problem of
time asymmetry and records convincingly, here is a se-
lection [2, 3, 16, 29, 31, 51, 59]. However, these problems
are not yet completely understood. But Observation 4 is
still correct, and any explanations of the arrows of time
have to take this into account.

17
Appendix B: Alternative options
In this section I discuss possible alternative options,
including some that seem to escape the argument that
mental states are O-nonlocal.
First, let us identify the possible alternatives to O-
nonlocality by looking into the assumptions of Theorem
1 and of Corollary 1. Corollary 1 establishes that each of
Claims R+ is R++ are inconsistent with the Integration
Property. If we want to save classicality, we can reject
Principle PM, the Integration Property, or Claim R.
Option 1 (deny Principle PM or the Integration Prop-
erty, instrumentalist version). The role of Science is only
to give an instrumentalist reduction of mental states to
physical states, but not necessarily an ontological reduc-
tion. Consequently, as long as the claimed O-nonlocality
of mental states does not lead to faster-than-light or back-
in-time signaling or other violations of the known physi-
cal laws, we should not even care about the mental states,
because they are not objective properties. Since private
experience is not objectively veriﬁable, it does not need
to be explained. One should only care about the physical
states, which are observable, and our language should not
be contaminated by statements about mind, conscious-
ness, etc.
Comment 1. The role and deﬁnition of Science may be
under debate. But if we assume that there is a reality,
and that our knowledge is entitled to seek explanations
about that reality, then a mere deﬁnition of Science as In-
strumentalism cannot make the questions go away. The
arguments in this article are directed towards the under-
standing of reality, which includes the mental states. In
fact, mental states are the way we even know about re-
ality. If we are committed to Instrumentalism, we have
to acknowledge that the primary instrument used in ex-
ploring objectivity is subjective:
Deﬁnition 7 (Objectivity). When a property of a sys-
tem is in principle accessible to all observers, and those
observing it agree on its value, the property and its obser-
vation are said to be objective, even if it may be just an
approximation of reality. Properties inaccessible even in
principle to more than a single observer are called sub-
jective.
Science can include among its goals also the explana-
tion of mental states, and conversely, mind is required to
do Science. This is not a singular case in Science, where
we often obtain relations that are not one-directional, for
example in General Relativity the distribution of mat-
ter aﬀects the spacetime curvature, which in turn aﬀects
how matter is distributed.
We learn about the world
through our minds, and about our minds by research-
ing our world. We hope we can break out of this loop
into an ascending spiral, and this turned out to be the
case so far. But our access to this spiral is not through
some God’s eye view that provides us full objectivity, as
we sometimes tend to see Science, but rather trough the
frog’s eye view of our limited and biased mental states.
Therefore, I think there is justiﬁcation also for the epis-
temically modest view that what we interpret as objectiv-
ity is merely the consensus emerging from corroborating
more subjective views, as captured in Deﬁnition 7.
Whether according to human-made deﬁnitions, the
questions about mental states lie in the ﬁeld of Science
or of Philosophy, these are questions about things we ex-
perience as real, and it is justiﬁed to ask them and to try
to answer them, even if they eventually will turn out to
“only seem to be real” as Dennett phrased it [25].
A position like Dennett’s heterophenomenology, or any
similar position which demarcates Science as being only
about the objectively observable, is perfectly justiﬁed as
long as it acknowledges this demarcation. This assump-
tion is very useful in allowing Science to focus on what
we can prove to others, but there is no objective proof
that this way can exhaust all aspects of reality.
Option 2 (deny Principle PM or the Integration Prop-
erty, illusionist version). There are simply no mental
states, period. This will do away with the whole prob-
lem, because if there are no mental states, there is no
need for the function Ψ postulated in Principle PM, such
a function would make no sense at all. Mental states are
an illusion of some physical states arranged in the right
conﬁguration that corresponds to that illusion.
Comment 2. I confess that I have no objective proof that
Option 2 is not available. But I also confess that I have
no idea what even means that there are no mental states,
or that they are illusions.
Mental states may include
wrong or unreal impressions, illusions about who you are,
about your mental states themselves, but even if these are
illusions, there is an experience of these illusions. Bill Nye
said it very concisely, with his characteristic wit [5]
Am I thinking, or am I just thinking that I’m
thinking?
Taking Dennett’s arguments as an example [25], I fully
agree that they show that there is no homunculus, no
Cartesian Theater, and even no objectively observable
Integration Property. His arguments can be interpreted
the way Dennett and many of his readers do, as show-
ing that mental states are not real, they “only seem to
be real”. But the same arguments can be interpreted as
showing that the classical models are inherently incom-
plete, precisely for lacking the Integration Property and
for deeming as unreal the primary tools we use to do
Science, our own minds. Conversely, the very arguments
in this article can be interpreted by someone who denies
the reality of mental states as providing even more direct
and more general evidence for their non-existence. Un-
less of course my argument makes empirical predictions,
as I argue to be expected in Implication 1.
At any rate, no matter how much I would try to con-
vince someone that I do have mental states, that person
can always appeal to objectivity and say that the only

18
things that exist are the measurable things, the mea-
surable properties of physical systems. That person (a
physical system for that matter) is free to deny the very
existence of mental states, because they are not directly
measurable. While I can report my mental states to other
people, the very process of reporting them means turning
them into physical means of communication (like sounds
or written text), resulting in physical processes, and it
can always be said that this is all there is.
Sometimes, it becomes very diﬃcult to distinguish
among Options 1 and 2. As Searle put it [70],
Very few people are willing to come right
out and say that consciousness does not ex-
ist. But it has recently become common for
authors to redeﬁne the notion of conscious-
ness so that it no longer refers to actual con-
scious states, that is, inner, subjective, qual-
itative, ﬁrst-person mental states, but rather
to publicly observable third-person phenom-
ena. Such authors pretend to think that con-
sciousness exists, but in fact they end up
denying its existence.
Theorem 1 does not assume directly Claim R, it as-
sumes Principle PM, which, while being a consequence
of Claim R, it can be true in any approach to the mind-
body problem which admits a relation between the men-
tal states and the physical states. So in fact Corollary 1
can be generalized to
Corollary 3. Given Observation 3, locality and the ex-
istence of physical correlates of mental states cannot both
be true.
Proof. Principle PM states that there is a correspondence
Ψ between physical and mental states, see eq. (1). But Ψ
is not necessarily a function of the form f : A →B, since
it is probably not deﬁned for all physical states, because
not all physical states appear to support mental states.
It is a partial function, because it is deﬁned on a sub-
set of all possible physical states. Moreover, it is as well
hard to prove that Ψ is surjective, there may be mental
states without physical correspondent. But in all these
cases, Ψ is a relation, i.e. a subset of all the pairs of the
form (mental state, physical state), of the Cartesian
product between the set of all physical states and the set
of all mental states. Even in this general case, Princi-
ple PM can be true, unless the relation Ψ is an empty
subset of this Cartesian product, or a small subset that
makes the relation between physical and mental states
irrelevant.
But as long as there is a relevant relation,
i.e. as long as the physical state has something to say
about the mental state, even if it does not completely
determine it, Principle PM is true and Theorem 1 can be
applied, with the consequence that O-nonlocality is re-
quired. So to enforce the locality of the mental states, we
have to make them supported by one-bit or one-particle
physical states, which means to make the relation Ψ a
small subset of the Cartesian product, i.e. to reject the
existence of such a relation between physical and mental
states, contrary to Observation 6 of diversity of mental
states.
This suggests other options to avoid O-nonlocality.
Option 3 (deny Claim R). Assume dualism, property
dualism, panpsychism, neutral monism or other vews
about consciousness that deny physicalism. From Corol-
lary 3, we see that Claim R is not necessary to reach the
conclusion that mental states are O-nonlocal. What needs
to be assumed for this to hold are Observations 1 and 3,
and a weak form of Principle PM, in which mental states
are at least partially a function of the physical states, or
in which there is a relation, in the mathematical sense de-
scribed in the proof of the Corollary. This relation does
not have to involve the full mental state. The consequence
of the generalization of Corollary 1 to Corollary 3 is that
mental states have to be O-nonlocal even in other theo-
ries about consciousness like those mentioned in Option
3. Now, if in these theories there are “nonphysical mental
properties”, they can be the ones to support entirely the
O-nonlocality, and the “physical properties” can remain
classical. So these theories do not require quantum ef-
fects, since they already made other assumptions, beyond
both classical and quantum physicalism.
Comment 3. This is a way to avoid nonlocal physics, but
without saving even the more general Claim R, because
dualism introduces nonphysical properties. I cannot even
imagine what would be nonphysical properties, since as
long as they are consistently describable by propositions,
we can include them among the physical ones, by ex-
tending what we mean by physics. On the other hand,
O-nonlocality is allowed by Quantum Physics, the price
being to give up Claim R+. I do not see how this al-
ternative option would work, or how it would be able to
do more than quantum physicalism, unless it has other
advantages, the most desirable one being to explain sen-
tient experience. But for the moment no explanation of
sentient experience is known [75].
Option 4 (deny Principle PM and Claim R). This Op-
tion is similar to Option 3, but, in addition, it assumes
that mental state can act on the physical world through
very localized inputs in the brain, in a local way consistent
with the arguments from §A 3. It does not violate Obser-
vation 6, by being richer than what the atom or particle
or bit through which the brain accepts them as inputs can
support. Imagine a computer whose input is a one-button
keyboard, and you can input using the Morse code. One
can input any text like this. So, if the physical state
from eq. (1) is just the input to the brain, not the true
physical correlate of the mental state, rich mental states
can exist and express themselves physically.
Comment 4. Please refer to Comment 3. While this kind
of dualism is in principle possible, I personally think it is
premature to accept it. Other options allow us to know
more about consciousness, and their exploration is not

19
yet exhausted.
Accepting this kind of dualism would
mean to give up too early. While I cannot refute this
option, I ﬁnd it unhelpful, at least for the moment.
Option 5 (single-bit temporal sequence). The physical
system underlying mental states contains only one bit at
a time, but the value of the bit changes in time, and the
sequence of these bits is what underlies the mental states.
Comment 5. This option was discussed in §A 3, and in
Objection 12, with the conclusion that this would still be
nonlocality, albeit in time.
Option 6. There is a way to store and access as much
information as needed at a single point of space: holo-
morphic functions. An analytic or holomorphic function
is deﬁned on an extended space, but its values, and the
values of its partial derivatives at each point of space, can
be used to determine the value of the function at any other
point, by using power series expansions at that point.
Comment 6. This is mathematically true. In fact, Stoica
[74] argues that the fundamental laws of physics may be
holomorphic, and that the ontology is not distributed in
space or spacetime, but it is all concentrated in a germ
of the holomorphic ﬁeld, or an equivalence class of germs
of the holomorphic ﬁeld, from which the ﬁelds can be
recovered by power series expansion and analytic contin-
uation.
A problem with this option is that there is no known
way to access even the precise value, let alone the values
of the higher order partial derivatives of the hypothet-
ical ﬁeld, and if this would be possible, it has to work
only up to a certain, unknown limit, because otherwise it
could be used to violate faster-than-light or back-in-time
no-signaling. There is no known mechanism other than
quantum measurement to extract even partial informa-
tion from the germ. But, for this discussion, the most
important aspect is that the germ of a holomorphic ﬁeld
is essentially nonlocal anyway. So, even if this Option
would be true, we are back to nonlocality, although it is
not clear how this can be related to quantum nonlocality.
But there may be some indications that such a relation
exists [76].
Option 7. Theorem 1 is correct, and mental states are
indeed O-nonlocal.
Comment 7. I think this is the right conclusion. But I
have no explanation for how this works, and no relevant
understanding of the consequences of this option. In Sec.
§IV I argued that there is a strong parallelism with quan-
tum nonlocality, but this does not answer the questions,
it merely provides a physical support for nonlocality.
[1] S. Aaronson. Why I am not an Integrated Information
Theorist (or, The Unconscious Expander), 2014.
[2] D.Z. Albert. Time and chance. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England, 2003.
[3] D.Z. Albert. After physics. Harvard University Press,
2015.
[4] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. W. Misner. Republication
of: The dynamics of general relativity. General Relativity
and Gravitation, 40(9):1997–2027, 2008.
[5] The Origins Project at ASU.
The great debate:
The
storytelling
of
science
(oﬃcial)
-
(Part
2/2).
http://youtu.be/40YIIaF1qiw#t=13m50s.
[6] H. Atmanspacher.
Quantum approaches to conscious-
ness. In E.N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, winter 2019 edition, 2019.
[7] H. Atmanspacher and T. Filk. Contextuality revisited:
Signaling may diﬀer from communicating. In Quanta and
Mind, pages 117–127. Springer, 2019.
[8] G.A. Baker Jr. Formulation of quantum mechanics based
on the quasi-probability distribution induced on phase
space. Phys. Rev., 109(6):2198, 1958.
[9] I.
Basieva,
V.H.
Cervantes,
E.N.
Dzhafarov,
and
A. Khrennikov.
True contextuality beats direct inﬂu-
ences in human decision making. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.,
148:1925–1937, 2019.
[10] J.D. Bekenstein. Universal upper bound on the entropy-
to-energy ratio for bounded systems.
Phys. Rev. D,
23(2):287, 1981.
[11] J.D. Bekenstein.
How does the entropy/information
bound work? Found. Phys., 35(11):1805–1823, 2005.
[12] J.S. Bell. Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechan-
ics: Collected papers on quantum philosophy. Cambridge
University Press, 2004.
[13] S. Blackmore and E.T. Tro´scianko. Consciousness: An
Introduction. Routledge, 2018.
[14] N. Block. Troubles with functionalism. 1978.
[15] R. Bousso. The holographic principle. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
74(3):825, 2002.
[16] S.M. Carroll. From eternity to here: the quest for the
ultimate theory of time. Penguin, 2010.
[17] H. Casini. Relative entropy and the Bekenstein bound.
Class. Quant. Grav., 25(20):205021, 2008.
[18] V.H. Cervantes and E.N. Dzhafarov. Snow Queen is evil
and beautiful: Experimental evidence for probabilistic
contextuality in human choices. Decision, 5(3):193, 2018.
[19] D.J. Chalmers. Facing up to the problem of conscious-
ness.
Journal of consciousness studies, 2(3):200–219,
1995.
[20] D.J. Chalmers. The conscious mind: In search of a fun-
damental theory. Oxford university press, 1996.
[21] P.M. Churchland. Eliminative materialism and proposi-
tional attitudes. The Journal of Philosophy, 78(2):67–90,
1981.
[22] C.J.S. Clarke. The nonlocality of mind. Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 2(3):231–240, 1995.
[23] D. Cole. The Chinese Room Argument. In E.N. Zalta,
editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Meta-

20
physics Research Lab, Stanford University, spring 2020
edition, 2020.
[24] A. Damasio. Self comes to mind: Constructing the con-
scious brain. Vintage, 2012.
[25] D. Dennett. Consciousness explained. Penguin UK, 1993.
[26] D. Dennett. Illusionism as the obvious default theory of
consciousness. J Conscious Stud, 23(11-12):65–72, 2016.
[27] D. Dennett. From bacteria to Bach and back: The evo-
lution of minds. WW Norton & Company, 2017.
[28] F. Dretske. Naturalizing the mind. MIT Press, 1997.
[29] A. Eddington. The nature of the physical world. Dent,
London, 1928.
[30] G.S. Engel,
T.S. Calhoun,
E.L. Read,
T.-K. Ahn,
T. Manˇcal, Y.-C. Cheng, R.E. Blankenship, and G.R.
Fleming. Evidence for wavelike energy transfer through
quantum coherence in photosynthetic systems. Nature,
446(7137):782–786, 2007.
[31] R.P. Feynman. The character of physical law. MIT press,
1965.
[32] M.P.A. Fisher. Quantum cognition: The possibility of
processing with nuclear spins in the brain. Ann. Phys.,
362:593–602, 2015.
[33] J.A. Fodor. The language of thought, volume 5. Harvard
University Press, 1975.
[34] P. Goﬀ. Consciousness and fundamental reality. Oxford
University Press, 2017.
[35] Trent-Von Haesler and Mario Beauregard.
Near-death
experiences in cardiac arrest: Implications for the con-
cept of non-local mind. Archives of clinical psychiatry
(S˜ao Paulo), 40(5):197–202, 2013.
[36] S. Hagan, S.R. HameroﬀR, and J.A. Tuszy´nski. Quan-
tum computation in brain microtubules:
Decoherence
and biological feasibility.
Phys. Rev. E, 65(6):061901,
2002.
[37] S. Hameroﬀ. Consciousness, neurobiology and quantum
mechanics: The case for a connection. In The emerging
physics of consciousness, pages 193–253. Springer, 2006.
[38] S.R. Hameroﬀand R. Penrose. Consciousness in the uni-
verse – an updated review of the “Orch OR” theory. In
Biophysics of Consciousness: A Foundational Approach,
pages 517–599. World Scientiﬁc, 2017.
[39] L. Hartmann, W. D¨ur, and H.J. Briegel. Steady-state
entanglement in open and noisy quantum systems. Phys.
Rev. A, 74(5):052304, 2006.
[40] W. Heisenberg. Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution
in Modern Science. Harper & Brothers Publishers, New
York, 1958.
[41] K Hepp. Coherence and decoherence in the brain. Jour-
nal of mathematical physics, 53(9):095222, 2012.
[42] D.R. Hofstadter. I am a strange loop. Basic books, New
York, 2007.
[43] K. Horton. NANDputer lives!, 2013.
[44] W. James.
The principles of psychology.
Benton;
Chicago, IL, USA, 1890.
[45] C. Koch and K. Hepp. Quantum mechanics in the brain.
Nature, 440(7084):611–611, 2006.
[46] R. Lahav and N. Shanks. How to be a scientiﬁcally re-
spectable” property-dualist”. The Journal of Mind and
Behavior, pages 211–232, 1992.
[47] J. Lau and M. Deutsch. Externalism about mental con-
tent. In E.N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, fall 2019 edition, 2019.
[48] G.W. Leibniz. The monadology. In Philosophical papers
and letters, pages 643–653. Springer, 1989.
[49] J. Levin. Functionalism. In E.N. Zalta, editor, The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research
Lab, Stanford University, fall 2018 edition, 2018.
[50] J. Li and G.S. Paraoanu. Generation and propagation
of entanglement in driven coupled-qubit systems. New
Journal of Physics, 11(11):113020, 2009.
[51] B. Loewer. The mentaculus vision. Harvard University
Press, 2020.
[52] Pim Van Lommel.
Non-local consciousness, a concept
based on scientiﬁc research on near-death experiences
during cardiac arrest. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
20(1-2):7–48, 2013.
[53] F. London and E. Bauer. The theory of observation in
quantum mechanics. In Quantum theory and measure-
ment, pages 217–259. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, NJ, 1983.
[54] W.S. McCulloch and W. Pitts.
A logical calculus of
the ideas immanent in nervous activity.
The Bulletin
of Mathematical Biophysics, 5(4):115–133, 1943.
[55] F.D. Natterer, K. Yang, W. Paul, P. Willke, T. Choi,
T. Greber, A.J. Heinrich, and C.P. Lutz. Reading and
writing single-atom magnets. Nature, 543(7644):226–228,
2017.
[56] Jennifer Ouellette. A new spin on the quantum brain.
Quanta Magazine, 2016.
[57] G. Panitchayangkoon, D. Hayes, K.A. Fransted, J.R.
Caram, E. Harel, J. Wen, R.E. Blankenship, and G.S.
Engel. Long-lived quantum coherence in photosynthetic
complexes at physiological temperature. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 107(29):12766–12770,
2010.
[58] T. Parent.
Externalism and self-knowledge.
In E.N.
Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, fall 2017
edition, 2017.
[59] R. Penrose. The emperor’s new mind. Oxford University
Press, 1989.
[60] G. Piccinini. Functionalism, computationalism, and men-
tal states. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. A, 35(4):811–833, 2004.
[61] E.M. Pothos and J.R. Busemeyer. Can quantum prob-
ability provide a new direction for cognitive modeling?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3):255–274, 2013.
[62] H. Putnam. Psychophysical predicates. In W. Capitan
and D. Merrill, editors, Art, Mind, and Religion. Pitts-
burgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.
[63] H. Putnam. The meaning of ‘meaning’. Minnesota Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of Science, 7:131–193, 1975.
[64] P. Pylkk¨anen.
Quantum theories of consciousness.
In
R.J. Gennaro, editor, The Routledge Handbook of Con-
sciousness, pages 216–231. Routledge, 2018.
[65] William Ramsey. Eliminative materialism. In E.N. Zalta,
editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Meta-
physics Research Lab, Stanford University, spring 2019
edition, 2019.
[66] M. Rescorla. The Computational Theory of Mind. In
Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, fall 2020 edition, 2020.
[67] S.J. Russell and P. Norvig.
Artiﬁcial intelligence:
a
modern approach. Pearson Education Limited, Malaysia,
2016.
[68] S. Sahu, S. Ghosh, K. Hirata, D. Fujita, and A. Bandy-
opadhyay.
Multi-level memory-switching properties of

21
a single brain microtubule.
Applied Physics Letters,
102(12):123701, 2013.
[69] J.R. Searle.
Minds, brains, and programs.
Behavioral
and brain sciences, 3(3):417–424, 1980.
[70] J.R. Searle.
The rediscovery of the mind.
MIT press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1992.
[71] H.P. Stapp. A quantum theory of the mind-brain inter-
face.
In Mind, matter and quantum mechanics, pages
147–174. Springer, 2004.
[72] H.P. Stapp. A quantum-mechanical theory of the mind-
brain connection. In Beyond Physicalism, pages 157–193.
Rowman & Littleﬁeld Lanham, 2015.
[73] O.C.
Stoica.
And
the
math
will
set
you
free.
Foundational
Questions
Institute,
“Trick
or
Truth:
the
Mysterious
Connection
Between
Physics
and
Mathematics”
essay
contest,
third
prize,
2015.
http://fqxi.org/community/forum/topic/2383,
last
accessed January 7, 2021.
[74] O.C.
Stoica.
Indra’s
net
–
Holomorphic
funda-
mentalness.
Foundational
Questions
Institute,
What
Is
“Fundamental”
essay
contest,
2017.
https://fqxi.org/community/forum/topic/2971,
last
accessed January 7, 2021.
[75] O.C. Stoica.
The negative way to sentience.
Preprint
on http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/17036/ - last accessed
January 7, 2021, March 2020.
[76] O.C. Stoica. The post-determined block universe. Quan-
tum Stud. Math. Found., 2020. arXiv:1903.07078.
[77] O.C. Stoica. Standard quantum mechanics without ob-
servers. Preprint arXiv:2008.04930, 2020.
[78] M. Tegmark.
Importance of quantum decoherence in
brain processes. Phys. Rev. E, 61(4):4194, 2000.
[79] M. Tegmark.
Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest
for the Ultimate Nature of Reality.
Knopf Doubleday
Publishing Group, 2014.
[80] G. Tononi, M. Boly, M. Massimini, and Ch. Koch.
Integrated information theory:
from consciousness to
its physical substrate.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
17(7):450–461, 2016.
[81] A.M. Turing.
Computing machinery and intelligence.
Mind, 59(236):433–460, 1950.
[82] J. von Neumann. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics. Princeton University Press, 1955.
[83] Virginie Van Wassenhove. Minding time in an amodal
representational
space.
Phil.
Trans.
R.
Soc.
B,
364(1525):1815–1830, 2009.
[84] C.P. Weingarten, P.M. Doraiswamy, and M. Fisher. A
new spin on neural processing: quantum cognition. Fron-
tiers in human neuroscience, 10:541, 2016.
[85] E.P. Wigner. On the quantum correction for thermody-
namic equilibrium. Phys. Rev., 40:749–759, Jun 1932.
[86] E.P. Wigner. Remarks on the mind-body question, pages
284–302. Heinmann, London, 1961.

