Reactive Epistemology
Philipp Blum
The Future of Swiss Philosophy, Ligerz, September ڥڥ, ڦڤڥګ
Epistemic normativity
When we say, of Sam, that he is epistemically but not morally good, for example, are we making a distinction such as
between, e.g., him being good-at reasoning but not so good-at acting (or perhaps: behaving morally?), or rather that he is a
better reasoner than a moral agent, or rather that he is “good” in the epistemic sense but not in the moral sense? The
most popular way of drawing the distinction introduces further complications: saying that his reasoning, but not his acting
deserves praise, not only forgets that his reasoning is part of his acting, but also assumes that it is the same thing (‘praise’)
he deserves for the one but not the other. Not only do we rarely praise people for their reasoning, but even when we do, we
do not generally exhort them, but simply acknowledge that their reasoning is well, i.e. competently (and sometimes even
skillfully) done.ڥ Whether they should do it at all, or even should do it well if they do it at all, is left open by our registration
of its quality.
The value of knowledge
Are there epistemic values? The question is ambiguous between (i) are there speciﬁc, domain-speciﬁc values in the ﬁeld
of epistemology? and (ii) are there values that are also epistemic? The question has real interest only if taken in the
second sense. We are not interested in schwepistemic values, for example, where schwepistemology is deﬁned by its aim
of maximising the ratio of bullshit among your beliefs. Someone might say that you schwepistemically ought to believe
any bullshit whatsoever, but as this does not entail that you ought to believe any bullshit whatsoever, this schwepistemic
‘obligation’ is of little interest to us. The question then is whether key topics of epistemology, like truth or knowledge, have
value.
“The value of knowledge” (or “the value of truth”) presents a second ambiguity: in one sense, “value of ” is appositive, as
in “the value of justice”; in the other, it is a functor mapping knowledge to something else, i.e. its value. Those who think
that the value of knowledge can be characterised in non-epistemic terms understand it in the second way. But we should
understand it in this way even if we think, as we should, that the value of knowledge is irreducibly epistemic. Knowledge
has value, but is not itself a value – it is an epistemic state, not an ideal aim of epistemic states.ڦ
What is the value of knowledge, understood along these terms? I will give my answer in three steps:
(i) why is it good to have beliefs at all, i.e. to have the attitude of wanting-to-know?
(ii) why is it good to avoid mistakes?
(iii) why is it good to be able to provide reasons?
For reasons I hope will become clearer below, I think we should strictly separate these three levels. With respect to them,
the question in what the value of knowledge consists receives three different answers:
(i’) it’s good to want-to-know because this is noble and sets us above the lower animals;
(ii’) it’s good to avoid mistakes, because once we have engaged in (i), we should not do it so badly that it would have been
better not to engage in the activity at all;
(iii’) it’s good to be able to provide reasons because this makes one virtuous.
level ڥ: why have beliefs at all?
Why is it good to engage in the pursuit of truth? Why shouldn’t we not be disinterested in the truth, abstain from forming
any beliefs and from making any judgements at all? We certainly could do so, but it would be a bad thing to do. There
are instrumental reasons for this: even if a life without belief may realise a certain number of goods, the pursuit of practical
goals is certainly facilitated by beliefs. There are, however, also epistemic reasons, which constitute part of the value of
knowledge.
ڥ. I am not sure that such acknowledgment deserves to be called “praise”, but intuitions (and cultural practices) may well vary here.
ڦ. Truth, on the other hand, not only has value, but is itself a value. We will come back to this below.
ڥ

It is good to engage in the pursuit of truth because our ability to do so is part of what sets us above the brutes. Even if
other animals may be capable of beliefs, the pursuit of truth as such seems unique to humans. It is also their best claim to
intrinsic value – we are the rational animals after all. What does it mean to engage in the pursuit of truth? It is to have a
sui generis attitude of wanting-to-know. This attitude is sui generis, because it is not the attitude of wanting or desiring to
be in some state of knowing, but rather a direct, un-decomposable and primitive relation to some truthbearer.
Couldn’t we have beliefs without engaging in the pursuit of truth? Why should it be impossible to have beliefs in the
absence of an attitude of wanting-to-know? And even if it is, of what kind is the relevant impossibility? It would be clearly
insufﬁcient to point out that a Moore-paradoxical attitude to one’s own beliefs (“I believe that ԟ, but I do not think that ԟ
is true”) is irrational, for this does not yet answer the question why it is good to be rational in that sense. The connection
between believing and wanting-to-know must be tighter. Wanting-to-know is constitutive of our having beliefs, which are
attempts at knowledge. Knowledge is in that sense explanatorily more basic than belief (Williamson ڦڤڤڤ; Hossack ڦڤڤګ).
While you cannot, I would hold, have beliefs without engaging in the pursuit of truth, i.e. without displaying the attitude
of wanting-to-know, it is certainly possible to have the attitude but still live a life without beliefs. That was precisely what
the ancient sceptics advocated (Burnyeat ڥڭڬڧ: ڥڦڪ): they advocated ataraxia, a “matter of not worrying about truth and
falsity any more” Burnyeat (ڥڭڬڧ: ڥڦڥ). But because ataraxia was supposed to be grounded in a prior recognition of the equal
strength (isostheneia) of opposed assertions, it grows out of a prior attitude of wanting-to-know. Those who lack the attitude
are fools, not skeptics. Wanting-to-know is in this sense prior to belief – it is presupposed by, but does not presuppose it.
The aim of belief, therefore, is not truth, but knowledge. The most basic epistemic value is the value of knowledge, not of
truth.
Why is it good to have beliefs? Perhaps surprisingly: because they may be false. That they may be false means that there is
no guarantee that our attempts at knowledge succeed. This is the important truth in fallibilism: there is no easy knowledge.
Contra Lewis (ڥڭڭڪ: ڨڥڭ), fallible knowledge is not knowledge despite uneliminated possibilities of error. Contra Cohen (ڥڭڬڬ:
ڭڥ), Stanley (ڦڤڤک: ڥڦڬ) and Brueckner (ڦڤڤک: ڧڬڨ), neither is fallible knowledge knowledge of a truth that is not entailed
by the evidence. The reason for this is simple: if either of these accounts were true, there would be no fallible knowledge.
If I know that ԟ, then surely ԟ is true in all possibilities uneliminated by my knowledge (cf. Hawthorne ڦڤڤڨ: ڦک). If my
evidence does not entail what I claim to know, then I cannot taking (what I take to be) my knowledge to be evidence. Even
fallible knowledge is evidence, however (cf. Williamson ڦڤڤڤ).ڧ
level ڦ: avoiding mistakes
An analogy to house-building may be helpful here: suppose, for the sake of the argument, that it is good to build houses
at all. While there is nothing reproachable about living in caves, the cave-men miss something important. This positive
evaluation of house-building is implicitly conditional: it is good to build proper houses, i.e. houses that to some degree fulﬁl
their essential function of protecting their inhabitants from the elements. The construction of houses that not only fail to
fulﬁl this role, but positively endanger their inhabitants (in the sense that they are less safe within than outside the house),
is not just bad, but forbidden.
level ڧ: epistemic mights, not epistemic oughts
To be sure, where evidence is conclusive if available at all, as it is in logic, we have a negative obligation to avoid mistakes:
we should not assert that Ԡ if we previously asserted that ԟ and that ԟ ݂Ԡ and want to stand by these assertions. Even this
negative obligation is conditional, however: it applies only to epistemic subject who decided to engage in the pursuit of
truth at all.
The model of emotions
Suppose I am standing in a Roman amphitheatre, about to be eaten by a lion. Looking at the hungry, angry, ferocious
lion before me, I note certain characteristics, of me, the lion and the situation, that induce me to believe that the lion is
dangerous (to me, in this situation) and also to see it as dangerous. In feeling fear of the lion, the world, and some aspect of
it in particular, is presented to me as dangerous. By feeling the fear, not just as a consequence of it, I am motivated to ﬂee
– this marks a contrast to the judgement that the lion is dangerous. By feeling the fear, not just as a consequence of it, I am
in contact with danger and in a position to acquire the concept of danger – this marks a contrast to the perception of the
lion as dangerous.
Reactive epistemology?
Like perception and emotion, belief is a reaction: the representational state is an entertaining of a thought, and the mental
act is a type of Stoic assent (in the case of belief; dissent in the case of disbelief).
ڧ. Could we at least deﬁne fallibilism about justiﬁcation as the negation of “if մ has justiﬁcation for believing that ֋ in virtue of having evidence ր,
then ր entail ֋” (Brueckner ڦڤڤک: ڧڬڨ–ڧڬک)? I do not think so. Fallibilism about knowledge and about justiﬁcation is motivated by epistemic humility, ie.
the recognition that our epistemic powers are ﬁnite and to err is human. Gettier-cases and the problem of induction are not needed for this.
ڦ

In the same way that thinking, by the ‘afﬁrmative’ mode, gives beliefs, it may, by the ‘interrogative’ mode, give questions,
and by the ‘mode of conjecture’, suppositions. What is belief a reaction to? Brentano may help us here, drawing our
attention to the possibility that inner representation is containment (i.e., works roughly in the way in which a quotation
name represents what it quotes by surrounding it by quotation marks). Quoting De Anima III. ڦ, p. ڨڦک, b, ڥڦ, he remarks
that a doubling of intentional objects is only needed if we individuate them by the representational states, but not if we
individuate them (correctly) by the mental acts directed at it: “the presentation [Vorstellung] of the sound is connected with
the presentation of the presentation of the sound in such a peculiarly intimate way that the former, by obtaining [indem sie
besteht], contributes inwardly to the being of the other [innerlich zum Sein der anderen beiträgt].” (bk. ڦ, ch. ڦ, §ڬ, ڥڬګڨ:
ڥڪګ)
The resulting picture is the following: There is thinking going on, and some of it is partitioned into a belief of a certain
content by an attitude of assent the subject directs at its own mental state. Such a belief, however, is not a representational
vehicle in the traditional sense, that allows the subject to represent something. Rather, the belief, as a mental particular
(and thus distinguished from the state of believing), is itself produced by (and thus posterior to) the representing of form.
The attitude of assent directed at the immanent object is at the same time, and by the same act, a representation of itself
as a psychological state, i.e. a belief. It thus projects its own form onto an amorphous mental process of thinking. There
is a peculiar interweaving [“eigentümliche Verwebung”, ڥڬګڨ: ڥڪګ] of the object of inner presentation (the belief) and the
presentation itself (the thinking), and both belong to the same act, the believing (cf. also Burge ڥڭڬڬ: ڪکڨ).
References
Brentano, Franz, ڥڬګڨ. Psychologie vom Empirischen Standpunkte, volume I. Leipzig: Dunker und Humblot. Second edition: Brentano (ڥڭڦڨ).
Brentano, Franz, ڥڭڦڨ. Psychologie vom Empirischen Standpunkt, volume I. ڦ edition. Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag. Edited by Oskar Kraus.
Brueckner, Anthony, ڦڤڤک. Fallibilism, Underdetermination, and Skepticism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research ګڥ(ڦ): ڧڬڨ–ڧڭڥ.
Burge, Tyler, ڥڭڬڬ. Individualism and Self-Knowledge. The Journal of Philosophy ڬک(ڥڥ): ڪڨڭ–ڪڪڧ. Reprinted in Burge (ڦڤڥڧ: کک–ڪګ).
Burge, Tyler, ڦڤڥڧ. Cognition Through Understanding. Number ڧ in Philosophical Essays, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Burnyeat, Myles F. (editor) , ڥڭڬڧ. The Skeptical Tradition. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.
Cohen, Stewart, ڥڭڬڬ. How to Be a Fallibilist. In Tomberlin, James E. (editor) Philosophical Perspectives ڦ: Epistemology, pp. ڭڥ–ڥڦڧ. Oxford: Basil Blackwell
Publishers.
Hawthorne, John, ڦڤڤڨ. Knowledge and Lotteries. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hossack, Keith G., ڦڤڤګ. The Metaphysics of Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, David, ڥڭڭڪ. Elusive Knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy ګڨ: کڨڭ–کڪګ. Reprinted in Lewis (ڥڭڭڭ: ڨڥڬ–ڨڨک).
Lewis, David, ڥڭڭڭ. Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanley, Jason, ڦڤڤک. Fallibilism and concessive knowledge attributions. Analysis ڪک(ڦ): ڥڦڪ–ڥڧڥ.
Williamson, Timothy, ڦڤڤڤ. Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ڧ

