Swarming bacterial fronts:
Dynamics and morphology of active
swarm interfaces propagating through passive frictional domains†
Joshua Tamayoa‡, Yuchen Zhangb‡, Alison E Pattesonc, Arezoo M. Ardekanib, Arvind
Gopinatha∗
Swarming, a multicellular type of ﬂagella-based motility observed in many bacteria species, enables
coordinated and rapid surface translocation, expansion and colonization.
In the swarming state,
bacterial ﬁlms display several characteristics of active matter including intense and persistence long-
ranged ﬂock like motions and strong ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁelds with signiﬁcant vorticity. Additionally
swarm fronts are typically dynamically evolving interfaces. Many of these fronts typically separate
motile active domains from passive highly frictional regions comprised of dead or non-motile bacteria.
Here, we study the evolving structural features of such active-passive interfaces in swarming Serratia
marcesens.
We expose localized regions of the swarm to high intensity wide-spectrum light and
create large domains comprised of tightly packed immotile bacteria. When the light source is turned
oﬀ, swarming bacteria outside this region advance into this highly frictional domain and continuously
reshape the interphase boundary. Integrating results from Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and
from intensity based image analysis, we ﬁnd that the evolving interface has both a clearly deﬁned
width and roughness. Correlations between spatially separated surface ﬂuctuations and damping of
the same are inﬂuenced by the interaction of the interfacial region with adjacently located collective
ﬂows. Dynamical growth exponents characterizing the spatiotemporal features of the surface are
extracted and are found to diﬀer from classically expected values for passive growth or erosion. To
isolate the eﬀects of hydrodynamic interactions generated by collective ﬂows and that arising from
steric interactions, we propose and analyze agent-based simulations with full hydrodynamics of rod-
shaped, self-propelled particles. Our computations capture qualitative features of the swarm and
predict correlation lengths consistent with experiments. Combining experiments with simulations,
we conclude that hydrodynamic and steric interactions enable diﬀerent modes of surface dynamics,
morphology and thus front invasion.
1
Introduction
Swarming migration or swarming in short is a multi-cellular mode
of ﬂagella-based motility1–4 that allows bacterial colonies to rapidly
and efﬁciently cover and subsequently colonize surfaces5–12. In na-
ture, this swarming can be viewed as a means to expand territory
quickly with collective long-ranged motion allowing for efﬁcient ex-
ploration. All forms of swarming bacterial ﬁlms share several char-
acteristics, including cooperative movement in thin ﬁlms, hyperﬂag-
ellation, secretion of a wetting agent, and a high-density population
of specialized swarmers7,8. Swarmers usually form a monolayer a
few millimeters wide near the leading edge; far from this boundary,
multilayered growth is observed1–4.
Swarming response is usually initiated by transferring planktonic
free-swimming bacteria in liquid media to soft agar gels. This pro-
cess results in a change to bacterial phenotypes that are morpho-
logically different (longer with more ﬂagella)5,9. As in bioﬁlm for-
mation13–16 (that is distinct and develops differently from swarm-
ing), swarms are dense and characterized by strong inter-cell in-
teractions. Characteristics of the state as well as onset of swarm-
aDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California Merced, Merced, CA.
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, Lafayette, IN.
cDepartment of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY.
‡Equal contribution
∗agopinath@ucmerced.edu
ing depends strongly on the nutrient composition of the liquid in
the substrate as well as viscosity of the ambient medium. Unlike
bioﬁlms, however, swarms are highly motile and feature long-range
collective motions7,9,17–25 that involve structures with clear length
scales and persistence times. From a biological standpoint, these
emergent ﬂow characteristics seem to confer beneﬁts relevant to
colonization and occupation of preferred niches6,7,26,27. Addition-
ally, enhanced surface expansion rates may help ﬁtness6 and also
yield elevated resistance to antibiotics27. Swarming contributes to
the ability of pathogenic species to cause and spread infections, in
part due to enhanced motility and in part due to the co-regulation
of associated virulence factors.
Besides being relevant in biology and medicine, swarming bac-
teria serve as a convenient experimental system to study and test
models for dense active matter and active ﬂuids23,28–32. Emergent
ﬂow features that are observed in swarms bear similarities to tur-
bulence in driven passive ﬂuids. Recent numerical and theoretical
studies have focused on the collective ﬂows and identiﬁed dynam-
ical exponents characterizing the energy spectrum and spatiotem-
poral features as well as variations near interfaces24,28. To explain
these features, theoretical models for swarming systems based on
adapted versions of classical nematic hydrodynamic theories and
hydrodynamic multiphase models have been used to characterize
the phase-separating active nematic and passive phases and prop-
agation of interfaces of active nematics on substrates33–36. Under-
Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–16 | 1

standing the role of swarming in enabling bacterial collective motil-
ity and rapid propagation is both important and timely; this will
require combination of experimental, analytical and computational
approaches.
An important feature of bacterial swarms are the dynamically
evolving interfaces and propagating fronts that form naturally. A
prototypical example of these fronts are the interfaces that separate
motile active domains from passive highly frictional regions com-
prised of dead or non-motile bacteria. In recent work24,25, we used
the response to wide-spectrum light to create internal active-passive
interfaces within dense active swarms of Serratia marcescens. The
overall effect of light was found to depend on both exposure time
and intensity; high intensities coupled with long exposure times
caused a permanent loss of motility25.
Combined with suitable
screens, this provided us a controllable method to generate macro-
scopic domains with nearly circular or straight interfaces. The pas-
sive domain and active swarm interact at this interphase boundary
where self-emergent, vortical ﬂows develop24. Our experiments re-
vealed that the interface region has a well-deﬁned thickness, with a
quantiﬁable surface energy and propagates with rich dynamics. In-
triguingly, our results also raise the possibility that the propagation
speed of the diffuse interface couples to local swarm velocity and
interface curvature24,37.
Here, we examine and investigate an equally important aspect
of the active-passive interface, namely its spatiotemporal structure.
The passive region comprises of densely packed aligned bacteria
arranged in static domains that are typically smaller than the struc-
ture of the collective ﬂow structures. Over time scales associated
with many lifetimes of these structures, the passive region there-
fore appears as a highly frictional domain which the active bacteria
have to penetrate in order to propagate. Employing PIV techniques
and intensity based image analysis, we ﬁnd that the diffuse, moving
interphase region is characterized by a well-deﬁned roughness pro-
ﬁle. Correlations between spatially and temporally separated sur-
face undulations are controlled by the interaction of the interface
region with the intense adjacently located active ﬂows. Dynamical
and growth exponents characterizing the spatiotemporal roughness
proﬁle differ from the canonical values valid for passive growth or
erosion. However, we do identify a self-similar behavior for the ex-
perimentally measured interfacial roughness opening up a question
for future exploration.
It is further of interest to understand if steric effects and hydro-
dynamic effects play equal roles in the interface propagation and
in determining the spatiotemporal features of the interface, speciﬁ-
cally roughness features and swarming intensity. Furthermore, un-
derstanding the relative importance of hydrodynamic interactions
will clarify the role of ﬂuid content in the underlying substrate. Our
experiments on Serratia marcescens do not allow us to discriminate
and separate the impact of purely steric effects from ﬂuid mediated
hydrodynamic interactions on the collective motion well within the
active phase as well as in the vicinity of the interface. To inves-
tigate each effect separately and also their combined effect when
acting in tandem, we analyze a discrete agent based simulations
that treat the bacteria as inertialess self-propelled rods (SPR) mov-
ing in a viscous ﬂuid in two dimensions with parameters chosen to
mimic the bacterial system. Taken together, our simulation results
and experiments, imply that hydrodynamic and steric interactions
enable different modes of front invasion.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present exper-
imental results and analysis of active swarming bacteria moving into
a densely packed domain of immotile bacteria. We focus on anal-
ysis of interfacial structure and morphology and roughness, com-
plementing our previous studies on the speed of propagation24,25.
Details of the agent based simulation model, scheme and imple-
mentation details are presented ﬁrst in Section 3, followed by a
discussion of our results. We ﬁrst compare features of the simulated
swarm with experimental data to check for consistency and ﬁdelity.
We then analyze results for the simulated swarms without and then
with hydrodynamic interactions and study the changes induced in
interface morphology and invasion dynamics. Taken together, our
experiments and simulations suggest that hydrodynamic and steric
interactions enable different modes of surface dynamics, morphol-
ogy and front invasion. We conclude in Section 4 by summarizing
our results and suggesting avenues for further experimental and
theoretical exploration.
2
Experiments: Swarming Serratia marcescens as a
model dense active system
The experimental protocols to prepare the swarms of Serratia
marcescens and the method of creating immotile (passive) do-
mains within actively swarming regions have been detailed previ-
ously24,25. We brieﬂy highlight aspects important to the current
work.
2.1
Methods and Materials
2.1.1
Growth of swarms and light exposure
Swarms of Serratia marcesens (ATCC 274, Manassas, VA) on agar
substrates were prepared by dissolving 1 w% Bacto Tryptone, 0.5
w% yeast extract, 0.5 w% NaCl , and 0.6 w% Bacto Agar in deion-
ized water. Melted agar was poured into petri dishes; to this 2 w%
of glucose solution (25 w%) was then added. Serratia marcescens
was then plated and inoculated on the solidiﬁed agar plates and
then incubated at 34oC. Colonies were observed to form at the in-
oculation site and then grow outward on the agar substrate. Ex-
periments on these swarming colonies were performed 12-16 hours
after inoculation. Figure 1(a) provides a snapshot of the swarm;
we observe the leading edge propagating onto free agar (top side,
white edge is the interface of the swarm propagating onto free me-
dia) while intense swarming is observed towards the lower half of
the ﬁgure as one moves away from this edge.
To generate an internal boundary separating active swarming do-
mains from a large passive immotile domain, we expose part of the
swarm to sustained high intensity light from an unﬁltered wide-
spectrum mercury lamp with known spectral characteristics. Stan-
dard ﬂuorescence microscope optical components were used to fo-
cus the light; the light path included a half-plane aperture.
The effects of light exposure on the collective swarming motility
of Serratia marcescens have been reported previously25. For small
exposure times (20 - 40 seconds) and weak intensities (I < 220 mW
at 535 nm) exposed cells remain active or are only temporarily pas-
sivated. For long exposure times (> 60 seconds) and sufﬁciently
high intensities (I > 220mW at 535 nm), the bacteria are rendered
immotile with large scale motions quenched permanently. For ex-
periments reported here, we chose an exposure time of 60 seconds
2 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

Fig. 1 (a) A section of a swarm front with velocity ﬁelds superimposed. The direction of propagation is upward. The free edge of the swarm is seen on the
top as the white curve. Intensity of the swarm increases rapidly as one moves into the swarm. The substrate is agar. We note that swarm speeds can reach
values of 50 µm/s. (b) The vortical and time-dependent nature of the collective ﬂows are easily observed by seeding the swarm ﬁlm with 2µm particles
(top, scale bar 25 µm) and then tracking their motions over time (below). We note persistent motion for small times leading to complex diﬀusion-like
response. Tracers that are close to each other may move apart rather rapidly. The length scales of the vortical structures are ∼20−25 µm; the residence
time of structures is around 0.8 seconds 24. (c) (Left) Raw image of the active (dark) - passive (light) edge generated by light exposure. Examination of
the vicinity of the front separating the active and passive domains 10s after exposure (t > 0) reveals strong velocity gradients (in color) in the active region.
In the passive phase, immotile bacteria reside in jammed states (see 1(e)) until they are swept away by the advancing front. Far from the interface, the
active ﬂows show intense vortical patterns, with clockwise and counter-clockwise patterns arrayed periodically. These vortices are transient and constantly
evolving and are interspersed with other features such as streamers and ﬂocks (see also ESM Movie 1). (d) Structural analysis using ImageJ and the
OrientationJ plugin of a section of the active-passive interface (see also ESM Movie 2). Passivated bacteria are to the bottom, the active swarm erodes
this passive region as it moves from top to bottom. We show (left) - length scales of similarly clusters, (middle, grayscale indicating degree of alignment)
the degree of alignment and (right) an instantaneous snapshot.
at intensity I = 370 µW (at 535 nm). Intense light under these con-
ditions when projected on the swarm through the half-plane aper-
ture yielded a paralyzed region (passive phase) within a swarming
domain (active phase) - the interphase boundary between the two
was roughly straight at scales larger than bacterial lengths and re-
mained so as long as exposure is maintained. When exposure was
stopped, the active phase penetrated the passive phase.
2.1.2
Imaging and PIV tools
High speed imaging coupled with structural analysis based on the
Orientation J plugin of the open-source software Image J38 and
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) based on the open source soft-
ware PIVLab39 were then used to analyze the dynamics of the
front region during both pre- and post-exposure stages. Bacteria
were recorded (with the agar plates facing down) using an inverted
Nikon microscope Eclipse Ti-U using either a Nikon 10x (NA = 0.3)
or 20x (NA = 0.45) objective. Images were gathered at either 30
frames per seconds with a Sony XCD-SX90 camera or at 60/125
frames per second with a Photron Fastcam SA1.1 camera. We used
videos of the swarm and PIVLab software to extract the bacterial
swarm velocity ﬁelds v(r,t) at locations in the recorded region. Here
we sampled the velocity ﬁeld at 3 µm spatial intervals, between im-
ages taken at 60 or 125 frames per second. Since the algorithm we
used is based on direct Fourier transform correlations, we used mul-
tiple passes and window sizes. The initial passes used large inter-
rogation windows for better signal-to-noise ratio and more robust
cross correlation. The interrogation window sizes decreased with
each pass to increase the vector resolution. The window sizes used
ﬁnally in our analysis corresponded to 64, 32, and 8 pixels or 21,11,
and 2.5 µm, allowing us to detect bacteria speeds of approximately
50 µm/s.
2.2
Results
2.2.1
Features of the swarming base state prior to exposure
As a point of departure we ﬁrst describe our base state - the un-
exposed actively swarming region. In collectively-moving swarms,
individual self-propelling cells are inﬂuenced by steric and hydro-
dynamic interactions with their neighbors7,9,10,19,24. These interac-
tions result in complex structural and ﬂow features including ﬂuc-
tuating regions of high vorticity and streamers as seen in Figure
1(a) (see also24,25).The intensity and transient of these emergent
ﬂows is clearly evidenced upon seeding the swarm with small 2 µm
colloidal spheres; these particles are strongly advected by the bac-
teria and follow tortuous trajectories as shown in Figure 1(b). The
mean square displacement obtained from long time measurements
provides an effective diffusivity that characterizes the activity of the
suspension24.
We used the PIV derived velocity ﬁelds to characterize spatiotem-
poral features of the ﬂow in addition to local speeds. As an illustra-
tive example, Figure 1(a) shows PIV derived velocity ﬁelds super-
imposed on the swarm. The probability distribution function p(v)
of averaged speeds (based on the PIV-measurements) v in a region
of area 400 µm2 and at a distance 100 µm from the edge of the
expanding colony shows a peak at 18 µm/s, an expectation value ≈
28 µm/s and a tail that extends to 100 µm/s. The advancing front
of the swarm is approximately 3 µm/s24. The spatial correlation
function Cv(∆r) and the temporal correlation Ct(∆t) of the velocity
Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–16 | 3

Fig. 2 (a) Interface proﬁles in the (x,y) plane obtained from the phase-ﬁeld based on intensity ﬂuctuations given by the locus φE = 0. For these proﬁles,
the one-dimensional, averaged phase ﬁeld (system size L = 200 µm) ⟨φE⟩x ≡
R L
0 (φE/L)dx follows a quasi-static form corresponding to a diﬀuse interface that
slowly propagates with ﬁnite thickness. (b) Snapshots focusing on a subdomain of Figure 1(b). The ﬁltered two-dimensional interface position identiﬁed
by the locus φE(rInt,t) = 0 is shown as the blue curve for various times after cessation of exposure. PIV derived Snapshots of the vorticity ﬁeld and overlaid
streamlines reveal the dynamic motion of individual vortices that cause the interface (black curve) to propagate and roughen. Individual vortices - red
(counter-clockwise) and blue (clockwise) - etch the interphase boundary (blue line).
ﬁelds were also calculated using
Cr(∆r) =
Dv(r0)·v(r0 +∆r)
|v(r0)|2
E
,
(1)
and
Ct(∆t) =
Dv(t0)·v(t0 +∆t)
|v(t0)|2
E
(2)
respectively, with brackets denoting averages over reference posi-
tions r0 and times t0. Application of equation (1) yielded typical
vortex sizes λc ≈20 µm. For ∆r < λc, bacterial velocities are cor-
related positively, Cr > 0. As ∆r increases, the function Cr decays
crossing zero and then stays negative for 21 µm < ∆r < 32 µm
indicating neighboring vortices are typically anti-correlated.
For
∆r > 32 µm, velocity ﬁelds become progressively uncorrelated. Fit-
ting Ct(∆t) = exp(−∆t/τ), we estimate τ ≈0.25 s.
2.2.2
Collective ﬂows in the interphase region
We next examine the collective velocity ﬁelds around the interphase
region that straddles the active and passive phases.
Figure 1(c)
shows a snapshot during light exposure (t < 0). The top half of
the image (bright) is the domain that is exposed to light incident
through a half-plane aperture. The dark (bottom) half is the un-
exposed active swarm. We note the (apparent) boundary between
the two phases is straight on scales much larger than the length
scale of the correlated structures but diffuse and mushy on shorter
length scales. Superimposed on the raw image, we show the ve-
locity ﬁelds obtained from PIV analysis. Swarming bacteria exhibit
strong collective motion right up to the boundary region (the inter-
phase region). Collective ﬂows exhibit signiﬁcant speeds of up to
50 µm/s. We ﬁnd that vortices align along the interface, arrayed
in an antisymmetric (clockwise/counterclockwise) pattern. These
dynamic vortices (typical lifetime, ∼0.24 s, frequency 0.8 s, char-
acteristic vortex size ∼20 −25 µm) etch the interface into cusps
and valleys and clearly control the morphology and structure of the
interface region.
Theoretical and computational studies of dense suspensions of
passive rods suggest that polar and/or nematic alignment may be
induced due to a combination of excluded volume effects (modeled
for instance using a mean-ﬁeld Maier-Saupe or Onsager potential)
and thermal diffusion40,41. Recognizing that bacterial swarms may
behave similarly, we examined the structure and alignment of bac-
terial clusters in the active phase using the Directional J and Ori-
entationJ plugins that are a part of the open source software Im-
ageJ. These calculate directional derivatives of the gradient in im-
age features, obtain the direction along which these derivatives are
maximized, and thereby compute the structure tensor. The struc-
ture tensor provides eigenvalues and eigenvectors that character-
ize the alignment direction, degree of alignment and degree of co-
herence. Qualitatively, the orientation is visualized as a false-color
image with colored domains with domains of the same color indi-
cating similarly aligned bacteria and intensity quantifying degree
of coherence. Structural information such as size of coherently ar-
rayed structures and length scales over which structural features are
correlated may thus be obtained.
Using these plugins we found that these domains exhibited a dis-
tribution of sizes, typically between 10-20 µm with continuously
changing orientational ﬁelds due to emergent ﬂows25. Figure 1(d)
shows the result of such an image based analysis of the structural
features demonstrating the presence of many intertwined aligned
domains. This however is just a static representation of the highly
dynamical swarming process.
In order to correlate and quantify
the surface structure and morphology with the collective ﬂows that
drive the front propagation, we next deﬁne some metrics of the in-
terface. We then analyze variations in these metrics with time and
with space.
2.2.3
Quantifying interface shape and roughness
The raw videos obtained from the images provide a sequence of
snapshots of the intensity ﬁeld over the domain of observation
as a function of time.
Noting that the the mean intensity ﬂuc-
tuations in the active and passive phases far from the boundary,
|∆IA(t)| and |∆IP(t)|, remained relatively constant over the duration
4 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

Fig. 3 Interface roughness as a function of box length and time and its statistical properties. The upper and lower roughness bounds, are measured from
four experiments. (a) Local interface roughness proﬁles W as a function of box length ℓmeasured over time t for a single experiment. (b) Averaging
over time, the mean interface roughness ⟨W⟩t versus ℓincreases sharply for ℓ< 80 µm, above which the roughness remains approximately constant. We
ﬁnd ⟨W⟩t ∼ℓfor ℓ< 80 µm. For ℓ> 80 µm up to the system size L, the dependence is very weak. The grey area show upper and lower limits from four
experiments indicating the sample to sample variation from the mean. We ﬁnd that ⟨W⟩t ∼ℓfor ℓ< 80 and scales weaker than
√
ℓfor ℓ> 80. The mean
value corresponds to approximately the length of a swarming bacterial cell (5-10 µm) and is much smaller than the scale of the vortical ﬂows adjacent to
the interface (20 µm). (c) Sample interface roughness W values for various ℓin a single experiment as a function of time, t. (d) Averaging over multiple
experiments (with system size, L = 200 µm held ﬁxed), ⟨W⟩increases from approximately 4 to 6 µm over 70 seconds. We ﬁnd ⟨W⟩to be nearly constant for
t < 25 s and then scale weakly with time (the power law exponent being between 1/2 and 1/3) for t > 25 s. (e) The correlation function g(t) = h∗
q(t)h∗
−q(0)
decays over time t for varying wavenumber q. We see oscillations that are superimposed on the mean decay suggesting that ﬂuctuations originating from
the transient nature of the near-interface active ﬂow impact the damping rate. (f) Damping rates Γ(q) extracted from four experiments are clustered such
that Γ ∼qz, where 3/2 < z < 3.
of the longest experiments, we deﬁned a scalar order parameter,
φE ∈[−1,1] (the subscript E denotes experiments)
φE = 2|∆I|−|∆IA(t)|−|∆IP(t)|
|∆IA(t)|−|∆IP(t)|
(3)
that was computed from intensity ﬂuctuations ∆I between succes-
sive images to locate and track the inter-phase boundary. To reduce
noise in the system (due to pixel resolution, short-range ﬂuctuations
and background light ﬂuctuations), we then ﬁltered the pixel-wise
calculated order parameter by smoothing the data over a 3×3 µm2
area.
The ﬁltered phase ﬁeld has value -1 corresponding to the
completely passive phase and +1 corresponding to the fully active
phase. The interphase boundary was identiﬁed as the characteris-
tic region over which φE changes from one asymptotic value to the
other. This variation occurs over a small but ﬁnite scale that we
earlier identiﬁed24 as a characteristic width of the interface; this in
turn is of the order of the bulk correlation length of density ﬂuctua-
tions.
To obtain a clear value for the mean interface position, we there-
fore deﬁned the interface position (in the two dimensional x −y
plane) rInt(t) implicitly by the locus of points such that φE(rInt,t) = 0.
Our system being approximately two-dimensional, we chose to ori-
ent the x axis along the edge of active-passive interface observed
at the instant exposure is stopped t = 0. The interface shapes ex-
tracted from the phase ﬁeld did not feature overhangs. Time snaps
of the interface location (here the two dimensional curve in the x−y
plane) for a representative experiment are shown in Fig, 2(a). We
note two main features characterizing the spatiotemporal evolution
of the interface proﬁles. First, the proﬁles clearly exhibit rough-
ness - this is evident from examining the interface structure nor-
mal to the direction of mean motion. Second, the interface prop-
agates due to the active domain eroding the passive one. In Fig-
ure 2(b), we show the PIV derived snapshots of the vorticity ﬁeld
and overlaid streamlines for the experiment corresponding to Fig-
ure 1(b) illustrating the rapid turnover of collective ﬂow features
before the interface has the time to propagate signiﬁcantly.
We
observe the dynamic motion of individual vortices that cause the
interface (solid blue curve) to propagate and roughen. Individual
vortices - red (counter-clockwise) and blue (clockwise) - etch the in-
terphase boundary (blue line). Further insight into interface thick-
ness is possible by averaging over the lateral dimension normal to
the direction of propagation (x in ﬁgure 2(a)), system size, L = 200
µm). This yields a reduced, one-dimensional, phase ﬁeld proﬁle
⟨φE⟩x ≡
R L
0 (φE/L) dx that, after a very short initial transient, is well
Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–16 | 5

represented by the quasi-steady form
⟨φE⟩x =
Z L
0
φE
L dx ≈tanh
y−Y(t)
d(t)

(4)
from which the mean averaged location of the interface Y(t) and
the intrinsic thickness d(t) may be estimated. Details of the proce-
dure and the connection between the spatiotemporal variations in
d and Y and the collective ﬂow in the active phase have been an-
alyzed24,25 earlier. Here, we will focus on the ﬁrst spatiotemporal
feature - the interface roughness.
2.2.4
Activity driven spatial correlations of the interface
Interface variations transverse to the direction of propagation are
related to the so-called extrinsic thickness W that characterizes
structural features such as curvature and roughness.
We calcu-
late the local interface roughness W (the width correlation func-
tion)42–45, deﬁned by
W 2(ℓ,t) =
DZ x0+ℓ
x0
1
ℓ
h(x′,t)−h(x′,t)
2dx′E
x0
(5)
where h(x′,t) is the local average over distance ℓ, x0 is the refer-
ence position and ℓthe averaging box length that in our series of
experiments varies from around 2 µm up to the system size L = 200
µm.
Figure 3 shows sample interface roughness proﬁles W(ℓ,t): Fo-
cusing ﬁrst on the ℓdependence of W - shown in Fig 3(a) - we
observe two regimes, the ﬁrst corresponding to ℓ< 80 µm and the
second to ℓ> 80 µm. For either regime, W increases with t (blue
to red) with the curves eventually collapsing to a single curve (c.f
the orange at 53 s and the red curve at 66 s). A time average of
the width W is shown in ﬁg. 3(b) - also shown is the experiment to
experiment variation (grey region, see caption). We ﬁnd ⟨W⟩t ∼ℓ
for ℓ< 80 µm. For ℓ> 80 µm, the dependence is very weak (the
exponent being smaller than 1/2). Together, the data in Figs. 3(a)
& 3(b) suggest that for interfacial separations less than ≈80 µm,
roughness is perhaps correlated (power law > 1/2). This result may
be a consequence of the periodicity of the active vortical ﬂows com-
bined with our observation that the surface may exhibit resistance
to deformation. However a clear understanding of the length scale
is elusive.
We use our experimental data to analyze the interface roughness
W values for various ℓin a single ﬂat interface experiment as a func-
tion of time, t. As seen in Fig. 3(c), we observe an increasing power
law in time with increasing ℓ; of course, eventually for large ℓ(up
to ℓ= L), we observe the curves approaching each other. Erosion
is caused by the swirling vortical ﬂows that form (arrayed periodi-
cally) adjacent to the interface. This spatial organization combined
with time dependence of the positions at which vortices are located,
results in ﬂuctuations in W observed in Fig 3(c). Fixing ℓ= 200 µm,
we average over multiple experiments and observe that the inter-
face roughness varies very little with time for the ﬁrst 25 seconds
or so (Fig 3(d); note also that vortex lifetimes are < 1 s), eventu-
ally after this grows very weakly (roughly as ⟨W⟩3 ∼t obtained by a
mean ﬁt).
Treating the interface as a continuous line, the global (system
scale) structure factor Sq for wavenumber q = nπ/L may be re-
lated to the Fourier amplitudes h∗q by Sq(t) = ⟨|h∗q(t)|⟩2. This and
the wavenumber dependent autocorrelation function g
h∗
q(t) =
Z L
0
h(x,t)
L
e−iqx dx, g(q,t) = h∗
q(t)h∗
−q(0)
(6)
may then be easily evaluated. For a damped interface that ﬂuctuates
in response to external noisy forcing, ﬁtting the growth coefﬁcients
to exp(−Γ(q)∆t)cos(ω(q)∆t) can help identiﬁes regimes for which
the damping is strong. Figs. 3(e) and 3(f) suggest that the interface
responds in a complex manner with ﬂuctuations that depend on
wavenumber q. Note that these oscillations arise from a combina-
tion of passive thermal noise (thermodynamic) as well as additional
non-equilibrium agitations due to the swirling, ﬂuctuating ﬂows at
the interface. It is difﬁcult to separate these two contributions from
the data.
A passive ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface excited by thermal capillary waves
may be treated as an harmonic oscillator driven by random noise
that satisﬁes the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. Assuming a non-
Markovian general Langevin equation with random forces that sat-
isfy ﬂuctuation-dissipation, Gross and Varnik46 have recently de-
rived scalings for the oscillation frequency and the growth rate in
terms of density ρ, surface tension σ, and viscosity µ. In the weakly
damped limit, they ﬁnd ω ∼q3/2 and Γ ∼q2. In the strongly damped
limit, they ﬁnd Γ ∼q.
Our extracted growth rates seems to suggest that the interface
dampening falls in between these two limiting regimes; however
variations between experiments make it difﬁcult to extract the fre-
quencies ω clearly. The dynamic growth exponent z deﬁned through
Γ(q) ∼qz are shown in Fig.
3(f); we ﬁnd that Γ ∼qz, where
3/2 < z < 3 with the damping rate increasing with q.
2.2.5
Activity driven evolution of interface roughness
Dynamic scaling approaches for the description of initially ﬂat,
self-afﬁne, single-valued interfaces that roughen with time have
been proposed based on continuum models of the growth/erosion
process in a variety of geophysical and materials physics con-
texts42,43,45,47.
Self-similar roughness proﬁles in these theoreti-
cally studied cases follow scalings given by W(L,t) ∼tβ , (t ≪t∗),
W(L,t) ∼ℓα, (t ≫t∗) and t∗∼ℓz with z = α/β. Here α, β and ℓ
are the local roughness exponent, local growth exponent and sys-
tem size respectively. The scaling relation here means that for early
time (t ≪t∗), the roughness grows as a power law of time till it sat-
urates for characteristic time t∗. After time t∗, the roughness grows
as a power law of ℓwith z deﬁned as the dynamic exponent,
W(L,t) ∼ℓαF

t/ℓα/β 
= ℓαF (t/ℓz)
(7)
A quantity complementary to characteristic time t∗, (if it exists) is
the characteristic width L∗. An alternate manner to describe self-
similarity is via the forms
W(ℓ,t)
∼
tα/zG (ℓ/η(t)) = tα/zG

ℓ/t1/z
,
(8)
G(ζ ≪1)
∼
ζ α,
G(ζ ≫1) ∼constant.
(9)
The spatiotemporal evolution of a ﬂat interface occurs as W ∼tβ
at short time; eventually correlations develop along the interface
that saturate when the correlation length becomes the characteristic
length. The set of exponents then decides the speciﬁc universality
class describing the growth42. We note that equations (7)-(9) usu-
6 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

Fig. 4 We estimate the roughness and dynamic exponents by measuring the extrinsic width W(ℓ,t) over time. (a) (i) To determine which scaling exponents
best match our system, we try to collapse our curves. Rescaled data points from from Fig. 3a collapse for growth exponent b = 1/3 and dynamic exponent
z = 3. (Right) Curves collapsed using scalings from (ii) EW and (iii) KPZ models. (b) The scaled interface roughness proﬁles collapse for four separate
experimental realizations with each experiment collapsing into its own curve The growth exponent is b = 1/3 and the dynamic exponent is z = 3. Here, we
show four experiments, denoted as set 1-4; each curve is plotted using a diﬀerent time value in that experimental set.
ally describe process without an imposed external length scale. The
Edwards-Wilkinson (EW) class describes an interface that roughens
due to random particle deposition and is smoothed by lateral mo-
tion, such as at the surface of settled granular aggregates under
gravity. The Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) class describes interfacial
growth due to random particle depositions and explicitly includes
a nonlinear term for growth perpendicular to the interface. Both
the KPZ and EW describe the interface through local growth mech-
anisms.
In order to test if the roughness proﬁles we obtained from ex-
periments were self-similar, we attempted to plot these in a man-
ner consistent with equations (7)-(9). Figure 4 summarizes these
results. We observe in 4(a) that the interface roughness proﬁles
do suggest a self-similar regime when rescaled in a manner con-
sistent with equation (8). Comparing subﬁgures 4a(i) with 4a(ii)
and 4a(iii) further suggests differences with the EW and KPZ type
scalings observed in passive systems. In ﬁgure 4(b) we see that
scaled roughness proﬁles from 4 experiments show similar qualita-
tive features. We see domains where the rescaled curves collapse
suggesting a self-similar form. We hypothesize that variations be-
tween experiments arise due to density and activity changes; these
in turn impact the size of the collective features that interact with
the interphase region.
In summary, our experimental data suggests that strong collec-
tive ﬂows in the interphase region play a critical role in the inter-
face structure and propagation. The passive region comprises of
densely packed aligned bacteria arranged in static domains that are
typically smaller than the structure of the collective ﬂow structures.
Over time scales associated with many lifetimes of these structures,
the passive region appears as a highly frictional domain which the
active bacteria have to penetrate in order to propagate through the
medium. Additionally ﬂow induced advection may transport pas-
sive bacteria away from the passive region and into the active re-
gion. These modalities of surface reorganization are different. For
the former, active bacteria in the form of ﬂocks or streamers pen-
etrate the passive region more efﬁciently; vortices do not. For the
latter (advection of passive bacteria), vortical structures are more
efﬁcient while streamers and ﬂocks merely serve to push the pas-
sive bacteria aside. In addition, observed collective ﬂows include
sterically induced ﬂows wherein bacteria push their neighbors in
a coordinated manner as well as hydrodynamically generated ﬂows
where ﬂow ﬁelds generated due to a moving bacterium inﬂuence its
neighbors. Both steric interactions and hydrodynamics can lead to
enhanced alignment40,41 which in turn lead to faster propagation
speeds of bacteria entering the passive phase.
3
Simulations of bacterial swarms
It is of interest to understand if steric effects and hydrodynamic ef-
fects play equal roles in the interface propagation and in determin-
ing the spatiotemporal features of the interface, speciﬁcally rough-
ness features and swarming intensity.
Furthermore, understand-
ing the relative importance of hydrodynamic interactions will shed
light on swarming in moist rather than wet environments. Here,
bacteria swarm in a ﬁlm sufﬁcient to maintain their swarming phe-
notype. The ﬁlm of liquid is however not thick enough to allow for
long range hydrodynamic interactions. Our experiments on Serratia
marcescens do not allow us to discriminate and separate the impact
of purely steric effects from ﬂuid mediated hydrodynamic interac-
tions on the collective motion well within the active phase as well
as in the vicinity of the interface.
To investigate each effect separately and when acting in tandem,
we next propose and analyze discrete agent based simulations that
treat the bacteria as inertialess self-propelled rods (SPR)28 moving
in a viscous ﬂuid. Steric interactions are implemented in a straight-
forward manner as explained below using standard interaction po-
tentials that depend on distances between the bacteria with rods
interacting with all neighbors within a cut-off distance. Hydrody-
namic interactions are implemented by treating each rod as a mov-
ing line of force dipoles. We do not include thermal noise in our
system and ignore translational and rotational diffusion of the rods.
3.1
Agent based simulation model without thermal noise
The simulated bacterial swarm system consists of N = 56,000 rod-
like bacteria. Each simulated bacteria is idealized as a slender rod
of length ℓb and width λ (the aspect ratio is thus a = ℓb/λ = 5)
Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–16 | 7

that can self-propel. These in-silico bacteria move in a domain of
area A = 500×800 (measured in bacterial width units); the ambient
ﬂuid is Newtonian with shear viscosity µ, and density ρ. The rods
have an intrinsic self-propulsion speed uo. We note that for Serra-
tia marcesens, the self-propulsion speed uo ∼28µm/s swimming in a
water-like Newtonian ﬂuid, the Reynolds number R ≡ℓbuoρ/µ ≪1
and thus the use of the Stokes equation is appropriate. In accord
with the experimental settings, we simulate a dense suspension
with an area fraction ψ = Nℓbλ/A = 0.7. In simulations, lengths
are scaled by rod width λ, velocities are scaled by intrinsic self-
propulsion velocity uo, time by τ = λ/uo ∼0.04 s, and forces by
µuoλ. Experiments on bacteria in the dilute pre-swarming phase
(Figure 5a) suggest that bacteria in colonies have a range of bacte-
rial lengths with a mean between 5-7 µm; longer bacteria that are
2-3 times the length are possible.
Rods are indexed uniquely so as to be able to track them over
time. The position and state of a rod with index α is completely
determined once the position of its mass rα, its orientation vector
pα, its linear velocity drα/dt, and its angular velocity ωα are known.
In the overdamped limit characterized by small Reynolds numbers,
the evolution of these variables is governed by
drα
dt
=
uh +Vpα +f−1
T ·Fs,
(10)
ωα
=
ωh +f−1
R ·Ts.
(11)
Here, uh and ωh are the hydrodynamic contributions to the trans-
lational and rotational speed of the rod, respectively V = 1 is the
dimensionless self-propulsion speed, p is the unit vector of rod ori-
entation, Fs and Ts are the force and torque due to the steric effects
between neighboring bacteria. The tensors fT and fR in (12) and
(13) are the translational and rotational friction tensors given by
fT
f0
=
f∥pαpα + f⊥(I−pαpα),
(12)
fR
f0
=
λ 2 fRI.
(13)
with f0 = 1 being the Stokesian friction coefﬁcient proportional to
the ﬂuid viscosity in scaled units. The three scalar friction coefﬁ-
cients f∥, f⊥and fR are dimensionless geometric factors that depend
on the aspect ratio a of the rods. Here, we adopt the expression for
cylinders and use
2π/f∥
=
ln(2a)−γ∥,
(14)
4π/f⊥
=
ln(2a)−γ⊥,
(15)
πa2/3fR
=
ln(2a)−γR
(16)
with (γ∥, γ⊥, γR) given by Broersma48.
3.2
Steric interactions
Steric interactions between rods (bacteria) are treated in a discrete
manner. We partition each rod into n = 6 segments with each seg-
ment represented by a point. The position of these points may then
be used to evaluate interactions. Geometry dictates that two rods α
and β interact only if their center-of-mass distance |∆rαβ | = |rα −rβ |
is less than ℓb + 2λ. Let rαβ
ij
be the distance between the i-th seg-
ment of rod α and j-th segment of rod β calculated as
rαβ
i j
= |∆rαβ +(ℓipα −ℓjpβ )|
(17)
where pα and pβ are the orientation vectors of rods with indices
α and β and parameters ℓi,ℓj ∈[−ℓb/2,ℓb/2] locate positions of the
segments along the rods. The total steric derived potential evalu-
ated along rod α is then obtained using the Yukawa potential for
the interaction28,49:
Uα = 1
2 ∑
β̸=α
H(Rc −rαβ ) U0
n2
n
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1
exp(−rαβ
i j /λ)
rαβ
ij
(18)
where H(x) is the Heaviside step function, U0 = 800 is the dimen-
sionless potential strength with scale of µu0λ 2, and Rc is the cutoff
radius beyond which the steric interaction is zero. Here we choose
Rc = 1.25λ. A linked-cells algorithm for short-range interaction50 is
used to accelerate the calculation of the steric interaction given the
large number of rods in our simulated system.
3.3
Hydrodynamic interactions
The hydrodynamic terms uh and ωh are obtained by solving for the
background ﬂow experienced by rod α due to the dipolar ﬂows gen-
erated by all the rods in the system. This background ﬂow is ob-
tained by solving the appropriate Stokes equation in 2D - here, the
two-dimensional incompressible Stokes equation for the ﬂuid veloc-
ity ﬁeld u supplemented with extra source terms corresponding to
the distribution of stresslets (dipolar terms) along each rod in the
system. The resulting extra ﬂuid induced drag forces are calculated
using the distributed Lagrange multiplier method51,52 used earlier
in suspensions of active swimmers.
The ﬂow ﬁeld induced in the ﬂuid due to the distributed active
stresslet is given by
∇2u
=
−∇p+
n
∑
i=1
Fiσ(x−xi),
(19)
∇·u
=
0,
(20)
where p is the pressure, and Fi = (2αh/n)(ℓi/|ℓi|)Vp is the force dis-
tribution for each rod segment, where i is the index of rod segments,
and αh is the dimensionless stresslet strength of the bacteria. In
our simulations, αh = 121. In (19), the term σ(x −xi) converts the
forces on rods (Lagrangian grid) to the background ﬂow ﬁeld (Eu-
lerian grid) with x, xi denoting the position of Cartesian grid points
and rod segments, respectively. The resulting ﬂow ﬁeld u is then
interpolated on the rod segments as v, and then integrated along
the rod length to obtain the total hydrodynamic contributions to
the translational and rotational speed of the rod
Mbuh =
Z
ℓb
ρvdℓ,
and
Ib ·ωh =
Z
ℓb
ρr×vdℓ,
(21)
where ρ = 1 is the density ratio between rods and the ﬂuid, ℓis
the distance along the rod length, r is the position vector evaluated
from the center of mass, and Mb and Ib are the dimensionless mass
and moment of inertia of the rod, respectively.
Evaluation of uh and ωh closes the set of equations (10)-(16) for
the system of rods. Positions and orientations can be tracked in
time. Concomitantly, (19)-(21) provides spatiotemporal features of
8 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

the ﬂuid.
4
Simulation results and analysis
4.1
Initialization
In the experiments, the quenched passive bacteria in the exposed re-
gion were observed to have signiﬁcant local nematic alignment25.
However on the whole when averaged over length scales much
larger than 20 µm alignment was more or less random.
This is
consistent with the paralyzed retaining order at length scales com-
parable to the size of the collective structures in the active region.
The swarming bacteria, when spatially and temporally averaged,
are on average randomly oriented (ignoring the small bias due to
the speed of the swarming front). Therefore, to maintain consis-
tency across simulations, and to try to mimic this feature in our
noise-less simulations, we conducted each simulation in two steps
with the domain held ﬁxed. To reduce the uncertainties, we aver-
aged the roughness results based on ten simulation runs with each
simulation starting from a different initial rod conﬁguration.
The ﬁrst step of the simulation allowed us to generate random
orientational and spatial distribution of bacteria (rods) at high vol-
ume fractions. In order to achieve this, we set all rods to be motile
and hydrodynamically interacting; the rods are located initially in
a rectangular grid and are aligned. A perturbation is then superim-
posed on the rod orientation p. We let each rod move and evolve
for a long enough time so that the position and orientation of the
rods represent a possible conﬁguration for the bacterial system be-
fore the exposure to light. There are nematic structures in the initial
state of the rods, and some regions are void of bacteria because of
the swarming effects. It is likely that in the swarming bacteria ex-
periments, noise and possible two-dimensional effects where bac-
teria can move in and out of the plane may reduce the propensity
for such regions devoid of bacteria. The rod positions and orienta-
tions are then extracted and used as the initial conﬁguration in the
second step.
In the second step, only rods located in the lower half of the do-
main are set to be motile (V = 1, Equation (10)) while the rest are
passive (V = 0, Equation (10)). We then advance time with each
rod moving and interacting with other rods. As the simulation pro-
ceeds, we track the active-passive interphase. Here, the simulation
domain is a rectangle of a ﬁxed height H = 800 with wall boundary
conditions applied at the upper and lower boundaries. This height
is large enough that the active-passive interphase is not affected by
the conﬁnement of the walls initially over the time-scale of our sim-
ulations. Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the left and
right boundaries of the simulation domain.
4.2
Deﬁning the effective interface position
To calculate the number density and velocity ﬁelds of bacteria, we
divided the simulation domain into small bins of size δ = 4 and
computed the numbers of both active and passive rods in each bin.
We smoothed the velocity and vorticity ﬁelds by analyzing the data
in overlapping cells28, with cell size 1.5 times bin size.
In our experiments, individual bacteria could not always be
clearly visualized especially in the passive region - however their
motion was clearly observable. Therefore, we used intensity ﬂuc-
tuations (that are correlated with density ﬂuctuations) to estimate
the phase-ﬁeld order parameter given by equation (3). Note that
ﬂuctuations in intensity are tracked not the intensity itself.
The
ﬁltered phase ﬁeld has value -1 corresponding to the completely
passive phase and +1 corresponding to the fully active phase. The
interface location and shape obtained thus was consistent with the
interface obtained using velocity ﬂuctuations24,25.
In our simulations however, rods can be directly tracked and there
is no direct analogue to intensity ﬂuctuations. We used a modiﬁed
order parameter based on number densities (the subscript S denot-
ing simulation)
φS =
(
(na −np)(na +np)−1,
if (na +np) > 0
0,
otherwise,
(22)
where na and nd are the number density of rod segments for active
and passive bacteria, respectively. Here φS = 1 corresponds to the
purely active phase and φS = −1 corresponds to the purely passive
phase. The exact value φS = 0 corresponds to the regions of equal
number of active and passive rods, or the regions that are void of
bacteria. We focus attention on the ﬁrst case; the second where
voids can form in the active phase is interesting in itself and is con-
nected to large scale density ﬂuctuations observed in active matter
models23,32.
Note that equation (22) exhibits a feature that is not observed or
cannot be discerned from experiments. The rod simulations some-
times show voids where there are no rods (active or passive) and
hence by deﬁnition φS = 0 since na + np = 0. This should be distin-
guished from the case where na = np. Consequently, we will distin-
guish the manner in which the phase-ﬁeld is evaluated to zero in
subsequent discussions.
Motivated by the success of the phase-ﬁeld approach in tracking
the experimentally observed interphase location, we employ a sim-
ilar method. The interface height h, is calculated by ﬁtting φS in
a vertical slice with φS = tanh((y −h)/d). This calculation of inter-
face is capable of dealing with possible overhangs and mixing in the
active-passive interphase. The interface roughness is subsequently
evaluated by using the same equation as in the experiments - equa-
tion (5).
4.3
The propagating interphase region - phenomenology and
structure
We ﬁrst investigated the rod conﬁguration and averaged density
and velocity/vorticity ﬁelds in the active-passive interphase for self-
propelled rods in two limits - without hydrodynamic interactions
between rods (no HI), and with full Stokesian hydrodynamics (with
HI). Figures 5 and 6 illustrate striking features of the interface mo-
tion and suggest signiﬁcant changes in interface structure when HI
is present.
When the hydrodynamic effects are excluded (Fig.
5(c)), the
rods only interact with each other through the short-range steric
interactions. In the active phase, bacteria have a pronounced ten-
dency to form collective structures such as ﬂocks and streamers;
these are nematic structures with groups of bacteria are moving to-
wards the same direction. The bacteria comprising these structures
are more likely to penetrate and form incisive cracks in the passive
phase. Eventually these protrusions form ﬁnger-like or island-like
(if these are disconnected from the active phase) regions in the pas-
sive phase. Since the passive bacteria cannot enter the active phase
Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–16 | 9

Fig. 5 (a) (i) Snapshots at two diﬀerent times for low density ﬁlms of Serratia marcescens where swarming is not seen provide insight into how bacterial
ﬂocks and clusters navigate jammed, stuck or otherwise immotile bacteria. ESM Movies 3,4(a,b,c) provide clear evidence of the manner in which steric
interactions align ﬂocks and clusters leading to more eﬃcient penetration and/or displacement in regions where bacteria are stuck or otherwise immobile.
(ii) Analysis using the Directional J plugin of the length distributions corresponding to the ﬁrst and last frames in ESM Movie 3. Here the mean bacterial
length was estimated to be 5.4 µm for the initial frame and 6.1 µm based on the last frame suggesting negligible bacterial growth in this dilute non-swarming
stage. (c,d) Structural features manifest during the evolution and progression of the front (c) without HI and (d) with HI are highlighted in these snapshots.
Detailed time sequences show conﬁgurations for active (red) and passive (black) bacteria. The snapshots correspond to ESM Movies 5(a) and 5(b). Here,
the simulations use an areal density Ψ = 0.7. The highlighted blue indicates that the passive region in the simulation provides a highly dense, frictional
medium with structural features that are small. The initial density is such that the passive phase compacts during the initial stages of the simulation. The
highlighted yellow boxes highlight the formation of a ﬁnger, that then pinches oﬀand subsequently propagates through this dense frictional passive region.
Some such ﬁngers are also observed to break-up into clusters and islands of active bacteria; these penetrate rapidly - the manner by which these intercalate
through immotile bacteria is similar to mechanisms observed in our experiments (ESM Movie 3).
due to being immotile and have to be convected by the incoming
active bacteria, there is net ﬂux of bacteria from the active phase
to the passive phase. Right below the active-passive interface, there
we observe signiﬁcant number of voids where very few active bacte-
ria are present. Furthermore, voids span multiple bacterial lengths.
In summary, the active-passive interface is always moving to-
wards the passive phase; trapping of the active bacteria in the
passive domain causes the bacterial number density in the passive
phase to increase.
We note that the motion of these ﬂocks and
streamers bears resemblance to the manner in which individual bac-
teria align, form clusters and then push through immobile or static
bacteria (Figure 5a, and ESM movies 3, 4(a-c)).
When hydrodynamic interactions are included as shown in Figure
5(d), active and passive phases are better mixed and the ﬁngering
seen previously is not observed possibly due to HI induced desta-
bilization. The length scale of nematic structures generated in the
passive domain decreases due to the hydrodynamically generated
active ﬂows. Passive bacteria are displaced and advected through
the active region in both cases eventually leading to mixing. We
anticipate that continuous realignment and instabilities are due to
local shearing ﬂows generated over the scale of many bacteria. Note
again that we do not have diffusion in our simulations, and hence
this destabilization is from hydrodynamic effects; the ﬁnal result
is an active, turbulent motion of rods21 with highly vortical struc-
tures. The ﬂow vortices lead to breakup of the active-passive inter-
face and substantially enhance the mixing between the active and
passive phases.
Comparison of sequences Figure 5(c) and Figure 5(d) (see also
ESM Movies 5a and 5b) clarify the nature of structural differences
in the interface region, and the variations in the manner in which
the leading front propagates without and with HI. Hydrodynamic
interactions are associated with a reduced occurrence of dendritic
protrusions that may pinch off, penetrate and move through the fric-
tional passive region. Furthermore, we see larger (white) voids with
lower values of local densities when hydrodynamic interactions are
neglected. We also note larger local interface mixing speeds when
hydrodynamic interactions are included. The interphase region is
more smeared out and exhibits the hallmark of a mushy, bi-phasic
mixed region when hydrodynamic interactions are present.
These conclusions are clariﬁed and supported when the compu-
tational results are recast in terms of the density dependent phase
ﬁeld φs (ESM Movies 6a and 6b).
10 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

Fig.
6 (a) Order parameter scalar ﬁelds φS for simulations depicted in Figure 5 deﬁned using equation (22) with HI (left) and without HI (right). The
full time evolution may be observed in ESM Movies 6a and 6b. Here, φS = 1 represents the purely active phase, and φS = −1 represents the purely passive
phase. Here, φS = 0 can represent regions of no bacteria or characterize equal density of active and passive bacteria. The interface between active and
passive phases is marked using the black curve. Black irregular curves represent the calculated position of the interface extracted using the hyperbolic
tangent function. Note that strictly speaking this approach is valid only under quasi-static conditions i.e, when interphase evolves very slowly and in a
manner where the motion is averaged over many time-scales of the local active ﬂow structures. (b) The simulated vorticity ﬁeld of the swarming bacteria
for both cases illustrating length scales of the spatiotemporal features. ESM Movies 7a (without HI) and 7b (with HI) provide more details of the time
evolution and persistence time of these features. We observe signiﬁcant regions with vortical structures.
(c) Here, we highlight the role of hydrodynamic
interactions in signiﬁcantly modifying both the interface morphology, eﬀective thickness as well as propagation speed. We note that the interface without
HI (set of tiles labelled (i)), is less diﬀuse than the interface when hydrodynamic interactions are present. We note also the increase in voids in the active
phase, fast moving large-scale ﬂocs traveling in the passive phase and the signiﬁcantly lower mixing in the absence of HI. Finally comparison of the jagged
black lines - the computed interface positions - suggests that the eﬀective roughness is also dependent on the presence of hydrodynamic interactions.
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],1–16 | 11

Fig. 7 (a) (Left) (Right) The vorticity ﬁeld in active phase is shown in more detail here illustrating interspersed clockwise and counterclockwise vortical
features and large-scale streaming ﬂows. (b) Velocity correlation function (VCF) calculated in the active phase are plotted here for two time instants and
for cases without and with HI. The characteristic vortex radius is the radius at which VCF=0. (Inset) Close up of the vortical structure in the yellow box
indicated in (a-right). (c) Close up snapshots of the vorticity ﬁeld at the interfacial region illustrating salinet morphological features for dry simulations
(without HI).
The phase ﬁeld calculated using equation (22) is shown in Fig-
ure 6(a), and the interface proﬁles are indicated on the same ﬁgure
as the black curve. In both cases - with and without HI, the in-
terfaces start from a ﬂat surface and then roughen. Figure 6(a) is
a representative snapshot of the structure of the phase-ﬁeld dur-
ing the front evolution focussing on the interphase morphology and
Figure 6(b) shows the associated calculated vorticity ﬁelds (note
that 6(b) is a sub-area of the region shown in 6(a)), again focus-
ing on the interphase region. As anticipated from Figures 5(c) and
5(d), we observed the following. (i) The front in the absence of HI
clearly demonstrates ﬁngering and clustering with these pinching
off and moving deep into the passive frictional domain. (ii) Non-HI
simulations demonstrate signiﬁcant density variations in the active
phase, reminiscent of the large amplitude density ﬂuctuations seen
in model theoretical active polar and nematic systems21,28. These
ﬂuctuations are usually smeared out when hydrodynamic interac-
tions are allowed. (iii) Finally, again as expected, HI smears out the
interphase region which now possesses features of a diffuse inter-
face. Note that a ﬁnite interface thickness was calculated in the Ser-
ratia experiments and reported earlier by us24 using both intensity
variations (a stand-in for density variations) as also independently
using PIV. Here we see that hydrodynamic interactions signiﬁcantly
thicken the apparent interface - i.e, there is truly a well mixed bi-
phasic region when HI is present.
Examination of the associated vorticity ﬁelds shows that vortical
structures are slightly larger and more segregated when hydrody-
namic interactions are non-existent. Comparing ﬁgures 6(b-ii) and
6(b-i) we conclude that the magnitude of vorticity attained in the
interphase region are the same order. It is likely however that the
spectral characteristics are different. We will revisit the vorticity
ﬁeld later in this article in following sections. For rods without hy-
drodynamics, the vortices are elongated and connected due to the
presence of the nematic structures. When hydrodynamics are in-
cluded, the vortices are broken, creating meso-scale turbulence and
leading to a more disordered ﬂow ﬁeld. Here, the magnitude of
ﬂow velocity and vorticity are larger than those without hydrody-
namics interactions, and there is a slight ﬂow in the passive phase
since the hydrodynamic interaction decays slowly with distance.
Hydrodynamic interactions impact not just the morphology and
structure of the interphase region but also the evolution and dynam-
ics. The striking difference between simulations without and with
HI are evident in Figures 6(c-i) and 6(c-ii). Note the increasingly
bi-phasic structure of the interphase region due to hydrodynamic
interactions; additionally, this mushy region gradually increases in
width due to mixing. Green domains deep in the active phase ob-
served in Figure 6(c-i) corresponding to voids or low density regions
are signiﬁcantly less for the case with HI than without.
4.4
Vorticity ﬁelds and velocity correlations
To check the effect of the bounding walls as well as to investigate
how velocity ﬁelds observed in our simulations compared with ex-
periments, we next analyzed the vorticity distribution and velocity
correlations far from the active-passive interphase region. Figure
7(a) shows the vorticity distribution as well as the location of the
boundary between the phases near the beginning of the simulation
(T = 20, left) and then well into the simulation (T = 220, right).
12 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

Fig. 8 Interface roughness W(L,t) evaluated over the whole system as a function of the time for diﬀerent system sizes (a,b) Interface proﬁles in the (x,y)
plane obtained from the phase-ﬁeld. For better visibility, proﬁles at diﬀerent time are separated by adding a vertical oﬀset. (c) The averaged interface
roughness scaled by the system size as a function of scaled time collapses onto a single curve. In (i,iii), hydrodynamic eﬀects are neglected. In (ii,iv),
hydrodynamic eﬀects are included.
Here hydrodynamic interactions are turned on. We note that vortic-
ity magnitudes across the active region are consistently similar once
we move away from the interface and deep into the active region
(yellow box).
As time progresses however the distance between
vortical structures increases slightly possibly due to the mixing and
convective ﬂux of passive rods into the active phase.
A closer examination shows wall effects on the active phase for
roughly y < 50; the no-ﬂux condition causes rods to reorient and
move parallel to the wall leading to a velocity in the same direc-
tion and negligible vorticity. In the bulk of active phase (∼when
50 < y < 350), clear vortical structures exist (Figure (7(a) right).
Vortices of both signs form periodically in a manner vey similar to
experiments? .
To quantify the structural features of the velocity ﬁeld, in addi-
tion to the vorticity ﬁeld, of the vortical structures in this region,
we calculate the velocity correlation function (VCF) in Figure 7(b)
choosing the region 100 < y < 300. Furthermore, to discern effects
due to HI, we analyze simulations with and without HI. Given the
VCF, characteristic vortex sizes can be found from the length-scale
at which VCF equals 0 and crosses over to positive values. The re-
sults at T = 20 correspond to pure active phase since the density of
passive rods in the active phase is negligible. At the start of simu-
lations (t = 20), the vortex radius for bacteria without HI is about
25µm and for bacteria with HI is 40 µm. The vortex radius is 40
µm for a dense suspension of B. subtilis20, and is about 20 −25
µm for swarming Serratia marcescens. Also at T = 20, we observe
that velocity for the rods without HI (red curve, red ﬁlled circles
in the ﬁgure) is less correlated than rods with HI (blue curve, blue
ﬁlled circles line in the ﬁgure). The vortex size for active bacte-
ria phase is about 40 microns (agreeing with our experiments). As
time goes by, for either with or without hydrodynamics, the number
density of active bacteria at the studied region decreases because
some active bacteria penetrate into the passive domain. Associated
with the decrease in number density is an increase in vortex radius.
Interestingly, these conclusions are consistent with our reported ob-
servations on slightly increases in size and longer residence time of
vortical structures close to the interphase24 (and thus higher den-
sity of passive rods). Thus our computations capture qualitative fea-
tures of the swarm and predict correlation lengths consistent with
experiments.
4.5
Roughness of the interface and comparison with experi-
ments
Finally, combining experiments with simulations, we conclude that
hydrodynamic and steric interactions enable different modes of sur-
face dynamics, morphology and thus front invasion. This is clearly
seen when one compares the vorticity ﬁelds in the interphase region
for simulations with and without HI (Figures 5(c,d), Figure 6 and
Figure 7(c)). In the absence of HI such as for dry systems where the
only contribution from ambient ﬂuid is the Stokes drag on the rods,
we observe a sharper interface structure, albeit with a more disrup-
tive morphology and extensive ﬁngering. Flocks and streamers can
develop at the interface, and exploiting any structural weakening in
the passive phase can pinch off and penetrate the frictional medium
as seen in Figure 7(b). What is noteworthy is that these clusters are
also characterized by strong vorticity and thus involve circulatory
motions.
Comparing the jagged structure of the interface as indicated by
the black curve in Figures 6(c-i) and 6(c-ii), we hypothesize the
different modalities of surface deformation and evolution not only
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],1–16 | 13

result in different propagation speeds and effective interface thick-
nesses but also lead to different roughness. Figure 8 conﬁrms this
hypothesis - note that in obtaining the roughness proﬁles, we varied
the width of our simulation domain, which is denoted as L.
To compare with experimental results, we next investigated the
scaling laws associated with the roughness features, given by W, as
deﬁned by equation 5, of the active-passive interface. For bacteria
either without - ﬁgures 8(c-i,iii) - or with hydrodynamics - ﬁgures
8(c-ii,iv) - the interface roughness always increases at early stages
and reaches a plateau with discernible saturation times t×.
Motivated by the collapse observed in the experiments and illus-
trated in ﬁgure 4, we then tested if our simulation data could be
collapsed onto a master curve by scaling the roughness with Lα and
time by Lz, where α is the roughness exponent and z is the dynamic
exponent. The results are shown in Figure 8(c-i,iii) for simulations
without hydrodynamic interactions and Figure 8(c-ii,iv) for simu-
lations with hydrodynamic interactions. The increasing rate in the
early stage corresponds to the growth exponent β, which is around
0.5 for bacteria either with or without hydrodynamics. The inclu-
sion of hydrodynamics increases α and z, meaning that the satu-
ration time and the maximum roughness both increase with the
system size with larger exponents. In Fig. 8(c-iv), the curves are
not collapsed so well, because the interface is not strictly self-afﬁne,
and the exponents slightly vary for different system sizes.
We also follow the same method as in the experiments and plot
the local roughness as a function of box sizes. The interface rough-
ness here is evaluated at simulation time from 600 to 1200, corre-
sponding to 21 s to 43 s in experiments. For bacteria either with or
without hydrodynamics, we ﬁnd that the local roughness increases
with the box size ﬁrst and then slightly increases when the box size
exceeds a critical length. When the hydrodynamic effects are ne-
glected, the data can be collapsed by scaling both the roughness
and box size by t0.2. For simulations with hydrodynamics, this scal-
ing increases to t0.3, and agrees with those in the experimental re-
sults. This is after the saturation time in the simulation (t× ∼250)
so that the exponents are different from the scaling in the roughness
growth.
5
Summary and Outlook
Swarming - a complex multi-cellular response featuring collective
and long ranged intense bacteria laden ﬂows - is perhaps the fastest
known bacterial mode of surface motility5,6 and enables efﬁcient
and rapid colonization of environments and tissues. Swarming re-
quires the integration of multiple and multimodal chemical and
physical signals, including physiological and morphological differ-
entiation of the bacteria into swarmer cells, the optimal presence
of nutrient and favorable porous surfaces7. A signiﬁcant compo-
nent of the swarming state are interfaces or propagating fronts that
form naturally allowing swarms to invade free space or highly fric-
tional domains. Here, we study the evolving structural features of
an active-passive interfaces using dense colonies of Serratia marce-
sens as a model system.
We image the evolution, dynamics and
morphology of the interphase region between an active (swarming)
phase and a passive (immotile) phase. The passive phase is densely
packed and micro-structured and hence offers an highly frictional
environment. Integrating results from Particle Image Velocimetry
(PIV), intensity based image analysis and analysis of surface ﬂuctu-
ations, we quantify the dynamics and morphology of the evolving
interface. We show that correlations between spatially separated
surface ﬂuctuations and damping of the same are inﬂuenced by the
interaction of the interfacial region with adjacently located collec-
tive ﬂows. Furthermore, dynamical growth exponents characteriz-
ing the active manner in which the interfacial region is continuously
reshaped differ signiﬁcantly from classically expected values.
To
complement and interpret our experiments, we presented a high-
performance numerical simulation that explicitly tracks the motion
of each bacteria with consideration of both cell-cell steric interac-
tion and far-ﬁeld hydrodynamic interactions. The simulations are
able to separate the steric and hydrodynamic effects and illustrate
the time evolution of mixing between the active and dead bacteria
swarms for either with or without hydrodynamic interactions. The
hydrodynamic effects have a tendency to create turbulence in active
phase, which disturbs the active-passive interface and thus enhance
the mixing between passive and active bacteria. The active turbu-
lence also decreases the length scale of the nematic structure and
make it easier for active bacteria to penetrate the passive phase.
At the same time, simulations in the dry regime - where hydrody-
namic interactions are neglected - strongly indicate signiﬁcant ﬁn-
gering instabilities with macro-scale ﬂocks penetrating the passive
phase, pinching off from the rest of the active domain and cover-
ing signiﬁcant territory in the passive region before fragmenting.
The interface with hydrodynamic effects shows larger roughness
exponent and dynamic exponent than those without hydrodynamic
effects, but the growth exponents are similar. Combining experi-
ments with simulations, we conclude that hydrodynamic and steric
interactions enable strikingly different modes of surface dynamics,
morphology and thus front invasion. Swarms typically utilize and
move in nutrient-laden ambient ﬂuid in a swarm that is extracted
from underlying soft poroelastic ﬂuid inﬁltrated substrates. Our ob-
servations imply that surfaces tailored with a friction gradient or a
porosity gradient may hinder swarm propagation signiﬁcantly.
We conclude with some possible extensions of this work. Our re-
sults strongly motivate the need for further careful experimentation
where bacterial swarm intensity (density and/or self-propulsion),
the substrate friction and softness can all be varied independently.
This will allow us to investigate carefully the physicochemical and
biophysical conditions under which the front propagation and at-
tendant instabilities may be suppressed or enhanced. In turn, this
information will also help elucidate the mechanisms underlying the
formation of jets and streamers observed in many advancing bacte-
rial interfaces.
The agent-based numerical model we studied considered the
propagation of swarms into frictional domains and was motivated
by the manner in which bacteria may reconstitute and reclaim ter-
ritory, and also the manner in which bacteria may physically in-
teract with sub-domains of other bacterial species or mutants with
strongly contrasting self-propulsion. It would be of interest to gen-
eralize our treatment by allowing the self-propulsion speed and vis-
cous friction to depend on biophysical parameters such as substrate
properties. Similarly, introducing a dependence on an ambient dif-
fusing chemical may provide a minimal model of quorum sensing.
Finally, a logical next step towards predictive modeling of the
biomechanical and biophysical aspects of swarming will be to
combine agent-based microscopic models as in this paper with
14 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

mesoscale models for active liquid crystals32–36.
Competing interests
Authors have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
JT was the recipient of an undergraduate research fellowship from
the NSF-CREST Center for Cellular and Biomolecular Machines at
the University of California Merced, and acknowledges support
from NSF-HRD-1547848.
AMA acknowledges grants from NSF-
CBET-1700961 and NSF-CBET-1604423.
Conﬂicts of interest
There are no conﬂicts to declare.
Author Contributions
AEP performed the experiments, and JT, AG and AEP analyzed the
experimental data. AMA and AG conceived the simulation model.
YZ performed the simulations, and YZ, AMA and AG analyzed sim-
ulation results. AG wrote the manuscript along with co-authors.
Data availability
Relevant data and simulation details are available from AG and
AMA.
Notes and references
1 H. C. Berg and D. A. Brown (1972) Chemotaxis in Escherichia
coli analysed by Three-dimensional Tracking, Nature 239, 500-
504.
2 H. C. Berg and R. A. Anderson (1973) Bacteria Swim by Rotat-
ing their Flagellar Filaments, Nature 245, 380-382.
3 H. C. Berg (2008) E. coli in Motion, Springer.
4 Microbubbles reveal chiral ﬂuid ﬂows in bacterial swarms, Y.
Wu B. G. Hosu, and H. C. Berg (2011) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108
(10), 4147-4151.
5 L. Alberti and R. M. Harshey (1990) Differentiation of Serra-
tia marcescens 274 into swimmer and swarmer cells, Journal of
Bacteriology 172, 4322.
6 R. M. Harshey (2003) Bacterial Motility on a Surface: Many
Ways to a Common Goal, Annual Reviews Microbiology 57, 249-
273.
7 M. F. Copeland and D. B. Weibel (2009) Bacterial Swarming: A
Model System for Studying Dynamic Self-assembly, Soft matter
5 (6), 1174-1187.
8 L. Hamouche, S. Laalami, A. Daerr, S. Song, I. B. Holland, S. J.
Séror, K. Hamze and H. Putzer (2017) Bacillus subtilis Swarmer
Cells Lead the Swarm, Multiply, and Generate a Trail of Quies-
cent Descendants, mBio 8, e02102-16.
9 N. C. Darnton, L.Turner, S. Rojevsky, and H. C. Berg (2010)
Dynamics of Bacterial Swarming, Biophysical Journal 98 (10),
2082-2090.
10 L. Turner, R. Zhang, N. C. Darnton and H. C. Berg (2010) Visu-
alization of Flagella during bacterial Swarming, Journal of Bac-
teriology 192 (13), 3259-67.
11 D. B. Kearns (2010) A ﬁeld guide to bacterial swarming motility,
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8 (9), 634-44.
12 R. M. Harshey and J. D. Partridge (2015) Shelter in a swarm, J.
Mol. Biol. 427 (23), 3683-3694.
13 N. Verstraeten, K. Braeken, B. Debkumari, M. Fauvart, J.
Fransaer, J. Vermant, and J. Michiels (2008) Living on a sur-
face: swarming and bioﬁlm formation. Trends Microbiol. 16
(10), 496-506.
14 C. M. Dejea et al. (2014) Microbiota organization is a distinct
feature of proximal colorectal 190 cancers, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (51), 18321-6.
15 M. T. Villanueva (2015) Metabolism: Bacterial bioﬁlms may
feed colon cancer, Nat Rev Cancer 15, 320.
16 C. H. Johnson et al. (2015) Metabolism links bacterial bioﬁlms
and colon carcinogenesis, Cell Metab. 21 (6), 891-7.
17 E. Steager, C. B. Kim, J. Patel, S. Bith, C. Naik, L. Reber, and M.
J. Kim (2007) Control of microfabricated structures powered by
ﬂagellated bacteria using phototaxis, Applied Physics Letters 90
(26), 263901.
18 E. B. Steager, C. B. Kim and M. G. Kim (2008) Dynamics of
pattern formation in bacterial swarms, Physics Fluids 20 (7),
073601.
19 S. Bensity E. Ben-Jacob, G. Ariel and A. Be’er (2015) Antibiotic-
Induced Anomalous Statistics of Collective Bacterial Swarming,
Phy. Rev. Lett. 114, 018105.
20 J. Dunkel, S. Heidenreich, K. Drescher, H. H. Wensink, M. Bär
and R. E. Goldstein (2013) Fluid Dynamics of Bacterial Turbu-
lence, Physical review letters 110, 228102.
21 E. Lushi, H. Wioland and R. E. Goldstein (2014) Fluid ﬂows cre-
ated by swimming bacteria drive self-organization in conﬁned
suspensions Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
111 (27), 9733-9738.
22 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath, M. Goulian and P. E. Arratia
(2015) Running and tumbling with E. coli in polymeric solu-
tions, Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 15761.
23 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath and P. E. Arratia (2016) Active col-
loids in complex ﬂuids, Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface
Science 21, 86-96.
24 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath and P. E. Arratia (2018) The prop-
agation of active-passive interfaces in bacterial swarms, Nature
Communications 9 (1), 5373.
25 J. Yang, P. E. Arratia, A. E. Patteson and A. Gopinath (2019)
Quenching active swarms: effects of light exposure on collective
motility in swarming Serratia marcescens, Journal of the Royal
Society Interface 16 (156), 20180960.
26 T. Kohler, L. K. Curty, F. Barja, C. van Delden and J.-C. Pechere
(2000) Swarming of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Is Dependent on
Cell-to-Cell Signaling and Requires Flagella and Pili, Journal of
Bacteriology 182 (21), 5990-5996.
27 M. T. Butler, Q. Wang and R. M. Harshey (2010) Cell density and
mobility protect swarming bacteria against antibiotics, Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107 (8), 3776-81.
28 H. H. Wensink, J. Dunkel, S. Heidenreich, K. Drescher, R. E.
Goldstein, H. Lowen and J. M. Yeomans (2012) Meso-scale tur-
bulence in living ﬂuids, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 109 (36), 14308-13.
29 M. C. Marchetti, J. F. Joanny, S. Ramaswamy, T. B. Liverpool,
J. Prost, M. Rao and R. A. Simha (2013) Hydrodynamics of soft
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],1–16 | 15

active matter, Review of Modern Physics 85, 1143.
30 S. Ramaswamy (2017) Active matter, Journal of Statistical Me-
chanics: Theory and Experiment 2017, 054002.
31 V. Bratanov, F. Jenko and E. Frey (2015) New class of turbulence
in active ﬂuids, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 112 (49), 15048-15053.
32 A. Gopinath, M. F. Hagan and M. C. Marchetti, and A.
Baskaran (2012) Dynamical self-regulation in self-propelled
particle ﬂows, Physical Review E 85 (6), 061903.
33 A. Doostmohammadi, J. Ignés-Mullol, J. M. Yeomans and F.
Sagués (2018) Active nematics, Nature Communications 9,
3246.
34 S. Chandragiri, A. Doostmohammadi, J. M. Yeomans and S. P.
Thampi (2019) Active transport in a channel: stabilisation by
ﬂow or thermodynamics, Soft Matter 15, 1597-1604.
35 R. C. V. Coelho, N. A. M. Araújo and M. M. Telo da Gama (2019)
Active nematic–isotropic interfaces in channels, Soft Matter 15,
6819-6829.
36 R. C. V. Coelho,
N. A. M. Araújo and M. M. Telo da
Gama
(2020)
Propagation
of
active
nematic–isotropic
interfaces
on
substrates,
Soft
Matter
Advance
Article
https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SM02306B
37 A. Gopinath, R. C. Armstrong and R. A. Brown (2006) Sec-
ond order sharp-interface and thin-interface asymptotic anal-
yses and error minimization for phase-ﬁeld descriptions of two-
sided dilute binary alloy solidiﬁcation, J. Cryst. Growth 291(1),
272-289.
38 https://imagej.net/Directionality.
39 W. Thielicke and E. Stamhuis (2014) PIVlab – Towards User-
friendly, Affordable and Accurate Digital Particle Image Ve-
locimetry in MATLAB, Journal of Open Research Software 2, 1.
40 A. Gopinath, R. C. Armstrong and R. A. Brown (2004) Observa-
tions on the eigenspectrum of the linearized Doi equation with
application to numerical simulations of liquid crystal suspen-
sions, J. Chem. Phys. 121 (12), 6093-6094.
41 A. Gopinath, L. Mahadevan and R. C. Armstrong (2006) Tran-
sitions to nematic states in homogeneous suspensions of high
aspect ratio magnetic rods, Phys. Fluids 18 (2), 028102.
42 M. Kardar, G. Parisi and Y.-C. Zhang (1986) Dynamic scaling of
growing interfaces, Physical Review Letters 56, 889.
43 T. Vicsek (1992) Fractal growth phenomena. World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 2nd Edition.
44 A. L. Barabasi and H. E. Stanley (1995) Fractal concepts in sur-
face growth, Cambridge University Press.
45 L. G. Wilson, V. A. Martinez, J. Schwarz-Linek, J. Tailleur, G.
Bryant, P. N. Pusey, and W. C. K. Poon (2011) Differential Dy-
namic Microscopy of Bacterial Motility, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
018101.
46 M. Gross M and F. Varnik (1982) Interfacial roughening in non-
ideal ﬂuids: Dynamic scaling in the weak- and strong-damping
regime, Physical Review E 87, 022407.
47 S. F. Edwards and D. R. Wilkinson (1982) The surface statistics
of a granular aggregate, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 381, 1780, 17-31.
48 S. Broersma (1981) Viscous force and torque constants for a
cylinder, J. Chem. Phys. 74, 6989.
49 Th. Kirchhoff, H. Löwen, and R. Klein (1996) Dynamical corre-
lations in suspensions of charged rodlike macromolecules, Phys.
Rev. E 53(5) 5011.
50 S. Plimpton (1995) Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range
Molecular Dynamics, Journal of Computational Physics 117 (1),
1-17.
51 Y. Zhang, G. Li and A. M. Ardekani (2018) Reduced viscosity for
ﬂagella moving in a solution of long polymer chains, Physical
Review Fluids 3 (2), 023101.
52 G. Li and A. M. Ardekani (2016) Collective Motion of Microor-
ganisms in a Viscoelastic Fluid, Physical Review Letters 117,
118001.
16 |
1–16
Journal Name, [year], [vol.],

