TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
RESEARCH REPORT
Direct force measurement and loading on developing tissues in
intact avian embryos
Chon U. Chan1,2,*, Fengzhu Xiong1,3,4,*,‡, Arthur Michaut3, Joana M. N. Vidigueira4, Olivier Pourquié3,‡ and
L. Mahadevan1,‡
ABSTRACT
Developmental morphogenesis is driven by tissue stresses acting on
tissue rheology. Direct measurements of forces in small tissues
(100 µm-1 mm) in situ, such as in early embryos, require high spatial
precision and minimal invasiveness. Here, we introduce a control-
based approach, tissue force microscopy (TiFM), that integrates a
mechanical cantilever probe and live imaging with closed-loop
feedback control of mechanical loading in early chicken embryos.
By testing previously qualitatively characterized force-producing
tissues
in
the
elongating
body
axis,
we
show
that
TiFM
quantitatively captures stress dynamics with high sensitivity. TiFM
also provides the means to apply stable, minimally invasive and
physiologically relevant loads to drive tissue deformation and to follow
the resulting morphogenetic progression associated with large-scale
cell movements. Together, TiFM allows us to control tissue force
measurement and manipulation in small developing embryos, and
promises to contribute to the quantitative understanding of complex
multi-tissue mechanics during development.
KEY WORDS: Tissue forces, Avian embryo, Feedback-control,
Loading, Body axis
INTRODUCTION
During
the
development
of
a
multicellular
organism,
cell
behaviours collectively generate tissue forces and often alter
tissue
mechanical
properties.
These
changes
drive
tissue
deformations
and
lead
to
functional
shapes
and
patterns.
Understanding the dynamics and regulation of these mechanical
factors
is essential
for creating
accurate models
of
tissue
morphogenesis and their eventual control, questions that span the
entire range from basic to applied developmental biology, e.g.
organoid engineering. Tissue size remains a major constraint for
mechanical studies of early animal embryos, where the fundamental
body plan and a variety of distinctly structured and shaped tissues
form rapidly at the small scale of 100 µm (Mongera et al., 2019). At
these developmental stages, tissues are very soft and produce small
stresses. A number of in vivo approaches have been developed to
address this challenge in early embryos. These include classic
embryology methods, such as surgical cutting (Schoenwolf and
Smith, 1990; Xiong et al., 2020), which allows inference of tissue
mechanical interactions; microaspiration (Kim et al., 2020), which
measures tissue mechanical properties; cantilever beams and fibres
(Chevalier et al., 2016; Hara et al., 2013) and embedding gels
(Zhou et al., 2009), which measure tissue stresses; and laser ablation
(Hutson et al., 2009), which assesses tissue tension, among others
(Campàs, 2016). Emerging (in the sense that they are more recently
applied to early embryos) techniques incorporating precision
engineering methods also show great promise, particularly in the
measurement of tissue mechanical properties in intact embryos (or
large explants). Examples include imaging-based methods, such as
optical coherence elastography (OCE) (Mulligan et al., 2016) and
Brillouin microscopy (Prevedel et al., 2019) operating with certain
mechanical models. Actuator-based approaches, such as magnetic
droplets (Serwane et al., 2017), atomic force microscopy (AFM)
(Barriga et al., 2018) and related microindenters (Marrese et al.,
2020), and optically trapped nanoparticles (Dzementsei et al.,
2018), offer direct mapping of the spatial-temporal mechanical
heterogeneity of tissues and can also be used to introduce a
controllable load to tissues in situ.
Using embedded soft alginate gels, our previous work (Xiong
et al., 2020) detected a pushing force from the axial tissues (neural
tube and the notochord) of early chicken embryos (HH8-12;
Hamburger and Hamilton, 1951) that drives body elongation and
cell movement near the posterior progenitor domain. Given that
only very soft alginate gels show visible deformation, it is likely that
this pushing force was very small. However, it was not possible to
use the gels for accurate quantification of the force as they were
heterogenous, irregularly deformed
and
likely change their
mechanical properties in the chemical environment of the
developing embryo. Furthermore, as the size of the gels were
relatively large (dozens of cell diameters) and stayed in the tissue for
a long period of time (Xiong et al., 2020), the deformation induced
by them at the local embedding site could alter the cell organization
and tissue mechanics of the normal tissue environment, making
tissue force quantification inaccurate. To minimize the tissue impact
of force sensors, ultra-thin retrievable probes can be used, which
reduce
the size and
duration of
contact required for the
measurements. Here, we present a new system using a micro-
cantilever deflection-based approach (Hara et al., 2013), which uses
a beam/needle that is bent when one end is held still and the other
end is under a load. By combining modern cantilevers, live imaging
and tracking, and electronic sensing in a programmed feedback
loop, we show that it is possible to construct a system capable of
Handling Editor: Thomas Lecuit
Received 20 June 2022; Accepted 6 April 2023
1John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR,
Singapore 138673. 3Department of Pathology, Brigham Women’s Hospital and
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
4Wellcome Trust/CRUK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 1QN, UK.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
‡Authors for correspondence (fx220@cam.ac.uk;
pourquie@genetics.med.harvard.edu; lmahadev@g.harvard.edu)
C.U.C., 0000-0002-9047-057X; F.X., 0000-0002-6153-0254; A.M., 0000-0003-
1226-0021; J.M.N.V., 0000-0002-3756-2854; O.P., 0000-0001-5189-1227; L.M.,
0000-0002-5114-0519
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

dynamic force measurement. Here, we present the design and
validation results of the system, which we termed Tissue Force
Microscopy (TiFM), and discuss its application to characterizing
and altering the active forces in live avian embryos.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The key for accuracy of a cantilever is the precision of the deflection
measurement, which comes from the positional difference between
the clamped end and the loaded end. The bigger the deflection,
the better the signal-to-noise ratio. To match the sensitivity
required for the small stresses produced by soft body axis tissues
in the early chicken embryo, we used commercially available
atomic force microscope (AFM) silicon-nitrate probes as our
cantilevers. These probes can have low stiffness constants to the
order of 0.01 N/m (10 nN/µm to put in the small tissue perspective).
In contrast to the tapping mechanism in AFM surface imaging,
we position these thin (∼1 µm) cantilevers vertically to allow
direct insertion into the tissue, with or without modifications to
the tip. In the case of measuring the axial pushing force, because
the tissue cross-section is much larger than that of the cantilever
tip, we glued a tailored piece of aluminium foil (200 µm square,
∼15 µm thick) to the tip (Michaut, 2018), which fully blocks the
elongating neural tube and notochord in a HH11 chicken embryo
upon insertion. The embryo (prepared using the ex ovo EC culture
protocol on a piece of windowed filter paper; Chapman et al.,
2001) is mounted on a glass-bottomed dish and imaged from
below (Fig. 1A, Fig. S1). The glass-bottomed dish contains a thin
layer of culture gel to support the embryo, and the embryo is
covered by a thin layer of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
mineral oil to prevent drying (Michaut, 2018). The whole stage is
set in an environmental enclosure maintaining 37.5°C with
heating fans. Embryos develop normally at a slightly lower rate
for at least 6 h under these conditions, as assessed by somite
formation and axis elongation (∼2 h per somite compared with the
∼1.5 h normal rate, ∼100 µm/h elongation speed compared with
the ∼150 µm/h normal rate). Notably, the probe insertion site
heals quickly after cantilever retraction and becomes barely
distinguishable under 1 h with foil and in a few minutes without
foil. The inverted microscope (10× objective) captures images of
the tissue section where the probe tip/attached foil is in focus and
sends them to the computer for real-time segmentation to measure
the position of the tip.
To enable dynamic positioning of the cantilever, the chip holding
the cantilevers is mounted on an electric piezo (Fig. S2). To enable
precise measurement of the chip/piezo position, they are further
flanked with a pair of capacitors (Fig. 1B,C). The capacitance
difference between the pair is highly sensitive to the distance
between the capacitor plates and therefore the movement of
the piezo. Before loading the embryo, the chip position and the
capacitance reading are first calibrated with the microscope to create
a lookup function where capacitance difference is interpreted as
chip position. This real-time position information can then be sent
as feedback to the voltage controller connected to the piezo as a
closed loop system (Fig. 1B-D, see Materials and Methods).
Voltage can thus be adjusted automatically if any drift of the piezo
and/or chip is detected, ensuring the stability of chip position.
Extended imaging of the chip confirms that the feedback loop
maintains stable chip positioning.
By taking the position differences between the foil (measured by
the microscope) and the chip (measured by the capacitors) over
time, and multiplying the cantilever spring constant (0.2 N/m) and
dividing by the foil cross-sectional area, we found the initial stress
[shortly after (under 30 min) probe insertion] to be ∼40 Pa for axial
elongation and the stalling stress in the longer term (>5 h) to be
∼100 Pa (Fig. 1D-F). Cells are observed to accumulate anterior to
the foil as the foil moves and eventually stalls (Movie 1). Posterior to
the foil, the cell density markedly reduces (Fig. 1F). The stalling
condition where large local tissue deformation has occurred does
not represent the normal condition of the tissues but helps assess the
force-producing capacity of the tissue. Foil alone directly connected
Fig. 1. Tissue force microscopy (TiFM) to measure the axial elongation
force. (A) The concept of TiFM. The design takes advantage of the flatness
of the early avian embryo. XC is the holder ‘chip’ position measured by the
capacitors, XT is the probe ‘tip’ position measured by the microscope. The
difference between them is a measure of the deflection of the cantilever
beam. (B,C) Probe holder and capacitors. Two capacitor plates and the
piezo are integrated for position control and measurement against two fixed
capacitor plates. C, capacitance; V, voltage. (C) A side photo of the
assembled probe holder. (D) Diagram of the axial elongation stress
measurement. This is a dorsal view of the tail end of the embryo, as seen in
E; the probe enters from the ventral side. A-P-labelled double-headed
arrows indicate the antero-posterior axis. pPSM, posterior presomitic
mesoderm; pNT, posterior neural tube; PD, progenitor domain. Cells from
the PD enter the U-shaped PSM under the pushing forces from the pNT and
notochord (Xiong et al., 2020). (E) Movie frames at the times indicated
(h:min). Foil movement under the elongation force. Arrows indicate the small
displacements of the foil (overlaid on the third image). The foil depth is
∼200 µm. Blue and red circles indicate the regions of interest for
fluorescence intensity measurements. This is a GFP embryo. Neural tube
folds can be seen to be closing and narrowing. Representative of five similar
experiments. (F) Axial elongation stress and cell density approximated by
fluorescence intensity. The stress is calculated from the displacement, the
cantilever spring constant (0.2 N/m) and the cross-sectional area of the foil.
Scale bar: 100 µm.
2
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

to the holding chip does not show any stable displacement (Movie 2,
Fig. S3A). These results are consistent with our previous gel
deformation experiments to detect the axis elongation force (Xiong
et al., 2020). To assess the invasiveness of the foil, which causes a
significantly larger area of tissue damage than sharp AFM probes
(100-400 µm wide and ∼15 µm thick, compared with 30-50 µm
wide and ∼1 µm thick), we took advantage of the piezo driver to cut
different-sized foil insertion wounds at the body axis end and
followed them over time (Fig. S3B). Thin slits (<20 µm) that are
typically left after stress measurements heal quickly (in under 1 h),
suggesting minimal cellular changes at the wound site (such as
epithelialization of the exposed cells, which builds tension that
prevents
wound
closure,
a
common
occurrence
in
tissue
microsurgeries that cause mechanical artifacts) and minimal long-
term effects on the tissue area.
We next measured the stress produced by the posterior presomitic
mesoderm (pPSM) flanking the body axis and known to be drivers
of elongation (Bénazéraf et al., 2010). In this case, the tissue
convergence speed (∼15 µm/h) is much slower than axis elongation
(∼150 µm/h). In addition, because the notochord normally also
undergoes tissue-autonomous convergence and resists PSM
deformation, inserting the probe between the notochord and
pPSM does not distinguish the source of the detected force. To
ensure that we can test whether pPSM generates a stress, we
positioned the probe next to the pPSM after surgically removing a
region of the posterior notochord (Fig. 2A). Unlike the anterior
PSM (aPSM) or somites, pPSM tissue is known to undergo
expansion and will fill this opening after surgery (Xiong et al.,
2020). A small stress in the range of 10-100 Pa is detected that
gradually dissipates over several hours (Fig. 2B,C). This is
consistent with our previous observations that the pPSM
compresses axial tissues and that the compression disappears
at the level of the differentiating aPSM (Xiong et al., 2020).
Our system thus enables direct quantitative (at the precision of an
order of magnitude in this particular case) confirmation of the
small forces generated by the tissues of the elongating chicken
body axis.
To perform controlled mechanical perturbations, we used the
feedback loop to move the piezo and/or chip to maintain a constant
deflection by comparing with the tip position obtained with live
segmentation of the tip images. This enables a sustained constant
force to be applied to the tissue through the cantilever tip. Using this
system, we loaded an anterior-to-posterior steady pulling force
(150-200 nN) on the axial tissues, which at the same time is also a
pushing force on the posterior progenitor domain (Fig. 3A). The
embryos
show accelerated
elongation
under
this
load
and
surrounding tissues exhibit differently patterned deformations
(Fig. 3A-C, Movies 3 and 4). For example, the neural folds
showed clear fastened convergence and closure under loading while
PSM elongated without pronounced width change (Fig. 3B). It is
also notable that, despite being under a strong load that doubled
elongation speed (Fig. 3C), the insertion location and surrounding
tissues remained intact and no tearing was observed, and the
insertion
wound
quickly
disappeared
after
probe
retraction
(Movie 4). We labelled cell clusters in the pPSM and followed
their movements by cell tracking (Fig. 3D). The stress loading
caused the cell cluster to move more laterally, following the ‘U’-
shaped trajectory from the progenitor domain to the pPSM
(Fig. 3E), consistent with more invasive approaches such as a
magnetic pin that produces excess stresses beyond the physiological
range (Xiong et al., 2020). These data together show that, in an
intact embryo, tissue stresses exerted at one location have wide
impacts through inter-tissue connections and alter cell behaviours at
a distance, highlighting the importance of integrated multi-tissue
models in developmental morphogenesis.
We name the close-loop electro-mechanical system, including the
vertical cantilever, the piezo, the capacitors, live imaging and
incubation described here, Tissue Force Microscopy (TiFM,
Fig. S1). TiFM theoretically reaches a sensitivity of 1 nN (limited
by the resolution and accuracy of tip imaging and tracking) with the
present hardware and has 3D coverage at ∼20 µm spatial resolution
(typical widths of the probe tip) parallel to the stress and 1-30 µm
along the direction of the stress (depending on how the tip is
modified, e.g. fluorescent dye, foil, etc.). The main measurement
error terms arise as the probe interfaces with the complex and
heterogenous embryonic tissues. For example, as the deflection
Fig. 2. Measurement of the posterior presomitic mesoderm
compression. (A) Ventral view of a HH11 avian embryo undergoing
posterior notochord (pNC) ablation to reveal the medial surface of the
pPSM. Arrowheads indicate the anterior and posterior borders of the surgical
window. Neural tube that is more dorsal remains intact and is in the view.
Representative of three similar experiments. A-P-labelled double-headed
arrows indicate the antero-posterior axis. Scale bars: 200 µm. (B) Dorsal
side view of the region in A now under the TiFM. As indicated in the
diagram, a soft triangular probe (0.01 N/m) is now inserted medially by the
pPSM boundary and the shadow of the triangle tip is visible. The pPSM
tissue is known to expand into this area after the pNC is ablated. pPSM,
posterior presomitic mesoderm; pNT, posterior neural tube. Scale bar:
100 µm. (C) Trace of the probe tip shows its deflection over time and
translates into the lateral to medial force generated by the pPSM. The force
quickly stalls around 100 nN and dissipates after a few hours. The estimated
depth of the probe is ∼30 µm and contact surface size with the probe is in
the order of 103-104 µm2, predicting a pPSM stress in the range of
10-100 Pa.
3
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

increases, the deviation from the vertical of the contact angle to the
tissue becomes more significant. Imperfections during foil
preparation can add errors to the tissue contact area and increase
tissue damage. In thicker tissues, probe tip tracking is more error-
prone due to reduced contrast in the images, although this could be
improved by modified tips such as those with glue and fluorescent
dyes, which create a trackable pattern (with trade-off of spatial
resolution). These factors should be considered when estimating
the stress measured or inflicted. For a detailed discussion of
sources of errors and how to estimate/control them, see Materials
and Methods section ‘Sources and considerations of measurement
errors’.
Using TiFM, a stress measurement against a deforming tissue
takes 10-30 min to reach stalling conditions (when further
deflection of the probe by the tissue becomes minimal). This may
take longer when the contact area is larger, as in the case of a foil-
probe construct, and thus the probe needs to be retracted to minimize
long-term invasiveness. The sharp tip creates little tissue damage
(such as tearing) even with a strong load. These features are
advantageous as the tissues are measured more closely to their
native state with smaller and shortened local deformations. By
applying a well-controlled stress close to the endogenous force of
the tissue in vivo, downstream cellular responses such as gene
expression changes can now be studied in more physiologically
relevant ranges and with reduced experimental noise that is
often difficult to achieve with mechanical perturbations. We
believe that the path is now open to combine TiFM loading with
genetic probes to allow molecular force reporters to be calibrated
(Kim et al., 2015). The difficulty of using inverted microscopy
with a thin flat sample like the early chicken embryo can be
overcome with self-detecting probes or alternative deflection
detectors, such as an interferometer. Future work will aim to
improve the automation and throughput of TiFM, and to expand its
applications to rheological measurements and other model
systems. Altogether, TiFM shows promise by adding to the
expanding toolbox (Campàs, 2016) for understanding the physical
mechanisms of morphogenesis and the quantitative engineering of
development in small tissues.
Fig. 3. Tissue and cell dynamics after mechanical load. (A) Schematic and images from a loaded avian embryo. The red triangle in the diagram indicates
the probe tip. The black arrow indicates the direction of the force. Posterior body axis and extra-embryonic regions (including zona opaca) are visible in the
images. This is a GFP embryo. Yellow arrows indicate the probe location. Yellow arrowhead shows the wound immediately after probe retraction. Yellow
dashed line measures elongation. Blue arrows indicate expansion of the zona opaca towards the embryo under load. Time stamps are in h:min. Images are
representative of five similar experiments. A-P-labelled double-headed arrows indicate the antero-posterior axis. Scale bar: 500 µm. (B) Magnified views of
body axis tissues under load, comparing 00:00 and 02:40 timepoints from A. Somites and anterior neural tube are largely unchanged. Posterior neural tube
markedly narrows while the PSM narrows only a little. NT, neural tube; PSM, pre-somitic mesoderm. Scale bars: 100 µm. (C) Physiological loading increases
elongation speed. Loaded samples are under 150-200 nN (n=4). 0 nN indicates no load control on the TiFM (n=4). Incubator control includes samples not on
the TiFM mounting environment (n=8), which develop faster. Data are mean±s.d. *P<0.001 and **P<0.001 (unpaired two-tailed t-tests). (D) Schematic and
images from a loaded and DiI-labelled embryo. The probe tip is fluorescent in the red channel, similar to DiI (red arrow in the images). The red triangle in the
diagram indicates the probe tip. The black arrow indicates the direction of the force. Red circles mark the DiI injection sites in the pPSM corresponding to the
clusters of cells on the image. pNT, posterior neural tube; PD, progenitor domain. Two clusters are at the same anterior-posterior level as the pNT and two
are at the same level as the PD. Some of the DiI-labelled cells in these movies can be tracked to analyse cell movements. Time stamps are h:min. Images
are representative of four similar experiments. Scale bar: 100 µm. (E) Medial to lateral speeds of cells measured from tracks at the pNT and PD levels,
respectively. Each speed measurement is calculated from the displacement of a cell over a 5 min interval. Loading causes cells to move more laterally, on
average. Data are mean±s.e.m. *P=0.032 and **P<0.001 (unpaired two-tailed t-tests).
4
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Eggs and embryo preparation
Wild-type chicken (Gallus gallus) eggs were supplied by Charles River
Laboratories and Medeggs (Fakenham, UK). Tg(CAG-GFP) (McGrew
et al., 2008) chicken eggs were provided by Clemson University (SC, USA;
originally by the University of Edinburgh). Eggs were kept in a monitored
15°C fridge for storage and in egg incubators at 37.5°C and ∼60% humidity
for incubation. HH stage 10-12 embryos were used. The early stage embryos
are used under a tissue protocol and do not require an animal protocol
according to institution guidelines. To obtain the embryos for TiFM
measurements, eggs were incubated for ∼40 h before opening for the EC
culture (Chapman et al., 2001). The EC culture uses 2 cm×2 cm pieces of
filter paper (Whatman) with two adjacent 0.5 cm holes in the centre. Eggs
were opened into a petri dish and the thick albumen on the top that covers the
embryo and the vitelline membrane was swept aside gently with small filter
paper pieces using a tweezer. The filter paper with holes was then lowered to
attach to the vitelline membrane in such a way that embryos were visible
through the hole (body axis aligned to the long axis of the hole). The
vitelline membrane was then cut around the filter paper to release the
embryo. The filter culture embryo was then rinsed in PBS to remove excess
yolk. The cleaned embryo was then placed on a 3.5 cm petri dish containing
2 ml of culture gel made according to the following formula (per 100 ml of
culture gel): part A, 50 ml albumin (beaten for 15 min) then supplemented
with 0.8 ml 20% D-glucose (Sigma); part B, 0.3 g BactoAgar (Sigma)
dissolved in 50 ml water in a microwave then supplemented with 1.23 ml
5 M NaCl. Part Awas warmed and part B cooled to 55°C in a water bath and
mixed thoroughly then added to petri dishes (2 ml each) before gelation.
The embryo cultures were then stored in a slide box with wet paper towels in
the incubator. In experiments where some tissue areas and cells are labelled
with DiI, the DiI was injected with a sharp-tipped glass needle by
mouth pipetting from the ventral side of the embryo. The stock solution of
2.5 mg/ml DiI in ethanol was diluted in PBS to 0.5 mg/ml before injection.
At the sample-loading step of the TiFM procedure (see below), two embryos
were taken and transferred to a pre-warmed glass-bottomed imaging dish
(MatTek) covered with 200 µl of culture gel. A second piece of filter paper
was then added to prevent the embryo from detaching and floating once it
was submerged. Pre-warmed PBS was then added to cover the embryos,
followed by one or two drops of mineral oil – enough to spread out and cover
the surface. One embryo was subjected to TiFM measurements and/or
loading while the other served as a control inside the incubation chamber on
the microscope.
Design and operation of the TiFM
A working TiFM can be assembled with the list of required equipment
and components below. Design considerations are described and the
components used in this study are listed, but it is not necessary to acquire the
same components. The construction of the probe holder and incubation
chamber would depend on the configuration of the base microscope that is
used. Similarly, existing microscope software can be incorporated into the
operation procedure. Users with electrical engineering and programming
experience are required for the assembly and maintenance of the system.
Required equipment and components
Microscope
To construct a TiFM system, an inverted microscope with xy stage control
and z focus control is required. We used the Zeiss Axio Observer base
(top modules including the TL illumination and condenser were removed).
A low-magnification objective of 2.5-5× is required for sample positioning
and a 10× objective is required for image data streaming.
Camera
Owing to the lack of TL illumination and the size and close proximity of the
probe holder to the sample, side LEDs were included to compensate for the
lack of light on the sample. A sensitive, fast camera is required to provide
high-resolution streaming of the probe tip in the tissue, which is essential for
real-time feedback control of the force. The temporal and spatial resolution
limit of the system is set by the camera and imaging protocol (described in
more detail in the ‘Operation’ section). We used a Ximea USB camera
(MQ042MG-CM).
Custom probe holder and capacitors
A stable, controllable probe needs to be installed on a reliable
micromanipulator and/or stage as a holder with minimal drift over time.
We
used
a
World
Precision
Instruments
WPI
M3301R
Manual
Micromanipulator and a Newport 9062-XYZ-M stage. The stage was
fixed to optical rails and beams (Thorlabs) onto the microscope base,
forming an overhang on top of the sample stage. We 3D printed two-part
plastic holders where the sample side has a slot for the chip of AFM probes
and the piezo side has a slot for the insertion of the mobile end of the piezo
(Fig. S2), and two slots on either side for the mobile copper capacitor plates.
The two parts were tightened with screws to allow piezo and probe
exchanges. The static end of the piezo was inserted into another printed
holder that connected to a cage holding the fixed capacitor plates. The
capacitors flanked the piezo, the positioning of which affected the
capacitance difference (Fig. 1B-C), allowing a calibration of capacitance
to holder position at the beginning of an experiment (described in more
detail in the ‘Operation’ section).
Voltage controller and piezo
A programmable voltage controller is required to drive the piezo. We used a
custom-built controller integrating a low and high power source; however,
commercial controllers (such as Thorlabs, MDT694B) would also work.
The controller needs to be able to adjust voltage output quickly and
accurately during live measurements to enable the feedback control. The
piezos we used are the ceramic piezoelectric benders from Thorlabs
(PB4NB2W). Components in the section ‘Custom probe holder and
capacitor’ should be designed in accordance with the type of the piezo and
working range required.
AFM probes
We used smooth (no tip modifications) silicon nitrate AFM probes from
Bruker (MLCT-O10) and NanoAndMore (AIO-AL-TL) with spring
constants ranging from 0.01 to 0.2 N/m. Comparable probes would be
feasible to use. It is advantageous to use probes with a larger length as they
can reach deeper points in the embryo.
Environmental chamber
The embryo requires proper temperature and humidity to develop normally.
Common lab and microscope facility environments have a low humidity and
room temperature around 25°C. We used a layer of mineral oil to reduce
evaporation but this is not the optimal method, as long-term survival of the
embryo is affected under this condition. Environment chambers where
humidity can be maintained at a high level while the electronics still function
would be desirable. Alternatively, oxygenating the culture media that
submerges the embryo may also be effective. We used a custom laser-cut
cardboard box to enclose the holder and the sample stage, and heating fans
integrated with temperature sensors to maintain 37.5°C. Commercially
available environmental chambers would also work but customization (e.g.
additional holes) is needed to allow the installation of the probe holder and
the electrical wires.
Optional components
Microcontroller
Because multiple data streams (images, capacitance, voltage, temperature,
etc.) flow through the system, it is advantageous to organize them under an
integrated controller to align data onto the same time axis. For force
measurement and loading, small time differences in data streams do not
cause a major issue because the probe and sample move slowly and errors
average out through the feedback over time. However, for other
measurements that can potentially be made using TiFM, such as
oscillatory rheology, time axis alignment is crucial. In these situations, a
master clock is used to trigger the camera and capacitance readings for
synchronization. We used a Teensy microcontroller to link different parts of
the system and interface with Matlab (Mathworks) on the computer.
5
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

Illumination modules
Having good contrast on the probe tip and embryo tissues is important for
the precision of tip positioning and position measurement via image
segmentation. The overhanging holder including the capacitors and the
piezo form an occlusion for overhead TL illumination. Small LEDs can
be installed on the holder to directly illuminate the sample. We used side
LEDs that are fixed on the sample stage. The LEDs can be triggered by
the camera or the microscope. We also used the fluorescence module of
the Zeiss scope to provide RL illumination of the GFP transgenic
embryos, and the probe tip that can be coloured using Quantum dots
glued on using epoxy, mixing dyes such as DiI with the epoxy or simply
taking advantage of the autofluorescence of epoxy.
Software
To measure and control forces, the locations of the chip and the tip
are streamed in real time, and the chip location can be altered by
piezo movement. Therefore, the main functions to achieve with the
software are to send and receive the chip and/or piezo position (i.e.
voltage), to program imaging, to receive images and to obtain tip
position. We used Matlab (MathWorks) to create the user interface that
plots the serial data via a USB link to the microcontroller, and to run the
image segmentation. For the objective and shutter control, we used
Micromanager (Edelstein et al., 2014). A Teensy program that integrates
the data streams is uploaded to the microcontroller before the start of
experiments.
Operation
Testing and calibration
An assembled TiFM system needs to be tested and calibrated before
loading actual samples. This step ensures the system functions properly
and produces necessary parameters and data for the sample measurements.
First, holder stability must be tested for the desired duration of the
experiment. Without samples, the microscope should be used to take a
timelapse of the overhang holder (1) without and (2) with the voltage
controller on, and (3) with the capacitor-voltage controller feedback loop
on where a set capacitance is sent by the software. For a stable system, all
timelapse results should show minimal movement of the probe, but the
system is usable if (1) is stable and (3) achieves correction for drifts in (2).
(1) tests the stability of the scaffold, such as the rails, columns and the
micromanipulator. (2) tests the stability of the piezo and voltage controller
output. (3) tests the capacitor positioning system and the feedback.
Second, the correlation between capacitance differences and the position
of the holder needs to be established by driving the piezo across its
dynamics range while capturing holder movement with timelapse
imaging. These data serve as a lookup table that links capacitance
reading to holder position, which will be used in sample measurements
where the holder position can no longer be measured by imaging because
of sample obstruction.
Sample loading and probe insertion
Because the sample will result in light obstruction and scattering, the
microscope view of the probe holder and tip will be blurry, making the
probe insertion process difficult to see from the camera. Therefore, the xy
position of the probe should be marked on the field of view before sample
loading. The probe holder is then raised in z (without touching its xy
control) in order to make room for the sample. After the sample dish (see
‘Embryo preparation’ section for the protocol of readying a chicken
embryo for TiFM) is in place, the desired tissue location can be aligned to
the mark using the sample stage so that the probe tip will enter the correct
location once it is lowered again. Once the probe enters the liquid layers,
care must be taken to lower the probe further to the desired tissue depth
slowly without overshooting, which could cause tip breakage and/or tissue
damage. The entrance of the probe and/or foil into the tissue is usually
smooth because of their sharpness. Light conditions may make it difficult
to see the location of the probe tip. It is advisable to adjust the objective
focus around the sample plane to find the probe tip. Once the probe is in
the proper tissue location and in focus, camera and lighting settings can be
further adjusted to ensure good contrast images at a fast rate (low exposure
time).
Force measurement and loading
To measure tissue forces and/or stresses, the probe should be inserted to
block the direction of tissue movement. If the desired measurement cross-
section of the tissue is larger than the probe, a piece of aluminium foil can be
attached to the probe tip via epoxy. We cut the foil pieces using a
micromanipulator with a blade under a dissecting microscope to obtain
rectangular pieces of 100-400 µm. To determine the contact area between
the tissue and the probe in order to calculate the stress (rather than just the
total force), the insertion depth is measured by the z positioning system of
the microscope. Using the Zeiss Axio Observer as an example: first, the
objective position is recorded from the z-controller screen when the focus is
on the surface of the tissue (e.g. endoderm for a dorsally mounted embryo,
as in Fig. 1E); second, the objective is moved (lowered) to focus on the
vicinity of the tissue layer of desired insertion depth (e.g. dorsal edge of the
neural plate, as in Fig. 1E); third, the probe (with or without foil) is inserted
until the tip or edge of the foil is in focus at the desired depth, some minor
adjustment of probe depth and/or focus might be performed for best focus
and contrast, then the z position of the objective is recorded again.
Comparing the recorded objective z positions yields the insertion depth.
Using the insertion depth and known shapes of the probes and/or foils and
the tissue, the tissue contact area can be estimated. To measure the stalling
stress, once the tip and/or foil is in position, the capacitance should be
fixed through the feedback loop to maintain the position of the holder.
Timelapse imaging of the tissue area and the tip and/or foil displacement
then indicates the force. The displacement will increase quickly then
slowly and finally stall as morphogenesis is stalled by the probe. To load
the tissue with a specific force, the force value will be evaluated against the
current probe location and capacitance reading, and an adjustment of
capacitance target (i.e. holder position) will be sent to the voltage
controller. With continued imaging and segmentation during the
experiment, the feedback loop maintains a dynamically stable difference
between the holder and the probe tip (i.e. cantilever deflection and force).
After completion of measurements, the probe should be washed in
deionized water by dipping to prevent damage from culture gel, albumen
and salt crystals after drying.
Sources and considerations of measurement errors
The working principle of the cantilever (with force constant k) method
requires accurate measurements of the location of the holder (XC) and the
tip (XT). For dynamic measurement and feedback control, these two
measurements should also be synchronized in time. Therefore, factors that
introduce inaccuracy for positional measurements and synchronization will
bring error terms to the force measurements. In addition, because tissue
stress (σ) is biologically more meaningful to calculate than the detected
or inflicted force (F), which varies with tissue contact area (A), the
requirement of contact area estimation raises additional error terms
[σ=k(XT-XC)/A]. For this current version of the TiFM, the largest error
term is associated with the lowest resolution aspect of the system, which is
the tracking of the tip position (hardware limited to ∼200 frame/second and
∼0.5 µm pixel sizes). The capacitors and piezos are subject to fluctuations in
the hardware, such as from the voltage controller, but the sampling rate is
higher and the errors are of a much smaller order of magnitude. Moreover,
during force control, although there is a delay between imaging and
segmentation of the tip to the action of voltage adjustment that may cause a
force error, such errors will average out quickly over time through the
feedback. Therefore, the main error considerations focus on the spatial
accuracy of XT and the estimation of A. Segmentation and tracking of the tip
(XT) without an embryo sample (e.g. in air or water) produce high accuracy
to the camera resolution. Errors increase as the imaging depth through
the tissue (DI) increases, which deteriorates the tip image contrast and
signal-to-noise ratio. This can be mimicked by imaging the probe movement
behind increasingly thicker gels that scatter the light from the tip. In the case
of the embryo, the scattering will be additionally complex due to tissue
heterogeneity. The exact positional uncertainty of the tip imaged through
6
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

thick tissues depends on the conditions under which the images are obtained
and should be taken into consideration when designing experiments. Using
fluorescently labelled probes and surgically removing some tissues to
image through are both effective ways of controlling this error. For the
estimation of A, the insertion angle (θI), depth (D) and features of the probe
tip (e.g. dye, foil) should be considered. Taking the axis elongation force for
example, the posterior body axis growth is largely horizontal during the
stages concerned, therefore a vertical insertion of probe is desirable. The
insertion angle (θI) is usually not perfectly vertical but can be adjusted by
rotation of the mounting arm while moving the focal plane along the probe
length (L) between the probe tip and base to minimize the on-camera
horizontal movement. This can reach a sin(θI)<0.05 for a L=200 µm probe.
The accuracy of depth of insertion (D), as obtained from the protocol
described in the section ‘Force measurement and loading’ depends on the
recognition of focal planes of tissue surfaces and probe tips by the user, and
can in practice have ±20 µm uncertainties that lead to uncertainties in
contact area estimation. Depending on the type of tip, foils can have a
10-20% uncertainty in A, while narrow probes can be accurate only by an
order of magnitude in terms of stress estimation under an error range of
±20 µm in z (e.g. Fig. 2C). Other factors include the quality of the foil
surface and edges, where some curvature may make the effective A smaller
than that of a flat foil. Effective ways in controlling the errors for A include
higher precision manufacturing of foils or other thinner materials (such as
mica); transgenic fluorescent embryos that enhance the recognition of tissue
layers and/or surfaces through focusing on cell layers. As an example, a
well-preadjusted probe (θI<15°) and a thin sample tissue location (such as
the pPSM where both DI and D<100 µm) enables stress measurements
by TiFM with a maximum 20% uncertainty term with a foil-probe construct
(100 µm wide), giving a high degree of confidence in the quantitative
characterization of tissue forces.
Data analysis
Movies were analysed in Fiji (ImageJ). Probe and/or foil displacement was
measured by object tracking in the intensity-time plot. The fluorescence
intensities (as a proxy to cell density) were measured by drawing a region of
interest before and after the foil. DiI-labelled cells were tracked with the
Manual Tracking plug-in. Tracking results and measurements were
processed in Matlab (Mathworks) with custom scripts and plotted with
Excel (Microsoft).
Acknowledgements
We thank S. Gapon, A. Mongera and C. Guillot for logistical and technical
assistance.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.U.C., F.X., A.M., O.P., L.M.; Methodology: C.U.C., F.X., A.M.,
J.M.N.V.; Software: C.U.C., F.X.; Validation: C.U.C., F.X.; Formal analysis: C.U.C.,
F.X.; Investigation: C.U.C., F.X., J.M.N.V.; Resources: C.U.C., F.X., A.M.; Data
curation: C.U.C., F.X., J.M.N.V.; Writing - original draft: F.X.; Writing - review &
editing: F.X., L.M.; Supervision: F.X., O.P., L.M.; Funding acquisition: F.X., O.P., L.M.
Funding
This work is supported by an Agency for Science, Technology and Research
International Scholarship to C.U.C., by a National Institutes of Health K99 award
(HD092582) and a Wellcome Trust/Royal Society Fellowship (215439/Z/19/Z) to
F.X., and by a National Institutes of Health R01 (HD097068) to O.P. and L.M. Open
Access funding provided by the University of Cambridge. Deposited in PMC for
immediate release.
Data availability
All relevant data can be found within the article and its supplementary information.
Peer review history
The peer review history is available online at https://journals.biologists.com/dev/
lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.201054.reviewer-comments.pdf.
References
Barriga, E. H., Franze, K., Charras, G. and Mayor, R. (2018). Tissue stiffening
coordinates morphogenesis by triggering collective cell migration in vivo. Nature
554, 523-527. doi:10.1038/nature25742
Bénazéraf, B., Francois, P., Baker, R. E., Denans, N., Little, C. D. and Pourquié,
O. (2010). A random cell motility gradient downstream of FGF controls elongation
of an amniote embryo. Nature 466, 248-252. doi:10.1038/nature09151
Campàs, O. (2016). A toolbox to explore the mechanics of living embryonic tissues.
Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 55, 119-130. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.03.011
Chapman, S. C., Collignon, J. J., Schoenwolf, G. C. and Lumsden, A. (2001).
Improved method for chick whole-embryo culture using a filter paper carrier.
Dev. Dyn. 220, 284-289. doi:10.1002/1097-0177(20010301)220:3<284::AID-
DVDY1102>3.0.CO;2-5
Chevalier, N. R., Gazguez, E., Dufour, S. and Fleury, V. (2016). Measuring the
micromechanical properties of embryonic tissues. Methods 94, 120-128. doi:10.
1016/j.ymeth.2015.08.001
Dzementsei, A., Barooji, Y. F., Ober, E. A. and Oddershede, L. B. (2018). In vivo
quantification of biomechanical cell properties within deep tissues. SSRN Electro.
J. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3304831
Edelstein, A. D., Tsuchida, M. A., Amodaj, N., Pinkard, H., Vale, R. D. and
Stuurman, N. (2014). Advanced methods of microscope control using μManager
software. J. Biol. Methods 1, e10. doi:10.14440/jbm.2014.36
Hamburger, V. and Hamilton, H. L. (1951). A series of normal stages in the
development of the chick embryo. J. Morphol. 88, 49-92. doi:10.1002/jmor.
1050880104
Hara, Y., Nagayama, K., Yamamoto, T. S., Matsumoto, T., Suzuki, M. and
Ueno, N. (2013). Directional migration of leading-edge mesoderm generates
physical forces: Implication in Xenopus notochord formation during gastrulation.
Dev. Biol. 382, 482-495. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.023
Hutson, M. S., Veldhuis, J., Ma, X., Lynch, H. E., Cranston, P. G. and
Brodland, G. W. (2009). Combining laser microsurgery and finite element
modeling to assess cell-level epithelial mechanics. Biophys. J. 97, 3075-3085.
doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2009.09.034
Kim, T.-J., Zheng, S., Sun, J., Muhamed, I., Wu, J., Lei, L., Kong, X.,
Leckband, D. E. and Wang, Y. (2015). Dynamic visualization of α-catenin
reveals rapid, reversible conformation switching between tension states. Curr.
Biol. 25, 218-224. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.017
Kim, H. Y., Jackson, T. R., Stuckenholz, C. and Davidson, L. A. (2020). Tissue
mechanics drives regeneration of a mucociliated epidermis on the surface of
Xenopus embryonic aggregates. Nat. Commun. 11, 665. doi:10.1038/s41467-
020-14385-y
Marrese, M., Antonovaité, N., Nelemans, B. K. A., Ahmadzada, A., Iannuzzi, D.
and Smit, T. H. (2020). In vivo characterization of chick embryo mesoderm by
optical
coherence
tomography-assisted
microindentation.
FASEB
J.
34,
12269-12277. doi:10.1096/fj.202000896R
McGrew, M. J., Sherman, A., Lillico, S. G., Ellard, F. M., Radcliffe, P. A.,
Gilhooley, H. J., Mitrophanous, K. A., Cambray, N., Wilson, V. and Sang, H.
(2008). Localised axial progenitor cell populations in the avian tail bud are not
committed to a posterior Hox identity. Development 135, 2289-2299. doi:10.1242/
dev.022020
Michaut, A. (2018) Biomechanics of anteroposterior axis elongation in the chicken
embryo. PhD thesis, Université de Strasbourg, France. https://theses.hal.science/
tel-02295322
Mongera, A., Michaut, A., Guillot, C., Xiong, F. and Pourquié, O. (2019).
Mechanics of anteroposterior axis formation in vertebrates. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
Biol. 35, 259-283. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100818-125436
Mulligan, J. A., Untracht, G. R., Chandrasekaran, S. N., Brown, C. N. and
Adie, S. G. (2016). Emerging approaches for high-resolution imaging of tissue
biomechanics with optical coherence elastography. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum
Electron. 22, 246-265. doi:10.1109/JSTQE.2015.2481705
Prevedel, R., Diz-Muñoz, A., Ruocco, G. and Antonacci, G. (2019). Brillouin
microscopy: an emerging tool for mechanobiology. Nat. Methods 16, 969-977.
doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0543-3
Schoenwolf, G. C. and Smith, J. L. (1990). Mechanisms of neurulation: traditional
viewpoint and recent advances. Development 109, 243-270. doi:10.1242/dev.
109.2.243
Serwane, F., Mongera, A., Rowghanian, P., Kealhofer, D. A., Lucio, A. A.,
Hockenbery, Z. M. and Campàs, O. (2017). In vivo quantification of spatially
varying mechanical properties in developing tissues. Nat. Methods 14, 181-186.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4101
Xiong, F., Ma, W., Bénazéraf, B., Mahadevan, L. and Pourquié, O. (2020).
Mechanical coupling coordinates the co-elongation of axial and paraxial tissues in
avian embryos. Dev. Cell 55, 354-366.e5. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2020.08.007
Zhou, J., Kim, H. Y. and Davidson, L. A. (2009). Actomyosin stiffens the vertebrate
embryo during crucial stages of elongation and neural tube closure. Development
136, 677-688. doi:10.1242/dev.026211
7
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES
Development (2023) 150, dev201054. doi:10.1242/dev.201054
DEVELOPMENT

