©          Nature Publishing Group
1964
334 
NATURE 
April 25, 1964 
VOL. 202 
BIO-ENGINEERING- CONCEPTS, TREND AND POTENTIAL* 
By PROF. ROBERT M. KENEDI 
Bio-Engineering Unit, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
Royal College of Science and Technology, Glasgow 
B
IO-ENGINEERING is an interdisciplinary activity. 
In examining such an activity it is worth while to 
take a brief look at the conventional division of the 
scientific field. 
Since the beginning of human time, man 
aimed at creating an environment which was most suited 
to, and catered for, all his needs. 
This necessitated an 
increasingly intense enquiry into the features and charac-
teristics of his uncontrolled surroundings and of himself in 
relation to these surroundings, giving rise to three broad 
scientific areas or disciplines : the physical sciences, dealing 
with inert materials ; the life sciences, dealing with units 
capable of self-repair and reproduction; the social sciences 
which deal with the interaction of the individual and 
groups of individuals. 
It should be appreciated that this separation of the 
sciences is not based on any 'natural' foundation-the 
division in fact is now seen to be quite arbitrary. As 
the field of enquiry of each major discipline widened, so 
the field of activity of a given individual trained in these 
disciplines narrowed to the point of the emergence of the 
specialist described somewhat unkindly, but nevertheless 
truly, as 'knowing more and more about less and less'. 
This in itself is not undesirable; but unfortunately the 
emergence of specialist groups has also led to the develop-
ment of specialist jargons, culminating in the specialist 
writing by and large for colleagues of his own speciality. 
In recent years, while this evolution towards mutual 
scientific incomprehensibility was permitted to develop 
unchecked, a parallel movement fortunately oriented in 
the opposite direction of collaborative scientific effort 
and mutual understanding between some of the major 
disciplines has also become evident. 
Nowhere has this 
been more apparent than in investigations relating to the 
human body. This without a doubt is the most complex 
living unit in existence and the whole spectrum of all the 
sciences is relevant to its investigation. One of the many 
interdisciplinary activities which have and are developing 
very rapidly indeed is in the fields of medicine and engin-
eering, called variously biological engineering, bio-
engineering, biomedical engineering. 
Using the word 
'engineering' in its very broad sense, meaning the applied 
physical sciences (this meaning of the word exists, incident-
ally, only in English), this new hybrid activity is the 
application of a wide range of specialist aspects of the 
physical sciences and of technology in a synthetized form 
to the study of the human body and its associated 
problems. 
Bio-engineering has many aspects, such as the develop-
ment of instrumentation, ranging from sophisticated 
electronic equipment, through artificial limbs and m etal 
implants to relatively simple single-purpose surgical 
tools; the investigation of the man-machine relationship, 
for example; investigations of the best ways of utilizing 
human effort in a given industrial process; effects on 
human behaviour and effort of unaccustomed surround-
ings, such as space flight, etc.; and the study of the 
mechanical and structural characteristics of the body 
itself and its tissues. 
This last forms a major section of bio-engineering and 
is the region in which the College Unit is active. Briefly, 
• Substance of Prof. Kenedi's inaugural lecture, delivered on February 10. 
See also Nature, iOO, 734 (1963), and 199, 1137 (1963). 
the human body and its components are subject to environ-
mental forces ; they transmit muscle actions and consist of 
deformable materials. 
The examination of these forces 
and their effects on human tissue contribute to the basic 
understanding of the pattern of human body behaviour 
as a whole, and it is becoming increasingly evident that 
these 'engineering' characteristics of tissue have a signifi-
cant bearing on treatment, particularly in plastic and 
orthopredic surgery. 
It is possibly of interest to examine at this stage just 
how bio-engineering investigations applied to the human 
body proceed. 
Engineering is a creatively biased activity, in which the 
conventional chain of events proceeds from determination 
of the constructional requirements, the specification, to 
analysis of the relevant strength and deformation prob-
lems, thence tc design and finally to construction. In all 
this, the engineer aims at creating a construction optimally 
suited to the specified requirements. All through, how-
ever, the engineer remains aware that as all basic data are 
only partly known, factors of safety allowing for a certain 
rational margin of uncertainty are necei5Sary. 
The analytical techniques available at present are 
woefully inadequate, and it happens not infrequently 
that constructions of an unconventional character are 
designed and erected more as the results of inspired 
engineering intuition than of substantiative analysis. 
In such cases, the formal analysis follows construction, 
lagging at times years behind; first, to explain the obvious; 
that is why the structure or mechanism performs its 
function without failure; and secondly, to permit codifica-
tion of the information so obtained for usc in constructions 
of a similar character in the futuro. 
Obviously the human body comes into this category of 
post-construction analysis as its initial construction date 
has preceded somewhat engineering attempts at its 
analysis. 
There are here a numbor of points that, in 
addition to their relevancy, are also indicative of the 
present trends of bio-engineering activity. 
Live human tissue as a material presents a completely 
virgin field for bio-engineering enquiry. A fair amount of 
work has been done in animals and freshly 'dead' tissue-
it is, however, doubtful as to how far such measurements 
may be applicable tc live human behaviour. Only recently 
have techniques been developed which permit such 
measurement in the living, which on the whole show 
that the basic components of the body, such as skin, 
muscle, cartilage and bone, are materials remarkably well 
suited to their function. 
Incidentally, this question of measurement has to be 
approached with a certain amount of care. It is one of 
the basic principles of tho technique of measurement that 
the instrument always affects the measurement in some 
way, however slight. This is particularly true of living 
tissue, and results obtained from specimens or subjocts 
over-enthusiastically festooned with instrumentation arc 
more likely to be representative of the influence of the 
instruments as an environmental factor than of the 
particular normal human characteristic the investigation 
was designed to determine. 
The design specification and limits of capability of the 
human body are not known, apart from possibly an estab-

©          Nature Publishing Group
1964
No. 4930 
April 25, 1964 
NATURE 
335 
lished minimum represented by the demands made on the 
body by tho present mode of life. Barring catastrophic 
happenings, it is very likely that the ultimate capabilities 
of the body will remain unestablished, since all endeavour 
is directed towards so controlling human evironment as to 
keep on reducing tho demands made on physical endurance 
and exertion by the pattern of living. 
Environmental control, which is also a bio-engineering 
activity, is directed at catering for the convenience of 
humans as they are now, thus removing those evolutionary 
stimuli which led to the present stage of physical develop-
ment as if this present stage were the ultimate perfection 
attainable. It can be argued that this stimuli-removing 
control introduces in itself an evolutionary influence 
which, from the physical point of view, is probably 
degenerative. 
The engineering reasons for post-construction analysis 
are, in addition to understanding function, the gathering 
of data for imitative future designs. It is intriguing to 
reflect in this connexion that, as one enquires into tho 
detail construction of the human body as it is at present, 
one finds features in direct opposition to the teachings of 
human devised engineering. This teaching was very well 
summed up by Oliver Wendell Holmes in "The Decou's 
Masterpiece": 
"Have you heard of the wonderful one hoss shay 
that was built in such a logical way, 
It ran for a hundred years to a day 
and then of a sudden-it went to pieces 
all at once and nothing first 
just like bubbles do when they burst." 
This expresses the epitome of engineering achievement 
in a construction, where all parts are of equal strength 
and have tho same length of life. One would not suggest 
as desirable that the human body should be so constructed 
that people would tend to explode into limbo, no matter 
how satisfying this would be from an engineering point 
of view ! Yet one would tend to expect some semblance of 
order and reason in tho distribution of safety factors 
against breakdown in the body. 
This, paradoxically, 
docs not appear to be the case. 
A typical instance is the bono and muscle arrangement 
of the hip joint. This joint is essentially a ball-and-socket 
arrangement surrounded by an embarrassing abundance of 
nauscles, twenty-two in number. The simplest movement 
is produced by the co-operation of a number of muscles. 
That tho interaction of such a multiplicity of components 
to produce movement is not strictly necessary is well 
known. A great variety of joint movements can be effected 
by one or other of several muscles, and the failure of a 
muscle or muscles may easily be compensated by tho 
action of tho remaining lrnits. It could possibly be argued 
that this is Nature's way of providing a safety factor 
against injury. Why then provide only one bono com-
ponent in tho hip, tho fracture of which immobilizes the 
individual ? Tho conclusion that we are still in the process 
of development and that the evolutionary process has 
not yet caughil up with the change from tho four-legged 
to tho two-legged stance is inescapable. Fracture of tho 
thigh bone in a four-legged creature, while inconvenient, 
is not necessarily immobilizing, such individuals exhibiting 
a safety concept in bone structure more in lino with 
that of tho muscle construction. The existence of this em-
barrassment of riches of one kind of component, side by 
side with paucity of another, is the paradoxical situation 
that appears to exist throughout tho body and is proving 
and continues to prove a source of challenging intellectual 
discomfort to the bio-engineering analyst. 
However, 
engineers on tho whole are reasonably ingenious indivi-
duals, and Nubar and Contini, two of the present-day 
pioneers in this field of analysis, have suggested a way 
out of this wood of muscle complexity by offering tho 
postulate for guidance in analysis that "a mentally normal 
individual will, in all likelihood, move (or adjust his 
posture) in such a way as to reduce his total muscular 
effort to a minimum" . 
The field in which at present tho greatest concentration 
of bio-engineering effort is found is that of artificial limbs. 
The general aim of these efforts is to provide as good a 
limb as possible within the overriding requirement that 
the limb approximates as closely as possible in appearance 
to its natural counterpart. This is an exceedingly severe 
limitation from the point of view of design, since the limb 
layout leaves much to be desired from an engineering 
point of view. 
Kinematically the lower limbs possess 
just about tho minimum number of joints which will 
permit an approximation to an even gait indicated by the 
degree to which the pelvis achieves level progression. 
Structurally the limb layout is questionable as it introduces 
a hinge in a compressive load-carrying member, thus 
permitting a tendency to 'buckle at the knees'. To control 
this tendency, the analyst is again presented by a sub-
stantial muscle group which, while having the advantage 
of permitting the knee to be used as a shock-absorbing 
device, again appears from an engineering point of view 
unnecessarily complex in layout and function. 
The 
natural limb thus works only because of the complex 
flexibility and adaptability of the controlling muscle 
actions. Without these muscle actions, which cannot be 
reproduced in artificial limbs, a layout imitating that of 
the natural limb is basically unsuitable to the function 
it is to perform and yet this normal layout is still the basis 
of present-day design. A basic design better in perform-
ance than tho natural limb is not outwith the bounds of 
possibility, if deviation from tho norm is accepted. This 
deviation from tho norm and the consequent removal of an 
engineering-wise severely inhibiting feature in artificial 
limb dosign is one of tho developments that are likely to 
come about. 
In other fields, it seems fairly certain that mechanical 
and structural knowledge of tho human body and its 
components will be accumulated adequate to the extent 
of permitting the description of human tissue behaviour 
in precise mathematical terms. This should, in time, per. 
mit the theoretical prediction of tissue behaviour and the 
consequent design of surgical techniques, effective 
artificial substitutes for damaged tissue, etc. Ultimately, 
in tho more distant future, once genetic control is under-
stood it would seem fairly certain that if the specialist 
fashion still obtains, genetic engineers or 'gonengs' 
will arise who will vie with each other in producing 
functional human body designs most suited for the career 
chosen! 
Descending from tho rather lofty plane of science 
fiction, it is perhaps relevant to touch, in conclusion, on 
the question of tho training of bio-engineering hybrids. 
In Great Britain this is virtually non-existent at present, 
while in the United States it is carried on at both under-
graduate- and postgraduate-levels, although the majority 
of training programmes are in the latter field. 
These 
programmes are of two kinds-some directed at students 
primarily trained in engineering, others at students 
primarily trained in medicine. 
The courses for undergraduates-this obtains in engin-
eering only--contain suggested electives in biology, 
organic chemistry and physiology, in collective time 
equivalent to about one-sixth of the total time in a four-
year course. 
At postgraduate-level a typical one-year 
course contains biology, engineering physiology, cellular 
physiology, organic chemistry, biochemistry and a variety 
of subjects dealing with the theories of biological processes, 
in association with research. In Great Britain there is 
only one postgraduate course at present, at the Imperial 
College of Science and Technology, London, designed 
primarily for medical graduates. 
The demand for bio-engineers in the United States has 
been estimated at 300 a year over the next ten years, 
who could be placed annually in various departments of the 

©          Nature Publishing Group
1964
336 
NATURE 
April 25, 1964 
VOL. 202 
universities, medical schools and Government. 
At the 
present time in the United States some hundred students 
are training at postgraduate-level in seven centres offering 
biomedical engineering facilities. There is no doubt that this 
type of training will expand and extend. At Glasgow, post-
graduate research facilities exist in this field at the Royal 
Colle~e of Science and Technology, and at present three 
full-tune researchstuden ts work on bio-engineering projects. 
The future in research, one would surmise, lies with 
collaborative medical engineering teams rather than with 
biologically trained engineers. Yet it is essential to keep 
an open mind on these matters, and there is one thing 
certain-there is no shortage of problems or of opportuni-
ties to participate in a deeply interesting activity with an 
enormous potential of contributions of basic value to 
oome. 
THE ALASKA EARTHQUAKE OF MARCH 28-30, 1964 
J
UST after 5.36 p.m. on Friday, local time, when many 
of the people of Anchorage, Alaska, were homeward 
bound, thinking no doubt of getting indoors again out 
of the snow and freezing temperatures, suddenly and 
without warning the first seismic shock occurred. Imme-
diately, buildings in the city centre collapsed, ground 
fissures appeared, down which cars slumped (one fissure 
was almost 100 ft. long with a drop of 10 ft.), and the 
control tower at the airport came toppling down. Imme-
diately also, more than 1,000 houses were destroyed, water 
pipes, electric power lines and gas mains were severed, 
and communications disrupted. Many people wore killed 
and injured. When the impact of the first shock was past, 
the city's services with all possible assistance drove into 
action. 
Residents were asked not to use the sewers, 
people queued for typhoid inoculations and hospital 
services were overworked. 
The State of Alaska was a 
disaster area. 
On the Gulf of Alaska, the village of 
Valdez was evacuated, apart from the necessary officials, 
owing to lack of water, sanitation and other services, and 
an emergency evacuation camp was set up at Gulkana, 
about 110 miles away. Seward, also on the Gulf of Alaska, 
was half destroyed and there were munerous fires since 
the earthquake had scattered the house fires as it passed. 
The village of Tuguyak on Kodiak Island was almost 
completely destroyed. The ripples from this earthquake 
focus sped through the solid earth to be recorded at 
seismological observatories throughout the world. 
Tho 
tsunami warning system began its calculations. 
At the moment of disaster the t sunami or seismic sea 
wave set out from near the epicentre and, shortly after, 
the tsunami warning system went into action and messages 
wore flashed to all parts of the Pacific. The sea waves 
were about 30 ft. high at Kodiak and Cordova in Alaska, 
and 8 ft. high when they arrived at Oahu, Hawaii. At 
Vancouver Island the sea-level rose as the waves passed, 
and at Crescent City in northern California five oil tanks 
were destroyed by the 12-ft.-high waves. 
The waves 
caused a break in the Commonwealth telephone cable 
connecting Canada with Australia and New Zealand, at 
a point about 7 t miles off the Canadian Pacific coast near 
Port Albemi in British Columbia. 
The waves were 
significant on tide gauges in Japan. 
Preliminary determinations of the epicentre of the shock 
place this at 61·1° N., 147·8° W. The depth of focus is 
considered shallow, and the Richter logarithmic magnitude 
between 8·2 and 8·6, making this one oft he world's greatest 
earthquakes. The epicentre is cast of Anchorage, Alaska, 
and tho origin time waH 1964 March 28d 03h 36m lOs 
o .lli.T. The complete death-roll and damage are not yet 
known. In Alaska, 65 are known dead as the result of the 
earthquake, and damage is estimated at more than 
250 million dollars. In Crescent City, California, due to 
the tsunami, 12 people are known dead and there was 
m ajor damage to property. 
Aftershocks are still con-
tinuing. Eight above magnitude 6 were experienced on 
the first day, March 28, and there were many smaller ones. 
On March 30, at 02h 18m 05s G.M.T. from the Kodiak 
Island region, came a shock of magnitude 6·7. 
The Aleutian Islands arc from Komandorski Islands to 
Alaska, and Alaska itself must be considered a major 
seismic andvolcanic zone of the Earth. For example, in 
the year 1959 there were some 40 earthquakes felt and 
recorded in Alaska. 
Shocks greater than magnitude 6 
and of shallow depth of focus ncar to the present epicentre 
also occurred at tho following times and places : 
19:~2 
September l4d 08h 43m 23s G.M.T., 61° N., 148° W. (6l); 
1933 January 04d 03h 59m 28s G.M.T., 6P N., 148° W. 
(6!); 1934 August 02d 07h 13m 08s G.M.T. , 
61~
0 N .. 
147!
0 W. (6); 1934 June 02d l6h 45m 29s G.M.T., 61!
0 N .. 
147° W . (6!): and earthquakes with intermediate depth 
of focus (about 80 km) occurred at: 1912 January 3ld 
20h llm 08s G.M.T., 6P N., 147!
0 W. (7!-); 1934 May 
04d 04h 36m 07s G.M.T., 61!
0 N., 147!
0 W. (7·2). 
Perhaps the greatest of the previous Alaskan earth-
quakes were on September 3 and 10, 1899, at Yakutat 
Bay, the latter being the greater, though from seismo-
grams both had magnitude between 8! and st. The area 
was visited shortly before the earthquake by the Harriman 
glacier exploration expedition, who took photographs, and 
about 6 years after the earthquake by a party of the U.S. 
Geological Survey. 
The shocks were accompanied b~· 
block faulting, and the largest known displacement by a 
single group of earthquakes then occurred. At maximum 
there was a permanent uplift of 47·5 ft. 
At the time of the shock a small party of prospectorR 
was camped near by on a glacier. 
Above them an ice 
dam holding a glacier lake broke, landslides happened all 
around, and a great wave 30 ft. high in the bay swept 
away their boat. Fortunately, they recovered the boat 
and escaped by sea, since the adjacent land was so cut up 
as to be almost impassable. 
The region was otherwise 
uninhabited. Outside the bay the sea wave was extremely 
small. Large seismic sea waves, or tsunamis, have been 
sent right across the Pacific Ocean from earthquake 
epicentres at various times, for example, from the Arica 
earthquake of 1868 and from the Iquique earthquake of 
1877. A great wave destructive at Hilo came from the 
small Aleutian Islands shock of April l , 1946, although a 
very small wave had resulted from the strong earthquake 
in the same Aleutian Islands region of November 10, 1938. 
Large tsunamis came from the earthquakes in Chile in 
May 1960 and from the present Alaskan shock. 
In the Aleutian Islands arc shallow-focus seismicity 
follows the northern concave side of the Aleutian trench, 
being less intense ncar the Komandorski Islands. At the 
eastern end of the arc activity is higher near the Kenai 
P eninsula. This seismic activity is only exceeded by that 
of Mexico, Japan and the Solomon Islands. Shallow-focus 
earthquakes with depths from 50 to 70 km are frequent, and 
intermediate-focus earthquakes with depths from 100 to 
170 km occur along the northern side of the Aleutian 
Islands arc and on the Alaska Peninsula from 176° to 
160° W. 
The shallow shocks in the interior of Alaska 
indicat e an interior structure related to tho Pacific coastal 
arc, in the same way as the Rocky Mountains are related 
to tho Pacific coastal ranges farther south in America. 
ERNEST Tn.r.oTsoN 

