1 / 2 
this job advertisement in German: go.uniwue.de/w2-sgt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg has a 
vacancy in the Institute for Computer Science for a 
University Professorship (W2) 
for Sustainable Game Technology 
to be filled as soon as possible. The position will be filled as a civil servant for life.  
The applicant must represent the field of Sustainable Game Technology in research and teaching. The aim 
is to attract a high-calibre academic personality and to strengthen the faculty's potential for third-party 
funding. The applicant should specialize in several of the following areas: 
• 
Mobile Games Hardware 
• 
Realtime Physics Simulation (e.g. GPU-based Fluid Dynamics) 
• 
Design of Energy-Efficient Chips 
• 
Design of Sustainable Hardware 
• 
Hardware-Based Efficient Visualization and Animation 
• 
GPU-Based Simulation and Optimization 
• 
Approximate Computing 
• 
Hardware-Based Surrogate Models 
Experience in interdisciplinary and international research cooperation is expected. The Center for Artificial 
Intelligence and Data Science (CAIDAS) at the University of Würzburg offers good opportunities for joint 
research work. 
Teaching duties include courses for the bachelor’s and master’s degree programs offered at the Institute of 
Computer Science at the University of Würzburg, in particular in the fields of Games Engineering and 
Computer Science & Sustainability. The professorship will be involved in the establishment of English-
language Master's degree programs in these areas.  
The University of Würzburg attaches great importance to the intensive supervision of students and doctoral 
candidates and expects a corresponding level of commitment from teaching staff. 
Requirements for appointment are a relevant university degree, pedagogical aptitude, special aptitude 
for scientific work, which is usually demonstrated by the quality of a doctorate, as well as additional 
scientific achievements as detailed in Art. 57 para. 1 sentences 3 and 4 BayHIG. The additional academic 
achievements should have been made in the field of Computer Science. 
Pursuant to Art. 60 Para. 3 BayHIG, an appointment to civil service can only be made up to the age of 52. 
Exceptions are possible in urgent cases. 
The University of Würzburg aims to increase the proportion of women in research and teaching and 
therefore expressly invites applications from suitably qualified female academics. 
Severely disabled applicants will be given preference in the case of otherwise essentially equal 
suitability. 
Applications are to be submitted by e-mail to w2-sgt@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de by 7 August 2024. 
The usual documents are required (curriculum vitae, certificates, list of publications, of courses, teaching 
evaluations) as a single pdf file. Furthermore, a completed application form is required as a separate xslx 
file (go.uniwue.de/2024-registration-form). 
 
 

2 / 2 
this job advertisement in German: go.uniwue.de/w2-sgt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To learn more about professorships in Germany (Bavaria), please visit: 
https://www.research-in-bavaria.de/de/how-to-become-a-professor, 
especially the section about professor appointments: 
https://www.research-in-bavaria.de/de/how-to-become-a-professor#c734 
 
For further information on the advertised professorship, please contact: 
Prof. Dr. Sebastian von Mammen (Professorship for Games Engineering) 
Tel.: +49 931 31 86381 
E-Mail: sebastian.von.mammen@uni-wuerzburg.de  
oder 
Dr. Marianus Ifland (Manager Institute of Computer Science) 
Tel.: +49 931 31 86746 
E-Mail: ifland@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de 

