arXiv:2107.13640v1  [cs.CR]  28 Jul 2021
Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
Amit Chaulwar 1 Michael Huth 1 2
Abstract
Federated analytics has many applications in
edge computing, its use can lead to better deci-
sion making for service provision, product de-
velopment, and user experience. We propose a
Bayesian approach to trend detection in which
the probability of a keyword being trendy, given
a dataset, is computed via Bayes’ Theorem; the
probability of a dataset, given that a keyword
is trendy, is computed through secure aggrega-
tion of such conditional probabilities over local
datasets of users. We propose a protocol, named
SAFE, for Bayesian federated analytics that of-
fers sufﬁcient privacy for production-grade use
cases and reduces the computational burden of
users and an aggregator. We illustrate this ap-
proach with a trend detection experiment and dis-
cuss how this approach could be extended further
to make it production-ready.
1. Introduction
Access to high-quality data for data-driven decision mak-
ing is very critical. With rising digitization, it has become
easier to gather data. Nowadays, many human activities are
digitized and we see an exponential increase in the number
of IoT devices. The data generated by such devices helps
with creating better products and services for the people.
However, such detailed data is often of a personal nature
and so poses a threat to privacy. Therefore, access to such
data, even with good intentions, needs to be controlled.
Federated
learning
(Shokri & Shmatikov,
2015;
Bonawitz et al., 2017) is the methodology that pro-
vides a means of decentralized computations for machine
learning without a need for moving local data of users.
In each round of the federated learning, the participating
devices train a model on their respective local data and
send only an encrypted update to the aggregator.
The
1Xayn AG, Berlin, Germany
2Department of Computing,
Imperial College London, London, U.K..
Correspondence to:
Amit Chaulwar <amit.chaulwar@xayn.com>, Michael Huth
<michael@xayn.com>.
aggregator combines updates from all participants to
improve a shared model followed by its distribution to all
participants.
Federated learning has the potential of generating better
models with lower latency and power consumption while
also ensuring privacy. However, as there is no access to
actual data from participating devices, it poses a problem
for the analysis of federated learning models. Federated an-
alytics (Ramage & Mazzocchi) is a practice introduced to
solve this problem. It uses the same infrastructure as fed-
erated learning to aggregate the computed metric by each
participating device using local data and shared models.
Federated analytics has already gone beyond just measur-
ing the quality metric to computing descriptive statistics
(Ramage & Mazzocchi; Zhu et al., 2020), generating syn-
thetic data (Xin et al., 2020; Chaulwar, 2020) and learning
new insights (Chen et al., 2019). These methods are gener-
ally combined with secure aggregation protocols to ensure
strong privacy properties.
This paper introduces a new topic in federated analytics,
namely Bayesian Federated Analytics, which learns indi-
vidual distributions of data on the edge and aggregates them
in a privacy-preserving way, such that the aggregated distri-
bution leads to new insights about the whole population.
We propose a secure aggregation protocol for aggregating
the local discrete distributions along with their privacy and
security analysis. We describe the application of this ap-
proach primarily for a trend detection application. How-
ever, we think the scope for Bayesian federated analytics
is much wider and we hope that this work will inspire new
privacy-preserving approaches in Bayesian federated ana-
lytics.
Outline of paper: Section 2 describes the previously pro-
posed methodologies for federated analytics and trend de-
tection along with their limitations. Section 3 introduces
Bayesian federated analytics and discusses possible advan-
tages over existing federated analytics. Section 4 proposes
a protocol for secure aggregation of feature vectors, called
SAFE in short. Its application in privacy-sensitive trend
detection is given in Section 5. Preliminary experimental
results for this trend detection method are presented with
a simple example in Section 6.
Finally, Section 7 con-
cludes and scopes out future work needed for making this

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
approach production-ready.
Notation: Throughout this paper, vectors are denoted by
lower case bold letters and random variables are repre-
sented by sans serif font.
2. Background
This section reviews previous approaches for federated an-
alytics and trend detections.
2.1. Federated Analytics
Federated analytics originated with the need to measure the
quality of the models obtained by federated learning. It
uses the same infrastructure as federated learning but with-
out the learning part. Therefore, it inherits some of the ben-
eﬁts as well as challenges associated with federated learn-
ing. It allows analysis of distributed data while preserving
privacy. However, it also faces issues like limited commu-
nication bandwidth, exposure to adversarial attacks, and so
forth.
Sharemind
(Bogdanov et al.,
2008),
RAPPOR
(Erlingsson et al., 2014), PROCHLO (Bittau et al., 2017)
and Secure MPC for analytics (Lapets et al., 2016) are
some of the privacy-preserving analytics systems that use
different privacy-preserving techniques such as privacy-
preserving randomization, local differential privacy, and
secure multi-party computation.
However, all of these
methods require an intermediary between the data owners
and analysers. This not only increases the computation and
communication requirements but also restricts the usage of
data to limited, authorised analysers. This is not desirable
for the progress of research in ﬁelds like machine learning
where the ease of access to the data is one of the main
reasons for progress.
In the secure aggregation of a song-recognition protocol,
described in (Ramage & Mazzocchi), the aggregator can
see only masked values. The stronger privacy properties
are ensured only with a large number of users and using
local differential privacy. This does not guarantee strong
privacy for a small number of users.
Federated heavy-hitters discovery (Zhu et al., 2020) is the
latest privacy-preserving method that can be used to de-
tect heavy-hitters. However, it is not suitable for ﬁnding
new trends. This method has inherent initial bias as it ini-
tially samples a random subset of users. Even after the re-
moval of stop-words, it will still detect – with high prob-
ability – heavy hitters that are not important for trend de-
tection. Also, it needs to update its belief for trend iden-
tiﬁcation based on past knowledge. Otherwise, the same
heavy hitters may be detected as a trend in consecutive iter-
ations. Since a single heavy-hitter discovery requires mul-
tiple rounds, this is not efﬁcient as well.
2.2. Trend Detection
The most common way of quantifying a trend is to look
at the counts of keywords, mentions or other engagements
over a period of time. Atypical changes in such time series
can indicate the presence of a trend, but a general deﬁni-
tion of atypical is hard to develop and largely depends on
the speciﬁc needs. The factors inﬂuencing the detection of
trends include time-to-detection, robustness, precision, re-
call, etc. A survey of trend detection methods can be found
in (Hendrickson et al., 2015; SwarajK et al., 2018).
The most obvious application of trend detection is social
media trend detection. The Twitter trend detection meth-
ods are described in (Hendrickson et al., 2015). However,
a research study (Annamoradnejad & Habibi, 2019), has
shown that 68% of Twitter trends are hashtags. Therefore,
the usage of these methods for trend detection in a set of
documents without hashtags is not evaluated. Facebook
trend detection (Cvijikj & Michahelles, 2011) performs de-
scriptive statistical analysis to detect three different cate-
gories of trending topics, which they call disruptive events,
popular topics, and daily routines. As the data for trend de-
tection based on Twitter and Facebook is generally public,
their trend detection methods do not need to consider the
privacy of users.
Google Trends (Goo) is a website by Google that ana-
lyzes the popularity of top search queries in Google Search
across various regions and languages. Although it only pub-
lishes trending search queries, Google itself has access to
each user’s individual search history which is very sensitive
information.
The information of which webpages a user browsed will
be even more insightful and very privacy-sensitive. There-
fore, there are beneﬁts in creating a trend detection method
for browsed webpages that is secure and does not leak any
private information.
3. Bayesian Federated Analytics
We take an alternative Bayesian view when compared to tra-
ditional federated analytics methods of measuring counts
or rates. We now present this approach and describe its
beneﬁts that can be exploited using a Bayesian perspective.
We note that the original motivation for applying Bayesian
thinking to federated analytics is taken from (Wel).
The basic idea behind the Bayesian federated analytics is
to learn individual data distributions of users at the edge
and to aggregate them securely such that the aggregated
distribution generates insights that help with making better
decisions, products, and so forth. We believe that such a

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
Bayesian approach for federated analytics has the follow-
ing potential advantages:
• The distribution of the edge data is determined by a
few parameters. This reduces the necessary commu-
nication bandwidth for transferring these local param-
eters for computing those of the aggregated distribu-
tion.
• Distributions approximate raw local data. Therefore,
their parameters contain less information than the raw
data and so their communication is less risky than
communicating raw data.
• Representing local data via distributions makes the ap-
plication of privacy-preserving techniques such as dif-
ferential privacy easier.
• The Bayesian approach allows for belief updates by
considering the posteriors from the last step as a
prior for the current step. In contrast, the aggregated
statistics of traditional federated analytics needs to be
tracked and additional time series analysis is required
to learn new trends.
• In the Bayesian approach, an active adversary can
only inﬂuence the aggregation results within the value
ranges of distribution parameters. Violations of such
ranges can be detected and such aggregation input
may be refused.
• The aggregated distributions can be used to generate
synthetic data, for example for data augmentation –
using generative models like variational autoencoders,
and generative adversarial networks.
4. Secure Aggregation of Feature Vectors
This section proposes a protocol, SAFE, for the secure ag-
gregation of feature vectors of N > 1 users in an honest
but curious adversary model. The set of features for all par-
ticipating users is indicated as V. For example, this work
takes a set of English vocabulary of size d as feature set.
The d-dimensional feature vector vi = (vi,1, . . . , vi,d) de-
scribes the value vi,j for all features j of user i. We assume
that all feature values vi,j are in the closed interval [aj, bj]
for all users i. For our application, we have [aj, bj] = [0, 1]
for all j = 1, . . . , d as feature values are probabilities. The
target function for aggregations is PN
i=1 vi, PN
i=1 vi/N,
or similar variants.
In this protocol, the feature values will be obfuscated with
sums of shares, where randomly generated shares are from
an interval of doubles. For example, this could be [−D, D]
for some large double D > 0. The choice of this interval
may be a function of the round number r of the aggregation
protocol, the user i, the coordinate vi,j of the vector vi or
additional factors. The steps of this protocol in a single
round of aggregation are as follow:
1. Each user i creates N shares (where N is the total
number of users) for her feature vector. The steps for
share creation and distribution for feature vector vi
are:
(a) N −1 shares ˜vk
i are randomly and indepen-
dently drawn in [−D, D]d, where k ranges over
{1, 2, . . ., N} \ {i}.
(b) The N th share ˜vi
i is calculated as follows:
˜vi
i = vi −
X
k̸=i
˜vk
i .
(1)
As the N−1 shares are calculated randomly from
random intervals, the N th share ˜vi
i is also not
deterministic.
2. Each user i keeps her N th share ˜vi
i. For each k in
{1, 2, . . ., N} \ {i}, user i sends the share ˜vk
i to the
user k.
In the same manner, user i also receives N −1 shares
from the other users: from each k in {1, 2, . . ., N} \
{i}, user i receives ˜vi
k.
3. User i can now calculate the obfuscated feature vector
v′
i for user i as:
v′
i = ˜vi
i +
X
k̸=i
˜vi
k.
(2)
4. Each user i sends the obfuscated feature vector v′
i to
the aggregator.
5. The aggregator computes PN
i=1 v′
i as the target output
since the following relation holds.
X
1≤i≤N
vi =
X
1≤i≤N
v′
i.
(3)
To see that this is correct, we ﬁrst note that we have
vi =
N
X
k=1
˜vk
i
(4)
for all users i. Therefore, the sum of all shares of all
users equals the lefthand side of (3). Thus, it sufﬁces
to show that the righthand side in (3) is the sum of all
shares of all users. But this is so since the diagonal
shares ˜vi
i occur in the sum of shares v′
i for user i. The
off-diagonal shares ˜vk
i of user i (where k ̸= i) occur
in the sum v′
k. This proves that (3) holds.

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
User 1 (D1)
User N (DN)
• Conference Reso-
lution
• Punctuation Re-
moval
• Lemmatization
• Stopwords Re-
moval
• Lower-Casing
• Primary Keyword
Sets Calculation
• Document Fre-
quency Calcula-
tion
p(DN/t)
p(D1/t)
Aggregation
p(D/t)
p(t/D)
p(t)
Figure 1. Flow Diagram for Computing the Probabilty of a Keyword t to be a Trending Keyword with Local Data D1, . . . , DN
We note that users receive random vectors as shares from
other users. Only ˜v′
i may leak some information about vi
and only the aggregator will receive this private input. But
this leakage is considerably mitigated against, since N −1
random shares from N −1 users are combined with the
N th share of user i to compute this private input.
More secure solutions require the exchange of secrets be-
tween users, mapping feature values into other represen-
tations for perfectly secure encryption (e.g. modulo arith-
metic), or the use of homomorphic encryption. Our proto-
col offers sufﬁcient protection for trend detection in prac-
tical settings while computing an aggregate with minimal
effort.
5. Bayesian Federated Trend Detection
In this section, we apply protocol SAFE to privacy-
preserving detection of trends for document interactions
(e.g., webpages clicked/liked) based on our approach to
Bayesian federated analytics.
We deﬁne the trend for interacted documents as below:
Trend: Keywords that are not frequently present
in past interacted documents but that appear fre-
quently in current interacted documents.
This deﬁnition is very basic and neglects many factors such
as seasonality. Our aim here is to illustrate our Bayesian
approach to federated and privacy-preserving analytics.
We formulate the task as the determination of the trending
keyword t in V while N users have interacted with random
subset of document set D. We note that multiple users can
interact with same document. The term V represents a set
of all possible keywords that can be trending. The set of
documents, with which user i has interacted with, is indi-
cated as Di and so Di ⊂D. In probabilistic terms, the
task is to ﬁnd a distribution p(t | D) that deﬁnes a higher
probability for a keyword in V as per our deﬁnition of the
trending keywords.
According to the Bayes formula, the expression for this
term can be written as
p(t = t | D) = p(D | t = t)p(t = t)
p(D)
.
(5)
This equation also captures our above deﬁnition of trend.
The semantics and its computation for each term from the
right hand side of Eq.(5) are described in following subsec-
tions and depicted in Fig. 1.
5.1. Prior Calculation
The term p(t) is the prior discrete probability distribution
over all keywords in the vocabulary V for being a trend-
ing keyword.
As per the deﬁnition of trend, the key-
word which occurs frequently in previously interacted doc-
uments should have a low prior probability for being a
trending keyword. The words which occur frequently in
the past interacted documents have low inverse document
frequency (IDF) values.
Therefore, the prior distribution is modelled as a Dirich-
let distribution parametrized by the IDF of keywords and
the prior probability for each keyword is calculated as the

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
expected mean from the Dirichlet distribution. As past in-
teracted documents, we take the whole English Wikipedia
to demonstrate the methodology. However, any suitable
dataset can be chosen for calculating the prior probabilities.
If there is no available dataset, one can also start with uni-
form prior and update the prior over the iterations.
5.2. Likelihood Calculation
The term p(D | t) is the likelihood for the Document set D
given that the keyword t is trending. As the aim is to pro-
tect the privacy of each user, nobody but user i has access
to the document set Di. Therefore, each user calculates
individual likelihoods p(Di|t) which then are aggregated
in a privacy-preserving way to the likelihood of the whole
document set.
The likelihood p(Di|t) is calculated based on the number
of documents in which the keyword is present in the pri-
mary keyword set of that document. The primary keyword
set is the set of ﬁve keywords that have the highest term
frequency in a document. We now describe these steps in
detail:
Using
the
conference
resolution
NLP
task
(Clark & Manning, 2016),
all the pronouns are con-
verted to corresponding entities.
We do this since
important keywords in a document are mentioned only a
few times although referred to many times with pronouns.
Non-conversion can adversely affect the term frequency of
such words and they would not be included in the primary
keyword set.
We used the conference resolution model
from the NLP library Spacy (Honnibal et al., 2020).
In order to reduce the computations and noise, general NLP
preprocessing tasks such as punctuation removal, lower-
casing, lemmatization and stop-words removal are per-
formed on the document set.
For each document, the primary keyword sets are calcu-
lated by computing the term frequencies of keywords inside
the documents.
The likelihoods of the dataset, given each keyword from the
primary keyword set, are calculated as the Dirichlet distri-
bution parametrized by the number of documents in which
the keywords in primary keyword sets are present.
We adopted the above method for likelihood calculations
for sake of simplicity. Different heuristics can be used in-
stead, as per the requirements to calculate these likelihoods.
5.3. Aggregation of Likelihood
Each user creates a d−dimensional vector of likelihoods,
where d is the size of the vocabulary V, as follow:
Li = (p(Di | t = t1), . . . , p(Di | t = td)) ,
(6)
where the likelihoods for the document set given the key-
word that is not present in any of the primary keyword set
is 0. If each document set Di is considered as an instance of
the random variable for the subset of document set D, then
the aggregation of these instances, i. e., the likelihood of
the whole document set, can be represented as their mean.
Therefore, the aggregator wants to perform the following
operation for each keyword:
p(D | t = t1) =
N
X
i=1
p(Di | t = t1).
(7)
This is the target function of our privacy-preserving aggre-
gation protocol SAFE described in Section 4, using vectors
of likelihoods as the feature vectors.
5.4. Marginalised Probability of Dataset
The calculation of the marginal probability p(D) needs ac-
cess to the entire dateset D. The protection of user privacy
demands that this dataset is either not computed in the ﬁrst
place or has restricted access. Therefore, we prefer not hav-
ing to compute the marginal probability at all. We now
describe how we can avoid this.
The marginal probability would be constant and the poste-
rior probability is proportional to the product of likelihood
and prior probability. Therefore, the equation (5) can be
alternatively written as follow:
p(t = t | D) ∝p(D | t = t)p(t = t).
(8)
As our aim to ﬁnd the trending keywords, i. e., only the
ranking of keywords, the calculation of exact value for the
posterior is not necessary and the marginalisation constant
p(D) can be safely ignored.
6. Results
In this section, the proposed trend detection methodol-
ogy is tested with 10 virtual users using a test document
set formed using a small subset of passages (ﬁrst 50, see
A) from the MSMarco passage dataset (Bajaj et al., 2018).
Each virtual user i chooses a random number of passages
from the test document set with replacement to form their
document set Di. The IDF weights for the keywords are
taken from (Mikhail Galkin, 2020). The results of perform-
ing the trend detection algorithm described in section 5 are
summarized in Table 1. The proposed method is compared
with the following two alternative methodologies:
1. Ranking based on total count: This method ranks key-
words based on their total count in the dataset D. This
is obviously not privacy-preserving and does not take
into account any history.

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
2. Ranking based on pooled trend: This method pools
trending keyword found locally by each user and then
ranks them based on the number of users who report it
as their local trend. The dataset D is not shared but lo-
cal trends are, which can reveal sensitive information.
This approach does not consider any history.
The results show that the keywords like “phloem”, “xylem”
have far less count than other keywords such as “Manhat-
tan” and “project”. Nevertheless they were ranked higher
because of high IDF values. On the other hand, ranking
based on total count shows opposite results while rank-
ing based on pooled trend shows comparable results which
would look similar to ranking based on IDF if history is
taken into consideration. In our proposed method, neither
hyperparameters nor a time-series analysis are required.
For this test, we used the keywords from an English Vo-
cabulary for trend detection. However, this method can be
easily extended from uni-gramss to n-grams if the corre-
sponding vocabulary is used. Nonetheless, the uni-grams
can also provide valuable insights into topics. The trending
keywords from Table 1 can be paired to discover popular
topics. For example, the trending keywords pairs “xylem-
phloem”, “costa-rica” and “manhatten-project” indicate the
topics plant tissues, the country Costa Rica and the world
war 2 nuclear weapon project, respectively.
7. Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed a Bayesian approach to federated analytics
that offers several beneﬁts for production-grade systems:
strong enough privacy and efﬁciency gains over the tradi-
tional federated analytics. We demonstrated these potential
advantages using a trend detection application in combina-
tion with a novel secure aggregation protocol. Our simple
test experiment validated the potential of our proposed ap-
proach by comparing to two alternative approaches.
The trend detection methodology presented in this paper
can be extended to increase its utility further.
Its pre-
deﬁned uni-gram vocabulary can be modiﬁed to an n-gram
vocabulary. The ability to handle out-of-vocabulary key-
words or to work without a predeﬁned vocabulary is de-
sired. We plan to evaluate aggregation methods that are
more general than simple mean, such as a weighted mean.
Weights can be deﬁned based on different factors such as
the number of documents the user interacted with, user his-
tory, and so forth. We plan to evaluate the methodology
over multiple iterations with prior updates.
We want to compare or integrate our secure aggregation
protocol with other methods (e.g., privacy-preserving com-
putation of common features via private set union for
honest-but-curious users (Frikken, 2007)) and with the ap-
plication of local differential privacy to feature vectors.
The feature vectors for trend detection are huge but gener-
ally sparse. We therefore have an incentive to adjust our
protocol to such sparse settings to reduce the communica-
tion bandwidth. This may use the determination of the pri-
vate union of features of all users as a pre-processing step.
References
Google trends.
https://trends.google.com/
trends/?geo=DE. Accessed: 2021-05-24.
Private,
bayesian,
distributed,
deep
learning.
https://slideslive.com/38923426/.
Accessed:
2021-
05-27.
Annamoradnejad, I. and Habibi, J. A comprehensive anal-
ysis of twitter trending topics. 2019 5th International
Conference on Web Research (ICWR), Apr 2019. doi:
10.1109/icwr.2019.8765252.
Bajaj, P., Campos, D., Craswell, N., Deng, L., Gao, J., Liu,
X., Majumder, R., McNamara, A., Mitra, B., Nguyen,
T., Rosenberg, M., Song, X., Stoica, A., Tiwary, S., and
Wang, T. Ms marco: A human generated machine read-
ing comprehension dataset, 2018.
Bittau, A., Erlingsson, U., Maniatis, P., Mironov, I., Raghu-
nathan, A., Lie, D., Rudominer, M., Kode, U., Tinnes, J.,
and Seefeld, B. Prochlo. Proceedings of the 26th Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Principles, Oct 2017. doi:
10.1145/3132747.3132769.
Table 1. Trend Detection Results with 10 Virtual Users
KEYWORD
TOTAL COUNT IN D
IDF
RANKING
BASED ON IDF
RANKING
BASED ON TOTAL COUNT
RANKING
BASED ON POOLED TREND
PHLOEM
49
9.8125
1
7
3
XYLEM
30
9.6191
2
16
4
OFFENDER
48
7.3567
3
8
3
RICA
57
6.0512
4
5
1
COSTA
57
5.2358
5
4
1
MANHATTAN
77
5.14365
6
1
2
PROJECT
75
3.1363
12
2
2

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
Bogdanov, D., Laur, S., and Willemson, J.
Sharemind:
A framework for fast privacy-preserving computations.
In Jajodia, S. and Lopez, J. (eds.), Computer Security -
ESORICS 2008, pp. 192–206, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-88313-5.
Bonawitz, K., Ivanov, V., Kreuter, B., Marcedone, A.,
McMahan, H. B., Patel, S., Ramage, D., Segal, A.,
and Seth, K. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-
preserving machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communi-
cations Security, CCS 2017, Dallas, TX, USA, October
30 - November 03, 2017, pp. 1175–1191, 2017.
doi:
10.1145/3133956.3133982.
Chaulwar, A.
Private dataset generation using privacy
preserving collaborative learning. https://arxiv.
org/pdf/2004.13598.pdf, 2020.
Chen, M., Mathews, R., Ouyang, T., and Beaufays, F.
Federated learning of out-of-vocabulary words. CoRR,
abs/1903.10635, 2019.
Clark, K. and Manning, C. D. Deep reinforcement learning
for mention-ranking coreference models. In Empirical
Methods on Natural Language Processing, 2016.
Cvijikj, I. P. and Michahelles, F.
Monitoring trends on
facebook. In 2011 IEEE Ninth International Conference
on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, pp.
895–902, 2011. doi: 10.1109/DASC.2011.150.
Erlingsson, ., Pihur, V., and Korolova, A. Rappor. Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security, Nov 2014.
doi:
10.1145/2660267.2660348.
Frikken, K. Privacy-preserving set union. In Katz, J. and
Yung, M. (eds.), Applied Cryptography and Network Se-
curity, pp. 237–252, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-72738-5.
Hendrickson, S., Kolb, J., Lehman, B., and Montague, J.
TREND DETECTION IN SOCIAL DATA. Technical
report, Twitter Gnip data science team, 2015.
Honnibal, M., Montani, I., Van Landeghem, S., and Boyd,
A.
spaCy: Industrial-strength Natural Language Pro-
cessing in Python. https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.1212303, 2020.
Lapets, A., Volgushev, N., Bestavros, A., Jansen, F., and
Varia, M. Secure mpc for analytics as a web application.
In 2016 IEEE Cybersecurity Development (SecDev), pp.
73–74, 2016. doi: 10.1109/SecDev.2016.027.
Mikhail Galkin, V. M. Wikipedia tﬁdf dataset. https://
github.com/SmartDataAnalytics/
Wikipedia_TF_IDF_Datase, 2020.
Ramage, D. and Mazzocchi, S. federated analytics: collab-
orative data science without data collection. https://
ai.googleblog.com/2017/04/federated-
learning-collaborative.html,
year=2020,
month=May.
Shokri, R. and Shmatikov, V.
Privacy-preserving deep
learning.
In 2015 53rd Annual Allerton Conference
on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton),
pp. 909–910, 2015.
doi: 10.1109/ALLERTON.2015.
7447103.
SwarajK, P., Manjula, D., Adhithyan, HemnathK, B., and
ManishKumar, L. Recent approaches for trend detection
from text documents and real time streams-a study. Inter-
national journal of engineering research and technology,
3, 2018.
Xin, B., Yang, W., Geng, Y., Chen, S., Wang, S., and
Huang, L. Private ﬂ-gan: Differential privacy synthetic
data generation based on federated learning. In ICASSP
2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2927–
2931, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9054559.
Zhu, W., Kairouz, P., McMahan, B., Sun, H., and Li, W.
Federated heavy hitters discovery with differential pri-
vacy, 2020.
A. Passages from MSMarco Dataset
Following passages are used for evaluation of trend detec-
tion methodologies. The detected trending keywords re-
ported in Table 1 are highlighted.
1. The presence of communication amid scientiﬁc minds
was equally important to the success of the Man-
hattan project as scientiﬁc intellect was. The only
cloud hanging over the impressive achievement of the
atomic researchers and engineers is what their success
truly meant; hundreds of thousands of innocent lives
obliterated.
2. The Manhattan project and its atomic bomb helped
bring an end to World War II. Its legacy of peaceful
uses of atomic energy continues to have an impact on
history and science.
3. Essay on The Manhattan project - The Manhattan
project The Manhattan project was to see if mak-
ing an atomic bomb possible.
The success of this
project would forever change the world forever mak-
ing it known that something this powerful can be man-
made.

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
4. The Manhattan project was the name for a project
conducted during World War II, to develop the ﬁrst
atomic bomb. It refers speciﬁcally to the period of the
project from 194 2-1946 under the control of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, under the administration of
General Leslie R. Groves.
5. versions of each volume as well as complementary
websites. The ﬁrst websiteThe Manhattan project:
An Interactive Historyis available on the Ofﬁce of His-
tory and Heritage Resources website, http://www.cfo.
doe.gov/me70/history. The Ofﬁce of History and Her-
itage Resources and the National Nuclear Security
6. The Manhattan project. This once classiﬁed photo-
graph features the ﬁrst atomic bomb a weapon that
atomic scientists had nicknamed Gadget.. The nuclear
age began on July 16, 1945, when it was detonated in
the New Mexico desert.
7. Nor will it attempt to substitute for the extraordinar-
ily rich literature on the atomic bombs and the end of
World War II. This collection does not attempt to doc-
ument the origins and development of the Manhattan
project.
8. Manhattan project. The Manhattan project was a
research and development undertaking during World
War II that produced the ﬁrst nuclear weapons.
It
was led by the United States with the support of the
United Kingdom and Canada. From 1942 to 1946,
the project was under the direction of Major General
Leslie Groves of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer was the direc-
tor of the Los Alamos Laboratory that designed the
actual bombs. The Army component of the project
was designated the
9. In June 1942, the United States Army Corps of Engi-
neersbegan the Manhattan project- The secret name
for the 2 atomic bombs.
10. One of the main reasons Hanford was selected as a site
for the Manhattan project’s B Reactor was its prox-
imity to the Columbia River, the largest river ﬂowing
into the Paciﬁc Ocean from the North American coast.
11. group discussions, community boards or panels with
a third party, or victim and offender dialogues, and
requires a skilled facilitator who also has sufﬁcient un-
derstanding of sexual assault, domestic violence, and
dating violence, as well as trauma and safety issues.
12. punishment designed to repair the damage done to the
victim and community by an offender’s criminal act.
Ex: community service, Big Brother program indeter-
minate sentence
13. Tutorial: Introduction to Restorative Justice. Restora-
tive justice is a theory of justice that emphasizes re-
pairing the harm caused by criminal behaviour. It is
best accomplished through cooperative processes that
include all stakeholders. This can lead to transforma-
tion of people, relationships and communities. Prac-
tices and programs reﬂecting restorative purposes will
respond to crime by: 1 identifying and taking steps to
repair harm, 2 involving all stakeholders, and. 3 trans-
forming the traditional relationship between commu-
nities and their governments in responding to crime.
14. Organize volunteer community panels, boards, or
committees that meet with the offender to discuss the
incident and offender obligation to repair the harm
to victims and community members. Facilitate the
process of apologies to victims and communities. In-
vite local victim advocates to provide ongoing victim-
awareness training for probation staff.
15. The purpose of this paper is to point out a number
of unresolved issues in the criminal justice system,
present the underlying principles of restorative justice,
and then to review the growing amount of empirical
data on victim-offender mediation.
16. Each of these types of communities the geographic
community of the victim, offender, or crime; the com-
munity of care; and civil society may be injured by
crime in different ways and degrees, but all will be af-
fected in common ways as well: The sense of safety
and conﬁdence of their members is threatened, order
within the community is threatened, and (depending
on the kind of crime) common values of the commu-
nity are challenged and perhaps eroded.
17. The approach is based on a theory of justice that con-
siders crime and wrongdoing to be an offense against
an individual or community, rather than the State.
Restorative justice that fosters dialogue between vic-
tim and offender has shown the highest rates of victim
satisfaction and offender accountability.
18. Inherent in many peoples understanding of the notion
of ADR is the existence of a dispute between identi-
ﬁable parties. Criminal justice, however, is not usu-
ally conceptualised as a dispute between victim and
offender, but is instead seen as a matter concerning
the relationship between the offender and the state.
This raises a complex question as to whether a crimi-
nal offence can properly be described as a dispute.
19. Criminal justice, however, is not usually conceptu-
alised as a dispute between victim and offender, but
is instead seen as a matter concerning the relationship
between the offender and the state. 3 This raises a

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
complex question as to whether a criminal offence can
properly be described as a dispute.
20. The circle includes a wide range of participants in-
cluding not only the offender and the victim but also
friends and families, community members, and justice
system representatives. The primary distinction be-
tween conferencing and circles is that circles do not
focus exclusively on the offense and do not limit their
solutions to repairing the harm between the victim and
the offender.
21. phloem is a conductive (or vascular) tissue found in
plants. phloem carries the products of photosynthesis
(sucrose and glucose) from the leaves to other parts
of the plant. The corresponding system that circulates
water and minerals from the roots is called the xylem.
22. phloem and xylem are complex tissues that perform
transportation of food and water in a plant. They are
the vascular tissues of the plant and together form vas-
cular bundles. They work together as a unit to bring
about effective transportation of food, nutrients, min-
erals and water.
23. phloem and xylem are complex tissues that perform
transportation of food and water in a plant. They are
the vascular tissues of the plant and together form vas-
cular bundles.
24. phloem is a conductive (or vascular) tissue found in
plants. phloem carries the products of photosynthesis
(sucrose and glucose) from the leaves to other parts of
the plant.
25. Unlike xylem (which is composed primarily of dead
cells), the phloem is composed of still-living cells that
transport sap. The sap is a water-based solution, but
rich in sugars made by the photosynthetic areas.
26. In xylem vessels water travels by bulk ﬂow rather than
cell diffusion. In phloem, concentration of organic
substance inside a phloem cell (e.g., leaf) creates a
diffusion gradient by which water ﬂows into cells and
phloem sap moves from source of organic substance
to sugar sinks by turgor pressure.
27. The mechanism by which sugars are transported
through the phloem, from sources to sinks, is called
pressure ﬂow.
At the sources (usually the leaves),
sugar molecules are moved into the sieve elements
(phloem cells) through active transport.
28. phloem carries the products of photosynthesis (su-
crose and glucose) from the leaves to other parts of
the plant. The corresponding system that circulates
water and minerals from the roots is called the xylem.
29. xylem transports water and soluble mineral nutrients
from roots to various parts of the plant. It is responsi-
ble for replacing water lost through transpiration and
photosynthesis. phloem translocates sugars made by
photosynthetic areas of plants to storage organs like
roots, tubers or bulbs.
30. At this time the Industrial Workers of the World had
a membership of over 100,000 members.
In 1913
William Haywood replaced Vincent Saint John as
secretary-treasurer of the Industrial Workers of the
World. By this time, the IWW had 100,000 members.
31. This was not true of the Industrial Workers of the
World and as a result many of its members were ﬁrst
and second generation immigrants.
Several immi-
grants such as Mary ’Mother’ Jones, Hubert Harrison,
Carlo Tresca, Arturo Giovannitti and Joe Haaglund
Hill became leaders of the organization.
32. Chinese Immigration and the Chinese Exclusion Acts.
In the 1850s, Chinese workers migrated to the United
States, ﬁrst to work in the gold mines, but also to take
agricultural jobs, and factory work, especially in the
garment industry.
33. The Rise of Industrial America, 1877-1900. When in
1873 Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner entitled
their co-authored novel The Gilded Age, they gave the
late nineteenth century its popular name. The term re-
ﬂected the combination of outward wealth and dazzle
with inner corruption and poverty.
34. American objections to Chinese immigration took
many forms, and generally stemmed from economic
and cultural tensions, as well as ethnic discrimination.
Most Chinese laborers who came to the United States
did so in order to send money back to China to support
their families there.
35. The rise of industrial America, the dominance of wage
labor, and the growth of cities represented perhaps the
greatest changes of the period. Few Americans at the
end of the Civil War had anticipated the rapid rise of
American industry.
36. The resulting Angell Treaty permitted the United
States to restrict, but not completely prohibit, Chinese
immigration. In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese
Exclusion Act, which, per the terms of the Angell
Treaty, suspended the immigration of Chinese labor-
ers (skilled or unskilled) for a period of 10 years.
37. Industrial Workers of the World. In 1905 representa-
tives of 43 groups who opposed the policies of Ameri-
can Federation of Labour, formed the radical labour
organisation, the Industrial Workers of the World

Secure Bayesian Federated Analytics for Privacy-Preserving Trend Detection
(IWW). The IWW’s goal was to promote worker sol-
idarity in the revolutionary struggle to overthrow the
employing class.
38. The railroads powered the industrial economy. They
consumed the majority of iron and steel produced in
the United States before 1890. As late as 1882, steel
rails accounted for 90 percent of the steel production
in the United States. They were the nations largest
consumer of lumber and a major consumer of coal.
39. This ﬁnally resulted in legislation that aimed to limit
future immigration of Chinese workers to the United
States, and threatened to sour diplomatic relations be-
tween the United States and China.
40. costa rica is known as a prime Eco-tourism destina-
tion so visitors are assured of majestic views, amazing
destination spots and a temperate climate. These fac-
tors assure medical tourists of an excellent vacation
experience that is conducive for recovery and relax-
ation.
41. Medical Tours costa rica: Medical Tourism Made
Easy! No Other Firm Has Helped More Patients. Re-
ceive Care Over the Last 15 Years
42. Medical Tours costa rica difference: At MTCR, our
aim is to become your one-stop shop for health care
services, so we have put together packages with you,
the medical tourist, in mind, offering a wide variety of
specialties.
43. Cost of Medical Treatment in costa rica. The follow-
ing are cost comparisons between Medical procedures
in costa rica and equivalent procedures in the United
States: [sources: 1,2]
44. Common Treatments done by Medical Tourists in
costa rica. Known initially for its excellent dental
surgery services, medical tourism in costa rica has
spread to a variety of other medical procedures, in-
cluding: General and cosmetic dentistry; Cosmetic
surgery; Aesthetic procedures (botox, skin resurfacing
etc) Bariatric and Laparoscopic surgery
45. Medical Tours costa rica ofﬁce remains within the
hospital and the Cook brothers 15 year relationship
running the hospitals insurance ofﬁce and seven years
running the international patient department serves
you the client very well.
46. About us. Medical Tours costa rica has helped thou-
sands of patients and are the innovators in medical
travel to costa rica. Brad and Bill Cook are vision-
aries that saw the writing on the wall while running
the International insurance ofﬁce for costa ricas busi-
est and most respected hospital The Clinica Biblica.
47. In an era of rising health care costs and decreased med-
ical coverage, the concept of combining surgery with
travel has taken off. The last decade has seen a boom
in the health tourism sector in costa rica, especially in
the area of plastic surgery.
48. The World Bank ranked costa rica as having the high-
est life expectancy, at 78.7 years. This ﬁgure is the
highest amongst all countries in Latin America, and is
equivalent to the level in Canada and higher than the
United States by a year. Top Hospitals for Medical
Tourism in costa rica
49. Over the last decade, costa rica has evolved from be-
ing a mere eco-tourism destination and emerged as
a country of choice for foreigners, particularly from
United States and Canada. These seek quality health-
care services and surgeries at a much lower price than
their home countries.
50. Color urine can be a variety of colors, most often
shades of yellow, from very pale or colorless to very
dark or amber. Unusual or abnormal urine colors can
be the result of a disease process, several medications
(e.g., multivitamins can turn urine bright yellow), or
the result of eating certain foods.

