Ilkogretim Online - Elementary Education Online, 2020; Vol 19 (Issue 4): pp. 6197-6214 
http://ilkogretim-online.org 
doi: 10.17051/ilkonline.2020.04.765027 
 
6197 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
Shabana Iqbal, (MPhil), Education Department, Punjab, Pakistan 
Dr. Abdus Samad, Assistant Professor/Chairman Department of English, Kohat 
University of Science and Technology, Kohat, Pakistan 
Dr. Abdul Waheed Qureshi, Assistant Professor Department of English, Abdul Wali 
Khan University, Mardan, Pakistan 
Neelam Sultan, Visiting Lecturer Department of English, Khushal Khan Khattak 
University, Karak, Pakistan 
 
Abstract 
The present study aims to conduct semantic and syntactic analysis of Samuel Beckett’s 
playWaiting for Godot, to explore the exploitation and utilization of these linguistic 
choices in the process of thematic construction. It highlights the role of language in the 
replication of significant aspects attached with the situational and mental states of the 
speaker.  It has been found that Beckett has exploited the linguistic choices of semantics 
and syntax to reveal and signify the themes of the play and the disjointed and non-
sequential words with fragmented and elliptic structures that have been deliberately 
used to connote to the prevalent themes of the play. 
Keywords: Exploitation; Linguistic Choices, Semantics, Syntax; Themes 
Introduction 
The role of language is crucial in literature as language is the building block of literature. 
Both language and literature are interrelated. Literature cannot be separated from 
language. In the same way, language also cannot be fully comprehended and 
appreciated without the study of literature. In recent years, language has acquired a 
significant place as being the explorer of the mental state (psyche) of speaker. Language 
is no longer perceived only as a tool which expresses the thoughts, rather it has 
occupied a role as the representation of ‘self’.  
In the twentieth century, the positivistic approaches to language and thought began to 
lose their earlier footing; speculation about language took a new turn. The Theatre of 
Absurd had assumed the leading position in this play of language and proved quite 
revolutionary in its attitude toward language. The Absurdist playwrights made 
experiments with the form of language to make it suitable medium for the expression of 
their ideology. Language had achieved a new role and position. Among the major 
proponents of Theatre of Absurd, Samuel Beckett, on account of writing unusual plays 

6198 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
and exploring a new form of drama, holds a prior position because of his inexhaustible 
experiments both on linguistic and thematic grounds. He is considered one of the last 
modernist writers and key figure of the Theatre of the Absurd.  
The play Waiting for Godot is a magnum opus in the literature which has astounded the 
world by its innovation and uniqueness. It carries all the features that can doom a 
literary genius to an unremitting failure. The play consists of no plot or action; rather, 
nothing really happens in the play. The setting of the play also seems to be insignificant 
with a low mound under a tree and two consecutive days. Two tramps are engaged in 
struggle to kill the time for a miraculous happening and arrival of Godot.They are 
engaging themselves in various activities to kill the time of prolonged waiting. They eat, 
drink, do merrymaking and sing-song, discuss many issues illogically and even try to 
commit suicide, but they cannot reduce their agitation of waiting. They are also 
encountered with two other characters Pozzo and Lucky in both the acts of play. Their 
prolonged and futile waiting makes them miserable in the eyes of reader. And the more 
miserable thing is that Godot never comes and their waiting never comes to an end. This 
sense of deprivation and nothingness is apparent through the very language of the play. 
Waiting for Godot was published and performed after Second World War. Although the 
play has no direct link with the war, it exquisitely imparts the chaotic state of mankind 
after the Second World War through the characters of Estragon and Viladimir.  
The language ofWaiting for Godot has been a debatable argument over many of the last 
decades. The writer’s command over the language usage to make it perfect 
representation of characters’ state of mind is definitely marvelous. The synchronization 
between the absurd state of characters and their meaningless dialogues go beyond 
appreciation. As the synopsis reveals that there is no such action which can catch the 
attention of the readers, it is the language that wins the first place for Beckett among the 
contemporary writers. He has assigned an unconventional role to the language by 
minimizing its denotative function. The most important point in the play is that the 
language and the theme go side by side. As it is a play in which nothing specific happens, 
meaning has been created through linguistic choices, dialogues and expressions of 
language. The linguistics choices that are going to be addressed are semantic and 
syntactic that give the play more depth and meaning.  This study is devoted to explore 
the expertise underlying the Beckett’s choice of language.  
Semantics is the leading branch of linguistics that studies meaning. It refers to the 
decontextualized and literal meaning that is communicated through language. The 
meaning occupies significant position in the study of language. For this reason the 
endeavor to find the meaning had been holding central and prior place in the study of 
language throughout the history. 
Syntax refers to the rules and principles that govern the overall sequence and structure 
of the sentence. These arrangements and sequential patterns add meaning to a sentence 

6199 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
which otherwise may be lost. Chomsky (1957) has said that the order of words in a 
formation of a sentence carries much importance which directly affects the process of 
the retrieval of the meaning. 
Structuralism upholds the belief that the meaning of anything depends on the structure 
in which it exists. Structural relativity gives absolute meaning to a particular thing that 
otherwise does not seem to convey any meaning at all. It carries us toward Ferdinand 
de Saussure (1916), who described language as a system of signs. A linguistic sign is not 
a link between a thing and a name, but between a concept[signified] and a sound 
pattern [signifier]. The present study will imply two major concepts that structuralism 
advocates. Firstly, it will use the perspective of structuralism that meaning lies in the 
structures. This will be implied while analyzing the syntactic structures used in Waiting 
for Godot. Secondly, de Saussure’s proposed concept of sign and signified will be 
employed while taking the semantic and syntactic choices as signs and themes as 
signified. By taking the structures as carrier of meaning and the words as signs that 
refer to signified, the study will search for the linguistic and thematic relevancy in the 
play.  
Objectives 
The study aims to internalize the concept of the language as a builder of themes and the 
writer’s intentional or unconscious use of such linguistic choices that create an ideology 
in itself. It will surely bridge the gap that exists between linguistics and literature that 
are interrelated disciplines.As for as specific objectives are concerned, it is intended to 
revise all the thematic concepts ofWaiting for Godot with the analytic lens of a linguist.  
Research Questions 
In order to achieve the above mentioned objectives, the study aims to answer these 
questions: 
• Do semantic choices inWaiting for Godot confer more depth on its meaning and 
theme? 
• How does the exploitation of syntactic structures inWaiting for Godot support 
and accelerate its thematic significance? 
• How does the framework of structuralism add more depth to the semantic and 
syntactic study ofWaiting for Godot? 
Delimitations 
The present research has analyzed the text taken fromWaiting for Godot, the English 
version published in 1952. This study is confined to the analysis of some specific 
excerpts that are found apt for the research purpose. The research has dealt with only 
two linguistic choices i.e. semantic and syntactic with the perspective of structuralism. 
Moreover, it has not focused on all of the thematic issues; rather, some selected themes 

6200 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
are probed into detail. The themes are not kept to be the direct concern of the study; 
rather, they are interlocked with linguistic choices for the purpose of seeking the 
meaning.  
Literature Review 
Waiting for Godot has been the special target of critics and researchers for some of the 
last decades. It has been widely appreciated and extensively criticized because of its 
linguistic and thematic novelty.The language of the play has allured many researchers 
to unfold its layers. But these layers have been folded so cunningly that still there are 
many depths to be explored. This study presents the review of the earlier works that 
were either related to language or related to the themes of the play because it aims to 
correlate the language with its themes. 
Rahimipoor etal., (2011) analyze the role of language in the Theatre of Absurd as how 
Beckett has used language to deploy the existential themes in the play.They say that 
true realization of self makes a person silent and the person with the real sense of his 
self cannot speak too much. Beckett has made this concept more prominent by making 
two tramps indulge in meaningless talk because they are hankering after their identity 
of self and far away from it. Moreover, he compares the language with that of self on the 
basis of its time and space bound property. In an attempt to make the language to reveal 
the self, Beckett has freed language from time and space. So the attempt to destroy the 
rationality of words is actually a step to discover the self.  
Andrew Kennedy (1991) argues that Beckett’s consciousness about suffering and 
uncertainty of human beings must be deepened because of the aftermath of Second 
World War and surely it has evolved his conception about the instability of language to 
share the experiences by the survivors of war. The disintegration of language in 
Beckett’s works is an attempt to depict authentic feelings of war. 
Liao(2014) has selected the four plays of Beckett to elaborate his notion of language. He 
says that Beckett, like the other playwrights of the Theatre of Absurd, has changed the 
concept of language by rendering it as an insufficient tool of communication. As 
Absurdists do not believe in the existence of truth, they also do not believe in language 
as an agent of revealing and conveying the truth. Beckett raises the language from the 
stature of mere an instrument of communication and renders it the role of more than 
that. Indeed, it is not inaccurate to say that Beckett revalues language. 
Esslin (1982), who firstly coined this term of ‘Theatre of Absurd’, argues that language 
has been devalued by the dramatist belonging to this theatre. Often a contradiction is 
found between what is spoken by characters and what is conveyed by the stage 
elements. By referring to the language of Beckett, he puts forward the notion that the 
playwright intentionally uses the language that is devoid of meaning to create a 
different type of experience in theatre. Moreover, he says that if meaning is lost, it will 

6201 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
directly question the instrument that is used to convey meaning i.e. language. According 
to him, Beckett has devalued the system of language to transmit a sense of 
meaninglessness in his work. Moreover, he says that silence in his works refers to the 
characters’ inability to communicate. 
Akhter etal., (2012) in their study are concerned with the grammatical deviations in 
Waiting for Godot. By discussing the purpose of these grammatical deviations, the 
researchers suggest that Beckett has deviated from the common pattern of English 
grammar in order to sustain the interest of the reader. This irregularity of dialogues 
seems as absurd to a common reader but for a researcher it is purposeful and burdened 
with deep thought.He proposes that elliptical utterances on the level of verb refer to the 
inaction of the play. Moreover, the inversion of syntactic order is also the most exploited 
technique of Beckett in which he changes the significance and meaning of words by 
changing their place. 
While presenting the concept of deconstruction in Waiting for Godot, Akhtar 
(2016)argues that language carries many functions in the domain of linguistics but in 
Waiting for Godot, language performs two functions. First one is informative function 
that is to convey any piece of information. Second function that the language of Waiting 
for Godot fulfils, is expressive function that refers to the ability of words to evoke the 
emotion of the listener or reader. The researcher finds that it is the second function that 
has been emphasized preferably in the text. 
While writing about the thematic significance of the play, Dontcheva (2015) holds the 
view that Waiting for Godotcan beinterpreted in so many ways. Beckett creates his own 
world that is neither true nor false. It is devoid of origin. It is a great machine like work 
that can produce multiple meanings. It opens the possibility of various interpretations 
whereas no derived conclusion can be true or false; it delineates itself the phenomenon 
of waiting. 
Forster (1989) says that there is no absurdity in the works of Beckett. The elements of 
entertainment and absurdity that are found in his works veil a deep sense of mental 
anxiety. The superficial absurdities of his works are the true representation of his 
anguish at the atrocities of life.  Forster quotes that in an interview, Beckett answered a 
question about the interpretation of his works by saying that he did not read 
philosophers. He was asked for the possibility of existentialism as a key to solve the 
problem or confusion that haunts his works. He answered with a remark that there is 
neither key nor a problem. It is here Foster takes his works under the ‘scholastic 
obstetrics’, a term presented by Swift to refer to the retrieval of those meanings that 
were far away from the author’s intention. 
While referring to the nothingness and meaninglessness inWaiting for Godot, Simoen 
(1991) argues that terrible idea of ‘self’ suffered a dynamic change in twentieth century. 

6202 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
This notion of self is terribly different than that of Classical and Romantic Ages. Now, it 
has become deconstructed, disintegrated, fragmented, shadowed, unstable, and 
submerged to the extent that it has become unable to tell a story in a logical sequence as 
the writers of earlier ages used to tell. This deterioration of self finds expression in 
Theatre of Absurd. Beckett’s Characters portray this deconstructed idea of self, dealing 
with meaninglessness of the world. 
Khan (2015), on the impact of absurdity in Waiting for Godot, states that dealing with 
the life of modern man, Waiting for Godot totally appears to be based on absurdism 
with its unconventional plot, unclear setting and passive characters. The conversation of 
characters has no positive axis and throughout the play it dwelt round the purposeless 
and unclear appointment with an undefined entity Godot. The part of the play is devoid 
of beginning, middle and end. The ending of the play is not conclusive. It seems to us 
that the tramps will surely come on the third day and resume their waiting. Everything 
in and about the play is burdened with absurdity.  
Federman(1965) says that works of Beckett have defied all classifications and do not fit 
into any definition of genre. Unconventional form, cunning use of language, lack of 
coherence, and ambiguous statements lead to contradictory interpretations. The 
characters of Beckett are undertaking the journey without beginning or end. He further 
elaborates that there is no unity and coherence in the plot of Waiting for Godot. 
Beckett’s plots are not organized or it can be said that there exists no plot in Beckett’s 
works because of which, his works lead to apparent meaninglessness and chaos. 
Structural Perspective 
The present study has employed two major concepts that structuralism advocates. 
Firstly, it has used the perspective of structuralism that meaning lies in the structures. 
This concept was used while analyzing the syntactic structures used in Waiting for 
Godot. Secondly, de Saussure’s proposed concept of sign and signified were used while 
taking the semantic and syntactic choices as signs and themes as signified. By taking the 
structures as carriers of meaning and words as signs that refer to signified, the study 
searched for the linguistic and thematic relevancy in the play. 
Symbols Used in Syntactic Analysis 
Syntactic categories of words are represented by symbols that are often consisted of 
abbreviation for that category. The common abbreviations or symbols of some 
categories are as follows: 
‘S’ for ‘Sentence’, ‘NP’ for ‘Noun Phrase’, ‘N’ for ‘Noun’, ‘PN’ for ‘Proper Noun’, ‘Art’ for 
‘Articles’, ‘V’ for ‘Verb’, ‘VP’ for ‘Verb Phrase’, ‘PP’ for ‘Prepositional Phrase’, ‘Pro’ for 
‘Pronoun’, ‘Adj’ for ‘Adjective’, and ‘Adv’ for “’Adverb’.  
There are some symbols that are generally used to represent syntactic feature. 

6203 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
▪ First is the sign of arrow → 
Arrow is used for the expression of ‘consists of or rewrites as’ 
   Art + N  → NP 
This is simply shorthand expression of saying that the combination of article and 
noun rewrites as noun phrase.  
▪ Second symbol is the use of  star * 
This sign points to the ungrammatical sentences. Any violation in grammatical 
rules is represented with this sign. 
These symbols will be relatively analyzed inWaiting for Godot to consider the role of 
language as the carrier of meaning.  
Interrogative Sentences and Theme of Ambiguity 
This study aimed to find out various semantic and syntactic choices that Beckett has 
used to raise and intensify for different thematic issues. One of these linguistic choices is 
making use of interrogative sentences.  A deliberate reading of the text shows that 
Beckett has made use of interrogative sentences repeatedly. In common use of language, 
the writer’s or speaker’s priority of using interrogative sentences refers to diverse 
facets about their choice and intentions. In Waiting for Godot, it is more apt to study this 
linguistic choice of putting questions with reference to the confused state of characters’ 
minds. Not only the questions show the ambiguities but their answers or replies are 
equally ambiguous in their syntactic and semantic relevancy to questions.  
Ambiguity is the key element in the Theatre of Absurd. Everything is ambiguous in the 
play. We do not know anything about the identity, occupations and desires of the 
characters except their prolong waiting. Nothing is sure about their purpose of waiting 
which ends in futile twice. The arduous sense of waiting haunts them throughout the 
play irrespective of the fact that they are unaware about the identity of Godot and the 
place where Godot has to come. The day of meeting and running day are also not 
certain. The other characters, Lucky and Pozzo and their identity are also hazy and 
vague. The repetitive use of interrogative sentences is quite apt to create these 
ambiguities and making them more emphatic. 
In this play, Estragon and Viladimir are randomly putting so many questions. Beckett 
has exploited the sentences with this syntactic structure to reveal the characters’ state 
of mind as more ambiguous and confused. The repetitive use of interrogative sentences 
reflects the ambiguities in the minds of the characters of the play. The play opens with a 
pithy dialogue: 
                     “Estragon:    Nothing to be done”. 
SVO structure 
(Beckett, 2016: 2) 

6204 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
This speech shows a conclusive judgment on the part of Estragon that he has nothing to 
do at all. The point is: why does this sentence seemto present conclusive judgment and 
why does it seem to be carrying a certainty on the part of speaker? If we syntactically 
analyze this dialogue, we will come to know that its SVO structure advocates and carries 
the element of certainty on the part of speaker. But what happens when this SVO 
syntactic structure is replaced by VSO i.e. descriptive is replaced by interrogative 
sentence? If we uphold the view that SVO reflexes the surety, certainty and conclusive 
judgment, VSO/VS will definitely mirrors the confusion, chaos and ambiguity.  
 The second dialogue of Estragon is: 
“Estrogen:  Am I?” 
VS structure 
(Beckett,2016: 2) 
This VS structure presents the Estragon’s ambiguity and vague idea about his own 
existence. The emphatic effect of this utterance would surely be minimized if it was in 
descriptive order e.g. I am not sure about my existence. VSO does not only stand for 
ambiguity but also for the emphatic state of bewilderment.  
Interrogative sentences are characterized as syntactic units which serve to express 
questions. If putting question shows lack of knowledge or ambiguous state of mind on 
the part of Estragon, insufficient and illogical reply of Viladimir makes him co-partner in 
this ambiguity.  
“Estragon: I asked you a question?  
SVO with question mark 
                            Viladimir: Ah. 
                            Estragon: Did you reply? 
VSO structure 
Viladimir: How’s the carrot?                VS structure 
Estragon: It’s a carrot”. 
                                                       (Beckett, 2016: 13) 
  Here the question of Estragon demands semantically laden statement that can work as 
sufficient and logical answer to his question. But the reply of Viladimir does not seem to 
be satisfactory. The insufficient semantics placement that is a single expression ‘Ah’ 
evokes further question instead of answering the first one. The second utterance of 
Viladimir also carries semantic irrelevancy. Instead of answering, he puts another 
question that is semantically out of place. It seems they are not getting or paying 
attention to each other. They are throwing words in space to fill the void or to kill the 
time of waiting. And their words are as uncertain and ambiguous as the entity for whom 
they are waiting.  

6205 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
The semantics and syntax of question provide a glimpse of questioner’s state of mind. A 
semantically laden question (SLQ) and a question having VSO carries much 
interrogative force and requires to be answered. Wisniewski (2003) states that “One 
should not identify answers with replies. In principle, every expression can serve as a 
reply to any question” (p. 14).The uncertainty and ambiguity is not only confined to the 
syntactic structure (VSO) that has been repetitively used but there also exists semantic 
ambiguity that is found in the replies of raised questions. There is hardly any question 
that meets ‘optimal possible answer’. Wisniewsk defines ‘Optimal Possible Answer’ as 
congruent, conclusive, complete, exhaustive and conclusive.  
“Estragon: His name is Godot?                     SVO with question mark 
                                   Viladimir: I think”. 
                                                          (Beckett, 2016: 14) 
            Here, the answer of Viladimir is not optimal in the sense that it does not convey the 
required information. Lack of optimality reflexes the lack of knowledge and uncertainty 
of Viladimir. Here, the questioning in declarative mode shows that Estragon is 
presupposing the name of Godot and he is just wanting confirmation of Viladimir but 
the ambiguous reply of Viladimir does not yield confirmation to his supposition and 
ambiguity takes place.   
The close reading of the text shows that more often we find replies not as a direct 
answer. Wisniewski (2003) defines that direct answer: “gives exactly what the question 
calls for . . . The label `direct' . . . connotes both logical sufficiency and immediacy” (p. 
13). Anyway, the replies of Beckett’s characters lack logical sufficiency and immediacy. 
These covert replies reflect the ambiguity that exists in the mind and surrounding of the 
speakers.  
“Estragon: 
And we?  
 
Viladimir: 
I beg your pardon? 
 
Estragon: 
I said, And we? 
 
Viladimir: 
I don’t understand. 
 
                Estragon: 
Where do we come in? 
 
Viladimir: 
Come in?” 
(Beckett, 2016: 20) 
This is another chunk presented as further elaboration of their bewildering states of 
mind when they are putting questions one after another. This sequential questioning 

6206 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
deciphers the ambiguity that haunts the play and the minds of both Estragon and 
Viladimir. The perspective of structuralism, that structure confirms the meaning, seems 
very apt here in case of interrogative structures.  
 
 
The Reflections of Semantic Variation and Syntactic Similarity 
Albert Camus (1975)denotes to various significant aspects of human life. He argues that 
there exists an underlying, identical and repetitive structure behind the apparent 
assorted actions of all men.  
 
Rising, tram, four hours in the office or factory, meal, tram, four hours of work, 
meal,  sleep and Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, 
according to  the same rhythm ― this path is followed most of the time … In itself 
weariness has  
something about it … Likewise and during every day of an 
unillustrious life, time  
carries us. (19) 
 
On the surface level, the varied actions of men continue and men undertake different 
activities one after another. This is how life goes on. But this rhythm remains the same 
and this path is easily followed most of the time. In writing Waiting for Godot,Beckett 
presented an epitome of human life, as reflected by Camus. The basic structure of life or 
what Shakespeare called the stage, remains the same but actors are changed. This 
replication in the broader metaphorical view, denotes to the theme of role taking that is 
the life itself. Like the circular wheel of life that awards some people with upward 
position while rendering others downward, the role changing of Estragon and Viladimir 
is also very suggestive and meaningful.  Beckett attaches more importance to dialogues 
rather than action. As there is no significant action in the play, the circularity of the play 
happens because of its dialogues. 
In the beginning of the play, this reflection of life occurs when Estragon and Viladimir 
are discussing about the boots of Estragon.  
 
“Viladimir: 
 
It hurts?                                                          
 
Estragon:  
 
Hurts! He wants to know if it hurts!” 
(Beckett, 2016: 3) 
Here occurs the replication as well. 
Another example of this role changing can be quoted from the play: 
 
“Estragon:  
 
Let’s go”.      
(Beckett, 2016: 7) 

6207 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
 
“Viladimir:               Let’s go”.    
(Beckett, 2016: 21) 
Their roles alter, dialogues exchange and they seem to be indulged in various activities 
but their essential motif remains the same that is waiting for Godot. This is how life goes 
on. Similar pattern of life is followed by one after another. If we relate this concept with 
language, it carries us toward de Saussure’s proposed concepts of Langue (underlying 
structure of language) and Parole (the actual speech utterances).  
Waiting for Godot is generally taken as representation of human life. Its language also 
reflexes the complexity of human life. The close reading of the play is suggestive of this 
linguistic structuralism with same syntactic structure and semantic variation.And the 
semantic variation is the representation of varied human activities that go on according 
to a similar pattern. This connection between langue and parole, syntactic similarity and 
semantic variation and similar pattern of life and various activities of human beings 
stand in same relation to one another and closely depict the structuralism’s view of 
signs and significations.  
Various examples from the text of Waiting for Godot can be viewed as the illustration of 
this similarity between the patterns of language and human life. There are many 
excerpts in the play where there is accurate demonstration of this close connection. On 
seeing some unusual marks on Lucky’s neck, they use this rhythm: 
 
                               “Estragon:  It’s the rope. 
                               Viladimir:  
It’s the rubbing.  
                               Estragon: 
 
It’s inevitable. 
                               Viladimir:  
It’s the knot. 
Estragon: 
           It’s the chafing”. 
 
(Beckett, 2016: 18-19) 
An intensive and structuralist study of the play will be suggestive of the fact that 
underlying structure of the play itself remains the same in both the acts. The play 
comprises of two acts and both the acts comprise of two consecutive days. The two 
major characters Estragon and Viladimir appear in both acts and are found to be 
indulged in the same crucial action that is waiting for an entity Godot which never 
comes twice. Two other characters Pozzo and Lucky come to Estragon and Viladimir in 
both acts. The appearance of messenger boy is also repeated twice. The setting of the 
play also remains the same except a few leaves that appear on the tree that was leafless 
in first act. So, if we look into the structure of the play deeply, it remains similar and 
identical throughout the play. It is only the surface level that keeps on changing. Their 

6208 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
dialogues alterand their conversation dwell round various subjects like talking about 
Godot, and committing suicide but their basic motif remains the same. This is how life 
carries us and this is how language works. There is strong continuity in the working of 
language and in the regularity of the play.  
This interconnection of language, life, and waiting for Godot is shown in Table 1 
 
Table No: 1 
Studying the play Waiting for Godot with the analytical lens of the third point i.e. similar 
syntactic structure and semantic variation, various direct examples can be quoted to 
support the argument. Here is an excerpt of the play that is the strong reflection of these 
linguistic choices of semantics and syntax. This proves that de Saussure’s langue and 
parole and Beckett’s choice of language stand in a very close connection to each other. 
 
“Estragon:    His friends. 
 
     Syntactic             Viladimir:          His agents. 
    Parallelism           Estragon:           His correspondence.                 Possessive pronoun +  
          Viladimir:          His books.Noun 
Estragon:          His bank account”. 
(Beckett, 2016: 11-12) 
These reflections of syntactic similarity and semantic variation lend an in-depth 
meaning to the play. Beckett has represented different colors of human life not only in 
form of thematic appeal but also exploited language as tool of manifestation and 
representation.  
Same rhythm 
Various preoccupations 
Camus’ Myth of Sysiphus 
Langue remains same 
Parole varies 
de Saussure’s  Course De 
Linguistique 
Similar syntactic structure 
Semantic variation 
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot 
Same circular structure and 
same characters 
Variation in dialogues and 
activities 
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot 
Same underlying motif of 
waiting 
Various activities to kill the 
time 
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot 
 

6209 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
Diminutive Syntactic Structures, Crude Semantics and Theme of Nothingness 
Nothingness is the optimal word that suggests the theme of the play. Either directly or 
indirectly, this nothingness is imprinted in the language that has diminutive syntax and 
crude semantics as they find nothing to manifest and elaborate. This brevity of 
sentences and crudeness of semantic choices stay a suitable option for the characters 
who find speaking as the only remedy to minimize their agonizing state of waiting. 
Despite the fact that they have speaking as only choice to pass the time, they have 
nothing to speak. The dialogues of both characters are sufficient evidence of this 
permeated nothingness. 
The syntactic structure and semantic choices seem to be minimized and language is 
stamped with nothingness. It depicts that Beckett has used a reduced form of language 
and silence to picture life that is obsessed with nothingness. Beckett has tried to convey 
more and more by using less and less. 
  “Viladimir: We have that excuse. 
                  Estragon:  
It’s so we won’t hear. 
                              Viladimir: 
 
We have our reasons.  
                              Estragon:  
 
All the dead voices. 
Viladimir: 
 
They make a noise like wings. 
Estragon:  
 
Like leaves. 
Viladimir: 
 
Like sand. 
                             Estragon:  
 
Like leaves. 
 
                                  Silence”. 
(Beckett, 2016: 52) 
The semantic and syntactic study of the excerpt reveals the nothingness that has 
victimized the poor tramps. Estragon and Viladimir are capable of listening only the 
dead voices that sound like leaves and sand. A keen study of the extract shows how the 
nothingness has affected the structure of sentences that is minimized to two or three 
words. The brief utterances of tramps show the inner void of their characters. They are 
just throwing the words to fill the gap. If they do not talk, silence takes the hold.  
A Glance at Diminutive Syntax 

6210 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
Diminutive syntactic structure refers to minimization of syntax by lesser use of sentence 
constituents.  Beckett seems to be extraordinary mindful while putting his crude words 
in a syntactic order.Here are some examples from the text of the play: 
a)   S                  b)     S 
NPVPNP        VP 
             Pro    V     VP 
We    have  our reasons      All the dead voices   *  
 
  c)         Sd)             S e) S 
 
NPNPNP  VP                  NP       VP 
ProVPNP                    V        NPV    NP 
They       make     a noise like wings       *          *         Like leaves.      *     *    Like sand 
 
f) S                                     g) S                        h)                S 
 
NPNPNP                   VP                NP        VP 
 
  Pro        V       NP                                                Conj  Pro    V 
 
They all  speaktogetherEach one to itself    *    *   Rather    they whisper  
 
i)S                      j)   Sk)S 
NP   VP                      NPVP   NP             VP 
             Pro              V                        Pro      V    Pro             V 
They             rustle           They    murmurThey                rustle                                           

6211 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
 
These tree diagrams show the diminutive syntactic structures that hardly occupy the 
required constituents and this diminution even leads to ungrammatical sentences that 
seem to make no sense. These reduced structures do not allow the words to convey the 
messages of the speakers. There is no use of determiner to qualify the speech. Sentences 
have been reduced to phrases that hardly carry nouns and verbs. Resultantly, 
nothingness takes the hold that is the prominent subject of the play itself.  
The nothingness or meaninglessness of language becomes clear when Estragon and 
Viladimir fail to find any suitable word to describe the trace of Lucky’s neck. The speech 
of Lucky can be seen as another example of this nothingness conveyed by language 
itself. Especially, at the end of his speech, the syntax is totally deteriorated consisting of 
little phrases and isolated words.   
 
 
 
“Estragon: 
 
Then adieu. 
                              Pozzo:            Adieu. 
                              Viladimir:        
Adieu. 
                              Pozzo:             
Adieu. 
                              Silence.            
No one moves.  
                              Viladimir:        
Adieu. 
                              Pozzo:              
Adieu. 
                              Estragon:         
Adieu. 
Silence”. 
 (Beckett, 2016: 36-37) 
Nothingness has been absorbed in the language both on semantic and syntactic level. 
The syntax has been reduced to mere one or two words and semantics has been 
deteriorated by their inability to utter a new word. They are just replicating the 
meaningless utterances of one after another. Estragon, Viladimir and Pozzo have the 
same word for bidding farewell to each other. They repeat ‘Adieu’ for seven times 
without moving as they are unable to utter new and refined words. This play of 
semantics and syntax is making the theme of meaninglessness more clear.   
Elliptic Syntactic Structures, Lack of Semantic Qualifier and Theme of Absurdity 

6212 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
Waiting for Godot epitomizes this absurd state of man amid the various purposeless 
purposes. Everything in and about this play is absurd and nonsensical. The theme of 
absurdity chases the play from the very beginning till the end. The plot of the play is 
absurd with the same absurd situation repeated on two consecutive days or might be 
continued for more days if Beckett would have enlarged the play. 
It is noteworthy here that absurdity is the main theme ofWaiting for Godot. It is 
centripetal force around which the main characters and action of the play revolve. It 
should not be overlooked here that waiting which is dominating occurrence throughout 
the play is also an absurdity. They do nothing but waiting apart from the fact that they 
do not have minimal idea about identity of Godot and his would be bestowed favor for 
them. They are just wedged and jammed over there. 
When we try to find the expression of this innate absurdity in the language of Estragon 
and Vliadimir, the language seems to be evident of this absurd state. If we analyze the 
syntactic structure of the play, ellipses are abundant in number. As it has been discussed 
earlier, a wide range of the dialogues of the play contains only one or two words, with 
no qualifiers. The dialogues which have considerable length often carry ellipses. The 
elliptic structure with minimal semantic qualifier makes their condition more absurd 
and meaningless. 
 
“Viladimir: 
Wait…we embraced…we were happy…happy…what do we do 
 
now  that we’re happy…go on waiting…waiting…let me think…it’s coming
 
…go on 
waiting…now that we’re happy…let me see…ah!”. 
(Beckett, 2016: 55) 
A casual reading of this text will surely leave its reader in uncertainty because the text 
does not make sense semantically. The key words like ‘embraced’, ‘happy’’, ‘waiting’, 
‘coming’, and ‘think’ are from different semantic fields. A kind of metonymic relation can 
be felt in the words ‘embrace and happy’ and ‘coming and waiting’.  But logically, it does 
not impart any notion to guess out the meaning of this utterance which jumps from past 
to present and from present to future intentions. This is elliptic-syntactical structure 
that is more apt to show the confusion of the minds of character. Confusion is also the 
crucial element of the theatre of absurd. This is how language as an active mechanism 
works and builds the theme not only with its confinement to semantics but also with 
syntax. Here the word ‘waiting’ is repeated three times but ellipse have been put twelve 
times. It seems that in these three lines Beckett has been exploiting the syntax more 
vigorously than semantics.   
The text becomes a complicated occurrence with its deficient and unexplained semantic. 
Semantic qualifier lends clarity and elaboration to any text. But the lack of semantic 
elaboration or syntactic unity leaves an absurd impression on the mind of hearer. The 
utterances are simply reflections of the absurdities. 

6213 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
Another example of this illogical formation of language is: 
 
“Estragon: That’s to say…you understand…the dusk…the strain…waiting…I 
 
confess…I imagined…for a second…” 
(Beckett, 2016: 17) 
The ellipses join these sentences hence the word order is neither sequential nor 
meaningful. The repetition of noun phrase also seems absurd when it does not repeat 
the determinant with the crucial word of the play.    
  the dusk                     the strain                     waiting 
 
Determiner + Noun            Determiner + Noun             Noun 
The syntactic choice seems absurd when it places determiner with dusk and strain but 
the key word of the play ‘waiting’ has been written without definite article that is used 
to refer specific things or the things that are already known. But it is quite absurd that 
the significance of the single act of waiting has been minimized here. Moreover, the 
utterance starts with present tense and ends in past tense. This again shows 
grammatical or structural deviation that does not sound reasonable. If we analyze the 
verbs of the text, the collocation of words ‘understand’ and ‘confess’ sounds reasonable 
but the addition of ‘imagined’ changes the real effect of the statement and makes it 
unreal and absurd.  
Conclusion 
The study justifiably holds the perspective of structuralism that meanings are inherent 
in the structures. The basic structure of utterance can convey, restrict, change or 
manipulate the meaning. The study argues that language is not only a passive carrier of 
meaning but becomes the creator of meaning in itself. The structuralism’s perspective of 
sign and signified has also given a valuable edge to indicate the semantics as carrier of 
hidden meaning. The observance, violation, manipulation and exploitation of semantic 
and syntactic choices in Waiting for Godot are highly considerable in the retrieval of 
meaning and make the play thematically significant. 
REFERENCES 
Akhtar, J. (2016). Waiting for Godot: A deconstructive study. Munich: GRIN Verlag. 
 
Retrieved from https://www.grin.com/document/337568 
Akhter, S., & Hayat, M. (2012). Grammatical deviations in Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for 
 
Godot. Language in India, 12(9). 

6214 | Dr. Abdus Samad      Linguistic Analysis Of Waiting For Godot: A Critical 
Survey 
 
 
Beckett, 
S. 
(2016). 
Waiting 
for 
Godot. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://samuel-
beckett.net/Waiting-for- 
Godot.html. 
Camus, A. (1975). The Myth of Sisyphus. (J. O’Brien, Trans.). New York: Penguin Books. 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. Paris: Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Press. 
de Saussure, F. (1916). Course de linguistique. Paris: University of Michigan.  
Dontcheva, A. (2015). Waiting-Samuel Beckett’s enigmatic sign of life. Bulgaria: Plovdiv 
 
University Press.  
Esslin, M. (1982).Absurd drama. England: Penguin Books. 
Federman, R. (1965). Journey to chaos: Samuel Beckett’s early fiction. Berkley: 
University of  California.  
Foster, P. (1989). Beckett and Zen. A study of dilemma in the novels of Samuel Beckett. 
 
Austin, USA: Wisdom Publications. 
 
Kennedy, A.K. (1989). Samuel Beckett. UK. Cambridge University Press. 
Khan, A. B., Mansoor, H. S., & Alia, H. (2015). The impact of absurdism in “Waiting for 
 
Godot” by Samuel Beckett.International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research 
and  
Modern Education, 1 (2).  
Liao, S. (2014). Links and blocks: The role of language in Beckett’s selected plays. 
Retrieved 
from Scholar.waret.org/1999.10./9997 
Rahimipoor, S., Edoyan, H., & Hashemi, M. (2011). Self revelation in Samuel Beckett’s 
 
language. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 28 (2011), 820-824. 
Wisniewsk, A. (2003). Semantics of questions. Poland: Adam Mickiewicz University 
press.  

