arXiv:2211.04467v2  [hep-th]  9 Nov 2022
A Panorama Of Physical Mathematics c. 2022
Ibrahima Bah1, Daniel S. Freed 2, Gregory W. Moore3,
Nikita Nekrasov4, Shlomo S. Razamat5, Sakura Sch¨afer-Nameki6
November 10, 2022
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
2 Department of Mathematics, University of Texas at Austin
3 NHETC and Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University
4 Simons Center for Geometry and Physics,
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3636, USA
5 Department of Physics, Technion, Haifa, 32000, Israel
6 Mathematical Institute,University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6GG, United Kingdom
Abstract
What follows is a broad-brush overview of the recent synergistic interactions between mathematics
and theoretical physics of quantum ﬁeld theory and string theory.
The discussion is forward-
looking, suggesting potentially useful and fruitful directions and problems, some old, some new,
for further development of the subject. This paper is a much extended version of the Snowmass
whitepaper on physical mathematics [1]. Version: November 10, 2022.
Contents
1
General Remarks
2
2
Quantum Field Theory
3
2.1
Approaches To Deﬁning Quantum Field Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Topological Quantum Field Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Algebraic Structures In Quantum Field Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Algebraic Structures Related To Operator Product Algebras
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Algebraic Structures Associated With Supersymmetric Sectors And BPS States .
6
2.4
Classiﬁcation And Deeper Understanding Of New Classes Of Supersymmetric Field
Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Generalizations Of The Notion Of “Symmetry”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
The Space Of Quantum Field Theories And The Renormalization Group . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Fundamental Formulation Of Non-Lagrangian Superconformal Field Theories . . . . . .
10
2.8
Nonperturbative Eﬀects, Resurgence, Stokes Phenomena, And Exact WKB Methods . .
10
2.9
Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
String Theory And M-Theory
13
3.1
What Is The Deﬁnition Of String Theory And M-Theory? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Topological String Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
String Perturbation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
LEET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Noncommutative Spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Anomalies
15
4.1
Anomaly Cancellation In String Compactiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Global Anomalies In 6d Supergravity Theories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Anomalies And Invertible Field Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Anomalies And Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1

5
Mathematics Resulting From Holography And Quantum Gravity
17
5.1
General Quantum Gravity Conjectures With Precise Mathematical Consequences . . . .
18
5.2
Holography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Interactions With Number Theory
20
6.1
Automorphic Forms And Partition Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Generalizations Of Automorphy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Geometric Langlands Program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.4
Attractors And Arithmetic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.5
Other Directions Relating Number Theory And String Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Interactions With Condensed Matter Physics
26
8
Connections To Geometry And Low-Dimensional Topology
28
8.1
Two-Dimensions: Moduli Spaces Of Curves And Hurwitz Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2
Knots, Links, And Three-Manifold Invariants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.3
QFT And Four-Manifold Invariants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8.4
Hyperk¨ahler and Quaternionic K¨ahler Geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
9
Geometrization Of Quantum Field Theory
33
9.1
Geometric Classiﬁcation of Superconformal Field Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9.1.1
6d SCFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.1.2
5d SCFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.1.3
Moduli Spaces of Theories with 8 Supercharges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9.1.4
Generalized Symmetries and Anomaly Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9.2
Manifolds with Exceptional Holonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9.3
Dualities Across Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
9.4
Holography And Classiﬁcation of QFTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
10 Some Important Topics In Physical Mathematics Not Covered Here
43
11 Acknowledgements
43
1
General Remarks
At the dawn of the scientiﬁc revolution Galileo wrote that the book of nature is written in the language
of mathematics [2, 3].
That insight continues to illuminate the pursuit of science to this day. As
physics progresses in its quest to understand the most fundamental laws of nature the mathematics
in use does not remain static. It is, rather, cumulative. Moreover, as stressed by both Einstein [4]
and Dirac [5], it becomes more sophisticated and more abstract. The history of the relation of physics
and mathematics teaches us that, very often, great advances in physics are accompanied by profound
innovations in mathematics, and vice versa. The past ﬁfty years have been a watershed moment in
this venerable dialogue between physics and mathematics. Astonishing advances in physics have led to
profound mathematical discoveries and conversely new areas of mathematics have been brought to bear
on attempts to understand some of the most basic questions about nature. There is a community of
scientists that places equal stress on both the applications to advances in mathematics along with the
drive to a deeper understanding of nature. A good name for the enterprise pursued by this community
is “physical mathematics.” The subject continues to be very active and vibrant. Foundations are
becoming ﬁrmer and some participants are thrusting into exciting new territory.
This broad overview is meant to accompany the Snowmass whitepaper on physical mathematics [1]
We will attempt to indicate some of the promising areas for future research along these lines, while
also recalling some older promising but recently untrodden paths. While many topics of interest are
covered here the authors are keenly aware that there are a large number of important topics, quite
relevant to current research in physical mathematics, which have been omitted. Some, but not all, of
these are addressed in other Snowmass documents. And then, there are the unknown unknowns: It
must be borne in mind that in research the greatest treasures are often unforeseen, and we expect that
some of the future paths indicated here will lead to unexpected and unanticipated new directions.
2

There are several other overviews of physical mathematics, or physmatics, as it is sometimes called
to which we draw the reader’s attention. These include [6–15]. In addition two ongoing world-wide
seminar series [16,17], as well as the annual international String-Math conferences, cover many topics
discussed herein and give an excellent snapshot of some of the most interesting current research topics.
The plan of this paper is as follows: Section 2 is a discussion of Quantum Field Theory (QFT). It
begins with a summary of attempts to give a general deﬁnition of what QFT is and covers some topics
in topological QFT. It also covers new algebraic structures and new notions of symmetries in QFT,
along with updates on resurgence. Complementing this, section 3 concerns some of the fundamental
questions relating to string theory and M-theory, and their mathematical foundation. Much recent
progress has been made in the study of anomalies, which are the topic of section 4, which addresses
both anomalies in a general QFT setting, as well as anomaly cancellation in string theory.
The
quantum consistency of string theory vacua plays another central role in section 5, where we discuss
some speciﬁc and concrete mathematical problems connected to general issues in quantum gravity
such as holography as well as certain aspects of the so-called “swampland program”. Section 6 touches
on some of the many interactions between string theory, QFT, and certain aspects of number theory.
Section 7 is an all-too-brief hint of some of the many and profound connections to condensed matter
physics. Geometry and topology provide a large set of connections to QFT and string theory and are
the topic of sections 8 and 9, where we discuss the relation between geometric invariants and QFTs, as
well as the geometrization program of QFTs, and superconformal ﬁeld theories (SCFTs), respectively.
A former section of this panorama has evolved into a separate publication [18]. A partial list of topics
to be covered in [18] is given in section 10.
2
Quantum Field Theory
The lingua franca of physical mathematics is quantum ﬁeld theory. There are many dialects of quantum
ﬁeld theory, and altogether, quantum ﬁeld theory is perhaps one of the most spectacularly success-
ful frameworks for describing nature in the history of science. Yet many physicists—and most (all?)
mathematicians—feel that we still lack a truly satisfactory and universally applicable deﬁnition. There-
fore, it is a major open question to ﬁnd an axiom system for quantum ﬁeld theory that adequately
captures the astonishing range of phenomena, both physical and mathematical, that it describes.
2.1
Approaches To Deﬁning Quantum Field Theory
Axiom systems for quantum mechanics date from the late 1920s and 1930s. The Dirac-von Neumann
axioms [19–21] start with a complex separable Hilbert space H and deﬁne states and observables in
terms of H . Time evolution is a unitary 1-parameter group acting on H generated by a self-adjoint
operator, the Hamiltonian. An alternative set of axioms for algebraic quantum mechanics was put forth
by von Neumann and Irving Segal [22]. Here one focuses on observables, which form a C∗-algebra A.
States are then positive unital functionals A →C. These frameworks for quantum mechanics are
mathematically rigorous, and in turn quantum mechanics was a main impetus for the development of
much of this mathematics, such as the theory of operators.
Quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) has long resisted such a clean mathematical treatment. There are,
of course, several traditional approaches in the physics literature. These include: perturbing away
from free ﬁeld theories, which can be deﬁned via an action principle; and lattice theories, which are
particularly well-suited to computations at strong coupling. Renormalization theory is a key ingredient
in all of these frameworks. In this section we focus on mathematical axiom systems for QFT. We
remark that each known approach to QFT has important limitations. For essays on general issues at
the foundations of QFT, see [23].
The ﬁrst attempts at an axiomatic formulation of QFT take place in ﬂat Minkowski spacetime M.
The Wightman axioms [24] postulate a unitary representation of the Poincar´e group on a Hilbert
space H as well as a ﬁeld map which assigns (possibly unbounded) operators on H to test functions
on M. Roughly, these axioms specialize to the Dirac-von Neumann axioms in case dim M = 1. The
alternative Haag-Kastler axioms [25] for QFT on M are in the spirit of algebraic quantum mechanics.
They assign a C∗-algebra A(U) (of observables) to each open subset U ⊂M with compact closure,
compatibly with the Poincar´e group and causality. These axiom systems—though incomplete and not
universally applicable—are the foundation and inspiration for much mathematical work in QFT.
3

Before we turn to modern axiom systems for QFT, we list some of the key issues one confronts in
formulating axioms:
1. Some QFT’s have no action principle and no obvious “fundamental” degrees of freedom.
2. Some QFT’s have many action principles, with completely diﬀerent “fundamental” degrees of
freedom.
3. Even when there is an action principle, interacting QFT’s with running coupling constants are
not clearly and rigorously mathematically deﬁned.
4. S-matrix amplitudes exhibit remarkable properties making startling connections to mathematical
ﬁelds not traditionally related to physics. Moreover, they encode physical properties such as
locality in highly nontrivial ways.
5. The universe of “theories” is not a disjoint union of string theory and QFT. From AdS/CFT we
believe that some ﬁeld theories are equivalent to string theories. On the other hand, there are
other “theories,” which are neither local quantum ﬁeld theories nor traditional string theories
(with gravity).
6. Many ﬁeld theoretic phenomena have geometrical reformulations, reducing highly nontrivial facts
of ﬁeld theory to simple geometrical constructions. See section 9 for more discussion.
7. A fully local theory should associate physical quantities to subspaces of all codimension and have
coherent gluing rules for gluing of such subspaces.
8. Even when there is an action principle, a QFT is not completely deﬁned by an action and a list
of local operators. One must include (higher categories of) defects of all dimensions, in accord
with the previous point.
In the mid 1980’s Graeme Segal introduced a novel axiom system for two-dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory [26]. In this telling a ﬁeld theory is a functorial assignment of a topological vector space to
a circle and of a trace class (nuclear) linear map to a 2-dimensional bordism endowed with a conformal
structure. In brief: a 2d conformal ﬁeld theory is a linear representation of the bordism category of
Riemann surfaces. As opposed to the Wightman axioms, which model QFT on ﬂat Minkowski space-
time, the Segal axioms model Wick-rotated QFT on compact Riemannian manifolds. Signiﬁcantly,
while they were originally developed for two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theories, the Segal axioms
are now understood to apply to quantum ﬁeld theories in all dimensions. For example, they apply
to topological ﬁeld theory, where the explicit relationship to classical bordism was ﬂagged by Michael
Atiyah [27]. Within the past year Segal, together with Maxim Kontsevich, posted a preprint [28] which
takes up the axiom system in the general QFT framework. Furthermore, they prove an analog of the
Osterwalder-Schrader theorem: they construct a QFT on globally hyperbolic Lorentz manifolds from
a QFT on Riemannian manifolds in which positivity of energy is encoded by having the theory deﬁned
on manifolds with certain complex metrics. The Segal axioms have provided an inroad into QFT for
mathematicians of all stripes. Much remains to investigate, particularly analytic aspects, and this
is a fertile ground for future investment. An interesting application of some observations of [28] to
quantum gravity appeared in [29].
In the past decade Kevin Costello and Owen Gwilliam developed an axiom system for Wick-rotated
QFT which is an analog of the Haag-Kastler axioms in ﬂat Minkowski spacetime [30,31]. They deﬁne
factorization algebras on smooth manifolds, modeled after the chiral algebras of Beilinson-Drinfeld [32].
The latter were motivated by two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory, whereas the former are meant
to apply to QFT in all dimensions. A factorization algebra F on a smooth manifold M assigns a chain
complex F(U) to each open subset U ⊂M, and the assignment satisﬁes a multiplicative version of
duals to the usual sheaf axioms (i.e., it satisﬁes a multiplicative cosheaf axiom). Many examples have
been constructed using Costello’s previous work on perturbation theory. Here is a very small quirky
sample of applications of these ideas to physical theories: [33–39]. This framework has opened new
mathematical avenues into modern aspects of QFT, such as the AdS/CFT correspondence. Again
there is much for the future that is worthy of robust support.
For further discussion of axiomatic approaches to deﬁning QFT, together with an ample set of
references to the older literature, see the recent Snowmass whitepaper [40].
4

2.2
Topological Quantum Field Theory
From the mathematical point of view, the best established QFT’s are the topological quantum ﬁeld
theories (TQFT). These have been put on a ﬁrm footing and capture some of the essential aspects of
locality. One way of taking the idea of locality to its logical conclusion is the notion of a fully extended
(a.k.a.
“fully local”) TQFT based on symmetric monoidal n-categories, where n is the dimension
of spacetime in a physical theory [41–46]. In recent years there has been a vigorous development of
this topic and mathematicians have extended these ideas in very sophisticated ways; a small sample
is [47,48]. (There is a recent discussion of fully local non-topological ﬁeld theories in [49].)
Although the subject has matured, and the language of TQFT is a commonly used and powerful
tool in mathematics, there remain many important open problems in the subject.
Many bordism
categories of physical interest (e.g. including various kinds of tangential structures) remain relatively
unexplored. Other extensions under exploration include equivariant, nonunitary, and nonsemisimple
TQFT’s. The study of defects and boundary conditions has much future potential. TQFT’s have also
proven to be quite powerful in addressing questions about anomalies in ﬁeld theory and topological
phases of matter, and we will comment further on that below.
Many important classiﬁcation questions remain unanswered.
The classiﬁcation of deformation
types of invertible TQFT’s [50] gives some hope that further and more general classiﬁcation questions
are not completely out of reach. An example of a long-standing open question is the classiﬁcation of
3d unitary TQFT’s. An old conjecture [51] posits that they are all associated with 3d Chern-Simons-
Witten theory, once one has chosen a suitable level and compact gauge group. (Closely related to this,
the modular tensor categories (MTC’s) of rational conformal ﬁeld theories (RCFT’s) should all be built
by using the Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten model [52] using a small set of standard constructions.)
There are recent interesting challenges to this conjecture [53–56] which should be further investigated.
In particular, Teleman has shown that the Haagerup MTC cannot come from a Chern-Simons-Witten
theory with compact gauge group [57]. It is important to bear in mind here the relevance of the notion
of Witt equivalence [58, 59]. One can ask whether the Haagerup MTC’s are Witt equivalent to the
theory with a compact gauge group. 1
Ironically, the ﬁrst topological ﬁeld theory to be discovered, Donaldson-Witten theory [62], does
not obey the oﬃcial deﬁnition of a TQFT. There are diﬃculties making sense of the instanton Floer
theory on arbitrary 3-manifolds, and it is certainly not known how to deﬁne a fully extended TQFT
corresponding to the Donaldson invariants. (It certainly cannot be unitary [63] or semisimple.) In a
similar vein the GL-twisted N = 4 SYM [64] has been extensively developed and intensively studied,
but it is not known how to deﬁne the topological theory on arbitrary four-manifolds. Similar remarks
apply to three-dimensional Chern-Simons theories with noncompact gauge groups. These are examples
of theories that are only partially deﬁned, they have not been deﬁned as fully extended (a.k.a. fully
local) TQFTs. It is not known if a fully extended version exists, or if there are fundamental obstructions
to such an extension. Clearly, there remain fundamental aspects to be understood even in some of the
most basic examples of what physicists regard as topological quantum ﬁeld theory.
There are other examples of such partially deﬁned TQFT’s where, in fact, we do know of deforma-
tions or regularizations that still lead to tractable theories. One good example is a two dimensional
relative of Donaldson theory, the topological Yang-Mills theory in two dimensions. It has an inﬁ-
nite set of states, the torus partition function is divergent and only a restricted set of correlation
functions makes sense. However, it has several well-known regularizations: the gauged G/G WZW
theory [65–67], and a ﬁnite coupling two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory [68, 69]. The latter is not,
strictly speaking, a topological theory, as it depends on a choice of a measure, and the Wilson loop
observables, although quite acceptable in the Yang-Mills theory, are not, strictly speaking, topological
- they only depend on the areas of the components of the surface on the complement of the Wilson
lines [70, 71].
Another interesting “deformation” is q-deformed 2d YM and further generalizations
which have shown up in a variety of contexts [72–76].
1Witt equivalence has recently been ﬁnding physical applications of fusion and modular categories. See, for example
[60] where it is used to discuss the existence of topological boundary conditions in three-dimensional topological theories
or [61] where it is applied to the question of time-reversal symmetry in 3d Chern-Simons theory.
5

2.3
Algebraic Structures In Quantum Field Theory
2.3.1
Algebraic Structures Related To Operator Product Algebras
The notion of an operator product expansion indicates that algebraic structures of some sort play a
fundamental role in quantum ﬁeld theory. This notion has been formalized and generalized in many
ingenious ways and the investigation of algebraic structures in QFT has been a dominant and enduring
theme of research and promises to continue being an important topic.
The study of two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory led to the mathematical study of vertex opera-
tor algebras (see e.g. [77–79]), a notion with a clear mathematical deﬁnition which nicely captures and
makes precise constructions which had previously been used in the physics literature. Today, vertex
operator algebra (VOA) theory is a well-established topic of mathematics but many interesting open
problems remain in this ﬁeld. There is still much to learn about the representation categories of VOA’s.
For example, one natural question is whether there is an analog of Tannaka-Krein reconstruction. In
another direction, one of the beautiful recent results in traditional VOA theory is a complete classi-
ﬁcation of the holomorphic VOAs of central charge 24 [80–83]. Another major gap in our knowledge
is any semblance of a classiﬁcation of holomorphic vertex operator algebras of central charge greater
than 24. This appears to be a very challenging problem, even more challenging than ﬁnding a useful
classiﬁcation of even unimodular lattices. Virtually nothing is known about what the general holomor-
phic CFT looks like. It is natural to speculate that there is an analog of the Smith-Minkowski-Siegel
mass formula for holomorphic CFTs, but, so far as we know, no work on this idea has been published.
Remarkably, VOA’s and structures similar to VOA’s of various kinds have been discovered in a wide
variety of new contexts in higher dimensional QFT. One generalization of the subject of vertex operator
algebras is the entire framework of factorization algebras [30], as discussed in §2.1. (These generalize
the Ed algebras relevant to TQFT.) An important open problem is to connect these ideas to more
traditional ideas of quantum ﬁeld theory based on Wightman and Haag-Kastler axioms. The work [84]
discusses the relation between VOA and the Haag-Kastler axioms, and should provide a ﬁrst step in
this direction. It would also be important to understand better the relation to the recent work [28].
Another rich source of nontrivial algebraic structures are the supersymmetric theories discussed in the
next section.
2.3.2
Algebraic Structures Associated With Supersymmetric Sectors And BPS States
Using supersymmetry and defects one can deﬁne important subsectors of the full operator product
algebra of certain quantum ﬁeld theories.
This has been done with great success in the past ten
years. Examples include the chiral algebras appearing in d = 4, N = 2 supersymmetric ﬁeld theories
[85–87]. Another beautiful example are the algebraic structures associated with holomorphic sectors
of supersymmetric theories [88,89], and with hybrid holomorphic-topological twists of supersymmetric
theories with extended supersymmetry [72,90,91]. This is currently a very active direction of research
with many potential applications [36,92–96].
Another class of algebraic structures are the generalizations of Gerstenhaber algebras that appear in
TQFT’s of cohomological type such as those studied in [97–99], leading to connections to BV algebras
and homotopical algebras.
Closely related to the above are algebraic structures associated to BPS states. One early hint that
spaces of BPS states should have an interesting algebra-like structure was inspired by the work of
Nakajima [100, 101] and is described in [102]. This led to various proposals for algebraic structures
associated to BPS states in [103–106]. One curious application of these ideas is a very suggestive
approach to the important problem of ﬁnding a conceptual basis for understanding the role of genus zero
groups in monstrous moonshine [107–109]. More recently, the subject of quiver algebras associated to
BPS states on D-branes has just begun to be developed [110–114], giving a new physical interpretation
of some old constructions of Nakajima and Kontsevich-Soibelman with many promising directions for
generalizations and further development.
In a parallel development, an in-depth study of the mathematical structures of BPS states in two-
dimensional QFT with (2, 2) supersymmetry has revealed a very rich mathematical structure similar
to, but diﬀerent from, topological string theory. This involves the 2-category of theories, interfaces,
and boundary-condition-changing operators, and involves various constructions in homotopical algebra
[115–119].
For yet another set of parallel developments see the remarks at the end of the section
2.9. This structure was developed in an eﬀort to understand the “categoriﬁcation of wall-crossing
6

formulae.”
Indeed these papers have explained a categorical version of the 2d Cecotti-Vafa wall-
crossing formula [120,121], and of Stokes’ phenomenon in general. But the extension to four dimensions
has remained elusive and is an important open problem. In [117] the “web-formalism” of [115, 116]
was reinterpreted in terms of polygons. This led to a higher-dimensional generalization in terms of
polytopes. It might be very interesting to ﬁnd a physical interpretation of the higher-dimensional
version of the web-formalism developed in [117]. Many of the above developments were motivated - in
part - by the desire to ﬁnd a categoriﬁcation of the full 2d4d wall-crossing formula. This goal remains
elusive, and is surely a good direction for future research.
For a recent overview of L∞structures in ﬁeld theory see [122].
2.4
Classiﬁcation And Deeper Understanding Of New Classes Of Super-
symmetric Field Theories
A well-known and very important problem in physical mathematics is ﬁnding a satisfactory formulation
of the six-dimensional superconformal ﬁeld theories with (2, 0) supersymmetry. Perhaps it should be
formulated axiomatically (an attempt was made in section 6 of [123]).
Or perhaps there is some
formulation in terms of some local degrees of freedom, perhaps by making sense of a “nonabelian
2-form gauge potential.” There are many attempts in the literature taking the latter approach. For
two examples see [124–126] and [127–130]. String theory constructions, which led to the discovery of
these theories [131–133], strongly indicate we know what the examples are: The basic components
are made of “Abelian” theories, and nonabelian theories classifed by an ADE classiﬁcation.
Just
assuming the theories exist has led to a host of very fruitful mathematical constructions shedding light
on hyperk¨ahler geometry, Hitchin systems, exact WKB theory, and low dimensional topology, among
other things.
One important aspect of the 6d theories are the various supersymmetric defects they possess.
Among these the half-supersymmetric codimension two defects are among the most important. Their
basic classiﬁcation has been investigated in, for examples, [134–136]. These defects have an interesting
operator product structure whose “structure constants” are themselves four-dimensional quantum ﬁeld
theories [137]. Clearly they deserve continued study.
It would also be of great interest to understand the full range of possibilities and map out the
geography of four-dimensional theories with N = 2 supersymmetry. An overview of the current status
is provided in the Snowmass paper [138]. There are three broad classes of known theories:
1. One class of such theories have Lagrangians N = 2 based on semi-simple Lie groups and hyper-
multiplets. All such UV-complete theories are classiﬁed in [139].
2. Another class (which partly overlaps with the previous one) are the theories obtained as limits
of ADE (0, 2) superconformal theories on spacetimes of the form C × R4 where C is a (possibly
punctured) curve. These are the class S theories [140–143]. (For some reviews see [123,144,145].)
3. Geometrically engineered theories and models engineered using brane constructions. For the
current status of these see section 9.
Within each of these classes quite a lot is known. Some of the Lagrangian theories can be realized
as the low energy limits of the theory on a stack of D3-branes probing an orbifold singularity, the
quiver gauge theories [146]. The requirements of asymptotic freedom constrains the choices of gauge
groups and matter multiplets of quiver theories. For example, if the gauge group is a product of
(special) unitary groups, then the only choices of quivers are the Dynkin diagrams of simple simply
laced Lie algebras or aﬃne Lie algebras.2 In the latter case the gauge group and matter content theory
is uniquely determined up to a single integer N. For such theories, possibly mass deformed in an
N = 2 supersymmetric way, the Seiberg-Witten geometry has been computed in [150] using the exact
quantum ﬁeld theory calculations performed using localization on a suitably (partly) compactiﬁed
moduli space of quiver instantons. The result of the limit shape calculation identiﬁes the Coulomb
branch with a base of an algebraic integrable system whose phase space is a moduli space of either the
ADE instantons of charge N on R2 × T 2, or the ADE monopoles with Dirac singularities on R2 × S1.
2One can have also a more exotic possibility of ﬁnding a Lagrangian description for class S theories which manifests
only N = 1 supersymmetry (see [147–149] for some examples). We will say more about this in Section 9.
7

(Two pedagogical reviews of limit shapes are [151,152].) In these results the charges are determined by
the ranks of gauge groups and the numbers of fundamental hypermultiplets. The results are in broad
agreement with earlier conjectures based on string theory considerations [153–155], although some of
the earlier conjectures require modiﬁcation. The theories with eight supercharges, appropriately lifted
to k + 4 dimensions on a spacetime of geometry R4 × T k lead to the moduli spaces of instantons
(monopoles) on R2−k × T 2+k (R2−k × T 1+k), respectively [150]. (In the lifted theories one can add
Chern-Simons couplings and/or encounter new anomalies.)
One might wonder if the problem simpliﬁes if one tries to classify theories with a large N limit
using the AdS/CFT correspondence. The aﬃne type quiver theories were previously studied, in the
large N limit, in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, in [156, 157], while the large N type
S-class theories were studied in [158].
(The holographic picture gives an interesting view on the
renormalization group ﬂow, which is sometimes possible, in the N = 2 case, to connect to the ﬁeld
theory computations [159]. This is a nice example of the geometrization of QFT discussed in more
detail in section 9 below.)
2.5
Generalizations Of The Notion Of “Symmetry”
Many of the most important developments in 20th century physics, including relativity, quantum
mechanics, and gauge theory make fundamental use of the notion of symmetry. In recent decades
the notion of symmetry has been further enhanced and extended and applied in surprising new ways.
Further generalizations of symmetry will surely be a theme for several years to come.
One example of an important new notion is that of “generalized p-form symmetries.” In various
forms these have been used for a long time. For example the use of “center symmetry” played an
important role in the early studies of phases in nonabelian gauge theories [160, 161]. In [162] they
played an important role in deﬁning ﬂux sectors in arbitrary Abelian gauge theories (including self-
dual theories) based on generalized cohomology theories. In an important advance, “generalized p-form
global symmetry” was formulated in terms of topological defect operators [163] where these defect
operators were put to very good use. In the case of two-dimensional rational conformal ﬁeld theories,
defects as symmetries—and duality defects—appeared a decade earlier in [164]. A hint on generalized
symmetry and topology also appeared in [165,166]. New insights into instanton eﬀects, even in textbook
examples of quantum mechanics were found and striking impliciations for QCD at θ = π were pointed
out [167]. Since then there has been widespread use of such generalized symmetries. Combined with
the theory of anomalies striking applications have been made to determine dynamics of nontrivial
theories [168–175]. Motivated, in part, by these developments there has been some exploration into
the notion of “two-group symmetries” [176,177] and these works clearly point the way to potentially
interesting future developments.
Further developments along these lines have tried to generalize even further the notion of symmetry
in terms of “categorical symmetries” and “noninvertible symmetries.” Algebras of symmetries are
common in both mathematics and quantum theory, and algebras include noninvertible elements. In
mathematics various categoriﬁed generalizations of algebras are being developed. For example, tensor
categories, for which there is a robust theory [178], are a once-categoriﬁed version of an algebra, and
this higher algebra underlies much research on Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten and Turaev-Viro models.
There are also higher categorical versions, including “En-algebras,” which enter topological ﬁeld theory
and are destined to ﬁnd applications beyond the topological case. The whole subject and its application
to physics is under active development. Certainly there is no settled deﬁnition of what “categorical
symmetry” should mean in ﬁeld theory. Roughly speaking, a categorical symmetry involves topological
defects with sums of simple objects in their fusion rules (in a semisimple setting) and couplings of
n-dimensional theories to n + 1-dimensional topological ﬁeld theories.
A Simons Collaboration is
devoted to exploring these ideas further [179]. Some of the recent developments are summarized in
the Snowmass contribution [180]. From a mathematical point of view the emergence of categorical
structures in QFT is particularly noteworthy, with most recent developments in this direction in
[181–190]. An in depth discussion of generalized categorical symmetries in the context of QFTs, string
theory and holography can be found in sections 2.9 and 9. Although not phrased as a “symmetry”
very closely related ideas had been previously explored in [191–193].
In another direction, the papers [194–196] have explored deeply the role of symmetry in black hole
physics, quantum gravity and the AdS/CFT correspondence. It would be interesting to combine the
ideas of these papers with some of the emerging ideas on global categorical symmetry. Some early
8

developments in this direction can be found in [197] and in holography/string theory in [198,199]. See
also section 2.9.
Another very important emerging set of ideas concerns asymptotic symmetries in gauge theories.
These were, indeed the basis for an early version of the AdS/CFT conjecture [200] and recently they
have been much studied in the context of BMS symmetries and the infrared structure of massless gauge
theories [201]. Related ideas concerning a hypothetical “celestial conformal ﬁeld theory” holographi-
cally dual to gravity in ﬂat space have been discussed in a number of papers [202]. The existence of
such a celestial conformal ﬁeld theory would be quite remarkable since it is far from obvious why the
Mellin transforms of scattering amplitudes should behave like the correlators of a local quantum ﬁeld
theory.
Finally, the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism gives yet another, perhaps not unrelated, generalization
of symmetry. The conventional Lie algebraic symmetry corresponds to a homomorphism V from some
Lie algebra g to the algebra V ect(M) of vector ﬁelds on some (super)manifold, e.g. a space of ﬁelds
(more generally, the space of ﬁelds and anti-ﬁelds in the BV sense). The classical action S0, which is a
function on M is invariant under the V(g)-action. It means that it can be extended to a function S on
M ×g∗⊕Πg in such a way, that the g∗dependence of S is linear (Πg-dependence is at most quadratic),
and S solves the classical master equation {S, S} = 0. The extension of S0 to S corresponds to the
familiar BRST formalism (except that BV allows for both gauged and global symmetries to be treated
in a similar way). The L∞-symmetry is a non-linear formal generalization of this construction, where
the requirement of linearity in anti-ﬁelds for ghosts is dropped. The need for such generalization is
provided by the renormalization group, as integrating out the charged degrees of freedom, produces
the above-mentioned non-linear terms, 3. For related ideas see [203].
2.6
The Space Of Quantum Field Theories And The Renormalization Group
It has been noted on many occasions that one of the main barriers to a more productive dialogue
between physicists and mathematicians is a rigorous understanding of scale transformations and the
renormalization group. Some important progress - in the perturbative regime - was made in [204],
which makes essential use of the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism. Another, quite diﬀerent approach to
renormalization theory makes use of ideas of noncommutative geometry, and phrases renormalization
in terms of a Birkhoﬀfactorization problem in a suitable Hopf algebra [205–207].
In spite of these and other approaches, a full nonperturbative treatment remains open. Indeed, it
is the subject of one of the Clay Millenium Problems.
Although we do not have a completely satisfactory and universal deﬁnition of what should be meant
by a “quantum ﬁeld theory,” it might not be too early to ask what can reasonably be said about the
full space of quantum ﬁeld theories - although it must be admitted that there is no really rigorous
deﬁnition of the “space of quantum ﬁeld theories”. Nevertheless, physicists have some intuitive pictures
based on Wilsonian ideas and the crucial concept of renormalization group ﬂow.
While understanding the space of 1d QFT’s presents some interesting issues the ﬁrst really non-
trivial case is the case of two-dimensions. This has long been recognized as a very important question
for fundamental physics [208,209]. Here there are well-known and profound results on renormalization
group ﬂow relating it to Einstein’s equations [210, 211]. In addition to this there is the remarkable
Zamolodchikov c-theorem [212]. An important analog appears in the case of conformal ﬁeld theories
with a non-conformal boundary theory [213–215]. This progress grew out of an interesting approach
to background-independent string ﬁeld theory [214, 216–218]. In this approach one considers a two
dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory on a surface with boundary. The two-dimensional “bulk” is confor-
mal but one allows boundary operators and boundary conditions that break the conformal invariance.
The RG does not change the conformal ﬁeld theory in the “bulk” but does alter the boundary con-
ditions. The “space” of such theories (with a ﬁxed conformal theory in the two-dimensional bulk)
is an interesting example of a space of theories might be more tractable than the general case of all
two-dimensional theories. It is possible one can say something about the space of components of such
a “space of quantum ﬁeld theories” using ideas from K-theory, an idea which has not been very deeply
explored, although it was mentioned in [219].
In the mathematical realm a very interesting proposal for a space of 2d quantum ﬁeld theories with
(0, 1) supersymmetry was made by Stolz and Teichner [220, 221]. The Stolz-Teichner program grew
3We thank A. Losev for illuminating discussions on this point
9

out of attempts to extend the ideas of Graeme Segal on elliptic cohomology to a theory conjecturally
equivalent to the theory of topological modular forms. The subject has recently gotten a big boost
from several recent works applying it to interesting questions in quantum ﬁeld theory [222–224] and
anomaly cancellation in heterotic string theory [225–227]. There is clearly a lot more to be learned
in this subject. For example, the generalized cohomology theory of topological modular forms (tmf)
has a 576-fold periodicity, analogous to the 8-fold periodicity of Cliﬀord algebras and real K-theory.
A clear physical explanation of this remarkable aspect of tmf might be highly interesting.
Moving on to higher dimensions, there are conjectural analogs of the Zamolodchikov theorem, and
there has been remarkable progress on this topic [228, 229]. Moreover it is related to questions of
quantum information theory [230–234]. Some bold conjectures about the global nature of the space
of conformal ﬁeld theories were made by Seiberg in [235]. It remains a challenge to see of any of the
above ideas can shed light on Seiberg’s conjectures.
Some of the issues here are closely related to those touched on in the condensed matter theory
section 7.
2.7
Fundamental Formulation Of Non-Lagrangian Superconformal Field
Theories
As was mentioned above, an important long standing open problem is the formulation of the six-
dimensional superconformal ﬁeld theories with (2, 0) supersymmetry. A key obstacle here is the proper
understanding of the formulation of self-dual theories. Note that these include the important sub-case
of chiral scalar ﬁelds in 1 + 1 dimensions. The subject has a long and extensive history.
Even the free self-dual Abelian theories - often dismissed as trivial - have not received a complete
and rigorous formulation as fully local (aka fully extended) ﬁeld theories. There is a long history of
attempts to write action principles for these theories. See [236–240] and the many references therein.
There is still no universally agreed-upon approach to deﬁning these theories via an action principle.
Moreover, even in the Abelian case there are many subtle topological issues some of which are discussed
in [162,238,239,241–246]. Finding a complete and deﬁnitive treatment of self-dual Abelian gauge ﬁelds
based on an arbitrary self-dual generalized cohomology theory remains an important open problem.
These are free theories, so, although the topic is subtle and diﬃcult, there is no insuperable obstacle to
giving such a treatment. And there is really no excuse for not doing so. To illustrate the incompleteness
of our understanding, we remark that the anomaly theory of the basic self-dual ﬁeld is constructed
in [244], where an integral lift of the middle Wu class is used. We inquire: What are the physical
consequences of this choice? For example, dimensional reduction of the 6-dimensional self-dual ﬁeld
to 4 dimensions yields Maxwell theory, and we can ask how this choice manifests there.
For generic choices of compactiﬁcation parameters the class S theories [140–143] do not possess
a known Lagrangian description. On the other hand, the semi-simple gauge group Lagrangians with
manifest N = 2 supersymmetry and hypermultiplet matter, describing an interacting SCFT are classi-
ﬁed in [139]. An interesting question is to understand whether Lagrangians manifesting less symmetry
can be constructed which will ﬂow to a generic N = 2 theory, i.e. a class S theory. This question can
be generalized to whether any conceivable SCFT has a description in terms of weakly coupled ﬁelds.
The reader will ﬁnd more on this question in section 9.
2.8
Nonperturbative Eﬀects, Resurgence, Stokes Phenomena, And Exact
WKB Methods
If QFT is understood in terms of the Feynman path integral, with Planck constant ℏmeasuring the
strength of the action in the exponential, the behavior of physical quantities as analytic functions of
ℏshould be at least as complicated as that of an exponential integral. In a nice analytic situation the
latter is a vector-valued function of parameters, the basis being given by the periods of the correspond-
ing form over the submanifolds known as Lefschetz thimbles. A critical point of the action may be in
the complex domain. The conventional perturbative expansion takes into account one, typically real,
classical solution, i.e. the one that asymptotes to some number of in-coming and out-going particles.
The sum of loop corrections almost never converges, e.g. by Dyson’s argument [247].
However, this divergence is already present in ﬁnite dimensional exponential integrals, so one can
try to isolate the divergence of perturbative expansion of an exponential integral within that of a path
10

integral. So far this wish was partly granted. One widely used technique is Borel resummation, which
is a way to trade the factorially growing sum over diagrams for an exponential integral of a rational
form. For some nice expository accounts of these ideas see [248–250].
The development of this idea leads to the notion of a trans-series and resurgence, see [251–255],
and [256] for a modern review. One class of problems on which these methods were tested since the
mid-1970’s 4, are the spectra of the one-dimensional Schr¨odinger operators −∂2
q +U(q). The convenient
choices of the potentials U(q) are polynomials in q (see [257] for a beautiful discussion).
The singularities of the Borel transform are, in ﬁnite dimensional examples, related to the critical
points of the action, which, in turn, are telling us about the possible Lefschetz thimbles. To some
extent this is conﬁrmed in Lipatov’s method of evaluating large order perturbative contributions by
a saddle point method [258]. However, it has been argued [259] there are singularities on the Borel
plane not attributed to the instantons of [258]. Very little is known about these singularities - which
are sometimes referred to as renormalons. If a semiclassical approach is valid then it is possible that
the missing critical points can be found in the properly understood complexiﬁcation of the space of
ﬁelds [260, 261]. The practitioners are widely spread across the spectrum of optimism on this issue.
For example it is not clear if renormalons can be approached semiclassically, as has been stressed by
M. Mari˜no.
The plethora of exact computations made available by localization in supersymmetric gauge the-
ories and topological strings, supplemented with dualities, mapping ℏto some geometric parameters,
gives a huge playground for investigations of these ideas, including the ill-understood “instanton-
fractionalization” [262,263], sometimes used to explain the renormalons. (It would be desirable if the
computations of [262] could be phrased in a controlled truncation to a quantum mechanical problem.)
It is also of interest to consider non-supersymmetric, asymptotically free, integrable theories in two
dimensions such as O(n) sigma models, the Gross-Neveu, model and so forth in this context. Recent
results in this area [264] indicate that some standard lore about renormalons needs to be revised.
The standard WKB method can be enhanced to give exact results in nontrivial quantum systems
using ideas explored some years ago in [257, 265]. Again, embedding quantum systems in the super-
symmetric context e.g. via Bethe/gauge correspondence gains some mileage. For example, the exact
quantization conditions [266] were related [267, 268] to equations [269] describing the vacua of the
Ω-deformed four dimensional S-class N = 2 theories, in the NRS coordinates5 on the moduli space
MC of ﬂat SL(2, C)-connections, cf. [271].
In an independent line of development, the study of wall-crossing and the counting of BPS states
led to a new mathematical object, known as spectral networks [272] which generalizes exact WKB
theory and leads to explicit constructions of BPS degeneracies of class S theories, as well as Darboux
coordinates on moduli spaces of ﬂat connections. These Darboux coordinates sometimes coincide with
Fock-Goncharov and other cluster coordinates. The canonical line bundle on the spectral curve admits
a ﬂat connection whose holonomy provides these coordinates, which are thereby closely related to (and
generalize) Voros symbols. Spectral networks provide the data to give a converse construction, namely
a construction of the corresponding nonabelian ﬂat connection from a ﬂat connection on the spectral
cover. These aspects of exact WKB theory were studied in [141,272–275], and more generally in [276].
The results of this development (in particular through the “conformal limit and the relation to
opers” [277,278]) have implications beyond that of supersymmetric ﬁeld theory, leading to new insights
in ordinary diﬀerential equations, such as the Schr¨odinger equation. See [279] for a recent discussion.
Very recently the Borel summability of the WKB series in many quantum problems has been rigorously
established [280].
The relation between Abelian and Nonabelian connections given by spectral networks has a q-
deformed analog [281,282] which has been beautifully developed and extended in the recent works [283–
285]. This subject should be further developed and should lead to useful insights about quantization
of character varieties, connecting to the works [286–288] on quantum cluster varieties on the one hand,
and the two [289, 290] and four dimensional [291] approaches to quantization of these spaces, on the
other. There are also intriguing recent math results on the representation theory of Skein modules [292]
which deserve a physical explanation.
4In works of e.g. Balian–Bloch, Dingle, Leray, Sibuya, Zinn-Justin.
5Sometimes called the complexiﬁed Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates in the literature, the NRS atlas [270] of Darboux
coordinates interpolates between Fenchel-Nielsen, Goldman, Kapovich-Milson, and Klyachko coordinate systems on
various real slices and tropical limits of MC.
They can also be viewed as a generalized system of Fock-Goncharov
coordinates, associated to laminations with closed orbits.
11

The work of [115,118] can be interpreted as a categoriﬁcation of Stokes phenomenon: The so-called
S-walls are Stokes’ lines. A construction of categoriﬁed parallel transport of a ﬂat connection was
given and the categoriﬁed S-wall factors in section 7.6 of [115] are categoriﬁed Stokes’ factors. This
categoriﬁcation of exact WKB theory should be developed further.
Considerations involving Stokes phenomena have also lead to striking results about 3-manifold
topology in the context of complex Chern-Simons theory [250,293,294]. See section 8.2 below for more
discussion about the relation to the topology of three-manifolds and links.
2.9
Defects
Traditional quantum ﬁeld theory has been concerned with correlation functions of local operators.
However, going back to the work of Wilson on lattice gauge theory it has been known that extended
“operators” such as Wilson lines (the trace of the holonomy of a gauge ﬁeld in a representation) play an
important role in formulations and explorations of ﬁeld theory. These “operators” are more properly
understood as “defects,” couplings of a quantum ﬁeld theory to a lower-dimensional theory of ﬁelds
localized on a submanifold of spacetime. Having phrased things that way, a host of generalizations
emerge. Moreover, the concept of defects can be further broadened to include other local objects, and
extended operators, deﬁned by allowing singular behavior of ﬁelds in the neighborhood of speciﬁed
subvarieites. In this way one can include disorder operators, ’t Hooft lines and other generalizations
such as surface defects, and higher dimensional defects. See [295] for one careful attempt to give a
deﬁnition of supersymmetric defect lines (’t Hooft-Wilson lines) in N = 4 SYM. Likewise, a surface
defect in a four-dimensional gauge theory with a gauge group G could be described as a coupling of a
two dimensional sigma model having G as a global symmetry, to the gauge ﬁelds propagating in the
ambient space, but pulled back to the surface. (But not all surface defects can be described in this
way.) See [103,296–302] for a small sampling of studies and reviews of surface defects.
Anton Kapustin, in his talk [303, §2] at the 2010 International Congress of Mathematicians, clariﬁed
the relationship between defects and extended ﬁeld theory. We remark that extended ﬁeld theory is
most developed for topological ﬁeld theories, as in section 2.2, but one can also contemplate extended
general quantum ﬁeld theories as well. Thus for an n-dimensional Wick-rotated ﬁeld theory F, the
value F(Y ) on a closed Riemannian (n−1)-manifold Y is a (topological) vector space, the value F(Z)
on a closed Riemannian (n −2)-manifold Z is a linear category (presumably with topology), etc.
Suppose X is an n-dimensional Riemannian manifold—a Wick-rotated spacetime—and W ⊂X is a 1-
dimensional submanifold, thought of as the worldline of a particle. The link of W ⊂X is a sphere Sn−2,
and defects supported on W are labeled by objects in the category F(Sn−2). More precisely, we should
take a limit as the radius of the linking sphere shrinks to zero. These ideas extend to submanifolds
in X of lower codimension, to which the theory F associates higher categories. Furthermore, one can
extend to submanifolds with boundaries and corners and other singularities. One important aspect to
understand better is the data on which a defect depends. As a very simple example, the Wilson lines
in 3d Chern-Simons theory depend on a framing of the normal bundle. This can be seen quite clearly
in the quantum correlators of the Wilson line defects. The analogous data for other defects in most
contexts has not been properly investigated.
In some situations, e.g. with topological defects, or with supersymmetric defects one can start
to discuss their operator products.
From the extended ﬁeld theory point of view, these products
are based on the Ek-algebra structure of the sphere Sk−1 in the bordism category. Here again, the
framing data is not usually mentioned, but the OPE of Wilson line defects does depend on such
data [304].
The products of line defects in Chern-Simons theory are closely related to the fusion
rules of anyons (and the framing data detects their spin). OPE’s of line defects have also played an
important role in the geometric Langlands program [64]. Recently there have been some investigations
into the “operator product expansions” of surface defects [115] and interfaces [305], ﬁnding interesting
relations to homotopy algebra and inﬁnite-dimensional quantum algebras. It seems clear that there is
a rich mathematical structure to be discovered here.
In the recent literature there has been much discussion of “non-invertible defects” and their relations
to “non-invertible symmetries.” Important examples of such noninvertible defects are defects which
implement Kramers-Wannier-like dualities in two and higher dimensions. For some recent progress
and the ﬁrst construction of non-invertible symmetries in d > 3 dimensional QFTs see [186,306,307].
Many of these are related to so-called condensation defects, which can be understood as gauging of a
(higher-form) symmetry on a defect, as opposed to the full theory, [187,188,308–311]. The symmetry
12

structure that emerges from these non-invertible defects should naturally ﬁt into the structure of higher
fusion categories (for fusion 2-categories see [312]) and has become a very interactive area of exchange
between mathematics and physics, see [186–188,190] for some recent progress on formulating symmetry
structures in terms of higher-categories.
In lower dimensions the categorical structure was exploited successfully and numerous physically
interesting results can be derived by utilizing non-invertible symmetries [115,182,184,189,192,313–318].
In d = 4 some examples have emerged studying e.g. constraints on pion decays from non-invertible
symmetries [319,320], and the characterization of vacuum structure of 4d N = 1 SYM [198].
Some of the techniques here are related to old ideas of “condensation of anyons” [321–324], a topic
which itself is closely related to simple current algebras [325] and extensions of chiral algebras [326].
This “condensation” is reminiscent of tachyon condensations of D-branes used construct D-branes of
various dimensions with nontrivial torsion K-theoretic RR charge [327–335]. It is an interesting open
issue whether ideas related to tachyon condensation, K theory, and stable non-supersymmetric branes
can be related to the modern work on defect/anyon condensation. Some evidence for this was recently
provided in the construction of non-invertible topological defects using branes in string theory [198],
where the fusion is replicated by brane-dynamics such as the Myers eﬀect.
Another potentially useful set of ideas in the theory of defects goes back to [105,336]. The space
of supersymmetric ground states of a supersymmetric ﬁeld theory in ﬁnite volume admits an action
of a pencil of commutative associative rings of local operators, commuting with some supercharge.
In addition, in Euclidean space-time, one can also act on the space of ground states by the non-
commutative algebra of supersymmetric interfaces. Interestingly enough, compositions of “raising” and
“lowering” interfaces may produce local protected operators, in the cohomology of some supercharge.
The whole structure resembles a Lie algebra, or its Yangian, or quantum, deformation, as seen in
the context of gauge theories with (4, 4) supersymmetry in two dimensions. For the recent progress
see [305]. These developments are partly based on the mathematical discoveries in [337, 338]. The
computations [301] of expectation values of supersymmetric defects, relating them to local operators
in the cohomology of some supercharge, reveal fascinating connections to both geometric [339] and
analytic Langlands program [340–342] and two dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory, e.g. [343].
3
String Theory And M-Theory
3.1
What Is The Deﬁnition Of String Theory And M-Theory?
We don’t know.
This is a fundamental question on which relatively little work is currently being done, presumably
because nobody has any good new ideas. Nevertheless, we should never lose sight of the fact that it is
one of the central unanswered problems in fundamental theoretical physics. M(atrix) theory [344–347]
and AdS/CFT [348] are profound insights and give partial answers, but they are tied to speciﬁc
backgrounds, and do not give satisfactory deﬁnitions of M-Theory/String Theory. See the Snowmass
whitepaper [349] discussing applications of the bootstrap philosophy to derive facts about string theory
and [350–355] for progress towards deriving string theory from ﬁeld theory following the ideas of
holography.
One notable attempt to give a fundamental formulation of string theory is the subject of string ﬁeld
theory. A solid foundation was given in [356,357] building on important previous work such as [358].
Unfortunately, the theory, as currently understood, is intractable.
Important progress was made,
nevertheless, with exact results on tachyon condensation [359, 360], an action for open superstring
ﬁeld theory using A∞structure [361] and most recently distinct progress on D-instanton amplitude
computations in [362–364], which would probably beneﬁt from the more precise matching to the
instanton counting developed in the ﬁeld theory context [365,366].
13

3.2
Topological String Theory
We will be brief in this section because much more discussion can be found in [18]. Topological string
theory is both a metaphor of the physical string theory, and a substructure of it. One central reason
for studying topological string theory is that if we are ever going to make progress on the question
of “what is string theory,” it is reasonable to expect that the much simpliﬁed version of the question
“what is topological string theory?” will be a more tractable and a useful ﬁrst case study. Topological
string theory was invented by Witten in [367, 368]. Some basic material for this subject is covered
in [369,370].
In the eﬀort to understand topological string theory much attention has focused on the topological
string partition function. In the A-model this is deﬁned, as a formal (possibly asymptotic) series by
a collection of functions Fg on Calabi-Yau moduli space, which are themselves generating functions
for Gromov-Witten invariants of genus g curves. This topological string partition function has been
the focus of intense research. The famous work of Bershadsky, Cecotti, Ooguri, and Vafa [371] almost
provides a recursive deﬁnition. In the compact case there is a crucial “holomorphic ambiguity,” which
has only been ﬁxed up to g ≤51 in some of the most favorable cases [372]. The open topological string
has the form of Chern-Simons theory, perhaps with the addition of some Wilson loop observables [373].
The computation of Fg for all g has essentially been solved by using techniques adapted from the
theory of matrix models for the B-model [374,375] and by using the topological vertex for the A-model
in the case of non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds [376]. The status of non-perturbative deﬁnition of
the topological string theory is discussed in [18]. Another review of the relevant issues can be found
in [249].
A suggestion to deﬁne nonperturbative topological string theory based on Fredholm determinants
associated to “quantum Riemann surfaces” was made in [377–380].
Curiously, similar ideas have
recently been applied in the context of nonperturbative deﬁnitions of JT gravity [381]. Some important
progress in the theory of quantum curves and the relation to topological string theory was made
in [382–385]. The relation between the quantization of a classical system based on a spectral curve,
and the topological string, a B model on a local Calabi-Yau which is a complexiﬁcation of a handlebody
whose boundary is that curve, or an A model on a local Calabi-Yau mirror, involves a version of a
blow-up formula and is discussed in [18]. The topological string partition function is closely related
to BPS state counting for compactiﬁcation of strings on Calabi-Yau manifolds. Various generating
functions of BPS state multiplicities, or twisted Witten indices of supersymmetric backgrounds of
string and M-theory can often can be mapped to the free-energy of some version of a topological
string, i.e. genus zero Gromov-Witten prepotential accounts for the one-loop eﬀects of the bound
states of instantons and W-bosons in M-theory on a local Calabi-Yau manifold, [386], while subjecting
it to the constant graviphoton background on R4 reveals all-genus topological string partition function
[387, 388].
These results predict nontrivial integrality properties of the Gromov-Witten invariants
(the mathematical deﬁnition of those via stable maps only guarantees their rationality), which can be
proven mathematically, using, curiously, p-adic analysis [389]. For physics justiﬁcation of these results
see [390].
The case of compact Calabi-Yau threefolds seems much more diﬃcult and there are no examples
where we can compute all the Fg, let alone give a nonperturbative deﬁnition. One potential way forward
is through an intriguing connection to BPS statecounting known as the OSV conjecture (named after
Ooguri-Strominger-Vafa). If properly understood, it might give a road to a nonperturbative deﬁnition
of topological string theory using the physics of supersymmetric black holes [391]. The most thorough
attempt to formulate and prove a sharp version of the OSV conjecture was made in [392], but a
completion of the project requires the solution of a number of unsolved problems addressed in the
conclusion of [392]. Some mathematical progress on these issues has been achieved in [393,394].
One of the problems one must solve to use an OSV-like formula is an eﬀective way of computing
BPS degeneracies for compact Calabi-Yau manifolds. One important outcome of [392,395–397] is an
interesting formula for BPS degeneracies based on “attractor ﬂow trees.” The formula of [392,395–397]
has been reﬁned and clariﬁed in [398–400].
Recently there has been some rigorous mathematical
work conﬁrming the physical conjectures [401, 402]. Another notable approach to computing BPS
degeneracies associated to non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds uses the mapping to associated quivers
and employing ﬁxed point formulae to obtain explicit results [403–407].
Other recent progress on
the BPS spectrum for string compactiﬁcation on non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds can be found
in [408–410]. A technique known as “exponential spectral networks” has been devised which might lead
14

to a systematic way of computing BPS degeneracies on non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds [411–414].
In spite of all this, ﬁnding the full BPS spectrum of the compactiﬁcation on any compact Calabi-Yau
other than (an orbifold of) a torus remains an important open problem.
3.3
String Perturbation Theory
Superstring perturbation theory remains a fundamentally important subject, central to the claims
that string theory provides a truly UV ﬁnite theory of quantum gravity. In [415,416] Witten revisited,
summarized, and clariﬁed a great deal of work that had been done on superstring perturbation theory
in the 1980’s. In particular [417] demonstrated conclusively the important fact that supermoduli space
is not split. Recent investigations [418, 419] have raised the possibility of unexpected divergences in
the type II string theory. These appear to be unphysical and it is important to clear up this point.
It is important to incorporate B-ﬁelds in the consideration of summing over spin structure, perhaps
using the methods of [420–422].
Most of the work on high-genus superstring perturbation theory has been done in the context of the
“RNS string formulation.” There is widespread belief that this formulation is not optimal - for example
spacetime supersymmetry is not manifest (but it is there [423]). Related to this, the incorporation
of nontrivial RR backgrounds, crucial to most forms of the AdS/CFT correspondence, is nontrivial.
Subsequently, much work and progress has been made on alternative worldsheet formulations. See [424]
for the state of the art on such alternative formulations, and [18] for further remarks. This remains
an important research direction for the future.
In the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, important advances using worldsheet perturbation
techniques have been made, opening up a host of interesting future directions for research, and making
contact with other current trends in thinking about quantum gravity. Some remarkable new results
on the SL(2, R) WZNW model have recently been achieved [354, 425, 426] pointing to a number of
interesting directions in the application of string perturbation theory to the AdS/CFT correspondence.
3.4
LEET
A very important aspect of string compactiﬁcation is the construction of low energy eﬀective actions.
From the mathematical viewpoint some of the main interest here are relations to hyperk¨ahler and
quaternionic k¨ahler geometry. Some aspects of this are discussed in section 8 below, and other aspects,
related to the theory of automorphic forms are discussed in section 6 below.
3.5
Noncommutative Spacetime
String theory clearly calls for some kind of emergent spacetime based on an algebraic structure. One
time-honored idea is that spacetime is a noncommutative manifold, an idea which can be made fairly
concrete in the context of string theory [427–430], following the earlier ideas [431, 432]. One of the
precursors of the interest to the realization of noncommutative geometry in string theory is the iden-
tiﬁcation of the moduli space of torsion free sheaves with that of instantons on a noncommutative
space [433]. The idea of an emergent spacetime from a more algebraic structure is part of the frame-
work of both M(atrix) theory [344] and AdS/CFT [348]. A simple concrete baby example can be given
in the case of 2d open-closed TQFT, which may be viewed as a string theory with 0-dimensional target
space. From a semisimple open string Frobenius algebra one may recover the spacetime, along with
the entire category of branes [434]. In the closely related subject of noncommutative ﬁeld theory [427]
many open problems remain. The extension of noncommutative ﬁeld theory to include nontrivial back-
ground NS ﬂux (background gerbe connection with nonzero curvature) is a very interesting problem
which might involve operator algebra theory at a deeper level than thus far has been employed. One
early attempt is the paper [329]. This subject has been somewhat neglected in recent years but there
are surely many treasures left to uncover.
4
Anomalies
The subject of anomaly cancellation blossomed in the early-to-mid 1980’s, in part driven by important
advances in understanding the formal structure of perturbative anomalies [435] and by the renewed
15

interest in string theory and higher dimensional supergravity theories.
The main idea was to use
anomalies as a systematic way to distinguish consistent from inconsistent ﬁeld theories and supergrav-
ity theories [436, 437]. This period was crowned with the discovery of the renowned Green-Schwarz
anomaly cancellation mechanism in 10-dimensional string theories [438].
4.1
Anomaly Cancellation In String Compactiﬁcation
Much work has been done on anomaly cancellation in string theory and M-theory but only recently has
a full consistency check of global anomaly cancellation in smooth M-theory backgrounds, not necessarily
orientable (but endowed with some other tangential structures), been performed in [439], building on
much previous work [440–444]. In [439] it is observed that there are two distinct trivializations of the
anomaly, and it remains a puzzle to decide if one is more physically relevant than the other. The
generalization of these results to include the presence of branes and singularities remains to be done.
Many issues remain from the examination of “frozen singularities” in M-theory [445] and it would seem
the time is ripe for a re-examination using the tools of equivariant diﬀerential cohomology, now that
diﬀerential cohomology is becoming a more familiar tool for physicists.
In string theory, a full discussion of anomaly cancellation on the worldsheet in the presence of
orientifolds remains to be done, and similarly a comprehensive discussion of global anomaly cancellation
in the presence of branes and orientifolds has not been done. (Some signiﬁcant unpublished work can
be found in [446].)
In general, there is no proof that global anomalies are canceled in compactiﬁcations of string theory.
For example, this is fairly nontrivial in compactiﬁcations of F-theory to 6d [447–452]. Some recent very
intriguing work on anomaly cancellation in heterotic string theory can be found in [225–227]. These
latter papers are particularly notable for their heavy use of the Stolz-Teichner conjecture relating the
topology of the space of (0,1) supersymmetric 2d QFTs to topological modular forms.
Finally, an old and vexing issue, closely related to anomalies, is that of the proper quantization
conditions for the various p-form gauge ﬁelds in M-theory and string theory. In the large distance weak-
coupling limit it would appear that one proper model of the M-theory C-ﬁeld is based on diﬀerential
cohomology whose underlying generalized cohomology theory is singular cohomology [442]. On the
other hand, in type II string theory the RR ﬁelds should be based on diﬀerential K-theory [162,243,
334, 453–455]. The consistency of these two viewpoints is only partially understood [441, 456], and
appears to rely on remarkable and subtle topological facts. As emphasized in [442] the M-theory
Chern-Simons term is really a cubic reﬁnement of the triple intersection product on diﬀerential H4
and a full study of the implications of summing over torsion ﬂuxes for this cubic reﬁnement has not
been carried out. (Some recent work on the cubic form in this context has appeared in [439, 457].)
Moreover the compatibility of the use of twisted diﬀerential cohomology in IIB string theory with the
expected S-duality has been a long-standing puzzle [441]. These old puzzles have recently been revived
in a provocative paper [458] investigating duality symmetry anomalies in type IIB string theory; see
also [459–464] for earlier work on duality anomalies in Type IIB. One possible way forward in addressing
this old puzzle concerns reconciling the K-theoretic classiﬁcation of RR charges in orientifolds [465]
with Witten’s discussion of S-duality for the baryon vertex in AdS/CFT [466].
4.1.1
Global Anomalies In 6d Supergravity Theories
It has long been recognized that not all LEETs are UV complete, or even internally consistent. This
idea is at the heart of the ’t Hooft anomaly matching conditions and the use of anomalies for separating
“good” theories from “bad” theories. In modern parlance these conditions are related to “landscape”
and “swampland” conjectures, and whether well-deﬁned low energy theories with gravity can be derived
from consistent string theory and/or M-theory compactiﬁcation. One well-deﬁned program for using
anomalies to shed light on such issues is reviewed in [448]. Considerations of global anomalies lead to
further constraints which have been explored in [245,450–452] but those papers leave some unresolved
issues. For example, the discussion of [451,452] reduced global anomaly cancellation to the triviality
of a certain 7-dimensional spin topological ﬁeld theory. Roughly speaking, this theory is the diﬀerence
between the invertible anomaly theory of the 6d supergravity ﬁelds and the invertible theory where the
Green-Schwarz counterterm is valued. It would be good to have an eﬀective way to compute this theory
given the deﬁning data of the supergravity. Moreover, [451,452] identiﬁed new theta angles and torsion
anomaly coeﬃcients whose physical role has not been fully understood. Finally, it would be good to
16

clarify which is the proper generalized cohomology theory underlying the diﬀerential cohomology used
to formulate the self-dual ﬁelds in the context of 6d supergravity. For example, it is natural to wonder,
given the experience from Appendix B of [455] whether the cleanest story would not come from using
diﬀerential KO theory. This idea has not been seriously explored yet. It seems fair to say that a
full and complete discussion of global anomaly cancellation in 6d supergravity remains to be given,
although this is not a view shared by all experts in the ﬁeld. Indeed, even in 8d supergravity important
subtleties arise as discussed in [467].
4.2
Anomalies And Invertible Field Theories
The geometrical interpretation of anomalies originated in the mid 1980’s as mathematicians such as
Atiyah, Bismut, Freed, Quillen, and Singer formulated a theory of anomaly cancellation in terms of
determinant line bundles. This has evolved into a modern interpretation [50, 468] using the concept
of invertible ﬁeld theories [443]. This modern interpretation is a generalization of the anomaly-inﬂow
mechanism that goes back to [469,470].
Brieﬂy, ﬁeld theories have an associative composition law with unit. Namely, two ﬁeld theories
can be “stacked” or tensored with no interaction. If F1, F2 are ﬁeld theories, then the state space of
F1 ⊗F2 on a spatial manifold Y is the tensor product F1(Y ) ⊗F2(Y ). Correlation functions and
evolution operators are similar tensor products. The unit theory 1 has 1-dimensional state space C
on all spatial manifolds, and all correlation functions equal 1. A ﬁeld theory α is invertible if there
exists α′ such that α⊗α′ is isomorphic to 1. It follows that all state spaces of α are 1-dimensional, but
they do not come with a basis element. Perhaps at ﬁrst surprisingly, such theories may be nontrivial
and furthermore have applications in physics beyond anomalies. For example, they capture short range
entangled (SPT) phases in condensed matter theory, if one is willing to jump from discrete models
to eﬀective ﬁeld theories. Invertibility takes us full circle from the bordism categories [471] of the
Segal [26] and Atiyah [27] axiom systems for ﬁeld theory to the classical bordism of Thom [472] and a
modern variant [473]; see [50,474]. Invertible theories are not necessarily topological. A good example
of nontopological invertible ﬁeld theories are those deﬁned by an exponentiated eta invariant. These
are related to parity anomalies [475–478] and are known as Dai-Freed theories. For two recent reviews
summarizing the status of these theories see [479,480]. The general theory of nontopological invertible
theories is under rapid development; a small sample of very recent papers is [481,482].
This viewpoint has been a very ﬂexible way of understanding anomalies but it is not clear that
it extends to all anomalies, such as duality symmetry anomalies or conformal anomalies, so there is
more to understand here. (For example, the conformal anomaly involves the Euler characteristic. It
is not clear how to obtain this from the usual descent formalism two dimensions higher.) Moreover,
as mentioned above there are new ideas involving extensions of the notion of symmetry to so-called
“categorical symmetry”, and these “symmetries” are also expected to have anomalies. This subject is
in its infancy.
4.3
Anomalies And Dynamics
As ﬁrst stressed by ’t Hooft [483], anomalies provide powerful constraints on RG ﬂow. These ideas
were used to great advantage in advances in understanding the dynamics of supersymmetric gauge
theories in the mid-1990’s [484]. In the past few years they have been combined with the new ideas
based on invertible topological ﬁeld theories and generalized symmetries to discover new constraints
on nontrivial RG ﬂows in quantum ﬁeld theories, see e.g. [167–175].
5
Mathematics Resulting From Holography And Quantum Grav-
ity
Sometimes general conjectures about quantum gravity, and the role of string theory in quantum gravity,
can motivate the discovery of new mathematical results. In this section we focus on some of these
aspects of physical mathematics.
17

5.1
General Quantum Gravity Conjectures With Precise Mathematical
Consequences
The past few years have seen some heightened activity in deriving general properties of quantum gravity
by studying generic properties of string compactiﬁcations and their global consistency conditions. Much
of this originates in the weak gravity conjecture. Here we will focus on the connection to mathematics
and refer to the reviews on this topic for a broader overview [448, 485–488]. In particular, we will
focus on consequences in algebraic and diﬀerential geometry, especially in relation to moduli spaces of
manifolds of special holonomy.
Sometimes the constrained structure of supergravity Lagrangians can lead to remarkable mathe-
matical predictions. The reasoning is that the existence of a suitably covariantly constant spinor on
a compact manifold implies a certain amount of unbroken supersymmetry when superstring theory
or supergravity is compactiﬁed on that manifold. But then the scalar ﬁelds in the supergravity are
related to moduli of the compactifying manifold. The constraints on how these scalar ﬁelds can ap-
pear in a supergravity Lagrangian have direct mathematical implications for the moduli space. The
phenomenon of mirror symmetry was in fact anticipated by exactly this kind of reasoning [489–491].
Another nice example of this reasoning is [492] where the constraints of the LEET coming from N = 4
supergravity predicted the form of the moduli space of K3 surfaces with complexiﬁed K¨ahler class to
be a double coset of O(4, 20), a fact later conﬁrmed by precise mathematical analysis [493,494].
A more speculative aspect of quantum gravity concerns aspects of the “landscape” of possible
string compactiﬁcations. One might ask what principles should prefer particular vacua, especially
when they come in continuous families. One approach to this question is to posit that there should
be a well-deﬁned probability distribution on a suitable set of string vacua. For perturbative string
compactiﬁcations there is a natural metric on the moduli spaces of string vacua - the Zamolodchikov
metric [212]. It is tempting to use this metric to deﬁne a natural measure on string compactiﬁcations,
but that will only make sense if the total volume is ﬁnite, a point ﬁrst emphasized in [495]. In this way
one is led to conjecture that, for example, the total volume of moduli spaces of Calabi-Yau three-folds is
ﬁnite [495]. For moduli spaces with a ﬁxed topological type the Zamolodchikov metric on the complex
structure moduli space is the Weil-Peterson metric. Thus, the general quantum gravity conjecture
leads to a very precise mathematical prediction. For moduli spaces with a ﬁxed topological type this
conjecture was shown to be correct in [496]. Analogous statements for, say, G2 compactiﬁcations of
M-theory remains interesting and open.
There are a number of general conjectures in quantum gravity which have generated a huge amount
of interest in the past several years. Again, we refer to [485–488] for reviews. Some of these conjectures,
when made suitably precise, can lead to impressive mathematical predictions. One example is the so-
called “swampland distance conjecture” (SDC) of [497]. In rather general terms the conjecture states
the following: A string compactiﬁcation can have a moduli space M, which is parametrized by massless
scalar ﬁelds. This moduli space can have a natural metric on it, and two points in M can be separated
by an inﬁnite distance. The conjecture states, that an inﬁnite tower of states become exponentially
light, when moving an inﬁnite distance in the moduli space. More intuitively the conjecture can be
rephrased as stating that an inﬁnite distance limit either corresponds to a decompactiﬁcation, or to
a tensionless limit of a weakly-coupled string (which in turn furnishes the inﬁnite tower of massless
states). The latter reﬁnement is sometimes called the emergent string conjecture (ESC) [498].
When the SDC is made mathematically precise in the context of Calabi-Yau compactiﬁcation some
very nontrivial mathematics emerges. For example tests of the conjecture using the spectrum of D-
branes as a function of the complex structure moduli space makes detailed and precise use of the Schmid
Nilpotent Orbit Theorem and the theory of degenerations of Hodge structures [499–503]. A key role
in this analysis is that inﬁnite distance in the Zamolodchikov-Weil-Peterson metric is characterized
by inﬁnite order monodromy of the periods. The ESC has motivated reﬁned studies of the ways K3
surfaces can degenerate [504]. There is room to run in this subject: Mathematically the challenge is
to ﬁnd a characterization of the behavior at inﬁnite distance limits for general Calabi-Yau three-fold
geometries, as well as elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau manifolds of other complex dimensions.
A much harder version of these questions concern the mathematical predictions following from
precise versions of the SDC in the context of other non-Calabi-Yau compactiﬁcations, e.g. for com-
pactiﬁcations on manifolds of exceptional holonomy. Some preliminary results for a special class of G2
manifolds has appeared in [505]. Constructions of such exceptional holonomy manifolds are central to
the Simons Collaboration on Special Holonomy [506], and will be discussed in section 9.2.
18

Some extensions of tests of the SDC to AdS compactiﬁcations have been studied in [507,508]. The
AdS-distance conjecture implies in particular that in an AdS ×X compactiﬁcation of string theory,
the AdS scale cannot be separated from the scale of the internal manifold X. In turn this implies
bounds on the conformal dimension of the ﬁrst non-trivial operator in the dual CFT. Mathematically
this problem can be rephrased as implying a bound on the eigenvalue of the (scalar) Laplacian on X.
Recently this was proven in [509] for a large class of holographic models where X is a Sasaki-Einstein
ﬁve-manifold, and a conjecture was put forward, that such a bound should exist and be universal (only
dimension dependent).
In the past year there has been exciting progress in the application of the theory of von Neumann
algebras to questions about the entropy of black holes and de Sitter space [510–516]. Notably some
nontrivial constructions in operator algebra theory relating type II and type III von Neumann algebras
turn out to have natural physical interpretations in terms of black holes. It seems clear that this
direction will lead to some interesting future progress
A completely diﬀerent approach to landscape and swampland issues has been initiated in [517,518]
and this is a potentially promising direction.
5.2
Holography
For well over 25 years the ideas of holography have been of central importance to the string theory
and quantum gravity communities. Yet, in relation to its immense importance and conceptual depth,
the direct connections between holography and pure mathematics have been relatively meager6. That
situation has started to change.
A very signiﬁcant advance in the theory of holography was recently made in [519–521], where the
path integral of a form of two-dimensional quantum gravity was related to both matrix models and the
mathematical work of M. Mirzakhani. (For some background on the relation to topological gravity see
[522].) This work, combined with some older results known as the “factorization problem in AdS/CFT”
[523,524], has in turn raised some key conceptual questions about the AdS/CFT correspondence, such
as whether topological eﬀects in quantum gravity (e.g.
wormholes) require one to “average” over
boundary quantum ﬁeld theories. As mentioned above, moduli spaces of string theories come with
a natural Zamolodchikov measure (provided the volume is ﬁnite), and the concept of Zamolodchikov
measure can be extended to moduli spaces of superconformal ﬁeld theories (provided the volume is
ﬁnite). When this is done for conformal ﬁeld theories of free bosons on a torus (a.k.a. Narain theories)
the resulting ensembles bear some resemblance to three-dimensional Chern-Simons gravity [525,526].
These recent papers have intriguing results, but puzzles remain [527] and it would be good to clarify
the status of these theories and to understand them better. (As an example of one puzzle, it would
be nice to clarify whether it is consistent, in a 3d theory of gravity, to sum over topologies which are
just handlebodies.) A recent proposal for solving the ensemble-average puzzle has in fact led to new
results in mathematics proper concerning (regularized) volumes of hyperbolic manifolds [528]. 7
A related set of observations concern certain natural ensembles of two-dimensional (4, 4) super-
symmetric sigma models [530,531]. The main result here is that these can only have a weak-coupling
gravity dual on a set of Zamolodchikov measure zero. Interestingly the papers [525,526] and [530,531]
made nontrivial use of the work of C.L. Siegel in analytic number theory. It would be very interest-
ing to understand if there are deeper relations between averaged QFT and analytic number theory.
For example, it would be natural to expect that there are connections to Kudla-Millson theory [532].
Currently other ensemble averages of higher dimensional superconformal theories are under investiga-
tion with a view to possible holographic interpretations [533]. If the ensembles have string-theoretic
interpretations as spaces of vacua one might expect the total Zamolodchikov volume again to be ﬁnite,
but this remains to be seen in all but the simplest examples. This line of development might be a
promising avenue for interesting new interactions between analytic number theory and QFT/ST.
A curious related recent development, inspired by questions in quantum gravity, including the
ensemble averaging question, are the “topological models of baby universes,” investigated in [534–538].
These involve the well-deﬁned problem of summing over bordisms with ﬁxed boundaries in a topological
ﬁeld theory. The model of [538] was interpreted as supporting the view that holographic duality involves
6Connections between solutions to supergravity theories, and the geometry of Sasaki-Einstein manifolds has of course
led to very important developments in mathematics, see section 9
7Another, very diﬀerent, approach to these puzzles makes use of the notion of “non-invertible symmetries” mentioned
above [529].
19

ensemble averages, but other interpretations are possible [535]. As far as we know there is no previous
mathematical work in this direction and it presents a potentially interesting opportunity for some
interactions between physicists and mathematicians. One important question is whether there are
any analogs of these models in d > 2 dimensions. Naive generalizations will not work. It has been
suggested by M. Kontsevich that it might be important to consider nonstandard ways of weighting the
sum over topologies using the results of [539].
6
Interactions With Number Theory
There are several intriguing connections between string theory and supersymmetric QFT and number
theory. Many potentially fertile seeds been planted, but have not yet blossomed, perhaps solely due
to lack of cultivation. We survey a few of these developments here. There are a number of other
intriguing relations to number theory that have arisen in the study of mathematical aspects of scattering
amplitudes. These have been covered in a separate Snowmass document [540].
6.1
Automorphic Forms And Partition Functions
One of the primary connections to number theory is through automorphic functions and analytic num-
ber theory. An important historical example is the explanation of modularity in Monstrous Moonshine
Conjectures via the relation of the Monster group to an orbifold conformal ﬁeld theory [79,541–543] 8.
Partition functions - understood in very broad terms - can be automorphic for three (interrelated)
reasons: They can be covariant under diﬀeomorphism symmetries, they can be covariant under duality
symmetries such as S-duality, or they can be terms in low energy eﬀective actions, whose duality
symmetry implies automorphy of the functions entering the eﬀective action. Often, but not always,
these partition functions are associated with generating functions of invariants of BPS states. We will
just list here a small set of examples of this phenomenon. It is not possible to give a complete list
because the literature is quite vast.
1. Two dimensional CFT, especially RCFT, is a rich source of automorphic functions thanks to
modular (or mapping class group) covariance of partition functions, conformal blocks, and cor-
relation functions. These considerations continue to play an important role in the modern era.
For example it is an important tool in investigations of spectral aspects of conformal ﬁeld theory,
where many of the questions are motivated by aspects of the AdS/CFT correspondence [545–548].
(A related set of ideas applies the conformal bootstrap to four-point functions and this has led
to interesting results on the spectrum of the Laplacian on hyperbolic surfaces [549]. Note that
the bootstrap equations follow from the mapping class group symmetry of the four-punctured
sphere and are thus a form of modular invariance.) In a related set of developments modularity
plays an important role in discussions of “extremal CFTs”, i.e. CFTs with small numbers of
low lying states [550–552]. Several important questions concerning existence of N = 0 extremal
CFTs remain open and it would be extremely interesting to clarify them [551–556].
Higher
dimensional theories involving general p-forms will illustrate similar phenomena. The higher
dimensional generalizations are not well-studied. To choose but one example: the conformal
blocks of self-dual six-dimensional theories are expected to be interesting automorphic objects
for groups of disconnected diﬀeomorphisms of six-manifolds.
2. Terms in the action for the LEET of string compactiﬁcations with duality symmetries provide a
rich source of examples. For example toroidal compactiﬁcation of type II string theory naturally
leads to Eisenstein series. For a review see [557]. If we combine this observation with the S-
duality of type IIB string theory, then, in the hands of [558–561] nontrivial observations about
some of the automorphic forms appearing in the Langlands program, and conjectures about
constant terms, can be addressed. The book [562] has an extensive review of the relation of string
theory scattering amplitudes and automorphic functions. These developments have also led to the
development of the whole subject of modular graph functions (which are related to the integrands
of expressions giving terms in the LEET). This is an active area of development [563–568]. The
8The role of various kinds of Moonshine in physical mathematics is an important and rich subject in and of itself.
We will not pursue it here because it is being addressed in a separate Snowmass document in [544].
20

paper [563] points out an interesting connection to the work of Faltings and the Kawazumi-Zhang
invariant.
3. Another notable use of the automorphy of the LEET is the T-duality symmetry (via het-
erotic/typeII duality) of the prepotential of type II theories compactiﬁed on K3-ﬁbered Calabi-
Yau manifolds. Study of these prepotentials led to a simple proof of the Borcherds lifts of auto-
morphic forms [569] in what is a nice example of the math-physics dialogue. The work of [569]
applied some standard techniques from string perturbation theory [570] in a fertile setting that
explained the remarkable phenomenon of Borcherds lifting in a conceptual way. The method was
generalized to the construction of automorphic forms for SO(p, q) in [571]. The resulting theory
of singular theta lifts, and the related results of [572] have led to several ingenious extensions
and generalizations in both the math and physics literature [563, 573–582], and have also been
of use in physics-inspired investigation of four-manifold invariants, as discussed elsewhere in this
paper.
4. The terms in the LEET mentioned above are often generating functions for invariants of BPS
states. The automorphy of such BPS statecounting functions played extremely important roles in
establishing fundamental string dualities [102,583–588] and in accounting for microstates of black
holes [589]. The breakthrough paper [589] has led to a vast literature on BPS statecounting and
automorphy, which continues to inspire and direct research to this day. Among the many modern
issues resulting from BPS state counting the question of the automorphic nature of the generating
functions of certain DT invariants of torsion sheaves on compact Calabi-Yau manifolds (“D4-
D2-D0 counting functions”) remains an important open one. Physical considerations suggest
that the 2d (0, 2) elliptic genus associated with 5-branes should exhibit interesting automorphic
properties [391,392,410,590–593]. Mathematically rigorous conﬁrmation of some of these physical
predictions have been made in the last several years and will probably be the source of interesting
mathematical research into the future [594–600]. (For related, but slightly diﬀerent appearances
of modular forms in mathematically rigorous investigations of enumerative geometry of Calabi-
Yau manifolds see [573,601,602].)
5. Another example of an important BPS counting function is the elliptic genus of N = 2 theories.
In the context of AdS/CFT this led to the application of Rademacher expansions [603–608] 9.
That in turn has led to important results in 3d quantum gravity [612] raising questions regarding
unitarity, and the existence of a Hilbert space interpretation in 3d gravity, that have yet to
be resolved. It also motivated some important developments in Moonshine. For example [613]
observed an important connection between Rademacher summability and the renowned genus
zero property of the Moonshine groups. (The relation between Rademacher summability and
genus zero goes back at least to [610] and references therein.) In the past several years there have
been extremely beautiful proofs of such “Fareytail expansions” of BPS counting functions via
localization in the supergravity path integral, and the development of some of these localization
tools have illuminated interesting issues in strongly coupled four-dimensional QFTs [614–618].
6. Partition functions of topologically twisted ﬁeld theories are a natural source of automorphic
functions thanks to nontrivial duality symmetries such as S-duality. A famous and paradigmatic
example are the partition functions of Vafa-Witten twisted N = 4 SYM [102].
Extensions
to higher rank go back to [619] and have been discussed in [593, 620–622].
The veriﬁcation
and extension of the physical predictions of have proven to be a rich source of inspirations
in enumerative algebraic geometry and have led to important advances such as [623–626]. The
partition functions of other S-dual symmetric quantum ﬁeld theories will lead to similar counting
functions for other enumerative invariants. See, for example, [627].
6.2
Generalizations Of Automorphy
Mathematicians and physicists have been exploring various extensions of the notion of automorphic
forms in the past few years. A number of promising directions have emerged that might well lead to
important results in the future.
9The mathematics here is closely related to a mathematical subject known as Eichler cohomology [609–611].
21

One of the most striking generalizations of modularity are the mock modular forms. See [628] for
a recent review of some of the ways they have appeared in physics. A precise mathematical deﬁnition
was codiﬁed in [629] but in fact many examples have been known since the work of Ramanujan, and,
somewhat later, in the work of D. Zagier [630, 631]. Mock modularity has been appearing in many
distinct ways in the literature on physical mathematics, and we will indicate some of the occurrences
below. It would be desirable to understand if there is a common concept underpinning these var-
ious instances of mock modularity in physics. Perhaps related to this, modularity has a beautiful
representation-theoretic interpretation in terms of SL(2, R). It would be very desirable to have an
analogous representation-theoretic basis for mock modularity, but such an interpretation is at present
lacking.
Mock modular forms showed up in the study of automorphic properties and holomorphic anomalies
of twisted supersymmetric gauge theory partition functions on four-manifolds [102,632]. More recently
the appearance of mock modularity in this context has been understood more systematically in [627,
633–636] and indeed the study of some examples lead to open questions about mock modular forms
[627].
Mock modularity also shows up naturally in the study of the Fareytail expansions of elliptic genera
and holomorphic anomalies in the context of AdS/CFT [604]. Another, related, source is the appear-
ance of these forms in BPS state counting functions for N = 4, d = 4 supersymmetric black holes. This
has been extensively investigated in the major work [637]. Similar considerations are expected to occur
in N = 2, d = 4 examples, but this has been much less investigated and is a natural direction for future
research. For some relevant results see [410, 593, 638–640]. Another appearance of mock-modularity
can be found in the eﬀects of D3 instantons on low energy eﬀective actions [641,642].
Yet another source of mock modularity is non-compactness of the target space in a sigma model
[643–651]. Recently a beautiful physical derivation of the APS index theorem based on path integrals
made use of this phenomenon [652]. It should be possible to understand, conceptually, the appearance
of mock modular objects in noncompact sigma models by applying similar considerations to the Dirac
operator on loop space, to get an “APS theorem” for such Dirac operators, but this has not been done.
The role of mock modularity in noncompact sigma models has recently played an unexpected and
important role in the connection of topological modular forms to the classiﬁcation of supersymmetric
ﬁeld theories [224].
Mock modular forms can be generalized to “mock modular forms of ﬁnite depth.” A mock modular
form - very roughly speaking - is a nonholomorphic function f(τ, ¯τ) on the upper half plane which has
the property that ¯∂f is simply related to a holomorphic modular form. One can then use this idea to
deﬁne iteratively a series of generalizations where a mock modular form of depth d is related, in an
analogous fashion, to a mock modular form of depth (d −1), where holomorphic forms are of depth 0.
Such functions have appeared in partition functions of twisted higher rank supersymmetric theories as
well as in D-instanton expansions. They have been studied mathematically in, for examples, [653–655],
which also make use of various generalizations of the error function. These ideas have been applied
to the counting functions associated with M-theory black holes in [640] and to D-brane BPS counting
functions in [656]. The paper [656] raises some unresolved puzzles related to the scaling BPS black
hole solutions of [392]. (In general, the scaling solutions tend to present puzzles [392,406,407,657] and
deserve to be understood better. A general condition for their existence can be found in [658].)
Another direction in which the notion of automorphy is being extended is to the domain of “quan-
tum modular forms” and “false theta functions.” At present, the precise deﬁnition “quantum modular
form” by D. Zagier leaves open the possibility of several variations [659, 660].
It is possible that
physical applications will guide the way to the “best” deﬁnition.
One important recent source of
quantum modular forms is via 3-manifold invariants associated to the partition functions of d = 3
N = 2 ﬁeld theories on plumbed 3-manifolds. These “ ˆZ-invariants” have illustrated curious relations
to mock modular forms and false theta functions [661–663]. A great deal needs to be clariﬁed con-
cerning these and related intriguing observations. Another source of “quantum modularity” in physics
appears through the presence of MacMahon, and MacMahon-like functions in black hole microstate
counting [408,664–666].
Yet another context in which modularity and its generalization play a role is the realm of super-
symmetric partition functions/indices in various dimensions [667]. Computing such indices one can
obtain explicit expressions which often exhibit interesting (mock/quasi/etc) modular behavior and its
generalizations. For example, in the supersymmetric index in four dimensions [668–670] one can see
22

hints of SL(3, Z) modularity [671–674]. Specializing to N = 2 theories and to Schur indices [74,675]
these hints of SL(3, Z) modularity become hints of SL(2, Z) modularity [676]. Some of these relations
have been intensely studied: e.g. in the context of the relation of the index to chiral algebras [85] the
Schur indices can be thought of as components of a vector valued modular form and are solutions to
certain logarithmic modular diﬀerential equations [87]. There are also intriguing connections between
these indices and the work of Kontsevich and Soibelman on wall crossing phenomena [677–680]. More-
over as the Schur indices are often given as integrals over Jacobi modular forms they can exhibit quasi
and mock modular properties [681,682] which would be very interesting to explore in further.
6.3
Geometric Langlands Program
The famous Langlands program in mathematics relates - very roughly speaking - arithmetic questions
related to Galois groups and motives on the one hand and automorphic function theory (and harmonic
analysis) associated with number ﬁelds, on the other. The Langlands program can be viewed as a
generalization of class ﬁeld theory (and is sometimes described as “non-abelian class ﬁeld theory”).
Some of the most important advances in number theory can be interpreted within the framework
of this program, which, moreover, promises to unify many areas within number theory and perhaps
even resolve some of the longstanding and outstanding questions within that ﬁeld. When one replaces
number ﬁelds by function ﬁelds of curves the questions can be stated more geometrically, and this
has led mathematicians to formulate an analogous program, the renowned Geometric Langlands Pro-
gram (GLP). When the curve C in question is over C the GLP, in particular, connects [683,684] the
holomorphic quantization of Hitchin’s moduli space MH(C, G) for gauge group G and the classical
holomorphic symplectic geometry of the moduli space of LG-local systems (ﬂat connections, for physi-
cists), see [685]. Moreover, Hitchin’s space plays a role in Ngo’s proof of the “fundamental lemma of
the Langlands program” thus leading to one route from the modern work on the GLP back to the
original Langlands program. Other ideas have been inspired by the connection to physics and have led
to progress purely within the mathematical activity in this area. See [339, 686–688] for introductory
reviews on the Langlands program and its geometric cousin.
It was understood early on that the GLP is intimately connected to two dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory, more speciﬁcally to the theory of chiral algebras. This follows from the fundamental result
of [689] realizing the center Z(bg) of the universal enveloping algebra of a current algebra bg associated
to a simple Lie algebra g at the critical level k = −h∨, as a limit of the associated W-algebra. In
turn, W-algebras appear naturally in 2d CFT [690]. The elements of the center become the diﬀerential
operators on BunG(C) twisted by the square root of its canonical bundle (MH(C, G) is a hyperk¨ahler
manifold, which in one of its complex structures is birational to T ∗BunG(C)). There was a little
setback, because unitarity of conformal ﬁeld theories with current algebra symmetry requires k > 0.
Despite this, other hints connecting GLP and physics were showing up, as described in [339]. In [691]
a relation was found between the Bethe ansatz, Sklyanin separation of variables, and the Beilinson-
Drinfeld view of GLP adapted to the case of genus zero curves with punctures, at least in the case
g = sl2. In [692] the separation of variables was interpeted in the language of D-branes wrapping
various cycles in a hyperk¨ahler manifold, as an example of mirror symmetry or T -duality. An example
of a quantum integrable system associated with a genus one curve E, an elliptic Calogero-Moser (eCM)
system of AN−1-type, was studied in [693], while the classical construction was given in [694]. The
full set of quantum integrals of motion of AN−1 eCM can be identiﬁed with the D-module part of
GLP adapted to the case of a genus one curve with one so-called minimal puncture. The dual side is
represented by the variety L of opers, which in the present case are the order-N diﬀerential operators
on the elliptic curve with a regular singularity at the puncture. The symbol of an oper is a meromorphic
function on T ∗E, which is a degree N polynomial along the cotangent directions, whose coeﬃcients
are meromorphic functions on E of speciﬁed poles at one point z = 0 at E. The vanishing locus is the
spectral curve Σ.
A year later this algebraic integrable system, in the very guise of [694], was proposed [695] as a
candidate description of the Seiberg-Witten geometry of the four dimensional N = 2∗with the gauge
group SU(N). The elliptic curve determines the gauge coupling of the ultraviolet theory (which has
N = 4 supersymmetry), on the one hand, the coupling constant is related in [694] to the residue of
the Higgs ﬁeld at the puncture, on the one hand, and to the mass of the adjoint hypermultiplet, on
the other. Finally, the abovementioned spectral curve Σ is the Seiberg-Witten curve of the eﬀective
N = 2∗theory.
23

Going back with the GLP story, the opers are, sometimes, called the quantum Seiberg-Witten
curves. We will get to their meaning for the N = 2∗theory (or its higher genus analogues) later. In
general it is hard to understand the physics of the variety of opers within the realm of the conventional
two dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory with bg-symmetry with a notable exception of Liouville (or Toda)
ﬁeld theory, where the so-called BPZ diﬀerential equations, which are obeyed by the conformal blocks
of correlators involving the so-called degenerate ﬁelds, do approach the opers on genus zero curves with
punctures, in the b →0 or b →∞limits (the large central charge, or quasiclassical, limit of Liouville),
see [696] for review. The subsequent progress came from the physical realization of MH(C, G) as
an eﬀective target space of a two dimensional sigma model. This is to be contrasted with the way
the moduli space of (compact group) ﬂat connections are related to the two dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory on that same Riemann surface C. Given Riemann surfaces D and C, a twisted version
of N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory on D × C, in the limit where C is much smaller than D becomes
a sigma model with D as a worldsheet and MH(C, G) as a target. Moreover, the Montonen-Olive
S-duality of the N = 4 super-Yang-Mills is then related to T -duality in the sigma model [697, 698].
Then, some ten years later, a few more crucial ingredients became available: the generalized complex
structures, the extension of the Fukaya category to hyperk¨ahler manifolds [699], the identiﬁcation of
Hecke operators and Hecke eignesheaves of the GLP in terms of the actions of ’t Hooft-Wilson lines on
branes, and special branes on Hitchin moduli space, respectively. Thus, the connection of N = 4 super-
Yang-Mills theory to GLP started to emerge [64] in a powerful way. In addition to the strong-weak
coupling duality symmetries of supersymmetric gauge theories and sigma models, the GLP was thus
connected to various geometric symmetries [64,696,700–706]. This led to important questions of the
classiﬁcation of supersymmetric boundary conditions of N = 4 SYM [707–709], which, in turn, plays
an important role in the gauge-theoretic interpretation of knot homology, as described above. These
insights also gave a large impetus to the development of the theory of supersymmetric defects [297],
related to the ramiﬁed version of the GLP [298, 300, 701, 702]. In particular, the geometric Satake
theorem has a natural interpretation in terms of extended observables, i.e. line operators [710–714]
and surface defects. More generally, the ideas of the GLP, and its gauge-theoretic interpretation have
played an important role in the development of geometric representation theory [715] of both ﬁnite-
dimensional and inﬁnite-dimensional groups (such as loop groups). Also, thinking about the kind of
quantization of MH(C, G) involved in the GLP raised interesting questions in the general theory of
quantization [269–271,289–291,340,716,717].
The insight into the GLP which follows from assuming the S-duality of the N = 4 super-Yang-
Mills theory can be further strengthened (sometimes leading to the actual proofs) using the input from
string theory. In particular, the realization of the N = 4 super-Yang-Mills as a six dimensional (2, 0)
superconformal theory compactiﬁed on an elliptic curve E of vanishing area, brings yet another tool in
the game. Namely, take the (2, 0) theory on E ×C ×D, but start with the compactiﬁcation on C. This
gives, at low energy, an N = 2 superconformal ﬁeld theory in four dimensions, compactiﬁed on E × D.
Moreover, there is a deformation of the latter, the so-called Ω-deformation [365], which allows E to vary
over D, possibly contracting at the boundaries and the corners of D, permitting for a smooth (partial)
compactiﬁcation to a manifold with torus isometry, while preserving some supersymmetry [291]. In
this way some of the peculiar branes, discovered in [699] and used in [64], acquire (conjecturally) a
natural geometric origin, as “no-boundary” condition in the geometry of the form cigar×R×S1, where
the cigar is viewed as an S1 ﬁbration over R+, degenerating over 0 ∈R+.
If, by some lucky guess, we can realize this N = 2 theory as a quiver gauge theory with unitary
gauge group factors, localization [365,718] lets one perform some eﬃcient exact calculations [301,302,
343,719–721], once the supersymmetry of Ω-background is identiﬁed with the rotation-equivariant de
Rham diﬀerential acting on the space of gauge ﬁelds. In this way the ingredients of geometric Langlands
correspondence are mapped to the expectation values of certain supersymmetric observables in N = 2
theory, such as surface defects of various kinds (the monodromy, or orbifold, or regular, defects, vortex
string defects, Q-observables, etc.). Then, in case of genus 0 and 1 curves C with punctures, both
the expectation values and the Dyson-Schwinger equations they obey, can be computed and hence
mapped to the equations of [722,723], producing the opers and D-modules generalizing those in [691].
In addition one ﬁnds an extension of the GLP away from the critical level.
This is the so-called
quantum Langlands correspondence, whose early incarnation is the relation between the bsl2-current
algebra conformal blocks and Virasoro conformal blocks with degenerate ﬁelds [724, 725], and whose
k →∞limit gives the well-known Painlev´e form of the Schlesinger equations [696,726].
24

Now, having the four dimensional N = 2 theory perspective on GLP, it is a natural next step to a
q-deformed version of the latter, by lifting the theory to ﬁve dimensions [90,727,728] and compactifying
on a circle with a twist, which in string theory terms corresponds to replacing the (2, 0)-superconformal
ﬁeld theory by a little string theory [729].
The three-fold view on the six-dimensional theory on D × C × E and other manifolds is very
powerful, especially if supplemented by additional string dualities. These become operational once
the six dimensional theory is related to the theory of NS ﬁvebranes of IIA string theory.
These
ideas imply the BPS/CFT correspondence [730] between the conformal ﬁeld theories (in the extended
sense) in two dimensions (and their q-deformations) and supersymmetric sector of four dimensional
theories (and their uplifts to higher dimensions). At the origin of this correspondence are the chiral
tensor ﬁelds propagating in the six dimensional (2, 0) theory [365], or their cousins living at the
intersections of branes (which could be obtained by T-dualizing the cigar-shaped geometries subject
to Ω-deformation [731], or by taking their S-duals [721]).
The typical localization computations in N = 2 gauge theories in four dimensions produce functions
matching the conformal, or chiral, blocks of some two dimensional chiral algebras. The most celebrated
example is the AGT correspondence [732], relating Liouville theory and class S gauge theories of A1-
type.
However, conformal blocks are not yet the physical observables of the two dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory, one needs to couple chiral blocks with the anti-chiral blocks. For example, the 4-point
function on a sphere can be expressed as a one-dimensional integral of a square of an absolute value
of a conformal block, where the integration variable parametrizes the conformal dimension of an
intermediate ﬁeld [733]. This convolution can be mapped to a partition function of a class S theory
corresponding to a 4-punctured sphere, which happens to be an SU(2) theory with Nf = 4 fundamental
hypermuliplets, compactiﬁed on an ellipsoid [734]. The shape of the ellipsoid is determined by the b
parameter of the Liouville theory, so that for b = 1 one gets the supersymmetric partition on a round
four-sphere [735].
Thinking about the correlation functions of WZNW theory, analytically continued in the level k
of the current algebra, presumably along the lines of [250], one naturally encounters questions of real
analysis on BunG. At the critical level k →−h∨the correlation functions become the eigenfunctions
of both sets of quantized Hitchin hamiltonians, twisted holomorphic and anti-holomorphic diﬀerential
operators on BunG, acting on half-densities. The choice of an eigenvector, and the corresponding
eigenvalue are determined by the choice of a classical limit of r = rk(G) ﬁelds, presumably the T -
duals of the subset of Cartan-valued “free ﬁelds,” the ϕ-ﬁelds of the Wakimoto realization [736–738].
Presumably [739], this relates the “analytic Langlands correspondence” of [340,342,717] to the bosonic
instantonic theory, also known as the curved βγ ¯β¯γ-system [740–743] on the complete ﬂag variety G/B,
and to the higher rank generalizations of [271,744,745]. Finally, the main ingredient of both analytic
and classical GLP, Hecke operators [341] (which commute with quantized Hitchin hamiltonians), show
up in the N = 2 description of the theory, as the so-called Q-observables, the speciﬁc surface defects,
which can be engineered using the folded instanton construction [746,747]. In this way explicit formulae
for the eigenvalues of the Hecke operators of [340,341] can be obtained by localization. This example
could become a speciﬁc application in mathematics of the six dimensional view on the GLP. For other
applications see [713]. It is tempting to conjecture that the paper [748] also ﬁts the six dimensional
perspective.
The subject is clearly very deep and will surely be an inspiring source of much future progress.
6.4
Attractors And Arithmetic
The beautiful attractor mechanism for construction of supersymmetric black holes [749] leads to some
interesting questions about arithmetic aspects of Calabi-Yau manifolds and special Hodge structures
on these manifolds [750–752]. 10 The attractor conjectures have recently received some attention by
physicists and mathematicians. See [754] for an overview. An important distinction must be drawn
between “rank one” and “rank two” attractors. Recently important evidence has been presented for
the (not unexpected) result that rank one attractors are not arithmetic varieties [755]. Although the
arguments in [755] are based on some (well-founded) conjectures, strictly speaking they do not apply
10A very beautiful generalization of the attractor mechanism based on defect lines was introduced in [753]. The ideas
of this paper have not been developed very far, but would seem to be promising.
25

to the three-dimensional case. Clearly there are loose ends to be tied up here. 11
The rank two attractors have especially nice properties and, thanks to standard conjectures in
arithmetic geometry are almost certainly arithmetic. Recently some beautiful new examples of rank
two attractors with curious properties have been discovered [756]. Interestingly, rank two attractors
can be found by searching for suitable factorization of zeta functions. In examples these zeta functions
are related to modular forms, but there is no known physical meaning of these modular forms.
Some interesting related work on aspects of complex multiplication in the context of RCFT can be
found in [757], which takes note of connections between the weight two modular forms associated to
L-functions of rational elliptic curves and traces in the R-sector of RCFTs
There are potential connections to the modular Calabi-Yau manifolds [758,759], but a clear physical
interpretation has not been given. A potentially important contribution in this direction is the recent
observation relating special ﬂux compactiﬁcations to modular Calabi-Yau manifolds [760].
6.5
Other Directions Relating Number Theory And String Theory
We mention a number of other intriguing directions in which research is making new and potentially
fruitful connections to number theory.
Some years ago [761] some interesting observations were made about the relation of N = 1 points in
the Coulomb branch of d = 4 N = 2 theories with Grothendiecks’ Dessin’s d’ Enfants. This direction
seems fascinating, but remains unexplored.
There are interesting ideas concerning a possible notion of “Hecke operators” on rational conformal
ﬁeld theories [762–764]. This direction is relatively unexplored. One of the main open problems, in our
view, is to extend the observed Hecke action to modular tensor categories. Progress in this direction
has been initiated in [764].
In a beautiful series of papers written over the past 20 years [756,765–769] P. Candelas and X. de
la Ossa and collaborators have explored various arithmetic aspects of Calabi-Yau manifolds, includ-
ing relations between point-counting and periods for Calabi-Yau manifolds over ﬁnite ﬁelds. Recent
achievements of this program have included discoveries of remarkable properties of zeta functions of
Calabi-Yau manifolds over ﬁnite ﬁelds [769] and intriguing new results relating attractor points to
special values of L-functions [768].
There is a famous analogy between number ﬁelds and compact oriented three-manifolds, in which
knots are analogous to primes. A nice exposition can be found in [770]. Starting with these ideas the
research program [771–774] seeks to deﬁne an arithmetic version of Chern-Simons theory.
Special values of L-functions are of interest to mathematicians for a number of reasons. In a very
interesting recent work [775] it is noted that in some d = 4 N = 2 CY compactiﬁcations the N = 2
central charges of BPS states at special points can be written naturally in terms of special values of
L-functions. It would be of interest to generalize these relations to a broader class of theories.
7
Interactions With Condensed Matter Physics
Although many of the techniques and motivations in physical mathematics have their origins in theo-
retical particle physics, the connections to condensed matter physics have been increasingly important.
The use of topology in condensed matter physics goes back a long way (it can be traced back to a paper
of Einstein’s on semiclassical quantization [776,777]) and is now a major aspect of modern condensed
matter physics. A proper discussion should include a least:
1. General theory of the Berry connection.
2. Relations to the quantum Hall eﬀect and Chern-Simons theory.
3. Aspects of anyon physics.
4. Applications to quantum information theory and topological quantum computing, and their
relation to fusion categories and modular tensor categories.
5. Topological insulators, topological superconductors, and topological aspects of band structure,
including relations to (twisted, equivariant) K-theory and several distinct “10-fold ways.”
11M. Elmi has informed us that there is numerical evidence that the generic rank 1 attractor point is not arithmetic.
26

6. Weyl semimetals.
7. Topological phases more broadly, including what is known about their classiﬁcation, and how
the classiﬁcation is modiﬁed by conditions such as symmetries and/or short-range entanglement.
8. Relations of this classiﬁcation program to the theory of anomalies.
9. Nonsupersymmetric dualities and higher dimensinal bosonization.
10. Emergent gauge ﬁelds.
Covering all this material properly would more than double the length of this panorama. Just a
few of the very many relevant reviews include [778–789]. We will content ourselves with just a few of
the most recent connections most relevant to other parts of this essay.
As we mentioned above, one of the most important open problems in physical mathematics, and
a root cause of the occasional chasm separating the intuition of mathematicians and physicists, is
the proper rigorous deﬁnition of quantum ﬁeld theory with nontrivial RG ﬂow. There is a signiﬁ-
cant body of mathematical work on quantum mechanical theories—from both condensed matter and
quantum ﬁeld theory—which incorporate energy and length scales. It is highly desirable to ﬁnd closer
connections of this work with the advances in the algebraic and topological sides of quantum theory.
It is often said that the best route to a rigorous deﬁnition of quantum ﬁeld theory is to use a lattice
regularization and ﬁnd a careful deﬁnition of the continuum limit. An interesting new wrinkle on this
old problem is the discovery of lattice models involving, for example, fracton phases. For one recent
review, see [790]. The investigation of fractor phases has become an important research direction in
condensed matter physics, as well as in high energy physics, because these lattice examples highlight
how subtle taking the continuum limit can be. Recent work [791–794] has clariﬁed the continuum
interpretation of some of these models and has demonstrated that, from traditional viewpoints of
quantum ﬁeld theories, the models are somewhat exotic. Certainly, the considerations in these papers
need to be further explored in several directions. For just one example, nontrivial interactions should
be included - the above works are based entirely on quadratic actions. It is possible that a theory of
“quantum ﬁeld theory with foliations” is relevant to these fracton phases. An exploration along these
lines can be found in [795–797] as well as in the related work [798] on topological defect networks. This
is new and relatively unexplored territory. It would be desirable to extend these models to include
more nontrivial foliations. Even in the framework of topological ﬁeld theory it might be interesting
to enhance the usual bordism categories to include foliations, or to explore whether, for example,
the Godbillon-Vey class could serve as an interesting action principle. Note, that the abelian ﬁve
dimensional Chern-Simons theory has the space of codimension two foliations with a ﬂat connection
on its leafs as a phase space [799]12. Also, a “Wick-rotated” Kodaira-Spencer theory describes the
three dimensional foliations of a six dimensional manifold equipped with a volume form (this is an
interpretation of Sect 2.1 of [800], referring to [371]), alternatively, one can also describe it by the “Wick-
rotated” version of the Polyakov-like formulation of the six dimensional Hitchin theory, obtained by
replacing +6 by −6 in the Eq. (11) of [801]. There are also interesting relations between fracton phases
and supersymmetric quiver theories [802,803] (as well as brane constructions [804]).
While fracton phases are currently popular we should not forget that even understanding rigorous
formulations of continuum limits of lattice formulations of more standard theories remains an important
open problem. Therefore it is important to be open to other novel ways to formulate theories with
scale. For example, in [805] the two-dimensional Ising model is placed in the framework of extended
topological ﬁeld theory creating a potential new pathway to incorporate the renormalization group.
Other new approaches to the problem of scale appear in [806,807].
One important question in this general set of ideas is when a topological phase must necessarily
have gapless modes when formulated on a manifold with boundary. A fairly general result in this
direction, in 2 + 1 dimensions, can be found in [60,808]. See also [172] for related obstructions to the
existence of gapped boundaries in invertible theories. One potentially interesting direction for future
research is to generalize these ideas and results other dimensions and to classify the various boundary
12The theory with the action
R
A ∧dA ∧dA associates to a four manifold M4 the phase space PM4 which is a quotient
of the space of solutions to the Gauss law F ∧F = 0 by the action of the group generated by the kernel of the form
R
M4 F ∧δA ∧δA, which is the semi-direct product of the gauge group and the group of diﬀeomorphisms of M4. The
foliation is spanned by the kernels of F
27

(and defect) theories that can exist in the presence of topological phases. An alternative set of ideas
addressing these kinds of problems can be found in [809].
A long-term project of Alexei Kitaev’s has been the classiﬁcation of short-range-entangled topo-
logical phases of matter in terms of a spectrum (in the sense of algebraic topology) in a generalized
cohomology theory. This approach attempts to classify phases of matter not by classifying spaces
of (local!) Hamiltonians but rather by examining the spaces of ground states of such local Hamil-
tonians. Kitaev has given precise deﬁnitions of short-range entangled states and a roadmap to their
classiﬁcation. A successful outcome of this program is likely to have a wide impact. 13
For some recent progress in the mathematical theory of SPT phases in quantum spin chains,
see [813]. If one allows passage to continuum ﬁeld theory, then short-range entangled states go over to
invertible ﬁeld theories [814], for which there is now a well-developed theory—at least in the topological
case—in the framework of stable homotopy theory. This leads to a general and computable formula
for the abelian group of invertible phases in all dimensions and for all symmetry types [50,815,816].
One can also use homotopical methods to compute groups of invertible phases on a ﬁxed space or stack
(space with symmetry) [817–819]. This includes interacting “crystalline phases”, a subject of current
interest in the condensed matter community; a very small sample of literature includes [820,821].
In the noninteracting case the classiﬁcation of topological band insulators is fairly well-understood.
It is based on K-theory [822–825], and, when crystalline symmetry is taken into account, twisted equiv-
ariant K-theory [826–829]. Some of the invariants implicit in twisted equivariant K-theory (obtained
by localizing the K-theory) have been used to give extensive lists of materials which might possibly be
crystalline topological insulators [830–833]. An interesting open question is whether there is topologi-
cal information in the twisted equivariant K-theory which has not yet been taken into account in the
classiﬁcation schemes of [830–833].
The connection between topological phases and TQFT’s has inspired new eﬀorts in the classiﬁcation
of TQFTs. Recently, 4d TQFTs were classiﬁed in [834–837], and most recently in [838], where it was
shown that not all 4d TQFTs are necessarily gauge theories of Dijkgraaf-Witten (for a ﬁnite group,
or higher-group) but can have a non-trivial so-called Majorana-layer, that obstructs mapping this to
a gauge theory. 5d topological order was discussed furthermore in [839].
Another fruitful point of contact between condensed matter theory and high energy physics is the
exploration of the notion of higher Berry curvatures and their relations to transport coeﬃcients [840–
844]. Among the many open questions these developments raise is the construction of a full diﬀerential
cohomology class corresponding to the higher Berry curvatures. Another important problem is the
generalization to include thermal transport coeﬃcients.
Underlying many of the ideas about topological phases of matter is quantum information theory,
a subject which has also been playing a central role in modern developments in quantum gravity. An
interesting generalization of ﬁnite depth quantum circuits are the quantum cellular automata [845–847]
which have interesting relations to C∗-algebras and index theory. It is natural to conjecture that they
too will play an interesting role in fundamental physics.
8
Connections To Geometry And Low-Dimensional Topology
8.1
Two-Dimensions: Moduli Spaces Of Curves And Hurwitz Theory
The development of matrix models of two-dimensional gravity [848–850] (see [851] for a review) led to
a physical proposal for computing intersection theory of Mumford-Morita-Miller classes on the moduli
spaces of curves [852], a proposal which was spectacularly conﬁrmed in [853]. See [854] for a review. A
much less well-known example are the generalizations studied in [855], which remain largely unexplored
(see, however, [856] for some developments). One interesting aspect of this work is that it uses an idea
closely related to the deﬁnition of Bauer-Furuta invariants of four-manifolds [857]. 14
A diﬀerent approach to the Witten conjecture was pursued in [861, 862] using Hurwitz moduli
spaces. These moduli spaces also appear quite naturally in large N expansions of two-dimensional
Yang-Mills theory [70,71,863,864]. More discussion can be found in [18]. Yet another approach to the
13Michael Freedman has, for some time now, suggested that a useful mathematical framework for this program is
coarse geometry and associated invariants, as developed by John Roe [810–812].
14The general idea behind the Bauer-Furuta invariant can in principle be applied to many other topological ﬁeld
theories of cohomological type. This is largely unexplored territory. Some aspects have been explored in the context of
Floer homotopy theory [858–860]. For a nice review, see the talk of C. Manolescu at the WHCGP, October 3, 2022.
28

Witten conjecture makes use of the ideas of geometric recursion [865,866]. See also [867] for appearance
of Hurwitz number in topological string theory.
More recently some remarkable new observations about Hurwitz theory motivated by the AdS3/CFT2
correspondence have been observed in [868] (See also [869,870].). It would be quite interesting to know
whether (and if so, how) these appearances of Hurwitz theory are related to each other.
8.2
Knots, Links, And Three-Manifold Invariants
In the past few decades there have been remarkable advances in the topology of 3-manifolds and
knots. Some of these advances have been deeply related to explorations of quantum ﬁeld theory. One
of the most spectacular applications of quantum ﬁeld theory to low dimensional topology is Witten’s
interpretation of the Jones polynomial in terms of Chern-Simons ﬁeld theory [871] and the associated
discovery of the WRT invariants of three-manifolds [872, 873]. The ramiﬁcations of these discoveries
continue to the present day.
Many modern investigations of the relation between three-manifold topology and supersymmetric
quantum ﬁeld theory are ultimately related to the 6d (2, 0) theory. Typically, one considers this theory
on a product of two 3-manifolds, compactiﬁes on the factors in diﬀerent orders and learns something
interesting. An important example of this general idea is provided by the study of theories T [M]
associated to considering the 6d theory on a 3-manifold M [874].
One can study, for example, partition functions of theories T [M] on S3 or more generally on lens
spaces. Somewhat surprisingly, these are closely related to Chern-Simons theories with noncompact
gauge groups such as complex gauge groups. See [875] for one example of such a computation. A great
deal of work has been done on localization computations of supersymmetric quantum ﬁeld theories on
spaces admitting a torus action. For example, [72] rederived the Verlinde formula using the embedding
of Chern-Simons theory into a twisted version of supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory.
In [90, 876]
the formalism applicable to lens spaces, S1 × Σ, and more general Seifert manifolds was developed.
See [877] for a review. The techniques have been extended to larger classes of three-manifolds such as
Seifert-ﬁbered spaces [878–883], as well as to ﬁve dimensional theories [884].
Through the above route (and others) the study of the 6d (2,0) theory leads to the study of Chern-
Simons theory for noncompact gauge groups, a subject which has been vigorously studied for decades
now. A very incomplete set of references includes [250, 885–888]. The subject continues to present
important open problems. It cannot be a topological ﬁeld theory in the strictest sense, because state
spaces are inﬁnite dimensional, and gluing is not obvious. Nevertheless, it is “almost” a TQFT. For
some approaches to solving this problem see [882,889–891].
A very important example of a “non-compact group Chern-Simons theory” is the “Teichmuller
TQFT.” [889, 892–895]. In particular, the extremely beautiful paper of V. Mikhaylov [894] relates
the Teichmuller TQFT to the 6d (2,0) theory, and formulates the hyperbolic volume conjecture of
Andersen-Kashaev in terms of a conjecture on the nature of solutions of the Kapustin-Witten equations
on M × R+ with Nahm pole boundary conditions at the ﬁnite boundary. It was recently pointed out
15 that this conjecture gives a natural explanation of some remarkable discoveries relating three-
dimensional indices to Stokes matrices of three-dimensional complex Chern-Simons theory [294].
One concrete form of the partition function of a complex Chern-Simons theory on a 3-fold are
the state-integral invariants, which can be deﬁned for a subclass of 3-manifolds that admit simplicial
decompositions with a so-called “positive angle structure.” They take the form of a contour integral
of products of factors, involving the quantum dilogarithm, and the precise contours are determined by
the angle structure [885,886,896–902].
If, instead one considers the partition function on a product of a disk and a circle, with a suitable
2d QFT on the boundary, and when M has a presentation given by a “plumbing presentation” one
is led to contour integral formulae for the “homological blocks” discussed in [891,903]. (Precursors to
these blocks, sometimes called “holomorphic blocks” in this context were described in [904,905].) The
derivation of these formulae could use further clariﬁcation - this is a good problem for the near-future.
The resulting formulae are clearly of great interest. They give interesting q-series related to mock
modular forms, resurgence and quantum modular forms [662]. Moreover, as shown in [904] they lead
to many interesting identities and results on q-series.
15In unpublished work of A. Khan, D. Gaiotto, G. Moore and F. Yan
29

Another source of three-manifold invariants based on twisted supersymmetric QFT are the Rozansky-
Witten invariants associated to a choice of holomorphic symplectic manifold [906, 907]. (These are
also known as B-twisted 3d N = 4 sigma models.) Recently interesting progress has been made on
such theories associated with noncompact manifolds such as Coulomb branches of 3d N = 4 the-
ories [908–910].
These investigations are part of a program to give a physical framework for the
non-semisimple 3-manifold invariants discussed in [911–914]. 16
Yet another application of the 6d (2, 0) theory is to link homology [920, 921]. One approach to a
physical understanding of link homology is based on statecounting and the M5 brane [903,922–926]. A
second (but closely related) approach to a physical basis for knot homology was initiated in [905,927].
The latter approach is intimately connected to the physical interpretation of the geometric Langlands
program and the theory of supersymmetric boundary conditions in N = 4 SYM. This approach
relies on Morse complexes based on the diﬃcult Kapustin-Witten and Haydys-Witten equations 17
but under some conditions important simpliﬁcations can be achieved and the formulation of knot
homology can be expressed in terms of two-dimensional Landau-Ginzburg theories [115, 933, 934]. A
related, but distinct, program has been vigorously pursued by M. Aganagic [935, 936] in work that
makes interesting use [729,937,938] of the q-deformed Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations of [939].
In a rather diﬀerent direction, an important source of progress in understanding the topology of 3-
manifolds has been the study of Ricci ﬂow [940–945] which itself is closely related to, the RG equations
of nonlinear sigma models [210,211]. It is natural to wonder whether there can be useful technology
transfer from the recently developed mathematics back to physics. See [946] for a very interesting
recent development in this direction.
The theories T [M] for M a non-hyperbolic three-manifold ﬂow to topological theories in the IR.
It was recently conjectured that this provides an interesting, new way to classify both bosonic and
fermionic phases of matter in 3d [947]. Fermionic phases arise by including reﬁned global information
in the dimensional reduction, which account for 1-form symmetries in the 3d theory [883].
This
potentially provides a complementary, geometric, way to classify gapped phases, distinct from the
approach using modular tensor categories (MTCs); see [178, 786, 948, 949] for a discussion of bosonic
topological order. Exploring this connection between non-hyperbolic three-manifolds and MTC seems
an intriguing direction for the future.
8.3
QFT And Four-Manifold Invariants
One of the paradigmatic examples of physical mathematics is the interaction between supersymmetric
ﬁeld theory and four-manifold invariants. After the discovery of instanton solutions of Yang-Mills
equations [950,951] the work of the Oxford school, led by M. Atiyah and N. Hitchin, culminated in the
discovery of Donaldson invariants of smooth four-manifolds [952,953]. Motivated by questions posed
by M. Atiyah, Witten produced a quantum ﬁeld theory interpretation of the Donaldson invariants and
in the process invented topological quantum ﬁeld theory [62]. The desire to use this formulation to
give an eﬀective evaluation of Donaldson invariants was one of the motivations for the development
of Seiberg-Witten theory [954,955] culminating in the introduction of Seiberg-Witten invariants [956],
a development which revolutionized the study of four-manifolds [957]. Given this spectacular success
one naturally wonders if further study of (topologically twisted) supersymmetric ﬁeld theory can lead
to further insights into the diﬀerential topology of four- (and three-) manifolds. In recent years there
have been several developments along these lines.
From the physical viewpoint the Seiberg-Witten theory can be used to give an evaluation of the
Donaldson invariants via the study of a certain integral along the Coulomb branch, sometimes referred
to as the “u-plane integral”. This family of integrals was ﬁrst studied in [632,958] and it leads to many
remaining open problems. In the case of pure SU(2) theory the wall-crossing behavior of the Coulomb
branch integral leads to a rather direct derivation of the famous “Witten conjecture” expressing the
16These works are in turn closely related to “logarithmic CFT,” perhaps better called “non-semisimple conformal
ﬁeld theory.” If one generalizes the representations of the Virasoro algebra provided by primary ﬁelds to reducible, but
indecomposable, representations then the usual conformal Ward identities lead to correlators that involve logarithms.
It is now recognized that there should be an important generalization of RCFT based on allowing such indecomposable
representations and this is an active area of current research. For reviews see [915–919]. The subject is diﬃcult. It
is analogous to generalizing the representation theory of compact groups to the representation theory of noncompact
groups. Nevertheless, it is now showing up in the physics of percolation, noncompact Chern-Simons theory, instantonic
ﬁeld theories [742,743], and the geometric Langlands program, so it is clearly important.
17Whose moduli spaces are beginning to be understood from a solid mathematical framework [928–932].
30

Donaldson invariants in terms of the Seiberg-Witten invariants for compact oriented four-manifolds
with b+
2 > 1 [632]. (One good aspect of this approach is that the four-manifold need not be toric,
or even complex. But it does require the existence of an almost complex structure, as is standard
in Donaldson theory.) The integral can be generalized to include other Lagrangian N = 2, d = 4
theories [632, 958, 959]. The formulation of u-plane integrand for general d = 4 N = 2 Lagrangian
theories involves a crucial - but diﬃcult - issue of determining “contact terms” in the presence of
observables. The determination of these terms was described in [958] as a theory of deformations
of special K¨ahler manifolds, yet to be developed.
This remains an important open problem.
As
explained in [958] in the general Lagrangian case the path integral localizes to the moduli space of the
nonabelian version of the Seiberg-Witten equations which, when localized further to the moduli space
of instantons, involves densities diﬀerent from those used to compute the Donaldson invariants. The
developments described here are nicely reviewed in detail in the book [960].
The direct evaluation of u-plane integrals is an eﬃcient way to use physics to derive the invariants
for manifolds with b+
2 = 1 such as CP2 and S2 × S2. It turns out that an eﬀective way to evaluate
these integrals involves the use of modular and mock-modular forms. This was recognized early on for
the special cases of CP2 and S2 × S2 [632,961–963], but the relation to mock modular forms is quite
deep and quite general, as has been clariﬁed recently in [627,634–636]. The latter papers highlight as
well the use of Jacobi-Maass forms. The technique has proven useful for the pure SU(2) theory and
for the SU(2) N = 2∗theory. In the case of SU(2) with fundamental ﬂavors new important technical
issues arise since the Coulomb branch is no longer a modular curve [964,965].
The case of the SU(2) N = 2∗theory presents a number of interesting variations on the above
ideas [627]. First, it interpolates nicely between the Donaldson and Vafa-Witten invariants. Being su-
perconformal it presents the added novelty that not only the integrand but the value of the Coulomb
branch integral (as a function of the ultra-violet coupling) is a mock modular form. In fact, the eval-
uation on general b+
2 = 1 manﬁfolds for general spin-c structure presents some new open problems
concerning mock Jacobi forms which have yet to be resolved [627]. Finally, and perhaps most interest-
ingly, there are very close connections to a beautiful series of works on enumerative algebraic geometry
by G¨ottsche, Kool, Nakajima, and Williams [966,967].
The case of pure SU(N) theory was studied in [958,959], and in [959] the wall-crossing technique
was employed to give explicit formulae for the SU(N) Donaldson invariants in terms of Seiberg-
Witten invariants. In principle the formulae can be generalized to all higher rank compact semisimple
gauge groups.
This has not been done, and it would be interesting to do so since it would lead
to nontrivial predictions about Floer homology following the line of reasoning in [968, 969].
The
mathematical challenges to verifying these physical predictions are formidable but nontrivial progress
has been made [969,970]. Generalizing the work of [627,634–636] to the case of higher rank theories
on b+
2 = 1 manifolds is completely open, and presents an interesting challenge that will probably lead
to new generalizations of the notion of automorphic functions. It would be very interesting to extend
the relation of the results of [627] with [966,967] to the higher rank case.
There are a number of other interesting and valuable generalizations of Coulomb branch integrals
which should be pursued in the future, and we will describe some of these brieﬂy.
One important generalization is to consider suitable couplings to supergravity to give ﬁeld theoretic
interpretations of Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants associated with families of four-manifolds.
This should connect to some old ideas of Donaldson concerning generalizations of the Donaldson in-
variants to give interesting equivariant cohomology classes on BDiﬀ(X) of a four-manifold X [957,971].
There has been some limited mathematical investigation of this topic. See [972–979] for some exam-
ples. There has been some recent deﬁnite progress in formulating the relevant physical theories for
addressing these problems [980] (which explores in great detail a suggestion made in [632]). Never-
theless, a great deal remains to be done. One key issue is ﬁnding a suitable generalizations of the 0-
and 2-observables of Donaldson theory to the families case. It is natural to expect that there will be
a family version of the “Witten conjecture” relating Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants, but no
concrete results on this have been published. Recently there have been some exciting developments on
the mathematical side concerning somewhat related problems (i.e. new results on the diﬀeomorphism
groups of four-manifolds) [981–984]. It would be very interesting to see if these are connected to the
invariants coming from SYM.
There should be new Coulomb branch integrals associated to 5d and 6d susy gauge theory, a topic
which has been explored in [958,985–990]. Mathematically, the 5d invariants are related to “K-theoretic
31

generalizations of Donaldson invariants.” Roughly speaking, one includes an insertion of the ˆA genus in
the intersection theory on the moduli space of instantons. Note, that on the physics side, for 4d/5d/6d
theories with unitary gauge groups the relevant contact terms were computed in [150, 365, 991–994],
using several new ideas: Ω-deformation [365], noncommutative ﬁeld theory [433], and localization.
Very recently the Coulomb branch integral for such 5d invariants has been under very careful and
intense scrutiny from several points of view [989,990] with a view to reproducing and generalizing the
results of [987].
Moving on to the six-dimensional approach to the Donaldson invariants and their generalizations,
many new issues arise. From one point of view, one would like to generalize the 4d theories from
Lagrangian theories to all theories of class S. In [627], section 8, a number of open problems related
to the formulation of general “u-plane integrals” for such theories were spelled out, and they will not
be repeated here - but they constitute an interesting set of directions for future progress. Moreover,
ever since the work of Vafa and Witten on S-duality of twisted N = 4 theory [102] a six dimensional
perspective on four-manifold invariants has been pursued.
In particular, a six dimensional lift of
Donaldson theory has been considered in section 5.6 of [72]. A dual viewpoint emerges: two dimensional
(0, 2)-supersymmetric sigma models with instanton moduli spaces as targets on the one hand, and the
double periodic version of Seiberg-Witten theory, on the other [727, 995, 996]. The ﬁrst viewpoint
upgrades Donaldson polynomials to the elliptic genus of instanton moduli space with some bundle of
matter zero-modes, mathematically viewed as moduli space of Higgs sheaves on a complex surface [997].
It is related to the attempts to ﬁnd the four dimensional analogues of RCFT and the related “four-
dimensional Verlinde formula” of [103].
The 6d viewpoint is also related to attempts to understand a ﬁeld-theoretic origin of Nakajima
algebras. The cohomology of the six dimensional counterpart of the Donaldson supercharge contains
an inﬁnite dimensional chiral algebra. (In this context it is worth recalling that elliptic genera of
instanton moduli spaces are used in the attempts to build the second quantized string theory from
Matrix theory, and in the calculations of black hole entropy [998], suggesting further intriguing potential
connections.)
There are several more recent, but closely related, developments. References [999–1001] suggested
that there might be new four-manifold invariants associated with the compactiﬁcation of a 6d theory
on a four-manifold. Roughly, one considers the tmf class of the resulting 2d susy QFT. However, it
remains to be seen if the tmf class really captures new topological information beyond the homotopy
type of the four-manifold. It is not obvious that the tmf class will depend on more than the homotopy
type since the IR theory on the Coulomb branch depends only on the homotopy type of the four-
manifold.
Relations to vertex operator algebra theory, generalizing the profound and remarkable
results of Nakajima relating the cohomology of moduli spaces of instantons to representations of aﬃne
Lie algebras, are also found in [999–1001].
Finally, as has been stressed by Witten, one of the most promising directions for the discovery of
new four-manifold invariants is to make good mathematical sense of a categoriﬁcation of Vafa-Witten
invariants.
8.4
Hyperk¨ahler and Quaternionic K¨ahler Geometry
Hyperk¨ahler metrics play an important role in investigations of moduli spaces of vacua of supersym-
metric ﬁeld theories. They have long been a source of fascination within mathematics. Indeed the
hyperk¨ahler quotient construction grew out of an extremely fruitful collaboration between physicists
and mathematicians in [1002].
More recently, investigations into the BPS spectrum of ﬁeld theory and their wall-crossing properties
led to a new construction of hyperk¨ahler metrics based on integral equations formally equivalent to
those appearing in the thermodynamic Bethe ansatz (TBA) [1003]. The new technique might lead to
useful exact results in hyperk¨ahler geometry. There have been interesting rigorous mathematical [1004]
and numerical [1005,1006] checks of [1003], but some basic questions (like existence and uniqueness of
solutions of the TBA equations) remain open. The techniques can, in principle, be extended to give
exact solutions of Hitchin’s equations on surfaces [1007] but this has been much less explored.
One of the initial hopes for the construction [1003] was the idea that one could use the construction
to produce exact formulae for K3 metrics.
For example, one could combine these ideas with the
discussion of the D3 probe in F-theory as a deformation of a system consisting of four copies of the
SU(2), Nf = 4, theory [1008]. The main diﬃculty in this approach is that of determining the relevant
32

spectral networks and BPS spectrum, since the D3 probe theory is not a standard quantum ﬁeld
theory. Recently this idea has been pushed further in the context of little string theory in [1009,1010].
It would be a major achievement of the mathematics-physics dialogue if these developments led to a
tractable and exact formula for the metric on any smooth nondegenerate K3 surfaces.
There has been some eﬀort to extend the new constructions of hyperk¨ahler metrics to quaternionic
K¨ahler metrics. The two are closely related by the Swann construction. These metrics are of im-
portance in deriving the hypermultiplet moduli spaces of the supergravity LEET of four-dimensional
N = 2 string compactiﬁcations. Progress has been made in [1011–1016] although obstacles remain
because of the large growth of BPS black hole entropy as a function of charge, and the related issue
of how to account for NS5-brane instanton contributions.
Recently there have been some very interesting developments concerning complex hyperk¨ahler
geometries associated with BPS states. These results shed light on some old work of D. Joyce on
wall-crossing invariants and perhaps will lead to progress in the construction of quaternionic K¨ahler
metrics [1017–1022].
Finally, the physics of BPS states makes nontrivial predictions about the cohomology and diﬀer-
ential geometry of certain hyperk¨ahler manifolds. Examples of the relevant manifolds include moduli
spaces of magnetic monopoles on R3 in Yang-Mills-Higgs theory. A remarkable paper of A. Sen used
the predictions of S-duality of N = 4 SYM to derive nontrivial conjectures about the existence of
self-dual normalizable harmonic forms on monopole moduli space [1023]. Historically, this paper pro-
vided a large impetus for the fundamental use of strong-weak duality symmetries in investigations of
supersymmetric ﬁeld theory and string theory. The essential technique used in [1023] is the collective
coordinate description of BPS states in weakly coupled ﬁeld theories. Some of Sen’s predictions were
rigorously proven in [1024]. When the technique of collective coordinate quantization is applied to
describe BPS states in general N = 2, d = 4 ﬁeld theories physical statements about BPS states
translate into nontrivial generalizations of Sen’s predictions and can be phrased as general predictions
about the L2 kernels of Dirac operators coupled to hyperholomorphic bundles over monopole moduli
space [1025,1026]. In some analogous situations the physical predictions based on BPS states about the
delicate questions regarding the kernels of Dirac operators on noncompact spaces have been rigorously
veriﬁed [1027].
The topology - speciﬁcally the homology and cohomology - of Hitchin moduli spaces and character
varieties has been the subject of much work beginning with a study of SYZ-type [1028] mirror symme-
try and its relation to Langlands duality [1029]. In another direction, a very general conjecture known
as the “P = W” conjecture has been extensively studied in [1030–1042]. The results can be inter-
preted very nicely using BPS states associated with string theory compactiﬁcation on local Calabi-Yau
manifolds [1043–1046].
9
Geometrization Of Quantum Field Theory
Geometric engineering of quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) broadly refers to the various methods used to
deﬁne QFTs from a certain geometric scheme. This provides a deﬁnition of QFTs beyond the standard
paradigm of Lagrangian theories and gives access to strongly-coupled regimes. Broadly speaking, the
following approaches fall under the header of geometric engineering:
1. Geometric engineering: The original framework that establishes the paradigm of geometric
engineering is the construction of QFTs by decoupling the low-dimensional non-gravitational
degrees of freedom of string or M-theory on a non-compact (and not necessarily smooth) space
X.
Some constructions of this type can be thought of as the limits of large volume of the
standard string compactiﬁcations on X, where gravity has been decoupled. The requirement of
supersymmetry in the resulting QFT usually implies that X has reduced holonomy.
2. Branes: QFTs can be geometrically deﬁned by also studying the low energy dynamics of branes
and various non-perturbative states of string and M-theory. These can be obtained in diverse
backgrounds which can be ﬂat, have reduced holonomy, be singular, and/or be supported by
ﬂux.
3. QFTd →QFTd−n: Another powerful scheme of geometric engineering is to obtain QFTs in
d-dimensions by reducing higher-dimensional ﬁeld theories on manifolds Σ, possibly with bound-
aries. In this paradigm, the QFT in d dimensions is deﬁned by the higher-d theory, the geometry
33

and topology of Σ, and the speciﬁc data for the reduction such as choice of topological twist,
ﬂuxes for ﬂavor symmetry, and boundary conditions on Σ for the higher-d theory. This approach
is complemented by the previous methods when the higher-d theory admits a geometric deﬁni-
tion. The reduction of the theory has a dual geometric picture where speciﬁc brane setups are
wrapped on Σ.
4. Holography: QFTs can also be deﬁned geometrically (though maybe the terminology of ge-
ometic engineering is less standard in this context) by constructing AdSd+1 × M solutions in
string and M-theory supergravity. The reduction of string and M-theory on M provides a su-
pergravity theory on AdSd+1 which then deﬁnes a conformal ﬁeld theory in d dimensions by
the AdS/CFT dictionary. This method is intimately related to the previous one since the AdS
solutions often describe the near-horizon limit of brane conﬁgurations.
Many of the above geometric realizations are inter-connected. Numerous theories have descriptions
in several of the above constructions, which are related by string dualities. An example is the 4d
N = 4 Super-Yang Mills theory with gauge algebra su(N): it has a constuction in terms of Type
IIB on C2/ZN × T 2, which can be thought of as a non-compact K3-surface times a torus; as theory
on a stack of N D3-branes (after decoupling the center of mass mode), as the 6d (2, 0) compactiﬁed
on a T 2, and ﬁnally it has as holographic description in terms of the Type IIB supergravity solution
AdS5 × S5. Diﬀerent realizations can provide at times better control of certain aspects. E.g. some
symmetries may be manifest in some descriptions and not in others.
The holographic setting provides a unique laboratory to explore strongly coupled QFTs via weakly
coupled gravitational theories. Indeed, this has been most fruitful in cases where the QFTs have large
number of degrees of freedom where the dual gravitational theory is in its classical regimes. There is a
very close connection between brane-engineering and holography in terms of the underlying geometies.
The prime example here are the Sasaki-Einstein manifolds X5 that appear in the constuction of AdS5
duals to 4d N = 1 SCFTs. In turn these SCFTs can be constucted by probing the singular Calabi-Yau
three-folds, that are the cones over the Sasaki-Einstein manifolds X5 [1047].
Geometric engineering provides new perspectives in the study of QFTs. First it often provides a way
to study both weakly-coupled and strongly-coupled QFTs using one geometric framework. It provides
a natural setting to extract and explore topological data (such as the generalized symmetries) and
invariant quantities of RG-ﬂows associated to QFTs such as ’t Hooft anomalies. Geometric structures
of QFTs such as moduli space of vacua, conformal manifolds, duality relations, and RG ﬂows are also
naturally realizable in geometric engineering. This paradigm also provides a way to make precise a
classiﬁcation program for QFTs and sharpens the notion of spaces of QFTs.
This is often aided by the fact that the QFT classiﬁcation program can be mapped to a geometric
one, where it ﬁnds a mathematically well-deﬁned formulation. These can be for example geometries X
with reduced holonomy and certain singularities, geometries M from solutions of supergravity equations
or choices of boundary conditions and topological twists on compact manifolds Σ. The interconnection
of QFTs and geometry is also a point of contact between the mathematics and physics communities
in the seminar series [16].
9.1
Geometric Classiﬁcation of Superconformal Field Theories
The canonical setup of geometric engineering will preserve some supersymmetry, which in the simplest
case implies that X has reduced holonomy. Examples of this are Calabi-Yau n-folds as well as excep-
tional holonomy G2 and Spin(7) manifolds. The use of geometrically engineering QFTs is three-fold: 1.
it allows the construction of strongly-coupled QFTs, 2. important properties such as symmetries and
their ’t Hooft anomalies are encoded in the string theory construction, 3. the geometrization enables
a classiﬁcation program.
In the recent past, the utility of this approach was realized in the context of a geometric classiﬁcation
of 6d superconformal ﬁeld theories (SCFTs) [1048–1050], and geometric exploration of 5d SCFTs
starting with [1051–1058]. SCFTs in dimensions 5 and 6 are automatically strongly-coupled, UV ﬁxed
points [1059, 1060], and not accessible with perturbative QFT methods. It is the existence of such
strongly-coupled SCFTs, which is predicted by string theory.
34

9.1.1
6d SCFTs
6d SCFTs have a geometric engineering realization in Type IIB string theory.
The theories with
N = (2, 0) supersymmetry are classiﬁed by an ADE gauge algebra, and have a construction from
C2/ΓADE, where ΓADE ⊂SU(2) is a ﬁnite subgroup of ADE type.
Note, that these SCFTs are
not absolute theories, see section 4.3. The absolute theories in 6d with maximal supersymmetry are
tabulated in [1061].
In contrast, the classiﬁcation of 6d (1, 0) theories is geometrically much more intricate: these
theories have a realization in terms of F-theory compactiﬁcations on elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau
three-folds. F-theory is Type IIB string theory, where the axio-dilaton τ = c0 + 1/gs is not constant,
but non-trivially ﬁbered over the type IIB compactiﬁcation space. For elliptic Calabi-Yau threefolds
the base is a K¨ahler surface B2 (and only for trivial ﬁbrations is the IIB compactiﬁcation space Ricci-
ﬂat).
In the simplest instance when the elliptic ﬁbration has a zero-section, it can be written in
Weierstrass form y2 = x3 + fx + g, where f and g are sections of the canonical bundle of B2. The
elliptic ﬁbration develops singularities, which follow (at least in codimension one in the base) the
Kodaira classiﬁcation of singular ﬁbers, which is characterized in terms of the vanishing order along
a discriminant component z = 0: (ordzf, ordzg, ordz∆) < (4, 6, 12), where ∆= 4f 3 + 27g2. Here
z is a local coordinate on the base B2. SCFTs arise when the vanishing orders satisfy ≥(4, 6, 12),
and are so-called non-minimal ﬁbers.
The classiﬁcation result in [1048–1050] states that the base
geometries for 6d SCFTs are B2 = C2/Γ where now Γ ⊂U(2). For a review see [1062]. Resolving
these singularities in the base, replaces B2 with ˜B2, which is resolved by a collection of rational curves.
This characterizes the tensor branch of the 6d SCFT, i.e. the moduli space that is characterized by
giving vevs to scalars in the tensor multiplet. The Kodaira type of the singular ﬁber above compact
(non-compact) curve in the base, maps in F-theory to the gauge (ﬂavour symmetry) group of the
6d theory. Additional codimension two singularities occur when two components of the discriminant
intersect. These correspond in the 6d theory to hypermultiplet matter.
Frozen Phase of F-theory.
In the realm of 6d SCFTs there are in addition so-called frozen singu-
larities [445, 1063, 1064], which correspond to adding O7+-planes into the F-theory compactiﬁcation.
One of the main challenges in the 6d classiﬁcation program is a ﬁrst principle understanding of these
frozen phases, the anomaly cancellation and dual M-theory description. To provide a precise deﬁnition
of the frozen phase of F-theory one would need to determine what corresponds to a “frozen” F-theory
background, when no dual IIA description exists. This is an important outstanding problem, which
plays a central role in establishing a mathematically complete classiﬁcation of 6d SCFTs.
9.1.2
5d SCFTs
A closely related question is the classiﬁcation program of 5d N = 1 SCFTs. Again, these are strongly-
coupled ﬁxed points, whose existence is argued using string theory [1059,1060,1065,1066]. The con-
jectured classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs is in terms of canonical singularities: i.e. non-compact Calabi-Yau
three-folds X, with singularities that admit a resolution π : e
X →X, such that the canonical classes
K ˜
X = π−1KX + P
i aiDi, where ai ≥0, where Di are the exceptional divisors of the blowup. For
ai = 0 these admit so-called crepant resolutions. When ai > 0 the singularity is terminal. Canonical
singularities also admit complex structure deformations. There are two types of moduli spaces for 5d
SCFTs: the Coulomb branch and Higgs branch. The latter has the structure of a hyper-K¨ahler cone.
The precise dictionary for canonical singularities to 5d SCFTs is extremely well developed and
understood for the case when crepant relations exist. The resolved geometry describes the Coulomb
branch of the 5d SCFT: this is an abelian gauge group with matter and Chern-Simons couplings. At
special subloci of the Coulomb branch there can be non-abelian gauge theory descriptions – but not
all theories have such a Lagrangian description. When the geometries have terminal singularities, the
interpretation of the 5d SCFTs is not fully understood, although recent progress in understanding their
deformations (and thereby the Higgs branch of the associated theories), has been made [1067–1069].
A classiﬁcation program of 5d SCFTs was initiated using various approaches. The most systematic
thus far is starting with the geometry underlying 6d SCFTs, and applying geometric deformations to
these geometries. In particular M-theory on elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau three-folds gives rise to 5d
KK-theories, which UV complete in 6d [1051]. Starting from these theories a systematic exploration
can be carried out [1053–1058], including salient features such as the symmetries and dualities of such
35

theories. It remains a challenging geometric question to prove that these constructions from 6d result
in a full classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs.
Future Directions.
Mathematically canonical singularities for 3-folds are in theory understood,
based on the Mori minimal model program in algebraic geometry (for an introduction see [1070]).
For 3-folds this is developed in much detail to the extent that an algorithm exists, how to perform
crepant and small resolutions, and identify terminal singularities. The issue however is that the explicit
classiﬁcation of canonical three-fold singularities does not exist (as in a list, or a concrete realization of
all such singularities). Clearly, the classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs provides some possible approach: starting
with the gluing of compact surfaces and collapsing these to singularities as in [1052]. However this
approach has not resulted in a characterization of the Calabi-Yau singularities, nor does it incorporate
terminal singularities. Combining the abstract insights from the minimal model program, combined
with the concrete construction of 5d SCFT from collections of compact surfaces, should be a very
promising starting point to provide a concrete classiﬁcation of canonical singularities. Note that for
n-fold canonical singularities with n > 3, the minimal model program is far less explicit than for
3-folds, so that further insights from geometric engineering of QFTs (e.g. 3d theories or 4d theories
for elliptic Calabi-Yau four-folds) could provide some guidance.
An important geometric question is the precise connection between canonical singularities and the
quantum Higgs branch of the associated 5d SCFT. What is the interpretation of terminal singularities?
Some aspects of this are discussed in [1067,1071]. Another important question is the inter-relation of
SCFTs accross dimensions: e.g. it is not known whether all 5d SCFTs be obtained from 6d SCFTs,
using a circle-reduction and deformations (such as ﬂavor Wilson lines, automorphism twists). Likewise
an even more challenging question is the classiﬁcation of 4d SCFTs with 8 or 4 supercharges.
Developing a uniﬁed framework – e.g. mapping geometric realizations to brane-constructions, and
vice versa – will be essential in developing a complete classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs.
Currently the
descriptions have a large overlap, but there are theories, which evade constructions in one of the
two frameworks. In particular, toric Calabi-Yau three-folds are dual to certain 5-brane brane-webs.
However, webs where multiple 5-branes can end on a single 7-brane – so-called ”white dots” [1072] –
are not understood in the geometry. Physically this is again interlinked by Higgsing. Mathematically
this will lead to a generalized notion of toric geometry, as anticipated in [1073,1074].
There are numerous constructions for 4d SCFTs and many approaches to their characterization
and classiﬁcation have been put forward. Here we focus on the geometric engineering constructions.
We discuss in section 9.3 constructions starting from higher dimensional QFTs, such as class S. Using
geometric engineering they can be obtained in Type IIB string theory on canonical singularities – i.e.
the same spaces that underlie the construction of 5d SCFTs in M-theory [1075–1079]. See [145] for a
recent pedagogical overview.
9.1.3
Moduli Spaces of Theories with 8 Supercharges
A beautiful connection between theories with 8 supercharges has emerged and made precise in the last
few years, which interconnects the theories by dimensional reduction (with added beneﬁts), and the
relation between their moduli spaces. Progress in the recent years has shown that the Higgs branches
of higher-dimensional theories (5d, 4d, in particular) can be characterized in terms of an auxiliary 3d
theory – the magnetic quiver theory [1080,1081].
The Higgs branch of a 5d SCFT is related to the versal deformations of the Calabi-Yau singularity
that engineers the theory in M-theory. However the Higgs branch receives quantum corrections. For
isolated toric or hypersurface singularities [986] the deformation theory is well-deﬁned, and in some
instances the full quantum Higgs branch can be determined. In general this is however not understood,
in particular for non-isolated singularities. Using an alternative description of 5d SCFTs, applicable
for a large class of theories albeit not all, based on 5-brane webs, an algorithm for determining the
Higgs branches using auxiliary 3d quiver gauge theories [1081,1082]. These so-called magnetic quivers
have 3d N = 4 supersymmetry and conjecturally, their Coulomb branch gives rise to the Higgs branch
of the 5d SCFT. The Coulomb branch of 3d N = 4 quivers can be given some characterization by
various 3d partition functions (see e.g. [877,879,1083,1084]) with the Hilbert series being the simplest
and most useful example. The expression for the Coulomb branch Hilbert series ﬁrst obtained in [1085]
is often called the monopole formula and for Lagrangian theories it can be obtained as a limit of the
supersymmetric index [1086]. The Coulomb branches were also studied using the algebra of protected
36

local operators in by Bullimore, Dimofte, Gaiotto [1087], and from more mathematical perspective in
the works of Braverman, Finkelstein and Nakajima [1088,1089]. This links the geometric engineering
program of SCFT to developments in 3d mirror symmetry and symplectic singularities.
Deriving the Higgs branch from a geometric description, and proving the conjecture connecting
it to the Coulomb branch of the 3d magnetic quiver is one of the outstanding question in this area.
This program of developing the quantum moduli space (including its global stratiﬁcation structure
into Higgs and Coulomb branches) will develop in parallel to the classiﬁcation of theories with 8
supercharges.
9.1.4
Generalized Symmetries and Anomaly Theories
Not only does geometric engineering construct QFTs, it also allows the computation of physical prop-
erties of the theories. This is of particular utility when these theories are strongly-coupled and non-
Lagrangian. Generalized global symmetries, higher-group symmetries and their anomalies, as discussed
in section 4, can be derived from the geometry.
Global symmetries are encoded in particular relative homology classes of the space X, relative to
its boundary ∂X: non-compact (relative) q-cycles in Hq(X, ∂X, Z), can be wrapped by branes, and
give rise to defect operators. The defect operators modulo screening by local operators is deﬁned as the
set of such relative cycles, modulo screening branes wrapping compact q-cycles, which can be obtained
by wrapping branes and their magnetic duals [1090–1099].
Anomalies for generalized higher-form symmetries are formulated in terms of the background ﬁelds:
for q-form symmetries these are B ∈Hq+1(Md, Γ(q)), where M is the spacetime. In M/string theory
these are realized from supergravity form-ﬁelds expanded on the relative cohomology cycles of the
compactiﬁcation space X. The symmetry topological ﬁeld theory is the d+1 dimensional TQFT, which
upon imposing boundary conditions for the background ﬁelds, gives rise to the anomaly theory of the d-
dimensional QFT. More generally anomalies for discrete symmetries require a reﬁnement to generalized
cohomology theories: the background ﬁelds for discrete symmetries descend from torsion cycles, which
can be incorporated by treating the string/M-theory ﬁelds as cocycles in a diﬀerential cohomology
theory [244, 1100]. See [162, 455] for introductions to diﬀerential cohomology aimed at physicists. In
M-theory it appears that the diﬀerential cohomology theory has an underlying quantization based
on (w4-shifted) singular cohomology theory, but in type II string theory the relevant cohomology
theory appears to be diﬀerential K-theory [162, 239, 243, 455, 1101].
This diﬀerential cohomology
approach to anomaly theories and symmetry TFTs was developed for higher-form symmetries in M-
theory compactiﬁcations in [1102]: The reduction on ∂X results in the SymTFT, which after choosing
boundary conditions, gives rise to the anomaly theory for 0- and 1-form symmetries.
The computation of anomaly theories can receive several contributions. The canonical ones come
from reducing the topological interactions of string or M-theory. Another contribution comes from
St¨uckelberg mechanisms that exist from the reduction of string or M-theory. In addition to providing
new anomaly terms, these mechanisms also reduce the continuous symmetries from string or M-theory
to discrete symmetries.
The existence of such mechanisms occur when the various q-form gauge
symmetries in string or M-theory fail to admit equivariant extensions with respect to the isometry
group of the manifold where the theory is being reduced on. A systematic study of anomaly theories
for continuous symmetries and the various obstructions that can lead to St¨uckelberg mechanisms have
been initiated in [1103–1109].
Clearly the ﬁeld of generalized symmetries, higher-groups and categorical symmetries has great
potential for more applications in the context of geometric engineering.
Higher-group symmetries
can be computed from the geometry, but anomalies for these should also fall into the framework of
symmetry TFTs and should arise from string theory. Non-invertible symmetry in higher dimensions
have recently been constructed within string theory [198,199,1110,1111], and play a role in the context
of the swampland program [1112].
9.2
Manifolds with Exceptional Holonomy
Special holonomy manifolds and calibrated geometry have played a central role in string compactiﬁca-
tion and in the study and application of D-branes and ﬂux compactiﬁcations ever since Calabi-Yau man-
ifolds were recognized as being of great importance in supersymmetric string compactiﬁcation [1113].
In particular, Calabi-Yau manifolds and holomorphic curves and bundles have been objects of central
37

interest, and have been at the focus of developments in enumerative algebraic geometry. Indeed, the
entire subject of mirror symmetry - currently an important part of modern mathematical research
grew out of these developments.
It is known from the Berger classiﬁcation that there are fascinating exceptional cases of special
holonomy manifolds in seven and eight dimensions with holonomy groups G2 and Spin(7), respectively.
Moreover, such manifolds admit natural generalizations of the instanton equations. Construction of
such manifolds and instantons, and of their moduli spaces present serious challenges to diﬀerential
geometers and analysts, but would be highly desirable in physics.
Enumerative problems in exceptional holonomy spaces could quite possibly see substatial progress.
One such question is related to the counting of associative three-manifolds in manifolds of G2 holonomy
and the related problem of counting of G2 instantons [1114–1116], and a clearer understanding of their
moduli spaces. The main mathematical challenge is that associative three-cycles can degenerate, by
either forming singularities or splitting. A consequence of this phenomenon is that the signed count
of associative cycles is not an invariant on the moduli of special holonomy metrics. Several proposals
have been put forward to deal with this challenge [1115, 1116]. Complementing this, there is an M-
theory proposal of interpreting the superpotential of the 4d QFT, which is obtained by compatifying
M-theory on a G2-holobnomy manifold, as the counting function of associative cycles based on the
observation that the eﬀective superpotential obtains non-perturbative contributions from M2-branes
wrapping associative three-cycles [1117]. An open problem raised by [1117] is the computation of the
contributions of non-isolated associative cycles. The formula for isolated cycles involves the Ray-Singer
torsion. Since torsion is most naturally interpreted as a measure it is reasonable to conjecture that the
formula of [1117] extends to non-isolated cycles, but this remains to be demonstrated from M-theory.
There is evidence for the existence of inﬁnitely many associative cycles in certain twisted connected
sum G2-manifolds [1118–1120]. A Simons Collaboration on Special Holonomy in Geometry, Analysis,
and Physics [506] has focused on problems in this general area and has been making excellent progress
in the multitude of nontrivial problems presented by these geometric structures.
See [1121] for a
relatively recent review of some of the mathematical progress that has been made.
Geometric engineering with non-compact G2 holonomy spaces has a relatively long-standing tra-
dition starting with [1122]. M-theory compactiﬁcation on G2 holonomy manifolds gives rise to 4d
N = 1 theories. In particular, such models have interesting particle physics applications: starting with
the construction of pure Super-Yang-Mills theories [1123], and supersymmetric Standard-Model type
models [1124]. The basic dictionary between gauge theory and geometry is as follows: codimension
4 singularities give rise to gauge groups (4d N = 1 vectors), matter in chiral multiplets arises from
codimension 7 singularities, whereas non-chiral matter comes from codimension 6. The mathematical
challenge, which to this moment is unsolved, is the construction of singular G2 holonomy manifolds,
which have codimension 4 and 7 singularities, thus giving rise to 4d gauge theories – coupled to gravity
– which model (semi-)realistic models in 4d.
In the past few years, much progress in the context of the Simons Collaboration on special holonomy
[506] has been made. Two areas in which there has been progress are addressing more global issues
and the study of compact geometries with G2 holonomy. These new compact geometries go beyond the
class of torus orbiolds known as Joyce orbifolds [1125,1126]. The results in [1127] and unpublished work
by Kovalev, suggested an inﬁnite class of compact G2 holonomy manifolds, which admit a ﬁbration by
K3-surfaces over three-manifolds (mostly S3 and quotients thereof).
The geometries found in [1127] have already had numerous implications within physics: in [1128]
models with conjectural codimension 4 and 6 singularities were constructed as singular limits of these
geometries. Such K3-ﬁbered G2 holonomy compactiﬁcations have dual descriptions in string theory,
F-theory and heterotic strings, where the generation of chiral matter is well-understood, and could
guide the mathematical eﬀorts in the construction of compact G2-geometries with chiral matter in
4d [1128–1132].
Another interface between geometry and physics arises in the context of M-theory/Type IIA limits:
M-theory compactiﬁed on a circle gives rise to Type IIA string theory [1133]. Therefore, whenever
a G2 manifold admits a circle-ﬁbration, there should be a relation of the M-theory compactiﬁcation
to a Type IIA compactiﬁcation. In general the IIA compactiﬁcation will include D6-branes (which
geometrize once uplifted to M-theory). A large class of new such G2 geometries was uncovered in [1134],
motivated by string theory, and their physics was discussed in [1135].
Mathematically the most important challenge remains the construction of compact but singular
38

G2-manifolds, which have singularities both in codimension 4 and 7. Physically, these correspond to
realizing gauge degrees of freedom (codimension 4 singularities e.g. of ADE-type) and chiral matter
in 4d (codimension 7). Note that the singular limits of twisted connected sum G2-manifolds, which
have been studied in the physics literature, have codimension 4 and 6 singularities, which only realized
gauge groups and non-chiral matter, and cannot be deformed within this class of G2-manifolds to
realize codimension 7 singularities that correspond to chiral matter [1130]18.
For Calabi-Yau manifolds, Yau’s proof of the Calabi conjecture provides a simple criterion for
SU(N) holonomy spaces. In the realm of G2 and Spin(7) holonomy, no such theorem (or even conjec-
ture) exists. This makes identifying geometries with exceptional holonomy particularly challenging to
construct and identify, requiring highly advanced diﬀerential geometric and analytic tools.
Spin(7) compactiﬁcations in M-theory result in 3d N = 1 supersymmetry and in heterotic string
theory with 2d N = (1, 0) spacetime supersymmetry. The case of one supercharge is a particularly
challenging subset of SQFTs, and furthering that study of Spin(7) holonomy can shed light on these
QFTs. Most constructions (both in geometry and string theory) are obtained by considering anti-
holomorphic involutions on Calabi-Yau four-folds due to Joyce [1136], with several recent applications
in terms of connected sum constructions in string theory [1137, 1138].
The main challenge is the
resolution of singularities that arise in these constructions, in a way that is compatible with the
Spin(7) structure.
9.3
Dualities Across Dimensions
In lower space-time dimensions, D ≤4, one can construct weakly coupled ﬁeld theories using standard
Lagrangian techniques which describe interacting CFTs. In particular one can start from a free theory
deformed by relevant couplings and ﬂow to an interacting CFT in the IR, or, in certain cases in D = 4,
deform the free theory by an exactly marginal coupling and describe an SCFT without any RG ﬂow
involved. One can thus study CFTs, and SCFTs in particular, in D ≤4, using a variety of purely
ﬁeld theoretic techniques.
In cases when one has some supersymmetry, e.g.
four supercharges in
D = 4, much non trivial physics in the IR can be directly and indirectly deduced from the Lagrangian
descriptions. One very nice example is the notion of IR duality where two or more diﬀerent weakly
coupled theories ﬂowing to the same theory in the IR [1139]. Another example is conformal duality
where two or more weakly coupled (or partially weakly coupled) theories are related by tuning con-
tinuously an exactly marginal coupling [140,143,148,1140–1142]. A third example is the emergence of
symmetry (ﬂavor symmetry and supersymmetry) in the IR [147,1143–1148]. The list goes on. When
studied directly in D ≤4 these strong coupling phenomena can be hard to understand or predict, but
new insight can be obtained from considering higher dimensional theories and employing dimensional
reduction. For example using known IR dualities in D = 4 one can place the relevant theories on a
circle, which can be viewed as a supersymmetric relevant deformation, ﬂow to low energies where the
theory is eﬀectively three dimensional and deduce IR dualities in D = 3 and adding another circle one
can go to D = 2 [1149–1158]. In this manner many previously discovered dualities (e.g. [1159–1164])
in D < 4 can be related to D = 4 dualities [1165–1169]. However, what about the dualities (and other
phenomena) in D = 4?
An answer lies in connecting the lower dimensional QFTs to higher dimensional ones. One can
start in D = 6, the highest dimension admitting interacting supersymmetric SCFTs [1170] and turn
on geometric deformations. In D = 6 there are no interesting supersymmetric relevant deformations
[1171]. However, we can deform a D = 6 theory in an interesting way by placing it on a compact surface.
We already have discussed going to D = 5 by placing the D = 6 models on a circle. This procedure can
be generalized to placing the D = 6 SCFTs on higher dimensional surfaces. For example, we can ﬂow
to D = 4 by utilizing a Riemann surface. Such surfaces in general are curved and thus to preserve some
supersymmetry we need to perform some twisting procedure. This procedure can be used to predict
existence of huge classes of D = 4 SCFTs (and using three dimensional and four dimensional manifolds
one can generalize to predicting existence of D = 3 and D = 2 SCFTs). One can read numerous
properties of the lower dimensional theories directly from geometry. This includes, symmetries (zero
form and higher form), anomalies, number and charged of relevant and marginal supersymmetric
deformations, and in many cases duality relations. The canonical example of such a construction is
18Although one can get deformations that result in codimension 7 singularities, these always appear pair-wise and
correspond to non-chiral matter.
39

generating D = 4 N = 2 SCFTs starting with a (2, 0) theory [140–143]: this is known as class S. This
has a vast generalization that lead to constructions of D = 4 N = 1 SCFTs in [1172–1175]. The same
techniques from (2, 0) SCFTs can be applied also to studying compactiﬁcations of (1, 0) SCFTs to
generate even larger classes of N = 1 SCFTs in D = 4 [1155,1176–1183]. One can try to connect the
explicit ﬁeld theoretic constructions of theories in D ≤4 and compactiﬁcations of D > 4 SCFTs. For
example one can seek for D = 4 ﬁeld theoretic descriptions of the SCFTs obtained by compactifying
D = 6 SCFTs on a surface. Whether this can always be done and if not what are the obstructions, are
important open problems. If one does ﬁnd such a connection between compactiﬁcations and D = 4
Lagrangians one can speak about an across dimensions IR duality: we have a D = 6 SCFT deformed by
geometry ﬂowing to a D = 4 SCFT deformed by a relevant coupling ﬂowing to the same SQFT. Once
such a dictionary between D = 4 QFTs and D = 6 QFTs is established many of the otherwise sporadic
lower dimensional understandings can be explained and predicted using the geometry explicitly present
in the construction. A similar program could be pursued starting from D = 5 SCFTs and ﬂowing to
D = 3 [1184,1185].
More generally we can start from diﬀerent D = 6 SCFTs and deform them by diﬀerent geometries.
In general we would ﬂow to diﬀerent lower dimensional SQFTs. However in some cases we can end up
with same lower dimensional models. In this case we can speak of D = 6 IR dualities. Explaining and
understanding such dualities probably should be done by going back to the geometric construction of
D = 6 SCFTs themselves in string/M/F-theory. Some examples of D = 6 IR dualities can be found
in [148,1178,1186–1188].
This line of research leads to many conceptual questions in SQFTs as well as to a lot of interesting
physical mathematics. Let us list some of the interesting questions one can address.
1. Lagrangians vs no-Lagrangians: Can any lower dimensional SCFT geometrically constructed
starting with higher dimensional one have a lower dimensional IR (or conformal) dual? Many
of the theories obtained in compactiﬁcations are often called non-Lagragian paying tribute to
the fact that a Lagrangian dual is not known at a certain point in time. So this question can
be phrased as whether non-Lagrangian theories in lower dimensions truly exist or not?
For
example, a canonical instance of a “non-Lagrangian” theory, the Minahan-Nemeschansky E6
N = 2 SCFT [1189], has several Lagrangian N = 1 constructions [149, 1190, 1191]. When one
does ﬁnd Lagrangian duals often the UV weakly coupled theories exhibit less symmetry, and
in some cases supersymmetry, than the IR ﬁxed point (See references above). To ﬁnd across
dimension dualities one thus needs to give up insisting on having all the symmetries of the IR
manifest. In some cases a D = 4 Lagrangian dual is not known, however constructions exist
which start from a vanilla Lagrangian in the UV but then tune the parameters (couplings or ﬂow
to the IR) so that certain symmetries emerge and are gauged [1176,1177,1181,1191–1194] (See
also [1187] for a D = 5 example). Thus one can wonder whether restricting to such constructions
one can construct any conceivable lower dimensional SCFT. The same question can be raised
regarding the higher dimensional SCFTs. We can try to construct D = 6 or D = 5 SQFTs giving
up some symmetry and in particular space-time symmetry. For example one can consider D = 4
quiver gauge theories in the limit the size of the quiver is large and obtain D = 6 SCFTs in a
process called dimensional deconstruction [1195–1197].
2. Geometric origin of lower dimensional SCFTs: Do all lower dimensional SCFTs have a
geometric construction starting with higher dimensional supersymmetric ones? The geometric
construction starts with a (1, 0) SCFT in D = 6 which has eight supercharges so the question
can be phrased as whether any supersymmetric SCFT (or even non-supersymmetric CFT) in
lower dimensions is related to a theory with eight supercharges.
3. Structure of the space of lower dimensional QFTs: SQFTs in lower dimensions are
interconnected by relevant and exactly marginal deformations. What is the structure of this
space? How much of it is determined by higher dimensional geometry? When the D = 4 SCFTs
are obtained by direct dimensional reduction of D = 6 SCFTs one can generally identify the
relevant and the marginal deformations with the KK reduction of the stress-tensor (leading to
exactly marginal deformations related to complex structure moduli) and the conserved currents
of the D = 6 SCFT [1172, 1193, 1198, 1199]. An example of an interesting question here which
received little attention is of studying and classifying N = 1 conformal dualities in D = 4, that is
40

weakly coupled cusps of D = 4 conformal manifolds [1142]. Similarly, the structure of conformal
manifolds in D = 3 seserves much more intense investigation, see e.g. [1200–1202].
4. Structure of moduli spaces: A related question is the geometry of the moduli spaces of
the SCFTs. The moduli spaces of theories with eight supercharges have deep connections with
mathematical physics and physical mathematics [365,955]. One approach to this subject, which
has been vigorously pursued in recent years, is to classify the possible geometries of D = 4
N = 2 Coulomb branches and relate this to classiﬁcation of D = 4 N = 2 SCFTs [1203–1209].
One can also study correlation functions of Coulomb branch operators in D = 4 N = 2 using
localization methods leading to beautiful results [1210]. Yet another fruitful direction is to try
to understand the moduli spaces of the strongly coupled SCFTs in D = 5 and D = 6 (again with
eight supercharges) using various group theoretical methods (the so called magnetic quivers)
[1073, 1080, 1211, 1212], see above. Finally, one can also consider the interplay between moduli
space ﬂows in higher dimensions, compactiﬁcations, and lower dimensional moduli spaces [1213].
This leads to interesting interconnections between geometric engineering of lower dimensional
SCFTs and the deeper structure of moduli spaces. In particular studying the interplay between
ﬂows and moduli spaces has already led to derivations of across dimensional dualities [1190,1192]
and studying this direction further could lead to many novel insights.
5. Mirror symmetry in lower dimensions and physics in D = 4: Mirror symmetry in
D = 3 and D = 2 is an extremely rich laboratory for deriving and studying results in physical
mathematics. We understand well string theoretic and brane origins of many instances of such
dualities: this structure is tightly tied to eight supercharges which for example allows for a clean
distinction between Higgs and Coulomb branches. However, one can ask whether these dualities
can also be understood purely using ﬁeld theoretic constructions starting in D = 6. In particular,
we can try to ﬁnd D = 4 dualities which lead upon dimensional reduction to mirror symmetry.
This necessarily leads to constructions with lower amounts of symmetry and supersymmetry. In
fact some of the canonical cases of mirror symmetry in D = 3 were recently imbedded in N = 1
D = 4 dynamics [1155–1157]. What is the mathematical implication of such an embedding?
6. Supersymmetric quantities: Supersymmetry allows us to compute various quantities exactly
with no regard to the values of coupling or the scale of RG ﬂow. Often, if not always, such
quantities can be related to counting problems of protected operators: various types of super-
symmetric indices and limits thereof. This leads to deep relations between the theory of special
functions and supersymmetric physics. For example, various dualities lead to non-trivial iden-
tities of elliptic-hypergeometric integrals and limits thereof, Painlev´e tau-functions, etc. A set
of pairs of concrete examples of the intimate relation between the mathematical works and the
supersymmetric physics is [1139, 1214], [1215, 1216], [1155, 1217], [1218, 1219], and [1220, 1221].
Many times these quantities can be related to topological, conformal, and integrable QFTs in
even lower dimensions (not necessarily supersymmetric).
The canonical, concrete, and most
studied example of those relations, generally called the BPS/CFT correspondence [297, 730], is
the AGT correspondence [732] (See also [1222–1225]), relating speciﬁc four dimensional quan-
tum ﬁeld theories with N = 2 supersymmetry and speciﬁc two dimensional conformal ﬁeld
theories. See [1226] for a comprehensive review and list of references. Another example is the
association of an integrable quantum mechanical system to supersymmetric theories with two
dimensional N = 2 super-Poincare invariance, the Bethe/gauge correspondence [336], including
those originating as four or six dimensional theories [1176,1182,1215,1216,1221,1227–1233]. In
the geometric program of relating compactiﬁcations of six dimensional theories to four dimen-
sional ones the quantum mechanical integrable models appear for example as operators acting
on supersymmetric indices [668–670] of the four dimensional theories introducing surface defects
in to the index computation [1227]. For a given six dimensional theory one then obtains one, or
more [1182] related, integrable models. The problem of classifying D = 6 SQFTs thus can be
tied to studying properties of spaces of integrable quantum mechanical models. In addition to
the above, the supersymmetric quantities often have surprising features appearance of which is
not always understood, see e.g. [1234].
41

9.4
Holography And Classiﬁcation of QFTs
Another fruitful direction of research that complements the geometric engineering methods above is
to study the space of AdS solutions in string or M-theory which are related to reduction of higher-d
theories on various manifolds similar to class S. For example, the classiﬁcation of holographic duals of
N = 1 SCFTs in D = 4 in M-theory corresponds to characterising the space of supergravity solution in
D = 11 of the form AdS5 × M6 [1235]. In the case of theories that are dual to reductions of 6D SCFTs
on Riemann surfaces, the supergravity equation reduces to a single Monge-Amp`ere equation whose
solution space governs the allowed choices of M6 and therefore the space of such SCFTs [1236,1237].
These equations generalize the SU(∞) Toda system that governs the holographic duals of N = 2
SCFTs [158]. Similarly the classiﬁcation problem for the holographic duals of N = 1 SCFTs from
massive type IIA corresponds to solving a pair of Monge-Amp`ere equations [1238].
Of course, the very Calabi-Yau metric is a solution to a (complex) Monge-Amp´ere equation on
its K¨ahler potential, and the toric Calabi-Yau metrics are similarly described by the solutions of real
Monge-Amp´ere equations in three dimensions.
The compactiﬁcation program of SCFTs can be studied in holography by considering near horizon
limits of branes systems wrapped on a compact manifold. The canonical examples, which have lead
to much interesting progress, are obtained from geometric duals of the topological twist, as initiated
in [1239]. There must exist a wider class of constructions beyond the paradigm of the topological twist
where branes wrap non-constant curvature manifolds. A systematic classiﬁcation of what is possible
subject to the constraint of supersymmetry is lacking. Indeed this is an active arena of research.
Recent important progress in these directions come from branes wrapping ”spindles” (manifolds with
orbifold ﬁxed points) [1240–1243] and discs with interesting holonomies at their boundary [1244,1245].
The latter methods have lead to the construction of holographic duals of Argyres-Douglas theories.
For further developments see [1246–1250].
In general the classiﬁcation of BPS equations that describe the AdS duals of systems of branes
and their reductions on various manifolds have been obtained from reducing supergravity with G-
structure. This has been the program of Gauntlett, Martelli, Sparks, Waldram, Kim over a large
body of literature [1047, 1251–1258]. (Another approach uses pure spinors. See for example [1259]
for Poincar´e compactiﬁcation.) With the classiﬁcation of possible BPS structures from supergravity,
It is an important question to understand the solution space of the PDEs and their associated AdS
geometries. One of the important successes in this program is the classiﬁcation of holographic six
dimensional SCFTs by the explicit realization of all AdS7 solutions of supergravity in [1260] and their
characterization in [1261]. A similar classiﬁcation program for ﬁve dimensional holographic SCFTs
in type II supergravity theories was initiated in [1262] where the basic PDEs that govern all AdS6
solutions are established. An important objective will be to understand the full solution space of such
PDEs.
Signiﬁcant steps have been made in understanding and characterizing the AdS6 solutions in type
IIB and their ﬁeld theory duals in [1263,1264]. More recently in [1265–1268] a systematic construction
of a large family of AdS6 solutions is obtained, these are dual to (p, q) brane engineering of ﬁve
dimensional SCFTs.
Another interesting direction in holography is a systematic characterization of Holographic RG
ﬂows [1269] by the study of geometric ﬂows of metrics. Flow equations are obtained in supergravity
where they interpolate between AdS × Σ. Here diﬀerent Σ’s identify diﬀerent CFT ﬁxed point. The
metric ﬂow can encode various aspects of deformability of CFTs and provide a mathematical framework
for exploring the space of CFTs. In particular important results about uniformatization of metric ﬂows
in the context of class S are described in [1270].
As importantly, using holographic RG ﬂows one can study various aspects of extremalization prin-
ciples that can ﬁx volumes of cycles in ﬁxed backgrounds, and determine existence conditions of speciﬁc
metrics in a given K¨ahler class [1271–1273]. Such principles can be used to identify dual counterparts
of ﬁeld theory phenomena such as a-maximization in four dimensions [1274] and c-extremization in
two dimensions [1275,1276].
42

10
Some Important Topics In Physical Mathematics Not Cov-
ered Here
We are painfully aware that there are numerous exciting developments, and indeed entire sub-ﬁelds of
physical mathematics which have not been covered in the above review. Some, but not all, of these
omitted topics were covered in a previous section 10 of this review. That section has evolved into a
separate publication [18]. Among the topics to be covered in [18] are
1. Relations to the higher algebra of operads, BV algebras, etc.
2. Further development of topological string theory and string ﬁeld theory
3. Open-closed string duality
4. Topological Recursion and non-perturbative Dyson-Schwinger
5. Twisted, topological, and hybrid holography
6. Numerous connections to integrability, including 4d CS, Bethe/gauge and ODE/IM correspon-
dences, QQ-systems and qq-characters.
7. Emergent and hidden hydrodynamics
11
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank David Ben-Zvi, Lakshya Bhardwaj, Daniel Brennan, Nikolay Bobev, Miranda
Cheng, Mykola Dedushenko, Emanuel Diaconescu, Tudor Dimofte, Lance Dixon, Yakov Eliashberg,
Mohamed Elmi, Michael Freedman, Arthur Jaﬀe, JeﬀHarvey, Mike Hopkins, Theo Johnson-Freyd,
Dominic Joyce, Anton Kapustin, Ahsan Khan, Alexei Kitaev, Zohar Komargodski, Maxim Kontsevich,
Igor Krichever, Craig Lawrie, Andrei Losev, Jan Manschot, Marcos Marino, Dave Morrison, Andy
Neitzke, Alexei Oblomkov, Andrei Okounkov, Natalie Paquette, Sara Pasquetti, Boris Pioline, Peter
E. Pushkar, Pavel Safronov, Vivek Saxena, Christoph Schweigert, Nathan Seiberg, Shu-Heng Shao,
Dennis Sullivan, Yuji Tachikawa, Constantin Teleman, Thomas Walpuski, Maxim Zabzine for useful
correspondence and discussions.
The work of IB is supported in part by NSF grant PHY-2112699 and in part by the “Simons
Collaboration on Global Categorical Symmetry”. DF is partially supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant Number DMS-2005286 and partially by the “Simons Collaboration on Global
Categorical Symmetries”. The work of GM is supported by US Department of Energy under grant
DE-SC0010008. SSN is supported in part by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework: ERC
grant 682608 and in part by the “Simons Collaboration on Special Holonomy in Geometry, Analysis
and Physics”. The research of SSR was supported in part by Israel Science Foundation under grants no.
2289/18 and 2159/22, by a Grant No. I-1515-303./2019 from the GIF, the German-Israeli Foundation
for Scientiﬁc Research and Development, and by BSF grant no. 2018204. This work was in part
performed at the Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by National Science Foundation grant
PHY-1607611.
References
[1] I. Bah, D. Freed, G. W. Moore, N. Nekrasov, S. S. Razamat, and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki,
“Snowmass Whitepaper: Physical Mathematics 2021,” arXiv:2203.05078 [hep-th].
[2] G. Galilei, “The assayer,” (Rome, 1623) .
[3] S. Drake and C. O’Malley, The Assayer, English Translation in The Controversy on the
Comets of 1618: Galileo Galilei, Horatio Grassi, Mario Guiducci, Johann Kepler.
Anniversary Collection. University of Pennsylvania Press, Incorporated, 2016.
https://books.google.com/books?id=a1MrEAAAQBAJ.
43

[4] A. Einstein, “On the method of theoretical physics,”
Philosophy of Science 1 no. 2, (1934) 163–169.
[5] Dirac, P. A. M., “XI.—The Relation between Mathematics and Physics,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 59 (1940) 122–129.
[6] F. J. Dyson, “Missed opportunities,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 78 (1972) 635–652.
[7] A. M. Jaﬀe, “Reviewing U.S. mathematics: critical resource for the future. Appendix C.
Ordering the universe: the role of mathematics,” Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 31 no. 6, (1984)
589–608.
[8] T. Y. Cao, ed., Conceptual foundations of quantum ﬁeld theory. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1999. Papers from the conference held at Boston University, Boston, MA, March
1–3, 1996.
[9] A. M. Jaﬀe and F. Quinn, “‘Theoretical mathematics’: Toward a cultural synthesis of
mathematics and theoretical physics,” Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 29 (1993) 1–13,
arXiv:math/9307227.
[10] M. Atiyah et al., “Responses to ‘Theoretical mathematics: toward a cultural synthesis of
mathematics and theoretical physics’, by A. Jaﬀe and F. Quinn,”
Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 30 (1994) 178–207, arXiv:math/9404229.
[11] E. Zaslow, “PHYSMATICS,” arXiv:physics/0506153.
[12] G. W. Moore, “Physical Mathematics And The Future,”.
https://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~gmoore/PhysicalMathematicsAndFuture.pdf.
[13] M. Aganagic, “String theory and math: Why this marriage may last. Mathematics and
dualities of quantum physics,” Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 53 no. 1, (2016) 93–115,
arXiv:1508.06642 [hep-th].
[14] Morrison, David R., “Geometry and physics: an overview,” in Topology and quantum theory
in interaction, vol. 718 of Contemp. Math., pp. 1–13. Amer. Math. Soc., [Providence], RI,
2018. arXiv:1805.06932.
[15] Y. Tachikawa, “Quantum ﬁeld theory and mathematics,”.
https://www.ipmu.jp/sites/default/files/imce/news/37E_Feature.pdf.
[16] I. Bah, J. J. Heckman, K. Intriligator, S. Pasquetti, S. S. Razamat, S. Schafer-Nameki, and
A. Tomasiello, “QFT and Geometry Seminar Series,”.
https://sites.google.com/view/qftandgeometryseminars/home.
[17] “Western Hemisphere Colloquium on Geometry and Physics.”
http://web.math.ucsb.edu/~drm/WHCGP/.
[18] N. Nekrasov, “The Ghosts of Past and Future Ideas and Inspirations on Interface of Physics
and Mathematics,”.
[19] P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford, at the Clarendon Press, 1947.
3d ed.
[20] J. Von Neumann, Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. Princeton University
Press, 2018.
[21] G. W. Mackey, Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. Dover Publications, Inc.,
Mineola, NY, 2004. With a foreword by A. S. Wightman, Reprint of the 1963 original.
[22] I. E. Segal, “Postulates for general quantum mechanics,”
Ann. of Math. (2) 48 (1947) 930–948.
44

[23] T. Y. Cao, ed., Conceptual foundations of quantum ﬁeld theory. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1999. Papers from the conference held at Boston University, Boston, MA, March
1–3, 1996.
[24] R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, spin and statistics, and all that. Princeton
Landmarks in Physics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2000. Corrected third
printing of the 1978 edition.
[25] R. Haag and D. Kastler, “An algebraic approach to quantum ﬁeld theory,”
J. Mathematical Phys. 5 (1964) 848–861.
[26] G. Segal, “The deﬁnition of conformal ﬁeld theory,” in Topology, geometry and quantum ﬁeld
theory, vol. 308 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pp. 421–577. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 2004.
[27] M. F. Atiyah, “Topological quantum ﬁeld theories,” Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math.
no. 68, (1988) 175–186 (1989).
[28] M. Kontsevich and G. Segal, “Wick Rotation and the Positivity of Energy in Quantum Field
Theory,” Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. 72 no. 1-2, (2021) 673–699,
arXiv:2105.10161 [hep-th].
[29] E. Witten, “A Note On Complex Spacetime Metrics,” arXiv:2111.06514 [hep-th].
[30] K. Costello and O. Gwilliam, Factorization algebras in quantum ﬁeld theory. Vol. 1, vol. 31 of
New Mathematical Monographs. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[31] K. Costello and O. Gwilliam, Factorization algebras in quantum ﬁeld theory. Vol. 2, vol. 41 of
New Mathematical Monographs. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2021.
[32] A. Beilinson and V. Drinfeld, Chiral algebras, vol. 51 of American Mathematical Society
Colloquium Publications. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2004.
[33] K. Costello and S. Li, “Quantization of open-closed BCOV theory, I,”.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.06703.pdf.
[34] O. Gwilliam and B. Williams, “The holomorphic bosonic string,” in Topology and quantum
theory in interaction, vol. 718 of Contemp. Math., pp. 213–258. Amer. Math. Soc.,
[Providence], RI, [2018] ©2018. arXiv:1711.05823.
[35] R. Grady and B. Williams, “Homotopy RG ﬂow and the non-linear σ-model,” in Topology and
quantum theory in interaction, vol. 718 of Contemp. Math., pp. 187–211. Amer. Math. Soc.,
[Providence], RI, [2018] ©2018. arXiv:1710.05973.
[36] K. Costello, E. Witten, and M. Yamazaki, “Gauge Theory and Integrability, I,”
ICCM Not. 06 no. 1, (2018) 46–119, arXiv:1709.09993 [hep-th].
[37] D. Berwick-Evans, “Supersymmetric ﬁeld theories and the elliptic index theorem with
complex coeﬃcients,” Geom. Topol. 25 no. 5, (2021) 2287–2384, arXiv:1610.00747.
[38] K. Costello and N. M. Paquette, “Twisted Supergravity and Koszul Duality: A Case Study in
AdS3,” Communications in Mathematical Physics 384 no. 1, (Apr, 2021) 279–339.
[39] K. Costello and N. M. Paquette, “Celestial holography meets twisted holography: 4d
amplitudes from chiral correlators,” arXiv:2201.02595 [hep-th].
[40] M. Dedushenko, “Snowmass White Paper: The Quest to Deﬁne QFT,”
arXiv:2203.08053 [hep-th].
[41] D. S. Freed, “Higher algebraic structures and quantization,” Comm. Math. Phys. 159 no. 2,
(1994) 343–398, arXiv:hep-th/9212115.
45

[42] R. J. Lawrence, “Triangulations, categories and extended topological ﬁeld theories,” in
Quantum topology, vol. 3 of Ser. Knots Everything, pp. 191–208. World Sci. Publ., River
Edge, NJ, 1993. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/9789812796387_0011.
[43] J. C. Baez and J. Dolan, “Higher-dimensional algebra and topological quantum ﬁeld theory,”
J. Math. Phys. 36 no. 11, (1995) 6073–6105.
[44] J. Lurie, “On the classiﬁcation of topological ﬁeld theories,” in Current developments in
mathematics, 2008, pp. 129–280. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2009. arXiv:0905.0465.
http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.0465.
[45] D. S. Freed, “The cobordism hypothesis,”
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 50 no. 1, (2013) 57–92, arXiv:1210.5100.
[46] C. Teleman, “Five Lectures On Topological Field Theory,”.
https://math.berkeley.edu/~teleman/math/barclect.pdf.
[47] D. Ayala and J. Francis, “The cobordism hypothesis,” 1705.02240.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.02240.pdf.
[48] D. Calaque and C. Scheimbauer, “A note on the (∞, n)-category of cobordisms,”
Algebr. Geom. Topol. 19 no. 2, (2019) 533–655.
[49] D. Grady and D. Pavlov, “The geometric cobordism hypothesis,” 2111.01095.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.01095.pdf.
[50] D. S. Freed and M. J. Hopkins, “Reﬂection positivity and invertible topological phases,”
Geom. Topol. 25 (2021) 1165–1330, arXiv:1604.06527 [hep-th].
[51] G. W. Moore and N. Seiberg, “LECTURES ON RCFT,” in 1989 BanﬀNATO ASI: Physics,
Geometry and Topology. 9, 1989.
[52] E. Witten, “Nonabelian Bosonization in Two-Dimensions,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 92 (1984) 455–472.
[53] D. E. Evans and T. Gannon, “The exoticness and realisability of twisted Haagerup-Izumi
modular data,” Commun. Math. Phys. 307 (2011) 463–512, arXiv:1006.1326 [math.QA].
[54] D. E. Evans and T. Gannon, “Tambara-yamagami, loop groups, bundles and kk-theory,”
2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09672.
[55] T.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Lin, K. Ohmori, Y. Tachikawa, and M. Tezuka, “Numerical evidence for a
Haagerup conformal ﬁeld theory,” arXiv:2110.03008 [cond-mat.stat-mech].
[56] R. Vanhove, L. Lootens, M. Van Damme, R. Wolf, T. Osborne, J. Haegeman, and
F. Verstraete, “A critical lattice model for a Haagerup conformal ﬁeld theory,”
arXiv:2110.03532 [cond-mat.stat-mech].
[57] C. Teleman, “The Haagerup TQFT is not a gauge theory.”
https://math.berkeley.edu/~teleman/math/Haagerup.pdf.
[58] A. Davydov, M. M¨uger, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik, “The Witt group of non-degenerate
braided fusion categories,” J. Reine Angew. Math. 677 (2013) 135–177.
[59] A. Davydov, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik, “On the structure of the Witt group of braided
fusion categories,” Selecta Math. (N.S.) 19 no. 1, (2013) 237–269.
[60] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman, “Gapped boundary theories in three dimensions,”
Comm. Math. Phys. 388 no. 2, (2021) 845–892, arXiv:2006.10200.
[61] R. Geiko and G. W. Moore, “When Does A Three-Dimensional Chern-Simons-Witten Theory
Have A Time Reversal Symmetry?,” arXiv:2209.04519 [hep-th].
[62] E. Witten, “Topological Quantum Field Theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 117 (1988) 353.
46

[63] M. H. Freedman, A. Kitaev, C. Nayak, J. K. Slingerland, K. Walker, and Z. Wang, “Universal
manifold pairings and positivity,” Geom. Topol. 9 no. 4, (2005) 2303–2317.
[64] A. Kapustin and E. Witten, “Electric-Magnetic Duality And The Geometric Langlands
Program,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 1 (2007) 1–236, arXiv:hep-th/0604151.
[65] M. Blau and G. Thompson, “Derivation of the Verlinde formula from Chern-Simons theory
and the G/G model,” Nucl. Phys. B 408 (1993) 345–390, arXiv:hep-th/9305010.
[66] A. Gerasimov, “Localization in GWZW and Verlinde formula,” arXiv:hep-th/9305090.
[67] E. Witten, “The Verlinde algebra and the cohomology of the Grassmannian,”
arXiv:hep-th/9312104.
[68] G. Moore, “Two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory and topological ﬁeld theory,” in Proceedings
of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Z¨urich, 1994), pp. 1292–1303.
Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1995.
https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.1007/978-3-0348-9078-6_60.
[69] E. Witten, “Two-dimensional gauge theories revisited,” J. Geom. Phys. 9 (1992) 303–368,
arXiv:hep-th/9204083.
[70] S. Cordes, G. W. Moore, and S. Ramgoolam, “Large N 2-D Yang-Mills theory and topological
string theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 185 (1997) 543–619, arXiv:hep-th/9402107.
[71] D. J. Gross and W. Taylor, “Two-dimensional QCD is a string theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 400 (1993) 181–208, arXiv:hep-th/9301068.
[72] N. Nekrasov, Four Dimensional Holomorphic Theories. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
1996. http://media.scgp.stonybrook.edu/papers/prdiss96.pdf.
[73] M. Aganagic, H. Ooguri, N. Saulina, and C. Vafa, “Black holes, q-deformed 2d Yang-Mills,
and non-perturbative topological strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 715 (2005) 304–348,
arXiv:hep-th/0411280.
[74] A. Gadde, L. Rastelli, S. S. Razamat, and W. Yan, “The 4d Superconformal Index from
q-deformed 2d Yang-Mills,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011) 241602, arXiv:1104.3850 [hep-th].
[75] Rastelli, L. and Razamat, S., The Superconformal Index of Theories of Class S, pp. 261–305.
2016. arXiv:1412.7131 [hep-th].
[76] Y. Tachikawa and N. Watanabe, “On skein relations in class S theories,”
JHEP 06 (2015) 186, arXiv:1504.00121 [hep-th].
[77] P. Goddard and D. I. Olive, “Kac-Moody and Virasoro Algebras in Relation to Quantum
Physics,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 1 (1986) 303.
[78] R. E. Borcherds, “Monstrous moonshine and monstrous Lie superalgebras,”
Invent. Math. 109 no. 2, (1992) 405–444.
[79] I. Frenkel, J. Lepowsky, and A. Meurman, Vertex operator algebras and the Monster, vol. 134
of Pure and Applied Mathematics. Academic Press, Inc., Boston, MA, 1988.
[80] S. M¨oller and N. R. Scheithauer, “A Geometric Classiﬁcation of the Holomorphic Vertex
Operator Algebras of Central Charge 24,” arXiv:2112.12291 [math.QA].
[81] A. N. Schellekens, “Meromorphic c = 24 conformal ﬁeld theories,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 153 (1993) 159–186, arXiv:hep-th/9205072.
[82] A. N. Schellekens, “On the classiﬁcation of meromorphic c = 24 conformal ﬁeld theories,”
Theor. Math. Phys. 95 (1993) 632–642.
[83] J. van Ekeren, S. M¨oller, and N. R. Scheithauer, “Construction and classiﬁcation of
holomorphic vertex operator algebras,” J. Reine Angew. Math. 2020 no. 759, (2020) 61–99.
47

[84] S. Carpi, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, and M. Weiner, “From vertex operator algebras to
conformal nets and back,” arXiv:1503.01260 [math.OA].
[85] C. Beem, M. Lemos, P. Liendo, W. Peelaers, L. Rastelli, and B. C. van Rees, “Inﬁnite Chiral
Symmetry in Four Dimensions,” Commun. Math. Phys. 336 no. 3, (2015) 1359–1433,
arXiv:1312.5344 [hep-th].
[86] C. Beem, W. Peelaers, L. Rastelli, and B. C. van Rees, “Chiral algebras of class S,”
JHEP 05 (2015) 020, arXiv:1408.6522 [hep-th].
[87] C. Beem and L. Rastelli, “Vertex operator algebras, Higgs branches, and modular diﬀerential
equations,” JHEP 08 (2018) 114, arXiv:1707.07679 [hep-th].
[88] A. Johansen, “Twisting of N = 1 susy gauge theories and heterotic topological theories,”
International Journal of Modern Physics A 10 no. 30, (Dec, 1995) 4325–4357.
[89] A. Losev, G. Moore, N. Nekrasov, and S. Shatashvili, “Chiral Lagrangians, Anomalies,
Supersymmetry, and Holomorphy,” Nuclear Physics B 484 no. 1-2, (Jan, 1997) 196–222.
[90] L. Baulieu, A. Losev, and N. Nekrasov, “Chern-Simons and twisted supersymmetry in various
dimensions,” Nuclear Physics B 522 no. 1-2, (Jun, 1998) 82–104.
[91] A. Kapustin, “Holomorphic reduction of N = 2 gauge theories, Wilson-’t Hooft operators, and
S-duality,” arXiv:hep-th/0612119.
[92] M. Aganagic, K. Costello, J. McNamara, and C. Vafa, “Topological Chern-Simons/Matter
Theories,” arXiv:1706.09977 [hep-th].
[93] K. Costello, T. Dimofte, and D. Gaiotto, “Boundary Chiral Algebras and Holomorphic
Twists,” arXiv:2005.00083 [hep-th].
[94] O. Gwilliam, E. Rabinovich, and B. R. Williams, “Quantization of topological-holomorphic
ﬁeld theories: local aspects,” arXiv:2107.06734 [math-ph].
[95] J. Oh and J. Yagi, “Poisson vertex algebras in supersymmetric ﬁeld theories,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 110 (2020) 2245–2275, arXiv:1908.05791 [hep-th].
[96] N. Garner and N. M. Paquette, “TASI Lectures on the Mathematics of String Dualities,” in
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics : Black Holes, Quantum
Information and Dualities (TASI 2021). 4, 2022. arXiv:2204.01914 [hep-th].
[97] C. Beem, D. Ben-Zvi, M. Bullimore, T. Dimofte, and A. Neitzke, “Secondary products in
supersymmetric ﬁeld theory,” Annales Henri Poincare 21 no. 4, (2020) 1235–1310,
arXiv:1809.00009 [hep-th].
[98] E. Getzler, “Batalin-Vilkovisky algebras and two-dimensional topological ﬁeld theories,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 159 (1994) 265–285, arXiv:hep-th/9212043.
[99] B. H. Lian and G. J. Zuckerman, “Algebraic and geometric structures in string backgrounds,”
in STRINGS 95: Future Perspectives in String Theory, pp. 323–335. 6, 1995.
arXiv:hep-th/9506210.
[100] H. Nakajima, “Instantons on ALE spaces, quiver varieties, and Kac-Moody algebras,” Duke
Math. 76 (1994) 365–416.
[101] H. Nakajima, “Hilbert schemes of points on surfaces and Heisenberg algebras [translation of
S¯ugaku 50 (1998), no. 4, 385–398; mr1 690 690],” vol. 15, pp. 207–222. 2002. Sugaku
expositions.
[102] C. Vafa and E. Witten, “A Strong coupling test of S-duality,”
Nucl. Phys. B 431 (1994) 3–77, arXiv:hep-th/9408074.
48

[103] A. Losev, G. Moore, N. Nekrasov, and S. Shatashvili, “Four-dimensional avatars of
two-dimensional RCFT,”
Nuclear Physics B - Proceedings Supplements 46 no. 1-3, (Mar, 1996) 130–145,
arXiv:hep-th/9509151.
[104] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “On the algebras of BPS states,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 197 (1998) 489–519, arXiv:hep-th/9609017.
[105] N. Nekrasov, “Supersymmetric gauge theories and quantization of integrable systems,”
Strings ’2009, Rome (22–26 June 2009) .
[106] Kontsevich, Maxim and Soibelman, Yan, “Cohomological Hall algebra, exponential Hodge
structures and motivic Donaldson-Thomas invariants,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 5 (2011) 231–352, arXiv:1006.2706 [math.AG].
[107] Harrison, S. and Paquette, N. and Persson, D. and Volpato, R., “BPS Algebras in 2d String
Theory,” arXiv:2107.03507 [hep-th].
[108] Paquette, N. and Persson, D. and Volpato, R., “Monstrous BPS-Algebras and the Superstring
Origin of Moonshine,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 10 (2016) 433–526,
arXiv:1601.05412 [hep-th].
[109] Paquette, N. and Persson, D. and Volpato, R., “BPS Algebras, Genus Zero, and the Heterotic
Monster,” J. Phys. A 50 no. 41, (2017) 414001, arXiv:1701.05169 [hep-th].
[110] D. Galakhov and M. Yamazaki, “Quiver Yangian and Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics,”
arXiv:2008.07006 [hep-th].
[111] D. Galakhov, W. Li, and M. Yamazaki, “Shifted quiver Yangians and representations from
BPS crystals,” JHEP 08 (2021) 146, arXiv:2106.01230 [hep-th].
[112] D. Galakhov, W. Li, and M. Yamazaki, “Toroidal and Elliptic Quiver BPS Algebras and
Beyond,” arXiv:2108.10286 [hep-th].
[113] G. Noshita and A. Watanabe, “A Note on Quiver Quantum Toroidal Algebra,”
arXiv:2108.07104 [hep-th].
[114] G. Noshita and A. Watanabe, “Shifted Quiver Quantum Toroidal Algebra and Subcrystal
Representations,” arXiv:2109.02045 [hep-th].
[115] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and E. Witten, “Algebra of the Infrared: String Field Theoretic
Structures in Massive N = (2, 2) Field Theory In Two Dimensions,”
arXiv:1506.04087 [hep-th].
[116] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and E. Witten, “An Introduction To The Web-Based Formalism,”
arXiv:1506.04086 [hep-th].
[117] M. Kapranov, M. Kontsevich, and Y. Soibelman, “Algebra of the infrared and secondary
polytopes,” Adv. Math. 300 (2016) 616–671, arXiv:1408.2673 [math.SG].
[118] M. Kapranov, Y. Soibelman, and L. Soukhanov, “Perverse schobers and the Algebra of the
Infrared,” arXiv:2011.00845 [math.AG].
[119] A. Z. Khan and G. W. Moore, “Categorical Wall-Crossing in Landau-Ginzburg Models,”
arXiv:2010.11837 [hep-th].
[120] S. Cecotti, P. Fendley, K. A. Intriligator, and C. Vafa, “A New supersymmetric index,”
Nucl. Phys. B 386 (1992) 405–452, arXiv:hep-th/9204102.
[121] S. Cecotti and C. Vafa, “On classiﬁcation of N=2 supersymmetric theories,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 158 (1993) 569–644, arXiv:hep-th/9211097.
[122] O. Hohm and B. Zwiebach, “L∞Algebras and Field Theory,”
Fortsch. Phys. 65 no. 3-4, (2017) 1700014, arXiv:1701.08824 [hep-th].
49

[123] G. W. Moore, “Lecture Notes For Felix Klein Lectures,”.
https://www.physics.rutgers.edu/$\sim$gmoore/FelixKleinLectureNotes.pdf.
[124] N. Lambert and C. Papageorgakis, “Nonabelian (2,0) Tensor Multiplets and 3-algebras,”
JHEP 08 (2010) 083, arXiv:1007.2982 [hep-th].
[125] N. Lambert, C. Papageorgakis, and M. Schmidt-Sommerfeld, “M5-Branes, D4-Branes and
Quantum 5D super-Yang-Mills,” JHEP 01 (2011) 083, arXiv:1012.2882 [hep-th].
[126] N. Lambert, C. Papageorgakis, and M. Schmidt-Sommerfeld, “Deconstructing (2,0)
Proposals,” Phys. Rev. D 88 no. 2, (2013) 026007, arXiv:1212.3337 [hep-th].
[127] J. Baez and U. Schreiber, “Higher gauge theory: 2-connections on 2-bundles,”
arXiv:hep-th/0412325.
[128] D. Fiorenza, H. Sati, and U. Schreiber, “Multiple M5-branes, String 2-connections, and 7d
nonabelian Chern-Simons theory,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 18 no. 2, (2014) 229–321,
arXiv:1201.5277 [hep-th].
[129] D. Fiorenza, C. L. Rogers, and U. Schreiber, “Higher U(1)-gerbe connections in geometric
prequantization,” Rev. Math. Phys. 28 no. 06, (2016) 1650012, arXiv:1304.0236 [math-ph].
[130] C. S¨amann, “Lectures on Higher Structures in M-Theory,” in Workshop on Strings,
Membranes and Topological Field Theory, Noncommutative Geometry and Physics,
pp. 171–210. 2017. arXiv:1609.09815 [hep-th].
[131] N. Seiberg, “Notes on theories with 16 supercharges,”
Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 67 (1998) 158–171, arXiv:hep-th/9705117.
[132] A. Strominger, “Open p-branes,” Phys. Lett. B 383 (1996) 44–47, arXiv:hep-th/9512059.
[133] E. Witten, “Some comments on string dynamics,” in STRINGS 95: Future Perspectives in
String Theory, pp. 501–523. 7, 1995. arXiv:hep-th/9507121.
[134] A. Balasubramanian and J. Distler, “Masses, Sheets and Rigid SCFTs,”
arXiv:1810.10652 [hep-th].
[135] A. Balasubramanian, J. Distler, and R. Donagi, “Families of Hitchin systems and N = 2
theories,” arXiv:2008.01020 [hep-th].
[136] O. Chacaltana, J. Distler, and Y. Tachikawa, “Nilpotent orbits and codimension-two defects of
6d N=(2,0) theories,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 28 (2013) 1340006, arXiv:1203.2930 [hep-th].
[137] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and Y. Tachikawa, “On 6d N =(2,0) theory compactiﬁed on a
Riemann surface with ﬁnite area,” PTEP 2013 (2013) 013B03, arXiv:1110.2657 [hep-th].
[138] P. C. Argyres, J. J. Heckman, K. Intriligator, and M. Martone, “Snowmass White Paper on
SCFTs,” arXiv:2202.07683 [hep-th].
[139] L. Bhardwaj and Y. Tachikawa, “Classiﬁcation of 4d N = 2 gauge theories,”
JHEP 12 (2013) 100, arXiv:1309.5160 [hep-th].
[140] D. Gaiotto, “N=2 dualities,” JHEP 08 (2012) 034, arXiv:0904.2715 [hep-th].
[141] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, “Wall-crossing, Hitchin Systems, and the WKB
Approximation,” arXiv:0907.3987 [hep-th].
[142] A. Klemm, W. Lerche, P. Mayr, C. Vafa, and N. Warner, “Self-dual strings and N = 2
supersymmetric ﬁeld theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 477 (1996) 746–766, arXiv:hep-th/9604034.
[143] E. Witten, “Solutions of four-dimensional ﬁeld theories via M-theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 500 (1997) 3–42, arXiv:hep-th/9703166.
50

[144] Y. Tachikawa, N=2 supersymmetric dynamics for pedestrians. 12, 2013.
arXiv:1312.2684 [hep-th].
[145] M. Akhond, G. Arias-Tamargo, A. Mininno, H.-Y. Sun, Z. Sun, Y. Wang, and F. Xu, “The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to 4d N = 2 Superconformal Field Theories,” 12, 2021.
arXiv:2112.14764 [hep-th].
[146] M. R. Douglas and G. W. Moore, “D-branes, quivers, and ALE instantons,”
arXiv:hep-th/9603167.
[147] K. Maruyoshi and J. Song, “N = 1 deformations and RG ﬂows of N = 2 SCFTs,”
JHEP 02 (2017) 075, arXiv:1607.04281 [hep-th].
[148] S. S. Razamat and G. Zafrir, “N = 1 conformal dualities,” JHEP 09 (2019) 046,
arXiv:1906.05088 [hep-th].
[149] G. Zafrir, “An N = 1 Lagrangian for the rank 1 E6 superconformal theory,”
JHEP 12 (2020) 098, arXiv:1912.09348 [hep-th].
[150] Nekrasov, N. and Pestun, V., “Seiberg-Witten geometry of four dimensional N = 2 quiver
gauge theories,” 2012.
[151] R. Kenyon, “Limit shapes and their analytic parameterizations,” in Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians—Rio de Janeiro 2018. Vol. IV. Invited lectures,
pp. 3137–3151. World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2018.
[152] A. Okounkov, “Limit shapes, real and imagined,”
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 53 no. 2, (2016) 187–216.
[153] S. Katz, P. Mayr, and C. Vafa, “Mirror symmetry and exact solution of 4-D N=2 gauge
theories: 1.,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 1 (1998) 53–114, arXiv:hep-th/9706110.
[154] S. A. Cherkis and A. Kapustin, “Periodic monopoles with singularities and N = 2 super
QCD,” Commun. Math. Phys. 234 (2003) 1–35, arXiv:hep-th/0011081.
[155] R. Friedman, J. Morgan, and E. Witten, “Vector bundles and F theory,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 187 (1997) 679–743, arXiv:hep-th/9701162.
[156] S. Kachru and E. Silverstein, “4d conformal theories and strings on orbifolds,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 4855–4858, arXiv:hep-th/9802183.
[157] A. E. Lawrence, N. Nekrasov, and C. Vafa, “On conformal ﬁeld theories in four-dimensions,”
Nucl. Phys. B 533 (1998) 199–209, arXiv:hep-th/9803015.
[158] D. Gaiotto and J. Maldacena, “The Gravity duals of N = 2 superconformal ﬁeld theories,”
JHEP 10 (2012) 189, arXiv:0904.4466 [hep-th].
[159] I. R. Klebanov and N. A. Nekrasov, “Gravity duals of fractional branes and logarithmic RG
ﬂow,” Nuclear Physics B 574 no. 1-2, (May, 2000) 263–274.
[160] A. M. Polyakov, Gauge Fields and Strings, vol. 3. Routhledge, 1987.
[161] G. ’t Hooft, “A Property of Electric and Magnetic Flux in Nonabelian Gauge Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 153 (1979) 141–160.
[162] D. S. Freed, G. W. Moore, and G. Segal, “Heisenberg Groups and Noncommutative Fluxes,”
Annals Phys. 322 (2007) 236–285, arXiv:hep-th/0605200.
[163] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, “Generalized Global Symmetries,”
JHEP 02 (2015) 172, arXiv:1412.5148 [hep-th].
[164] J. Fr¨ohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Kramers-Wannier duality from conformal
defects,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 no. 7, (2004) 070601, 4, arXiv:cond-mat/0404051.
51

[165] Z. Nussinov and G. Ortiz, “Suﬃcient symmetry conditions for Topological Quantum Order,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106 (2009) 16944–16949, arXiv:cond-mat/0605316.
[166] Z. Nussinov and G. Ortiz, “A symmetry principle for topological quantum order,”
Annals Phys. 324 (2009) 977–1057, arXiv:cond-mat/0702377.
[167] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, “Theta, Time Reversal, and
Temperature,” JHEP 05 (2017) 091, arXiv:1703.00501 [hep-th].
[168] D. Gaiotto, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, “Time-reversal breaking in QCD4, walls, and
dualities in 2 + 1 dimensions,” JHEP 01 (2018) 110, arXiv:1708.06806 [hep-th].
[169] C. C´ordova, D. S. Freed, H. T. Lam, and N. Seiberg, “Anomalies in the Space of Coupling
Constants and Their Dynamical Applications II,” SciPost Phys. 8 no. 1, (2020) 002,
arXiv:1905.13361 [hep-th].
[170] C. C´ordova, D. S. Freed, H. T. Lam, and N. Seiberg, “Anomalies in the Space of Coupling
Constants and Their Dynamical Applications I,” SciPost Phys. 8 no. 1, (2020) 001,
arXiv:1905.09315 [hep-th].
[171] C. C´ordova and K. Ohmori, “Anomaly Constraints on Gapped Phases with Discrete Chiral
Symmetry,” Phys. Rev. D 102 no. 2, (2020) 025011, arXiv:1912.13069 [hep-th].
[172] C. C´ordova and K. Ohmori, “Anomaly Obstructions to Symmetry Preserving Gapped
Phases,” arXiv:1910.04962 [hep-th].
[173] L. Bhardwaj, M. Bullimore, A. E. V. Ferrari, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “Anomalies of
Generalized Symmetries from Solitonic Defects,” arXiv:2205.15330 [hep-th].
[174] D. Delmastro, J. Gomis, P.-S. Hsin, and Z. Komargodski, “Anomalies and Symmetry
Fractionalization,” arXiv:2206.15118 [hep-th].
[175] T. D. Brennan, C. Cordova, and T. T. Dumitrescu, “Line Defect Quantum Numbers &
Anomalies,” arXiv:2206.15401 [hep-th].
[176] C. C´ordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, “Exploring 2-Group Global Symmetries,”
JHEP 02 (2019) 184, arXiv:1802.04790 [hep-th].
[177] C. C´ordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, “2-Group Global Symmetries and
Anomalies in Six-Dimensional Quantum Field Theories,” JHEP 04 (2021) 252,
arXiv:2009.00138 [hep-th].
[178] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik, Tensor categories, vol. 205 of Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2015.
http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/10.1090/surv/205.
[179] “Simons Collaboration on Global Categorical Symmetries,”. https://scgcs.berkeley.edu/.
[180] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, K. Intriligator, and S.-H. Shao, “Snowmass White Paper:
Generalized Symmetries in Quantum Field Theory and Beyond,” in 2022 Snowmass Summer
Study. 5, 2022. arXiv:2205.09545 [hep-th].
[181] W. Ji and X.-G. Wen, “Categorical symmetry and noninvertible anomaly in
symmetry-breaking and topological phase transitions,”
Phys. Rev. Res. 2 no. 3, (2020) 033417, arXiv:1912.13492 [cond-mat.str-el].
[182] Z. Komargodski, K. Ohmori, K. Roumpedakis, and S. Seifnashri, “Symmetries and strings of
adjoint QCD2,” JHEP 03 (2021) 103, arXiv:2008.07567 [hep-th].
[183] L. Kong, T. Lan, X.-G. Wen, Z.-H. Zhang, and H. Zheng, “Algebraic higher symmetry and
categorical symmetry – a holographic and entanglement view of symmetry,”
Phys. Rev. Res. 2 no. 4, (2020) 043086, arXiv:2005.14178 [cond-mat.str-el].
52

[184] R. Thorngren and Y. Wang, “Fusion Category Symmetry I: Anomaly In-Flow and Gapped
Phases,” arXiv:1912.02817 [hep-th].
[185] R. Thorngren and Y. Wang, “Fusion Category Symmetry II: Categoriosities at c = 1 and
Beyond,” arXiv:2106.12577 [hep-th].
[186] L. Bhardwaj, L. E. Bottini, S. Schafer-Nameki, and A. Tiwari, “Non-Invertible
Higher-Categorical Symmetries,” arXiv:2204.06564 [hep-th].
[187] L. Bhardwaj, S. Schafer-Nameki, and J. Wu, “Universal Non-Invertible Symmetries,”
arXiv:2208.05973 [hep-th].
[188] T. Bartsch, M. Bullimore, A. E. V. Ferrari, and J. Pearson, “Non-invertible Symmetries and
Higher Representation Theory I,” arXiv:2208.05993 [hep-th].
[189] Y.-H. Lin, M. Okada, S. Seifnashri, and Y. Tachikawa, “Asymptotic density of states in 2d
CFTs with non-invertible symmetries,” arXiv:2208.05495 [hep-th].
[190] D. S. Freed, G. W. Moore, and C. Teleman, “Topological symmetry in quantum ﬁeld theory,”
arXiv:2209.07471 [hep-th].
[191] I. Brunner, N. Carqueville, and D. Plencner, “Discrete torsion defects,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 337 no. 1, (2015) 429–453, arXiv:1404.7497 [hep-th].
[192] C.-M. Chang, Y.-H. Lin, S.-H. Shao, Y. Wang, and X. Yin, “Topological Defect Lines and
Renormalization Group Flows in Two Dimensions,” JHEP 01 (2019) 026,
arXiv:1802.04445 [hep-th].
[193] Y.-H. Lin and S.-H. Shao, “Duality Defect of the Monster CFT,”
J. Phys. A 54 no. 6, (2021) 065201, arXiv:1911.00042 [hep-th].
[194] T. Banks and N. Seiberg, “Symmetries and Strings in Field Theory and Gravity,”
Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 084019, arXiv:1011.5120 [hep-th].
[195] D. Harlow and H. Ooguri, “Symmetries in quantum ﬁeld theory and quantum gravity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 383 no. 3, (2021) 1669–1804, arXiv:1810.05338 [hep-th].
[196] D. Harlow and H. Ooguri, “Constraints on Symmetries from Holography,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 19, (2019) 191601, arXiv:1810.05337 [hep-th].
[197] B. Heidenreich, J. McNamara, M. Montero, M. Reece, T. Rudelius, and I. Valenzuela,
“Non-Invertible Global Symmetries and Completeness of the Spectrum,”
JHEP 09 (2021) 203, arXiv:2104.07036 [hep-th].
[198] F. Apruzzi, I. Bah, F. Bonetti, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “Non-Invertible Symmetries from
Holography and Branes,” arXiv:2208.07373 [hep-th].
[199] I. n. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, “Branes and Non-Invertible Symmetries,”
arXiv:2208.07508 [hep-th].
[200] J. D. Brown and M. Henneaux, “Central Charges in the Canonical Realization of Asymptotic
Symmetries: An Example from Three-Dimensional Gravity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 104 (1986) 207–226.
[201] A. Strominger, “Lectures on the Infrared Structure of Gravity and Gauge Theory,”
arXiv:1703.05448 [hep-th].
[202] A.-M. Raclariu, “Lectures on Celestial Holography,” arXiv:2107.02075 [hep-th].
[203] E. P. Verlinde, “The Master equation of 2-D string theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 381 (1992) 141–157, arXiv:hep-th/9202021.
53

[204] K. Costello, Renormalization and eﬀective ﬁeld theory, vol. 170 of Mathematical Surveys and
Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2011.
https://doi.org/10.1090/surv/170.
[205] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, “Hopf algebras, renormalization and noncommutative geometry,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 199 (1998) 203–242, arXiv:hep-th/9808042.
[206] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, “Renormalization in quantum ﬁeld theory and the
Riemann-Hilbert problem. 1. The Hopf algebra structure of graphs and the main theorem,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 210 (2000) 249–273, arXiv:hep-th/9912092.
[207] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, “Renormalization in quantum ﬁeld theory and the
Riemann-Hilbert problem. 2. The beta function, diﬀeomorphisms and the renormalization
group,” Commun. Math. Phys. 216 (2001) 215–241, arXiv:hep-th/0003188.
[208] M. R. Douglas, “Spaces of Quantum Field Theories,”
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 462 no. 1, (2013) 012011, arXiv:1005.2779 [hep-th].
[209] D. Friedan, “A Tentative theory of large distance physics,” JHEP 10 (2003) 063,
arXiv:hep-th/0204131.
[210] C. G. Callan, Jr., E. J. Martinec, M. J. Perry, and D. Friedan, “Strings in Background
Fields,” Nucl. Phys. B 262 (1985) 593–609.
[211] D. H. Friedan, “Nonlinear Models in Two + Epsilon Dimensions,”
Annals Phys. 163 (1985) 318.
[212] A. B. Zamolodchikov, “Irreversibility of the Flux of the Renormalization Group in a 2D Field
Theory,” JETP Lett. 43 (1986) 730–732.
[213] I. Aﬄeck and A. W. W. Ludwig, “Universal noninteger ’ground state degeneracy’ in critical
quantum systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 161–164.
[214] D. Kutasov, M. Marino, and G. W. Moore, “Some exact results on tachyon condensation in
string ﬁeld theory,” JHEP 10 (2000) 045, arXiv:hep-th/0009148.
[215] D. Friedan and A. Konechny, “On the boundary entropy of one-dimensional quantum systems
at low temperature,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 030402, arXiv:hep-th/0312197.
[216] E. Witten, “On background independent open string ﬁeld theory,”
Phys. Rev. D 46 (1992) 5467–5473, arXiv:hep-th/9208027.
[217] A. A. Gerasimov and S. L. Shatashvili, “On exact tachyon potential in open string ﬁeld
theory,” JHEP 10 (2000) 034, arXiv:hep-th/0009103.
[218] D. Kutasov, M. Marino, and G. W. Moore, “Remarks on tachyon condensation in superstring
ﬁeld theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0010108.
[219] G. W. Moore, “K theory from a physical perspective,” in Symposium on Topology, Geometry
and Quantum Field Theory (Segalfest), pp. 194–234. 4, 2003. arXiv:hep-th/0304018.
[220] S. Stolz and P. Teichner, “What is an elliptic object?,” in Topology, geometry and quantum
ﬁeld theory, vol. 308 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pp. 247–343. Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 2004. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511526398.013.
[221] S. Stolz and P. Teichner, “Supersymmetric ﬁeld theories and generalized cohomology,”
arXiv:1108.0189 [math.AT].
[222] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, “Holomorphic SCFTs with small index,”
arXiv:1811.00589 [hep-th].
[223] D. Gaiotto, T. Johnson-Freyd, and E. Witten, “A Note On Some Minimally Supersymmetric
Models In Two Dimensions,” arXiv:1902.10249 [hep-th].
54

[224] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, “Mock modularity and a secondary elliptic genus,”
arXiv:1904.05788 [hep-th].
[225] Y. Tachikawa, “Topological modular forms and the absence of a heterotic global anomaly,”
arXiv:2103.12211 [hep-th].
[226] Y. Tachikawa and M. Yamashita, “Topological modular forms and the absence of all heterotic
global anomalies,” arXiv:2108.13542 [hep-th].
[227] K. Yonekura, “Heterotic global anomalies and torsion Witten index,” JHEP 10 (2022) 114,
arXiv:2207.13858 [hep-th].
[228] Z. Komargodski and A. Schwimmer, “On Renormalization Group Flows in Four Dimensions,”
JHEP 12 (2011) 099, arXiv:1107.3987 [hep-th].
[229] H. Elvang, D. Z. Freedman, L.-Y. Hung, M. Kiermaier, R. C. Myers, and S. Theisen, “On
renormalization group ﬂows and the a-theorem in 6d,” JHEP 10 (2012) 011,
arXiv:1205.3994 [hep-th].
[230] H. Casini and M. Huerta, “A c-theorem for the entanglement entropy,”
J. Phys. A 40 (2007) 7031–7036, arXiv:cond-mat/0610375.
[231] H. Casini and M. Huerta, “On the RG running of the entanglement entropy of a circle,”
Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 125016, arXiv:1202.5650 [hep-th].
[232] H. Casini, M. Huerta, R. C. Myers, and A. Yale, “Mutual information and the F-theorem,”
JHEP 10 (2015) 003, arXiv:1506.06195 [hep-th].
[233] H. Casini, I. Salazar Landea, and G. Torroba, “The g-theorem and quantum information
theory,” JHEP 10 (2016) 140, arXiv:1607.00390 [hep-th].
[234] H. Casini, E. Test´e, and G. Torroba, “Markov Property of the Conformal Field Theory
Vacuum and the a Theorem,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 no. 26, (2017) 261602,
arXiv:1704.01870 [hep-th].
[235] N. Seiberg, “Talk at Strings 2019,”. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6ODV9Y63yA.
[236] E. Andriolo, N. Lambert, and C. Papageorgakis, “Geometrical Aspects of An Abelian (2,0)
Action,” JHEP 04 (2020) 200, arXiv:2003.10567 [hep-th].
[237] E. Andriolo, N. Lambert, T. Orchard, and C. Papageorgakis, “A Path Integral for the
Chiral-Form Partition Function,” arXiv:2112.00040 [hep-th].
[238] D. Belov and G. W. Moore, “Holographic Action for the Self-Dual Field,”
arXiv:hep-th/0605038.
[239] D. M. Belov and G. W. Moore, “Type II Actions from 11-Dimensional Chern-Simons
Theories,” arXiv:hep-th/0611020.
[240] A. Sen, “Self-dual forms: Action, Hamiltonian and Compactiﬁcation,”
J. Phys. A 53 no. 8, (2020) 084002, arXiv:1903.12196 [hep-th].
[241] L. Alvarez-Gaume, J. B. Bost, G. W. Moore, P. C. Nelson, and C. Vafa, “Bosonization on
Higher Genus Riemann Surfaces,” Commun. Math. Phys. 112 (1987) 503.
[242] L. Alvarez-Gaume, G. W. Moore, P. C. Nelson, C. Vafa, and J. b. Bost, “Bosonization in
Arbitrary Genus,” Phys. Lett. B 178 (1986) 41–47.
[243] D. S. Freed, G. W. Moore, and G. Segal, “The Uncertainty of Fluxes,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 271 (2007) 247–274, arXiv:hep-th/0605198.
[244] M. J. Hopkins and I. M. Singer, “Quadratic functions in geometry, topology, and M theory,”
J. Diﬀ. Geom. 70 no. 3, (2005) 329–452, arXiv:math/0211216.
55

[245] C.-T. Hsieh, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, “Anomaly inﬂow and p-form gauge theories,”
arXiv:2003.11550 [hep-th].
[246] E. Witten, “Five-brane eﬀective action in M theory,” J. Geom. Phys. 22 (1997) 103–133,
arXiv:hep-th/9610234.
[247] F. J. Dyson, “Divergence of perturbation theory in quantum electrodynamics,”
Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 631–632.
[248] V. I. Arnold, S. M. Gusein-Zade, and A. N. Varchenko, Singularities of diﬀerentiable maps.
Volume 2. Modern Birkh¨auser Classics. Birkh¨auser/Springer, New York, 2012. Monodromy
and asymptotics of integrals, Translated from the Russian by Hugh Porteous and revised by
the authors and James Montaldi, Reprint of the 1988 translation.
[249] M. Mari˜no, “Lectures on non-perturbative eﬀects in large N gauge theories, matrix models
and strings,” Fortsch. Phys. 62 (2014) 455–540, arXiv:1206.6272 [hep-th].
[250] E. Witten, “Analytic Continuation Of Chern-Simons Theory,” AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math. 50
(2011) 347–446, arXiv:1001.2933 [hep-th].
[251] Pham, F., “Introduction `a la r´esurgence quantique. (Introduction to quantum resurgence),”
S´eminaire Bourbaki 38`eme ann´ee no. Expos´es Nos. 651–668, (1985/86) .
[252] Pham, F., “Resurgence, quantized canonical transformations, and multi-instanton
expansions.” Algebraic analysis, Pap. Dedicated to Prof. Mikio Sato on the Occas. of his
Sixtieth Birthday, Vol. 2, 699-726 (1989)., 1989.
[253] J. ´Ecalle, Les fonctions r´esurgentes. Tome I, vol. 5 of Publications Math´ematiques d’Orsay 81
[Mathematical Publications of Orsay 81]. Universit´e de Paris-Sud, D´epartement de
Math´ematique, Orsay, 1981. Les alg`ebres de fonctions r´esurgentes. [The algebras of resurgent
functions], With an English foreword.
[254] J. ´Ecalle, Les fonctions r´esurgentes. Tome II, vol. 6 of Publications Math´ematiques d’Orsay 81
[Mathematical Publications of Orsay 81]. Universit´e de Paris-Sud, D´epartement de
Math´ematique, Orsay, 1981. Les fonctions r´esurgentes appliqu´ees `a l’it´eration. [Resurgent
functions applied to iteration].
[255] J. ´Ecalle, Les fonctions r´esurgentes. Tome III, vol. 85 of Publications Math´ematiques d’Orsay
[Mathematical Publications of Orsay]. Universit´e de Paris-Sud, D´epartement de
Math´ematiques, Orsay, 1985. L’´equation du pont et la classiﬁcation analytique des objects
locaux. [The bridge equation and analytic classiﬁcation of local objects].
[256] Aniceto, Inˆes and Basar, Gokce and Schiappa, Ricardo, “A Primer on Resurgent Transseries
and Their Asymptotics,” Phys. Rept. 809 (2019) 1–135, arXiv:1802.10441 [hep-th].
[257] Voros, Andr´e, Spectre de l’´equation de Schr¨odinger et m´ethode BKW, vol. 9 of Publications
Math´ematiques d’Orsay 81. Universit´e de Paris-Sud, D´epartement de Math´ematique, Orsay,
1982.
[258] L. N. Lipatov, “Divergence of the Perturbation Theory Series and the Quasiclassical Theory,”
Sov. Phys. JETP 45 (1977) 216–223.
[259] G. ’t Hooft, “Can we make sense out of ”Quantum Chromodynamics”?,” 1977.
[260] N. Nekrasov, Tying up instantons with anti-instantons. 2018. arXiv:1802.04202 [hep-th].
[261] I. Krichever and N. Nekrasov, “Towards Lefschetz Thimbles in Sigma Models, I,”
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 132 no. 4, (Apr, 2021) 734–751.
[262] G. V. Dunne and M. Unsal, “Resurgence and Trans-series in Quantum Field Theory: The
CPN−1 Model,” JHEP 11 (2012) 170, arXiv:1210.2423 [hep-th].
56

[263] S. Jeong, “Splitting of surface defect partition functions and integrable systems,”
Nucl. Phys. B 938 (2019) 775–806, arXiv:1709.04926 [hep-th].
[264] M. Marino, R. Miravitllas, and T. Reis, “New renormalons from analytic trans-series,”
arXiv:2111.11951 [hep-th].
[265] E. Delabaere and F. Pham, “Resurgent methods in semi-classical asymptotics,”
Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e Phys. Th´eor. 71 no. 1, (1999) 1–94.
[266] U. D. Jentschura and J. Zinn-Justin, “Instantons in quantum mechanics and resurgent
expansions,” Phys. Lett. B 596 (2004) 138–144, arXiv:hep-ph/0405279.
[267] D. Kreﬂ, “Non-perturbative quantum geometry,”
Journal of High Energy Physics 2014 no. 2, (Feb, 2014) .
[268] Ba¸sar, G¨ok¸ce and Dunne, Gerald V., “Resurgence and the Nekrasov-Shatashvili limit:
connecting weak and strong coupling in the Mathieu and Lam´e systems,”
JHEP 02 (2015) 160, arXiv:1501.05671 [hep-th].
[269] N. Nekrasov and S. Shatashvili,
“Quantization of Integrable Systems and Four Dimensional Gauge Theories,” in 16th
International Congress on Mathematical Physics, pp. 265–289. 8, 2009.
arXiv:0908.4052 [hep-th].
[270] N. Nekrasov, A. Rosly, and S. Shatashvili, “Darboux coordinates, Yang-Yang functional, and
gauge theory,” Nuclear Physics B - Proceedings Supplements 216 no. 1, (Jul, 2011) 69–93.
[271] J. Teschner, “Quantisation conditions of the quantum Hitchin system and the real geometric
Langlands correspondence,” arXiv:1707.07873 [math-ph].
[272] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, “Spectral networks,”
Annales Henri Poincare 14 (2013) 1643–1731, arXiv:1204.4824 [hep-th].
[273] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, “Spectral Networks and Snakes,”
Annales Henri Poincare 15 (2014) 61–141, arXiv:1209.0866 [hep-th].
[274] L. Hollands and A. Neitzke, “Spectral Networks and Fenchel–Nielsen Coordinates,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 106 no. 6, (2016) 811–877, arXiv:1312.2979 [math.GT].
[275] S. Codesido, M. Marino, and R. Schiappa, “Non-Perturbative Quantum Mechanics from
Non-Perturbative Strings,” Annales Henri Poincare 20 no. 2, (2019) 543–603,
arXiv:1712.02603 [hep-th].
[276] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, “Analyticity and resurgence in wall-crossing formulas,”
arXiv:2005.10651 [math.AG].
[277] O. Dumitrescu, L. Fredrickson, G. Kydonakis, R. Mazzeo, M. Mulase, and A. Neitzke, “Opers
versus nonabelian Hodge,” arXiv:1607.02172 [math.DG].
[278] D. Gaiotto, “Opers and TBA,” arXiv:1403.6137 [hep-th].
[279] A. Grassi, Q. Hao, and A. Neitzke, “Exact WKB methods in SU(2)Nf = 1,”
arXiv:2105.03777 [hep-th].
[280] N. Nikolaev, “Existence and Uniqueness of Exact WKB Solutions for Second-Order Singularly
Perturbed Linear ODEs,” arXiv:2106.10248 [math.AP].
[281] D. Galakhov, P. Longhi, and G. W. Moore, “Spectral Networks with Spin,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 340 no. 1, (2015) 171–232, arXiv:1408.0207 [hep-th].
[282] M. Gabella, “Quantum Holonomies from Spectral Networks and Framed BPS States,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 351 no. 2, (2017) 563–598, arXiv:1603.05258 [hep-th].
57

[283] A. Neitzke and F. Yan, “q-nonabelianization for line defects,” JHEP 09 (2020) 153,
arXiv:2002.08382 [hep-th].
[284] A. Neitzke and F. Yan, “The quantum UV-IR map for line defects in gl(3)-type class S
theories,” arXiv:2112.03775 [hep-th].
[285] F. Yan, “Exact WKB and the quantum Seiberg-Witten curve for 4d N = 2 pure SU(3)
Yang-Mills, Part I: Abelianization,” arXiv:2012.15658 [hep-th].
[286] V. V. Fock and A. B. Goncharov, “Moduli spaces of local systems and higher teichmuller
theory,” 2006.
[287] V. Fock and A. Goncharov, “The quantum dilogarithm and representations of quantum
cluster varieties,” Inventiones mathematicae 175 no. 2, (Sep, 2008) 223–286.
[288] V. V. Fock and A. B. Goncharov, “Cluster ensembles, quantization and the dilogarithm,”
2009.
[289] S. Gukov and E. Witten, “Branes and Quantization,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 13 no. 5, (2009) 1445–1518, arXiv:0809.0305 [hep-th].
[290] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Probing Quantization Via Branes,”
arXiv:2107.12251 [hep-th].
[291] N. Nekrasov and E. Witten, “The Omega Deformation, Branes, Integrability, and Liouville
Theory,” JHEP 09 (2010) 092, arXiv:1002.0888 [hep-th].
[292] F. Bonahon and H. Wong, “Representations of the Kauﬀman bracket skein algebra I:
invariants and miraculous cancellations,” Invent. Math. 204 no. 1, (2016) 195–243.
[293] J. Gu and M. Mari˜no, “Peacock patterns and new integer invariants in topological string
theory,” arXiv:2104.07437 [hep-th].
[294] S. Garoufalidis, J. Gu, and M. Mari˜no, “Peacock patterns and resurgence in complex
Chern-Simons theory,” arXiv:2012.00062 [math.GT].
[295] A. Kapustin, “Wilson-’t Hooft operators in four-dimensional gauge theories and S-duality,”
Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 025005, arXiv:hep-th/0501015.
[296] A. Braverman, “Instanton counting via aﬃne Lie algebras. 1. Equivariant J functions of
(aﬃne) ﬂag manifolds and Whittaker vectors,” in CRM Workshop on Algebraic Structures and
Moduli Spaces. 1, 2004. arXiv:math/0401409.
[297] Nekrasov, N., “2d CFT-type equations from 4d gauge theory,” ”DARPA Workshop
“Langlands Program and Physics”, IAS, March, 2004”.
[298] S. Gukov and E. Witten, “Rigid Surface Operators,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 14 no. 1, (2010) 87–178, arXiv:0804.1561 [hep-th].
[299] D. Gaiotto, S. Gukov, and N. Seiberg, “Surface Defects and Resolvents,”
JHEP 09 (2013) 070, arXiv:1307.2578 [hep-th].
[300] S. Gukov, Surface Operators, pp. 223–259. 2016. arXiv:1412.7127 [hep-th].
[301] N. Nekrasov, “BPS/CFT correspondence IV: sigma models and defects in gauge theory,”
Letters in Mathematical Physics 109 no. 3, (Jul, 2018) 579–622.
[302] N. Nekrasov, “BPS/CFT correspondence V: BPZ and KZ equations from qq-characters,” 2017.
[303] Kapustin, Anton, “Topological ﬁeld theory, higher categories, and their applications,” in
Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians. Volume III, pp. 2021–2043.
Hindustan Book Agency, New Delhi, 2010. arXiv:1004:2307.
58

[304] G. W. Moore, “Introduction To Chern-Simons Theories, Section 2.2.16, Remark 6,”.
https://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~gmoore/TASI-ChernSimons-StudentNotes.pdf.
[305] M. Dedushenko and N. Nekrasov, “Interfaces and Quantum Algebras, I: Stable Envelopes,”
arXiv:2109.10941 [hep-th].
[306] J. Kaidi, K. Ohmori, and Y. Zheng, “Kramers-Wannier-like duality defects in (3+1)d gauge
theories,” arXiv:2111.01141 [hep-th].
[307] Y. Choi, C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, “Non-Invertible Duality Defects
in 3+1 Dimensions,” arXiv:2111.01139 [hep-th].
[308] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, “Condensations in higher categories,”
arXiv:1905.09566 [math.CT].
[309] K. Roumpedakis, S. Seifnashri, and S.-H. Shao, “Higher Gauging and Non-invertible
Condensation Defects,” arXiv:2204.02407 [hep-th].
[310] Y. Choi, C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, “Non-invertible Condensation,
Duality, and Triality Defects in 3+1 Dimensions,” arXiv:2204.09025 [hep-th].
[311] L. Lin, D. G. Robbins, and E. Sharpe, “Decomposition, condensation defects, and fusion,”
arXiv:2208.05982 [hep-th].
[312] C. L. Douglas and D. J. Reutter, “Fusion 2-categories and a state-sum invariant for
4-manifolds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11933 (2018) .
[313] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “TFT construction of RCFT correlators 1. Partition
functions,” Nucl. Phys. B 646 (2002) 353–497, arXiv:hep-th/0204148.
[314] C. Bachas and M. Gaberdiel, “Loop operators and the Kondo problem,” JHEP 11 (2004) 065,
arXiv:hep-th/0411067.
[315] J. Fuchs, M. R. Gaberdiel, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Topological defects for the free
boson CFT,” J. Phys. A 40 (2007) 11403, arXiv:0705.3129 [hep-th].
[316] A. Kapustin and N. Saulina, “Surface operators in 3d Topological Field Theory and 2d
Rational Conformal Field Theory,” arXiv:1012.0911 [hep-th].
[317] J. Fuchs, C. Schweigert, and A. Valentino, “Bicategories for boundary conditions and for
surface defects in 3-d TFT,” Commun. Math. Phys. 321 (2013) 543–575,
arXiv:1203.4568 [hep-th].
[318] L. Bhardwaj and Y. Tachikawa, “On ﬁnite symmetries and their gauging in two dimensions,”
JHEP 03 (2018) 189, arXiv:1704.02330 [hep-th].
[319] Y. Choi, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, “Non-invertible Global Symmetries in the Standard
Model,” arXiv:2205.05086 [hep-th].
[320] C. Cordova and K. Ohmori, “Non-Invertible Chiral Symmetry and Exponential Hierarchies,”
arXiv:2205.06243 [hep-th].
[321] D. Aasen, E. Lake, and K. Walker, “Fermion condensation and super pivotal categories,”
J. Math. Phys. 60 no. 12, (2019) 121901, arXiv:1709.01941 [cond-mat.str-el].
[322] F. A. Bais, N. M. Muller, and B. J. Schroers, “Quantum group symmetry and particle
scattering in (2+1)-dimensional quantum gravity,” Nucl. Phys. B 640 (2002) 3–45,
arXiv:hep-th/0205021.
[323] F. A. Bais and C. J. M. Mathy, “The Breaking of quantum double symmetries by defect
condensation,” Annals Phys. 322 (2007) 552–598, arXiv:cond-mat/0602115.
[324] F. A. Bais and J. K. Slingerland, “Condensate induced transitions between topologically
ordered phases,” Phys. Rev. B 79 (2009) 045316, arXiv:0808.0627 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
59

[325] B. Gato-Rivera and A. N. Schellekens, “Complete classiﬁcation of simple current
automorphisms,” Nucl. Phys. B 353 (1991) 519–537.
[326] G. W. Moore and N. Seiberg, “Naturality in Conformal Field Theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 313 (1989) 16–40.
[327] R. Gopakumar, S. Minwalla, and A. Strominger, “Noncommutative solitons,”
JHEP 05 (2000) 020, arXiv:hep-th/0003160.
[328] J. A. Harvey, P. Kraus, F. Larsen, and E. J. Martinec, “D-branes and strings as
noncommutative solitons,” JHEP 07 (2000) 042, arXiv:hep-th/0005031.
[329] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “Noncommutative tachyons and K theory,”
J. Math. Phys. 42 (2001) 2765–2780, arXiv:hep-th/0009030.
[330] P. Horava, “Type IIA D-branes, K theory, and matrix theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1999) 1373–1404, arXiv:hep-th/9812135.
[331] P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “Boundary string ﬁeld theory of the D anti-D system,”
Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 106004, arXiv:hep-th/0012198.
[332] E. J. Martinec and G. W. Moore, “On decay of K theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0212059.
[333] A. Sen, “Tachyon condensation on the brane anti-brane system,” JHEP 08 (1998) 012,
arXiv:hep-th/9805170.
[334] E. Witten, “D-branes and K-theory,” JHEP 12 (1998) 019, arXiv:hep-th/9810188.
[335] S. Schafer-Nameki, “K-theoretical boundary rings in N=2 coset models,”
Nucl. Phys. B 706 (2005) 531–548, arXiv:hep-th/0408060.
[336] N. A. Nekrasov and S. L. Shatashvili, “Supersymmetric vacua and Bethe ansatz,”
Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 192-193 (2009) 91–112, arXiv:0901.4744 [hep-th].
[337] H. Nakajima, “Quiver varieties and ﬁnite dimensional representations of quantum aﬃne
algebras,” 1999.
[338] D. Maulik and A. Okounkov, “Quantum groups and quantum cohomology,” 2018.
[339] E. Frenkel, “Lectures on the Langlands program and conformal ﬁeld theory,”.
https://math.berkeley.edu/~frenkel/houches.pdf.
[340] P. Etingof, E. Frenkel, and D. Kazhdan, “An analytic version of the Langlands
correspondence for complex curves,” arXiv:1908.09677 [math.AG].
[341] P. Etingof, E. Frenkel, and D. Kazhdan, “Hecke operators and analytic Langlands
correspondence for curves over local ﬁelds,” arXiv:2103.01509 [math.AG].
[342] P. Etingof, E. Frenkel, and D. Kazhdan, “Analytic Langlands correspondence for PGL(2) on
P1 with parabolic structures over local ﬁelds,” arXiv:2106.05243 [math.AG].
[343] N. Nekrasov and A. Tsymbaliuk, “Surface defects in gauge theory and KZ equation,”
arXiv:2103.12611 [hep-th].
[344] T. Banks, W. Fischler, S. H. Shenker, and L. Susskind, “M theory as a matrix model: A
Conjecture,” Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 5112–5128, arXiv:hep-th/9610043.
[345] T. Banks, “Matrix theory,” Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 67 (1998) 180–224,
arXiv:hep-th/9710231.
[346] T. Banks, “TASI lectures on matrix theory,” in Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in
Elementary Particle Physics (TASI 99): Strings, Branes, and Gravity, pp. 495–542. 5, 1999.
arXiv:hep-th/9911068.
60

[347] D. Bigatti and L. Susskind, “Review of matrix theory,” NATO Sci. Ser. C 520 (1999)
277–318, arXiv:hep-th/9712072.
[348] O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri, and Y. Oz, “Large N ﬁeld theories,
string theory and gravity,” Phys. Rept. 323 (2000) 183–386, arXiv:hep-th/9905111.
[349] R. Gopakumar, E. Perlmutter, S. S. Pufu, and X. Yin, “Snowmass White Paper:
Bootstrapping String Theory,” arXiv:2202.07163 [hep-th].
[350] R. Gopakumar, “From free ﬁelds to AdS,” Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 025009,
arXiv:hep-th/0308184.
[351] S. R. Das and A. Jevicki, “Large N collective ﬁelds and holography,”
Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 044011, arXiv:hep-th/0304093.
[352] R. Gopakumar, “From free ﬁelds to AdS: III,” Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 066008,
arXiv:hep-th/0504229.
[353] S. S. Razamat, “On a worldsheet dual of the Gaussian matrix model,” JHEP 07 (2008) 026,
arXiv:0803.2681 [hep-th].
[354] L. Eberhardt, M. R. Gaberdiel, and R. Gopakumar, “Deriving the AdS3/CFT2
correspondence,” JHEP 02 (2020) 136, arXiv:1911.00378 [hep-th].
[355] O. Aharony, S. M. Chester, and E. Y. Urbach, “A Derivation of AdS/CFT for Vector
Models,” JHEP 03 (2021) 208, arXiv:2011.06328 [hep-th].
[356] B. Zwiebach, “Closed string ﬁeld theory: Quantum action and the B-V master equation,”
Nucl. Phys. B 390 (1993) 33–152, arXiv:hep-th/9206084.
[357] W. Taylor and B. Zwiebach, “D-branes, tachyons, and string ﬁeld theory,” in Theoretical
Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics (TASI 2001): Strings, Branes and
EXTRA Dimensions, pp. 641–759. 10, 2003. arXiv:hep-th/0311017.
[358] E. Witten, “Noncommutative Geometry and String Field Theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 268 (1986) 253–294.
[359] M. Schnabl, “Analytic solution for tachyon condensation in open string ﬁeld theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 10 no. 4, (2006) 433–501, arXiv:hep-th/0511286.
[360] E. Fuchs and M. Kroyter, “Analytical Solutions of Open String Field Theory,”
Phys. Rept. 502 (2011) 89–149, arXiv:0807.4722 [hep-th].
[361] T. Erler, Y. Okawa, and T. Takezaki, “Complete Action for Open Superstring Field Theory
with Cyclic A∞Structure,” JHEP 08 (2016) 012, arXiv:1602.02582 [hep-th].
[362] A. Sen, “Fixing an Ambiguity in Two Dimensional String Theory Using String Field Theory,”
JHEP 03 (2020) 005, arXiv:1908.02782 [hep-th].
[363] A. Sen, “D-instanton Perturbation Theory,” JHEP 08 (2020) 075,
arXiv:2002.04043 [hep-th].
[364] A. Sen, “D-instantons, string ﬁeld theory and two dimensional string theory,”
JHEP 11 (2021) 061, arXiv:2012.11624 [hep-th].
[365] N. A. Nekrasov, “Seiberg-Witten prepotential from instanton counting,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 7 no. 5, (2003) 831–864, arXiv:hep-th/0206161.
[366] Nekrasov, Nikita, “Instanton partition functions and M-theory,”
Japanese Journal of Mathematics 4 no. 1, (2009) 63–93.
[367] E. Witten, “Topological Sigma Models,” Commun. Math. Phys. 118 (1988) 411.
61

[368] E. Witten, “Mirror manifolds and topological ﬁeld theory,” AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math. 9
(1998) 121–160, arXiv:hep-th/9112056.
[369] K. Hori, S. Katz, A. Klemm, R. Pandharipande, R. Thomas, C. Vafa, R. Vakil, and E. Zaslow,
Mirror symmetry, vol. 1 of Clay Mathematics Monographs. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI; Clay Mathematics Institute, Cambridge, MA, 2003. With a preface by Vafa.
[370] P. S. Aspinwall, T. Bridgeland, A. Craw, M. R. Douglas, M. Gross, A. Kapustin, G. W.
Moore, G. Segal, B. Szendr˝oi, and P. M. H. Wilson, Dirichlet branes and mirror symmetry,
vol. 4 of Clay Mathematics Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI;
Clay Mathematics Institute, Cambridge, MA, 2009.
[371] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri, and C. Vafa, “Kodaira-spencer theory of gravity and
exact results for quantum string amplitudes,”
Communications in Mathematical Physics 165 no. 2, (Oct, 1994) 311–427.
[372] M.-x. Huang, A. Klemm, and S. Quackenbush, “Topological string theory on compact
Calabi-Yau: Modularity and boundary conditions,” Lect. Notes Phys. 757 (2009) 45–102,
arXiv:hep-th/0612125.
[373] E. Witten, “Chern-Simons gauge theory as a string theory,” Prog. Math. 133 (1995) 637–678,
arXiv:hep-th/9207094.
[374] V. Bouchard, A. Klemm, M. Marino, and S. Pasquetti, “Remodeling the B-model,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 287 (2009) 117–178, arXiv:0709.1453 [hep-th].
[375] B. Eynard, “A short overview of the ”Topological recursion”,” arXiv:1412.3286 [math-ph].
[376] M. Aganagic, A. Klemm, M. Marino, and C. Vafa, “The Topological vertex,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 254 (2005) 425–478, arXiv:hep-th/0305132.
[377] A. Grassi, Y. Hatsuda, and M. Marino, “Topological Strings from Quantum Mechanics,”
Annales Henri Poincare 17 no. 11, (2016) 3177–3235, arXiv:1410.3382 [hep-th].
[378] S. Codesido, A. Grassi, and M. Marino, “Spectral Theory and Mirror Curves of Higher
Genus,” Annales Henri Poincare 18 no. 2, (2017) 559–622, arXiv:1507.02096 [hep-th].
[379] M. Marino, “Spectral Theory and Mirror Symmetry,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 98 (2018) 259,
arXiv:1506.07757 [math-ph].
[380] A. Grassi, J. Gu, and M. Mari˜no, “Non-perturbative approaches to the quantum
Seiberg-Witten curve,” JHEP 07 (2020) 106, arXiv:1908.07065 [hep-th].
[381] C. V. Johnson, “Quantum Gravity Microstates from Fredholm Determinants,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 no. 18, (2021) 181602, arXiv:2106.09048 [hep-th].
[382] Coman, I. and Pomoni, E. and Teschner, J., “From quantum curves to topological string
partition functions,” arXiv:1811.01978 [hep-th].
[383] I. Coman, E. Pomoni, and J. Teschner, “Trinion Conformal Blocks from Topological strings,”
JHEP 09 (2020) 078, arXiv:1906.06351 [hep-th].
[384] Coman, I. and Longhi, P. and Teschner, J., “From quantum curves to topological string
partition functions II,” arXiv:2004.04585 [hep-th].
[385] A. Grassi, Q. Hao, and A. Neitzke, “Exponential Networks, WKB and the Topological
String,” arXiv:2201.11594 [hep-th].
[386] A. E. Lawrence and N. Nekrasov, “Instanton sums and ﬁve-dimensional gauge theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 513 (1998) 239–265, arXiv:hep-th/9706025.
[387] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M theory and topological strings. 1.,” arXiv:hep-th/9809187.
[388] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M theory and topological strings. 2.,” arXiv:hep-th/9812127.
62

[389] M. Kontsevich, A. S. Schwarz, and V. Vologodsky, “Integrality of instanton numbers and
p-adic B-model,” Phys. Lett. B 637 (2006) 97–101, arXiv:hep-th/0603106.
[390] M. Dedushenko and E. Witten, “Some Details On The Gopakumar-Vafa and Ooguri-Vafa
Formulas,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 20 (2016) 1–133, arXiv:1411.7108 [hep-th].
[391] H. Ooguri, A. Strominger, and C. Vafa, “Black hole attractors and the topological string,”
Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 106007, arXiv:hep-th/0405146.
[392] F. Denef and G. W. Moore, “Split states, entropy enigmas, holes and halos,”
JHEP 11 (2011) 129, arXiv:hep-th/0702146.
[393] Y. Toda, “A note on Bogomolov-Gieseker type inequality for Calabi-Yau 3-folds,”
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 142 no. 10, (2014) 3387–3394.
[394] S. Feyzbakhsh, “Explicit formulae for rank zero DT invariants and the OSV conjecture,”
arXiv:2203.10617 [math.AG].
[395] F. Denef, “Supergravity ﬂows and D-brane stability,” JHEP 08 (2000) 050,
arXiv:hep-th/0005049.
[396] F. Denef, B. R. Greene, and M. Raugas, “Split attractor ﬂows and the spectrum of BPS
D-branes on the quintic,” JHEP 05 (2001) 012, arXiv:hep-th/0101135.
[397] F. Denef, “Quantum quivers and Hall / hole halos,” JHEP 10 (2002) 023,
arXiv:hep-th/0206072.
[398] J. Manschot, “Wall-crossing of D4-branes using ﬂow trees,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 15 no. 1, (2011) 1–42, arXiv:1003.1570 [hep-th].
[399] E. Andriyash, F. Denef, D. L. Jaﬀeris, and G. W. Moore, “Bound state transformation walls,”
JHEP 03 (2012) 007, arXiv:1008.3555 [hep-th].
[400] S. Alexandrov and B. Pioline, “Attractor ﬂow trees, BPS indices and quivers,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 23 no. 3, (2019) 627–699, arXiv:1804.06928 [hep-th].
[401] H. Arg¨uz and P. Bousseau, “The ﬂow tree formula for Donaldson-Thomas invariants of
quivers with potentials,” arXiv:2102.11200 [math.RT].
[402] S. Mozgovoy, “Operadic approach to wall-crossing,” J. Algebra 596 (2022) 53–88,
arXiv:2101.07636 [math.AG].
[403] J. Manschot, B. Pioline, and A. Sen, “Wall Crossing from Boltzmann Black Hole Halos,”
JHEP 07 (2011) 059, arXiv:1011.1258 [hep-th].
[404] J. Manschot, B. Pioline, and A. Sen, “A Fixed point formula for the index of multi-centered
N=2 black holes,” JHEP 05 (2011) 057, arXiv:1103.1887 [hep-th].
[405] J. Manschot, B. Pioline, and A. Sen, “From Black Holes to Quivers,” JHEP 11 (2012) 023,
arXiv:1207.2230 [hep-th].
[406] J. Manschot, B. Pioline, and A. Sen, “On the Coulomb and Higgs branch formulae for
multi-centered black holes and quiver invariants,” JHEP 05 (2013) 166,
arXiv:1302.5498 [hep-th].
[407] J. Manschot, B. Pioline, and A. Sen, “The Coulomb Branch Formula for Quiver Moduli
Spaces,” arXiv:1404.7154 [hep-th].
[408] S. Mozgovoy and B. Pioline, “Attractor invariants, brane tilings and crystals,”
arXiv:2012.14358 [hep-th].
[409] P. Descombes, “Cohomological DT invariants from localization,”
arXiv:2106.02518 [math.AG].
63

[410] S. Alexandrov, N. Gaddam, J. Manschot, and B. Pioline, “Modular bootstrap for D4-D2-D0
indices on compact Calabi-Yau threefolds,” arXiv:2204.02207 [hep-th].
[411] R. Eager, S. A. Selmani, and J. Walcher, “Exponential Networks and Representations of
Quivers,” JHEP 08 (2017) 063, arXiv:1611.06177 [hep-th].
[412] S. Banerjee, P. Longhi, and M. Romo, “Exploring 5d BPS Spectra with Exponential
Networks,” Annales Henri Poincare 20 no. 12, (2019) 4055–4162,
arXiv:1811.02875 [hep-th].
[413] S. Banerjee, P. Longhi, and M. Romo, “Exponential BPS Graphs and D Brane Counting on
Toric Calabi-Yau Threefolds: Part I,” Commun. Math. Phys. 388 no. 2, (2021) 893–945,
arXiv:1910.05296 [hep-th].
[414] S. Banerjee, P. Longhi, and M. Romo, “Exponential BPS graphs and D-brane counting on
toric Calabi-Yau threefolds: Part II,” arXiv:2012.09769 [hep-th].
[415] E. Witten, “More On Superstring Perturbation Theory: An Overview Of Superstring
Perturbation Theory Via Super Riemann Surfaces,” arXiv:1304.2832 [hep-th].
[416] E. Witten, “Superstring perturbation theory via super Riemann surfaces: an overview,”
Pure Appl. Math. Quart. 15 no. 1, (2019) 517–607.
[417] R. Donagi and E. Witten, “Supermoduli Space Is Not Projected,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 90
(2015) 19–72, arXiv:1304.7798 [hep-th].
[418] G. Felder, D. Kazhdan, and A. Polishchuk, “Regularity of the superstring supermeasure and
the superperiod map,” arXiv:1905.12805 [math.AG].
[419] G. Felder, D. Kazhdan, and A. Polishchuk, “The moduli space of stable supercurves and its
canonical line bundle,” arXiv:2006.13271 [math.AG].
[420] J. Distler, D. S. Freed, and G. W. Moore, “Spin structures and superstrings,” in Surveys in
diﬀerential geometry. Volume XV. Perspectives in mathematics and physics, vol. 15 of Surv.
Diﬀer. Geom., pp. 99–130. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2011. arXiv:1007.4581 [hep-th].
[421] Kaidi, J. and Parra-Martinez, J. and Tachikawa, Y., “Classiﬁcation of String Theories via
Topological Phases,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 no. 12, (2020) 121601,
arXiv:1908.04805 [hep-th].
[422] J. Kaidi, J. Parra-Martinez, Y. Tachikawa, and w. a. m. a. b. A. Debray, “Topological
Superconductors on Superstring Worldsheets,” SciPost Phys. 9 (2020) 10,
arXiv:1911.11780 [hep-th].
[423] D. Friedan, E. J. Martinec, and S. H. Shenker, “Conformal Invariance, Supersymmetry and
String Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 271 (1986) 93–165.
[424] N. Berkovits, “Manifest spacetime supersymmetry and the superstring,” JHEP 10 (2021) 162,
arXiv:2106.04448 [hep-th].
[425] A. Dei and L. Eberhardt, “String correlators on AdS3: three-point functions,”
JHEP 08 (2021) 025, arXiv:2105.12130 [hep-th].
[426] L. Eberhardt, “Summing over Geometries in String Theory,” JHEP 05 (2021) 233,
arXiv:2102.12355 [hep-th].
[427] M. Douglas and N. Nekrasov, “Noncommutative ﬁeld theory,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 73 (2001) 977–1029, arXiv:hep-th/0106048.
[428] A. Konechny and A. S. Schwarz, “Introduction to M(atrix) theory and noncommutative
geometry,” Phys. Rept. 360 (2002) 353–465, arXiv:hep-th/0012145.
[429] A. Konechny and A. Schwarz, “Introduction to M(atrix) theory and noncommutative
geometry. Part 2.,” arXiv:hep-th/0107251.
64

[430] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “String theory and noncommutative geometry,”
JHEP 09 (1999) 032, arXiv:hep-th/9908142.
[431] A. Connes, M. R. Douglas, and A. S. Schwarz, “Noncommutative geometry and matrix
theory: Compactiﬁcation on tori,” JHEP 02 (1998) 003, arXiv:hep-th/9711162.
[432] M. R. Douglas and C. M. Hull, “D-branes and the noncommutative torus,”
JHEP 02 (1998) 008, arXiv:hep-th/9711165.
[433] N. Nekrasov and A. Schwarz, “Instantons on Noncommutative R4, and (2, 0) Superconformal
Six Dimensional Theory,”
Communications in Mathematical Physics 198 no. 3, (Nov, 1998) 689–703.
[434] G. W. Moore and G. Segal, “D-branes and K-theory in 2D topological ﬁeld theory,”
arXiv:hep-th/0609042.
[435] B. Zumino, Y.-S. Wu, and A. Zee, “Chiral Anomalies, Higher Dimensions, and Diﬀerential
Geometry,” Nucl. Phys. B 239 (1984) 477–507.
[436] L. Alvarez-Gaume and E. Witten, “Gravitational Anomalies,” Nucl. Phys. B 234 (1984) 269.
[437] E. Witten, “Global gravitational anomalies,” Commun. Math. Phys. 100 (1985) 197.
[438] M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, “Anomaly Cancellation in Supersymmetric d = 10 Gauge
Theory and Superstring Theory,” Phys. Lett. B 149 (1984) 117–122.
[439] D. S. Freed and M. J. Hopkins, “Consistency of M-Theory on Non-Orientable Manifolds,”
Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. 72 no. 1-2, (2021) 603–671, arXiv:1908.09916 [hep-th].
[440] E. Witten, “On ﬂux quantization in M theory and the eﬀective action,”
J. Geom. Phys. 22 (1997) 1–13, arXiv:hep-th/9609122.
[441] D.-E. Diaconescu, G. W. Moore, and E. Witten, “E8 gauge theory, and a derivation of K
theory from M theory,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 6 (2003) 1031–1134,
arXiv:hep-th/0005090.
[442] E. Diaconescu, G. Moore, and D. S. Freed, “The M-theory 3-form and E8 gauge theory,” in
Elliptic cohomology, vol. 342 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pp. 44–88. Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2007. arXiv:hep-th/0312069.
[443] D. S. Freed and G. W. Moore, “Setting the quantum integrand of M-theory,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 263 (2006) 89–132, arXiv:hep-th/0409135.
[444] E. Witten, “The ”Parity” Anomaly On An Unorientable Manifold,”
Phys. Rev. B 94 no. 19, (2016) 195150, arXiv:1605.02391 [hep-th].
[445] J. de Boer, R. Dijkgraaf, K. Hori, A. Keurentjes, J. Morgan, D. R. Morrison, and S. Sethi,
“Triples, ﬂuxes, and strings,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4 (2002) 995–1186,
arXiv:hep-th/0103170.
[446] D. S. Freed, “Lectures on twisted K-theory and orientifolds,”.
https://web.ma.utexas.edu/users/dafr/vienna.pdf.
[447] V. Kumar, D. R. Morrison, and W. Taylor, “Global aspects of the space of 6D N = 1
supergravities,” JHEP 11 (2010) 118, arXiv:1008.1062 [hep-th].
[448] W. Taylor, “TASI Lectures on Supergravity and String Vacua in Various Dimensions,”
arXiv:1104.2051 [hep-th].
[449] A. Grassi and D. R. Morrison, “Anomalies and the Euler characteristic of elliptic Calabi-Yau
threefolds,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 6 (2012) 51–127, arXiv:1109.0042 [hep-th].
[450] S. Monnier, G. W. Moore, and D. S. Park, “Quantization of anomaly coeﬃcients in 6D
N = (1, 0) supergravity,” JHEP 02 (2018) 020, arXiv:1711.04777 [hep-th].
65

[451] S. Monnier and G. W. Moore, “A Brief Summary Of Global Anomaly Cancellation In
Six-Dimensional Supergravity,” arXiv:1808.01335 [hep-th].
[452] S. Monnier and G. W. Moore, “Remarks on the Green-Schwarz Terms of Six-Dimensional
Supergravity Theories,” Commun. Math. Phys. 372 no. 3, (2019) 963–1025,
arXiv:1808.01334 [hep-th].
[453] R. Minasian and G. W. Moore, “K theory and Ramond-Ramond charge,”
JHEP 11 (1997) 002, arXiv:hep-th/9710230.
[454] E. Witten, “Overview of K-theory applied to strings,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16 (2001) 693–706, arXiv:hep-th/0007175.
[455] D. S. Freed, “Dirac charge quantization and generalized diﬀerential cohomology,” in Surveys
in Diﬀerential Geometry, pp. 129–194. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2000.
arXiv:hep-th/0011220.
[456] D.-E. Diaconescu, G. W. Moore, and E. Witten, “A Derivation of K-theory from M-theory,”
arXiv:hep-th/0005091.
[457] F. Han, R. Huang, K. Liu, and W. Zhang, “Cubic forms, anomaly cancellation and
modularity,” Adv. Math. 394 (2022) 108023, arXiv:2005.02344 [math.DG].
[458] A. Debray, M. Dierigl, J. J. Heckman, and M. Montero, “The anomaly that was not meant
IIB,” arXiv:2107.14227 [hep-th].
[459] M. R. Gaberdiel and M. B. Green, “An SL(2, Z) anomaly in IIB supergravity and its F theory
interpretation,” JHEP 11 (1998) 026, arXiv:hep-th/9810153.
[460] S. Mukhi, “Dualities and the SL(2,Z) anomaly,” JHEP 12 (1998) 006,
arXiv:hep-th/9810213.
[461] R. Minasian, S. Sasmal, and R. Savelli, “Discrete anomalies in supergravity and consistency of
string backgrounds,” JHEP 02 (2017) 025, arXiv:1611.09575 [hep-th].
[462] B. Assel and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “Six-dimensional origin of N = 4 SYM with duality defects,”
JHEP 12 (2016) 058, arXiv:1610.03663 [hep-th].
[463] T. Pantev and E. Sharpe, “Duality group actions on fermions,” JHEP 11 (2016) 171,
arXiv:1609.00011 [hep-th].
[464] Y. Tachikawa and K. Yonekura, “Why are fractional charges of orientifolds compatible with
Dirac quantization?,” SciPost Phys. 7 no. 5, (2019) 058, arXiv:1805.02772 [hep-th].
[465] J. Distler, D. S. Freed, and G. W. Moore, “Orientifold Precis,” arXiv:0906.0795 [hep-th].
[466] E. Witten, “Baryons and branes in anti-de Sitter space,” JHEP 07 (1998) 006,
arXiv:hep-th/9805112.
[467] Y. Lee and K. Yonekura, “Global anomalies in 8d supergravity,” JHEP 07 (2022) 125,
arXiv:2203.12631 [hep-th].
[468] D. S. Freed, “Anomalies and Invertible Field Theories,”
Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 88 (2014) 25–46, arXiv:1404.7224 [hep-th].
[469] C. G. Callan, Jr. and J. A. Harvey, “Anomalies and Fermion Zero Modes on Strings and
Domain Walls,” Nucl. Phys. B 250 (1985) 427–436.
[470] L. D. Faddeev and S. L. Shatashvili, “Algebraic and Hamiltonian Methods in the Theory of
Nonabelian Anomalies,” Teor. Mat. Fiz. 60 (1984) 206–217.
[471] J. W. Milnor, Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem. Notes by L. Siebenmann and J. Sondow.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965.
66

[472] R. Thom, “Quelques propri´et´es globales des vari´et´es diﬀ´erentiables,” Comment. Math. Helv.
28 (1954) 17–86.
[473] S. Galatius, U. Tillmann, I. Madsen, and M. Weiss, “The homotopy type of the cobordism
category,” Acta Math. 202 no. 2, (2009) 195–239, arXiv:math/0605249.
[474] D. S. Freed, M. J. Hopkins, and C. Teleman, “Consistent orientation of moduli spaces,” in
The many facets of geometry, pp. 395–419. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2010.
arXiv:0711.1909. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199534920.003.0019.
[475] A. N. Redlich, “Gauge Noninvariance and Parity Violation of Three-Dimensional Fermions,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 18.
[476] A. N. Redlich, “Parity Violation and Gauge Noninvariance of the Eﬀective Gauge Field
Action in Three-Dimensions,” Phys. Rev. D 29 (1984) 2366–2374.
[477] A. J. Niemi and G. W. Semenoﬀ, “Axial Anomaly Induced Fermion Fractionization and
Eﬀective Gauge Theory Actions in Odd Dimensional Space-Times,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 2077.
[478] L. Alvarez-Gaume, S. Della Pietra, and G. W. Moore, “Anomalies and Odd Dimensions,”
Annals Phys. 163 (1985) 288.
[479] E. Witten and K. Yonekura, “Anomaly Inﬂow and the η-Invariant,” in The Shoucheng Zhang
Memorial Workshop. 9, 2019. arXiv:1909.08775 [hep-th].
[480] D. S. Freed, “The Atiyah–Singer index theorem,”
Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 58 no. 4, (2021) 517–566, arXiv:2107.03557 [math.HO].
[481] M. Yamashita and K. Yonekura, “Diﬀerential models for the anderson dual to bordism
theories and invertible qfts, i,” arXiv:2106.09270.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.09270.pdf.
[482] K. Gomi and M. Yamashita, “Diﬀerential ko-theory via gradations and mass terms,”
arXiv:2111.01377. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.01377.pdf.
[483] G. ’t Hooft, “Naturalness, chiral symmetry, and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking,”
NATO Sci. Ser. B 59 (1980) 135–157.
[484] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Lectures on Supersymmetry Breaking,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 24 (2007) S741–S772, arXiv:hep-ph/0702069.
[485] T. D. Brennan, F. Carta, and C. Vafa, “The String Landscape, the Swampland, and the
Missing Corner,” PoS TASI2017 (2017) 015, arXiv:1711.00864 [hep-th].
[486] E. Palti, “The Swampland: Introduction and Review,”
Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 6, (2019) 1900037, arXiv:1903.06239 [hep-th].
[487] M. van Beest, J. Calder´on-Infante, D. Mirfendereski, and I. Valenzuela, “Lectures on the
Swampland Program in String Compactiﬁcations,” arXiv:2102.01111 [hep-th].
[488] D. Harlow, B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, “The Weak Gravity Conjecture: A
Review,” arXiv:2201.08380 [hep-th].
[489] L. J. Dixon, “Some world sheet properties of superstring compactiﬁcations, on orbifolds and
otherwise,” in Summer Workshop in High-energy Physics and Cosmology. 10, 1987.
[490] L. J. Dixon, V. Kaplunovsky, and J. Louis, “On Eﬀective Field Theories Describing (2,2)
Vacua of the Heterotic String,” Nucl. Phys. B 329 (1990) 27–82.
[491] W. Lerche, C. Vafa, and N. P. Warner, “Chiral Rings in N = 2 Superconformal Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 324 (1989) 427–474.
67

[492] N. Seiberg, “Observations on the Moduli Space of Superconformal Field Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 303 (1988) 286–304.
[493] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, “String theory on K3 surfaces,” AMS/IP Stud. Adv.
Math. 1 (1996) 703–716, arXiv:hep-th/9404151.
[494] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, “U duality and integral structures,”
Phys. Lett. B 355 (1995) 141–149, arXiv:hep-th/9505025.
[495] J. H. Horne and G. W. Moore, “Chaotic coupling constants,”
Nucl. Phys. B 432 (1994) 109–126, arXiv:hep-th/9403058.
[496] M. R. Douglas and Z. Lu, “Finiteness of volume of moduli spaces,” arXiv:hep-th/0509224.
[497] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “On the Geometry of the String Landscape and the Swampland,”
Nucl. Phys. B 766 (2007) 21–33, arXiv:hep-th/0605264.
[498] S.-J. Lee, W. Lerche, and T. Weigand, “Emergent Strings from Inﬁnite Distance Limits,”
arXiv:1910.01135 [hep-th].
[499] T. Eguchi and Y. Tachikawa, “Distribution of ﬂux vacua around singular points in Calabi-Yau
moduli space,” JHEP 01 (2006) 100, arXiv:hep-th/0510061.
[500] T. W. Grimm, E. Palti, and I. Valenzuela, “Inﬁnite Distances in Field Space and Massless
Towers of States,” JHEP 08 (2018) 143, arXiv:1802.08264 [hep-th].
[501] T. W. Grimm, C. Li, and E. Palti, “Inﬁnite Distance Networks in Field Space and Charge
Orbits,” JHEP 03 (2019) 016, arXiv:1811.02571 [hep-th].
[502] A. Joshi and A. Klemm, “Swampland Distance Conjecture for One-Parameter Calabi-Yau
Threefolds,” JHEP 08 (2019) 086, arXiv:1903.00596 [hep-th].
[503] B. Bastian, T. W. Grimm, and D. van de Heisteeg, “Modeling General Asymptotic
Calabi-Yau Periods,” arXiv:2105.02232 [hep-th].
[504] S.-J. Lee and T. Weigand, “Elliptic K3 Surfaces at Inﬁnite Complex Structure and their
Reﬁned Kulikov models,” arXiv:2112.07682 [hep-th].
[505] F. Xu, “On TCS G2 manifolds and 4D emergent strings,” JHEP 10 (2020) 045,
arXiv:2006.02350 [hep-th].
[506] “Simons Collaboration on Special Holonomy in Geometry Analysis and Physics,”.
https://sites.duke.edu/scshgap/.
[507] D. L¨ust, E. Palti, and C. Vafa, “AdS and the Swampland,” Phys. Lett. B 797 (2019) 134867,
arXiv:1906.05225 [hep-th].
[508] E. Perlmutter, L. Rastelli, C. Vafa, and I. Valenzuela, “A CFT distance conjecture,”
JHEP 10 (2021) 070, arXiv:2011.10040 [hep-th].
[509] T. C. Collins, D. Jaﬀeris, C. Vafa, K. Xu, and S.-T. Yau, “On Upper Bounds in Dimension
Gaps of CFT’s,” arXiv:2201.03660 [hep-th].
[510] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, “Causal connectability between quantum systems and the black
hole interior in holographic duality,” arXiv:2110.05497 [hep-th].
[511] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, “Emergent times in holographic duality,”
arXiv:2112.12156 [hep-th].
[512] E. Witten, “Why Does Quantum Field Theory In Curved Spacetime Make Sense? And What
Happens To The Algebra of Observables In The Thermodynamic Limit?,”
arXiv:2112.11614 [hep-th].
[513] E. Witten, “Gravity and the Crossed Product,” arXiv:2112.12828 [hep-th].
68

[514] R. Longo and E. Witten, “A note on continuous entropy,” arXiv:2202.03357 [math-ph].
[515] V. Chandrasekaran, R. Longo, G. Penington, and E. Witten, “An Algebra of Observables for
de Sitter Space,” arXiv:2206.10780 [hep-th].
[516] V. Chandrasekaran, G. Penington, and E. Witten, “Large N algebras and generalized
entropy,” arXiv:2209.10454 [hep-th].
[517] M. Freedman and M. S. Zini, “The Universe from a Single Particle,” JHEP 01 (2021) 140,
arXiv:2011.05917 [hep-th].
[518] M. Freedman and M. S. Zini, “The universe from a single particle. Part II,”
JHEP 21 (2020) 102, arXiv:2108.12709 [hep-th].
[519] P. Saad, S. H. Shenker, and D. Stanford, “JT gravity as a matrix integral,”
arXiv:1903.11115 [hep-th].
[520] D. Stanford and E. Witten, “JT gravity and the ensembles of random matrix theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 24 no. 6, (2020) 1475–1680, arXiv:1907.03363 [hep-th].
[521] T. G. Mertens and G. J. Turiaci, “Solvable Models of Quantum Black Holes: A Review on
Jackiw-Teitelboim Gravity,” arXiv:2210.10846 [hep-th].
[522] R. Dijkgraaf and E. Witten, “Developments in Topological Gravity,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 33 no. 30, (2018) 1830029, arXiv:1804.03275 [hep-th].
[523] E. Witten and S.-T. Yau, “Connectedness of the boundary in the AdS / CFT
correspondence,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3 (1999) 1635–1655, arXiv:hep-th/9910245.
[524] J. M. Maldacena and L. Maoz, “Wormholes in AdS,” JHEP 02 (2004) 053,
arXiv:hep-th/0401024.
[525] N. Afkhami-Jeddi, H. Cohn, T. Hartman, and A. Tajdini, “Free partition functions and an
averaged holographic duality,” JHEP 01 (2021) 130, arXiv:2006.04839 [hep-th].
[526] A. Maloney and E. Witten, “Averaging over Narain moduli space,” JHEP 10 (2020) 187,
arXiv:2006.04855 [hep-th].
[527] N. Benjamin, C. A. Keller, H. Ooguri, and I. G. Zadeh, “Narain to Narnia,”
arXiv:2103.15826 [hep-th].
[528] J.-M. Schlenker and E. Witten, “No ensemble averaging below the black hole threshold,”
JHEP 07 (2022) 143, arXiv:2202.01372 [hep-th].
[529] F. Benini, C. Copetti, and L. Di Pietro, “Factorization and global symmetries in holography,”
arXiv:2203.09537 [hep-th].
[530] N. Benjamin, M. C. N. Cheng, S. Kachru, G. W. Moore, and N. M. Paquette, “Elliptic
Genera and 3d Gravity,” Annales Henri Poincare 17 no. 10, (2016) 2623–2662,
arXiv:1503.04800 [hep-th].
[531] G. W. Moore, “Computation Of Some Zamolodchikov Volumes, With An Application,”
arXiv:1508.05612 [hep-th].
[532] S. S. Kudla and J. J. Millson, “Intersection numbers of cycles on locally symmetric spaces and
Fourier coeﬃcients of holomorphic modular forms in several complex variables,”
Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. no. 71, (1990) 121–172.
[533] S. Collier and E. Perlmutter, “Harnessing S-Duality in N = 4 SYM & Supergravity as
SL(2, Z)-Averaged Strings,” arXiv:2201.05093 [hep-th].
[534] V. Balasubramanian, A. Kar, S. F. Ross, and T. Ugajin, “Spin structures and baby
universes,” JHEP 09 (2020) 192, arXiv:2007.04333 [hep-th].
69

[535] A. Banerjee and G. W. Moore, “Comments on Summing over bordisms in TQFT,”
arXiv:2201.00903 [hep-th].
[536] R. de Mello Koch, Y.-H. He, G. Kemp, and S. Ramgoolam, “Integrality, duality and ﬁniteness
in combinatoric topological strings,” JHEP 01 (2022) 071, arXiv:2106.05598 [hep-th].
[537] J. G. Gardiner and S. Megas, “2d TQFTs and baby universes,” JHEP 10 (2021) 052,
arXiv:2011.06137 [hep-th].
[538] D. Marolf and H. Maxﬁeld, “Transcending the ensemble: baby universes, spacetime
wormholes, and the order and disorder of black hole information,” JHEP 08 (2020) 044,
arXiv:2002.08950 [hep-th].
[539] S. Nariman, “On the ﬁniteness of the classifying space of diﬀeomorphisms of reducible three
manifolds,” 2021.
[540] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. J. Dixon, A. J. McLeod, M. Spradlin, J. Trnka, and A. Volovich,
“Solving Scattering in N = 4 Super-Yang-Mills Theory,” arXiv:2207.10636 [hep-th].
[541] R. E. Borcherds, “Monstrous moonshine and monstrous Lie superalgebras,”
Invent. Math. 109 no. 2, (1992) 405–444.
[542] R. E. Borcherds, “What is Moonshine?,” in Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians, Vol. I (Berlin, 1998), no. Extra Vol. I, pp. 607–615. 1998.
[543] L. J. Dixon, P. H. Ginsparg, and J. A. Harvey, “Beauty and the Beast: Superconformal
Symmetry in a Monster Module,” Commun. Math. Phys. 119 (1988) 221–241.
[544] S. M. Harrison, J. A. Harvey, and N. M. Paquette, “Snowmass White Paper: Moonshine,”
arXiv:2201.13321 [hep-th].
[545] S. Ganguly and S. Pal, “Bounds on the density of states and the spectral gap in CFT2,”
Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 10, (2020) 106022, arXiv:1905.12636 [hep-th].
[546] T. Hartman, C. A. Keller, and B. Stoica, “Universal Spectrum of 2d Conformal Field Theory
in the Large c Limit,” JHEP 09 (2014) 118, arXiv:1405.5137 [hep-th].
[547] J. Kaidi and E. Perlmutter, “Discreteness and integrality in Conformal Field Theory,”
JHEP 02 (2021) 064, arXiv:2008.02190 [hep-th].
[548] C. A. Keller and A. Maloney, “Poincare Series, 3D Gravity and CFT Spectroscopy,”
JHEP 02 (2015) 080, arXiv:1407.6008 [hep-th].
[549] P. Kravchuk, D. Mazac, and S. Pal, “Automorphic Spectra and the Conformal Bootstrap,”
arXiv:2111.12716 [hep-th].
[550] G. H¨ohn, Selbstduale Vertexoperatorsuperalgebren und das Babymonster, vol. 286 of Bonner
Mathematische Schriften [Bonn Mathematical Publications]. Universit¨at Bonn,
Mathematisches Institut, Bonn, 1996. Dissertation, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit¨at
Bonn, Bonn, 1995.
[551] E. Witten, “Three-Dimensional Gravity Revisited,” arXiv:0706.3359 [hep-th].
[552] M. R. Gaberdiel, S. Gukov, C. A. Keller, G. W. Moore, and H. Ooguri, “Extremal N = (2, 2)
2D Conformal Field Theories and Constraints of Modularity,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 2 (2008) 743–801, arXiv:0805.4216 [hep-th].
[553] F. Ferrari and S. M. Harrison, “Properties of extremal CFTs with small central charge,”
arXiv:1710.10563 [hep-th].
[554] D. Gaiotto and X. Yin, “Genus two partition functions of extremal conformal ﬁeld theories,”
JHEP 08 (2007) 029, arXiv:0707.3437 [hep-th].
70

[555] D. Gaiotto, “Monster symmetry and Extremal CFTs,” JHEP 11 (2012) 149,
arXiv:0801.0988 [hep-th].
[556] S. M. Harrison, “Extremal chiral N = 4 SCFT with c = 24,” JHEP 11 (2016) 006,
arXiv:1602.06930 [hep-th].
[557] N. A. Obers and B. Pioline, “U duality and M theory,” Phys. Rept. 318 (1999) 113–225,
arXiv:hep-th/9809039.
[558] M. B. Green, S. D. Miller, J. G. Russo, and P. Vanhove, “Eisenstein series for higher-rank
groups and string theory amplitudes,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 4 (2010) 551–596,
arXiv:1004.0163 [hep-th].
[559] M. B. Green, S. D. Miller, and P. Vanhove, “Small representations, string instantons, and
Fourier modes of Eisenstein series,” J. Number Theor. 146 (2015) 187–309,
arXiv:1111.2983 [hep-th].
[560] M. B. Green, S. D. Miller, and P. Vanhove, “SL(2, Z)-invariance and D-instanton
contributions to the D6R4 interaction,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 09 (2015) 307–344,
arXiv:1404.2192 [hep-th].
[561] D. Gourevitch, H. P. A. Gustafsson, A. Kleinschmidt, D. Persson, and S. Sahi, “Fourier
coeﬃcients of minimal and next-to-minimal automorphic representations of simply-laced
groups,” arXiv:1908.08296 [math.NT].
[562] P. Fleig, H. P. A. Gustafsson, A. Kleinschmidt, and D. Persson, Eisenstein series and
automorphic representations. Cambridge University Press, 6, 2018.
arXiv:1511.04265 [math.NT].
[563] B. Pioline, “A Theta lift representation for the Kawazumi-Zhang and Faltings invariants of
genus-two Riemann surfaces,” J. Number Theor. 163 (2016) 520–541,
arXiv:1504.04182 [hep-th].
[564] J. Broedel, O. Schlotterer, and F. Zerbini, “From elliptic multiple zeta values to modular
graph functions: open and closed strings at one loop,” JHEP 01 (2019) 155,
arXiv:1803.00527 [hep-th].
[565] E. D’Hoker, M. B. Green, O. G¨urdogan, and P. Vanhove, “Modular Graph Functions,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 11 (2017) 165–218, arXiv:1512.06779 [hep-th].
[566] E. D’Hoker, M. B. Green, and B. Pioline, “Higher genus modular graph functions, string
invariants, and their exact asymptotics,” Commun. Math. Phys. 366 no. 3, (2019) 927–979,
arXiv:1712.06135 [hep-th].
[567] E. D’Hoker and W. Duke, “Fourier series of modular graph functions,”
J. Number Theor. 192 (2018) 1–36, arXiv:1708.07998 [math.NT].
[568] E. D’Hoker and O. Schlotterer, “Identities among higher genus modular graph tensors,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 16 no. 1, (2022) 35–74, arXiv:2010.00924 [hep-th].
[569] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “Algebras, BPS states, and strings,”
Nucl. Phys. B 463 (1996) 315–368, arXiv:hep-th/9510182.
[570] L. J. Dixon, V. Kaplunovsky, and J. Louis, “Moduli dependence of string loop corrections to
gauge coupling constants,” Nucl. Phys. B 355 (1991) 649–688.
[571] R. E. Borcherds, “Automorphic forms with singularities on Grassmannians,”
Invent. Math. 132 (1998) 491–562, arXiv:alg-geom/9609022.
[572] R. Dijkgraaf, G. W. Moore, E. P. Verlinde, and H. L. Verlinde, “Elliptic genera of symmetric
products and second quantized strings,” Commun. Math. Phys. 185 (1997) 197–209,
arXiv:hep-th/9608096.
71

[573] J. Bryan and G. Oberdieck, “CHL Calabi-Yau threefolds: curve counting, Mathieu moonshine
and Siegel modular forms,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 14 no. 4, (2020) 785–862,
arXiv:1811.06102 [math.AG].
[574] J. H. Bruinier and J. Funke, “On two geometric theta lifts,”
Duke Math. J. 125 no. 1, (2004) 45–90.
[575] S. Carnahan, “Generalized moonshine II: Borcherds products,”
Duke Math. J. 161 (2012) 893–950, arXiv:0908.4223 [math.RT].
[576] A. Dabholkar and S. Nampuri, “Spectrum of dyons and black holes in CHL orbifolds using
Borcherds lift,” JHEP 11 (2007) 077, arXiv:hep-th/0603066.
[577] T. Eguchi and K. Hikami, “Twisted Elliptic Genus for K3 and Borcherds Product,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 102 (2012) 203–222, arXiv:1112.5928 [hep-th].
[578] V. A. Gritsenko and V. V. Nikulin, “Automorphic forms and Lorentzian Kac-Moody algebras.
II,” Internat. J. Math. 9 no. 2, (1998) 201–275.
[579] G¨ottsche, L. and Kool, M., “A rank 2 Dijkgraaf-Moore-Verlinde-Verlinde formula,”
Commun. Number Theory Phys. 13 no. 1, (2019) 165–201.
[580] A. Klemm and M. Marino, “Counting BPS states on the enriques Calabi-Yau,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 280 (2008) 27–76, arXiv:hep-th/0512227.
[581] D. Persson and R. Volpato, “Second Quantized Mathieu Moonshine,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 08 (2014) 403–509, arXiv:1312.0622 [hep-th].
[582] C. Angelantonj, I. Florakis, and B. Pioline, “Threshold corrections, generalised prepotentials
and Eichler integrals,” Nucl. Phys. B 897 (2015) 781–820, arXiv:1502.00007 [hep-th].
[583] M. Bershadsky, C. Vafa, and V. Sadov, “D-branes and topological ﬁeld theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 463 (1996) 420–434, arXiv:hep-th/9511222.
[584] S. Ferrara, J. A. Harvey, A. Strominger, and C. Vafa, “Second quantized mirror symmetry,”
Phys. Lett. B 361 (1995) 59–65, arXiv:hep-th/9505162.
[585] L. G¨ottsche, “Betti numbers for the Hilbert function strata of the punctual Hilbert scheme in
two variables,” Manuscripta Math. 66 no. 3, (1990) 253–259.
[586] A. Sen, “Duality symmetries in string theory,” Curr. Sci. 77 no. 12, (1999) 1635–1645.
[587] A. Sen, “An introduction to duality symmetries in string theory,” in Les Houches Summer
School: Session 76: Euro Summer School on Unity of Fundamental Physics: Gravity, Gauge
Theory and Strings, pp. 241–322. 7, 2001.
[588] C. Vafa, “Instantons on D-branes,” Nucl. Phys. B 463 (1996) 435–442,
arXiv:hep-th/9512078.
[589] A. Strominger and C. Vafa, “Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy,”
Phys. Lett. B 379 (1996) 99–104, arXiv:hep-th/9601029.
[590] J. de Boer, M. C. N. Cheng, R. Dijkgraaf, J. Manschot, and E. Verlinde, “A Farey Tail for
Attractor Black Holes,” JHEP 11 (2006) 024, arXiv:hep-th/0608059.
[591] D. Gaiotto, A. Strominger, and X. Yin, “The M5-Brane Elliptic Genus: Modularity and BPS
States,” JHEP 08 (2007) 070, arXiv:hep-th/0607010.
[592] D. Gaiotto and X. Yin, “Examples of M5-Brane Elliptic Genera,” JHEP 11 (2007) 004,
arXiv:hep-th/0702012.
[593] S. Alexandrov, J. Manschot, and B. Pioline, “S-duality and reﬁned BPS indices,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 380 no. 2, (2020) 755–810, arXiv:1910.03098 [hep-th].
72

[594] V. Bouchard, T. Creutzig, D.-E. Diaconescu, C. Doran, C. Quigley, and A. Sheshmani,
“Vertical D4 −D2 −D0 Bound States on K3 Fibrations and Modularity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 350 no. 3, (2017) 1069–1121, arXiv:1601.04030 [hep-th].
[595] A. Klemm, D. Maulik, R. Pandharipande, and E. Scheidegger, “Noether-lefschetz theory and
the yau-zaslow conjecture,” 2008.
[596] A. Gholampour and A. Sheshmani, “Donaldson–Thomas invariants of 2-dimensional sheaves
inside threefolds and modular forms,” Adv. Math. 326 (2018) 79–107,
arXiv:1309.0050 [math.AG].
[597] D. Maulik and R. Pandharipande, “Gromov-Witten theory and Noether-Lefschetz theory,”
2012.
[598] Yukinobu Toda, “Flops and the S-duality conjecture,”
Duke Mathematical Journal 164 no. 12, (Sep, 2015) .
[599] Yukinobu Toda, “S-duality for surfaces with An-type singularities,” 2013.
[600] Yukinobu Toda, “Generalized Donaldson-Thomas invariants on the local projective plane,”
2014.
[601] J. Bryan, “The Donaldson-Thomas partition function of the banana manifold,”
arXiv:1902.08695 [math.AG].
[602] D. Maulik, R. Pandharipande, and R. P. Thomas, “Curves on K3 surfaces and modular
forms,” J. Topol. 3 no. 4, (2010) 937–996. With an appendix by A. Pixton.
[603] R. Dijkgraaf, J. M. Maldacena, G. W. Moore, and E. P. Verlinde, “A Black hole Farey tail,”
arXiv:hep-th/0005003.
[604] J. Manschot and G. Moore, “A Modern Farey Tail,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 4 (2010) 103–159, arXiv:0712.0573 [hep-th].
[605] M. C. N. Cheng and J. F. R. Duncan, “On Rademacher Sums, the Largest Mathieu Group,
and the Holographic Modularity of Moonshine,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 6 (2012) 697–758, arXiv:1110.3859 [math.RT].
[606] M. C. N. Cheng and J. F. R. Duncan, “Rademacher Sums and Rademacher Series,”
Contrib. Math. Comput. Sci. 8 (2014) 143–182, arXiv:1210.3066 [math.NT].
[607] M. C. N. Cheng and J. F. R. Duncan, “The Largest Mathieu Group and (Mock) Automorphic
Forms,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 85 (2012) 53–82, arXiv:1201.4140 [math.RT].
[608] M. C. N. Cheng, J. F. R. Duncan, and J. A. Harvey, “Umbral Moonshine,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 08 (2014) 101–242, arXiv:1204.2779 [math.RT].
[609] M. I. Knopp, “Some new results on the Eichler cohomology of automorphic forms,”
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 80 (1974) 607–632.
[610] M. I. Knopp, “Rademacher on J(τ) Poincar´e series of nonpositive weights and the Eichler
cohomology,” Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 37 no. 4, (1990) 385–393.
[611] D. Niebur, “Construction of automorphic forms and integrals,”
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 191 (1974) 373–385.
[612] A. Maloney and E. Witten, “Quantum Gravity Partition Functions in Three Dimensions,”
JHEP 02 (2010) 029, arXiv:0712.0155 [hep-th].
[613] J. F. Duncan and I. B. Frenkel, “Rademacher sums, Moonshine and Gravity,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 5 (2011) 849–976, arXiv:0907.4529 [math.RT].
[614] A. Dabholkar, J. Gomes, and S. Murthy, “Localization & Exact Holography,”
JHEP 04 (2013) 062, arXiv:1111.1161 [hep-th].
73

[615] A. Dabholkar, J. Gomes, and S. Murthy, “Nonperturbative black hole entropy and
Kloosterman sums,” JHEP 03 (2015) 074, arXiv:1404.0033 [hep-th].
[616] R. K. Gupta and S. Murthy, “All solutions of the localization equations for N=2 quantum
black hole entropy,” JHEP 02 (2013) 141, arXiv:1208.6221 [hep-th].
[617] I. Jeon and S. Murthy, “Twisting and localization in supergravity: equivariant cohomology of
BPS black holes,” JHEP 03 (2019) 140, arXiv:1806.04479 [hep-th].
[618] S. Murthy and V. Reys, “Functional determinants, index theorems, and exact quantum black
hole entropy,” JHEP 12 (2015) 028, arXiv:1504.01400 [hep-th].
[619] J. A. Minahan, D. Nemeschansky, C. Vafa, and N. P. Warner, “E strings and N=4 topological
Yang-Mills theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 527 (1998) 581–623, arXiv:hep-th/9802168.
[620] J. Manschot, “BPS invariants of N = 4 gauge theory on Hirzebruch surfaces,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 6 (2012) 497–516, arXiv:1103.0012 [math-ph].
[621] J. Manschot, “Sheaves on P2 and generalized Appell functions,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 21 (2017) 655–681, arXiv:1407.7785 [math.AG].
[622] J. Manschot, “Vafa-Witten Theory and Iterated Integrals of Modular Forms,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 371 no. 2, (2019) 787–831, arXiv:1709.10098 [hep-th].
[623] A. Sheshmani and S.-T. Yau, “Higher rank ﬂag sheaves on Surfaces and Vafa-Witten
invariants,” arXiv:1911.00124 [math.AG].
[624] Y. Tanaka and R. P. Thomas, “Vafa-Witten invariants for projective surfaces I: stable case,”
J. Alg. Geom. 29 no. 4, (2020) 603–668, arXiv:1702.08487 [math.AG].
[625] Y. Tanaka and R. P. Thomas, “Vafa-Witten invariants for projective surfaces II: semistable
case,” Pure Appl. Math. Quart. 13 no. 3, (2017) 517–562, arXiv:1702.08488 [math.AG].
[626] R. P. Thomas, “Equivariant K-Theory and Reﬁned Vafa-Witten Invariants,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 378 no. 2, (2020) 1451–1500, arXiv:1810.00078 [math.AG].
[627] J. Manschot and G. W. Moore, “Topological correlators of SU(2), N = 2∗SYM on
four-manifolds,” arXiv:2104.06492 [hep-th].
[628] A. Dabholkar and P. Putrov, “Three Avatars of Mock Modularity,” 10, 2021.
arXiv:2110.09790 [hep-th].
[629] S. Zwegers, “Mock theta functions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0807.4834 (2008) .
[630] D. Zagier, “Nombres de classes et formes modulaires de poids 3/2,” C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
S´er. A-B 281 no. 21, (1975) Ai, A883–A886.
[631] F. Hirzebruch and D. Zagier, “Intersection numbers of curves on Hilbert modular surfaces and
modular forms of Nebentypus,” Invent. Math. 36 (1976) 57–113.
[632] G. W. Moore and E. Witten, “Integration over the u-plane in Donaldson theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 1 (1997) 298–387, arXiv:hep-th/9709193.
[633] A. Dabholkar, P. Putrov, and E. Witten, “Duality and Mock Modularity,”
SciPost Phys. 9 no. 5, (2020) 072, arXiv:2004.14387 [hep-th].
[634] G. Korpas and J. Manschot, “Donaldson-Witten theory and indeﬁnite theta functions,”
JHEP 11 (2017) 083, arXiv:1707.06235 [hep-th].
[635] G. Korpas, J. Manschot, G. Moore, and I. Nidaiev, “Renormalization and BRST Symmetry in
Donaldson-Witten Theory,” Annales Henri Poincare 20 no. 10, (2019) 3229–3264,
arXiv:1901.03540 [hep-th].
74

[636] G. Korpas, J. Manschot, G. W. Moore, and I. Nidaiev, “Mocking the u-plane integral,”
arXiv:1910.13410 [hep-th].
[637] A. Dabholkar, S. Murthy, and D. Zagier, “Quantum Black Holes, Wall Crossing, and Mock
Modular Forms,” arXiv:1208.4074 [hep-th].
[638] J. Manschot, “Stability and duality in N=2 supergravity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 299 (2010) 651–676, arXiv:0906.1767 [hep-th].
[639] M. C. N. Cheng, J. F. R. Duncan, S. M. Harrison, J. A. Harvey, S. Kachru, and B. C.
Rayhaun, “Attractive Strings and Five-Branes, Skew-Holomorphic Jacobi Forms and
Moonshine,” JHEP 07 (2018) 130, arXiv:1708.07523 [hep-th].
[640] S. Alexandrov and B. Pioline, “Black holes and higher depth mock modular forms,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 374 no. 2, (2019) 549–625, arXiv:1808.08479 [hep-th].
[641] S. Alexandrov, S. Banerjee, J. Manschot, and B. Pioline, “Multiple D3-instantons and mock
modular forms I,” Commun. Math. Phys. 353 no. 1, (2017) 379–411,
arXiv:1605.05945 [hep-th].
[642] S. Alexandrov, S. Banerjee, J. Manschot, and B. Pioline, “Multiple D3-instantons and mock
modular forms II,” Commun. Math. Phys. 359 no. 1, (2018) 297–346,
arXiv:1702.05497 [hep-th].
[643] T. Eguchi and K. Hikami, “Superconformal Algebras and Mock Theta Functions,”
J. Phys. A 42 (2009) 304010, arXiv:0812.1151 [math-ph].
[644] T. Eguchi and K. Hikami, “Superconformal Algebras and Mock Theta Functions 2.
Rademacher Expansion for K3 Surface,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 3 (2009) 531–554,
arXiv:0904.0911 [math-ph].
[645] T. Eguchi and Y. Sugawara, “Non-holomorphic Modular Forms and SL(2,R)/U(1)
Superconformal Field Theory,” JHEP 03 (2011) 107, arXiv:1012.5721 [hep-th].
[646] J. Harvey and S. Murthy, “Moonshine in Fivebrane Spacetimes,” JHEP 01 (2014) 146,
arXiv:1307.7717 [hep-th].
[647] J. Harvey, S. Murthy, and C. Nazaroglu, “ADE Double Scaled Little String Theories, Mock
Modular Forms and Umbral Moonshine,” JHEP 05 (2015) 126, arXiv:1410.6174 [hep-th].
[648] S. Murthy, “A holomorphic anomaly in the elliptic genus,” JHEP 06 (2014) 165,
arXiv:1311.0918 [hep-th].
[649] Y. Sugawara, “Comments on Non-holomorphic Modular Forms and Non-compact
Superconformal Field Theories,” JHEP 01 (2012) 098, arXiv:1109.3365 [hep-th].
[650] J. Troost, “The non-compact elliptic genus: mock or modular,” JHEP 06 (2010) 104,
arXiv:1004.3649 [hep-th].
[651] J. Troost, “An Elliptic Triptych,” JHEP 10 (2017) 078, arXiv:1706.02576 [hep-th].
[652] A. Dabholkar, D. Jain, and A. Rudra, “APS η-invariant, path integrals, and mock
modularity,” JHEP 11 (2019) 080, arXiv:1905.05207 [hep-th].
[653] S. Alexandrov, S. Banerjee, J. Manschot, and B. Pioline, “Indeﬁnite theta series and
generalized error functions,” Selecta Math. 24 (2018) 3927, arXiv:1606.05495 [math.NT].
[654] J. Funke and S. Kudla, “On some incomplete theta integrals,”
Compositio Mathematica 155 no. 9, (Aug, 2019) 1711–1746.
[655] C. Nazaroglu, “r-Tuple Error Functions and Indeﬁnite Theta Series of Higher-Depth,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 12 (2018) 581–608, arXiv:1609.01224 [math.NT].
75

[656] A. Chattopadhyaya, J. Manschot, and S. Mondal, “Scaling black holes and modularity,”
JHEP 03 (2022) 001, arXiv:2110.05504 [hep-th].
[657] I. Bena, M. Berkooz, J. de Boer, S. El-Showk, and D. Van den Bleeken, “Scaling BPS
Solutions and pure-Higgs States,” JHEP 11 (2012) 171, arXiv:1205.5023 [hep-th].
[658] P. Descombes and B. Pioline, “On the Existence of Scaling Multi-Centered Black Holes,”
Annales Henri Poincare 23 no. 10, (2022) 3633–3665, arXiv:2110.06652 [hep-th].
[659] Lawrence, R. and Zagier, D., “Modular forms and quantum invariants of 3-manifolds,” vol. 3,
pp. 93–107. 1999. Sir Michael Atiyah: a great mathematician of the twentieth century.
[660] D. Zagier, “Quantum modular forms,” in Quanta of maths, vol. 11 of Clay Math. Proc.,
pp. 659–675. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2010.
[661] K. Bringmann, K. Mahlburg, and A. Milas, “Quantum modular forms and plumbing graphs of
3-manifolds,” J. Combin. Theor. Series A170 (2020) 105145,
arXiv:1810.05612 [math.QA].
[662] M. C. N. Cheng, S. Chun, F. Ferrari, S. Gukov, and S. M. Harrison, “3d Modularity,”
JHEP 10 (2019) 010, arXiv:1809.10148 [hep-th].
[663] M. C. N. Cheng, F. Ferrari, and G. Sgroi, “Three-Manifold Quantum Invariants and Mock
Theta Functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 378 no. 2163, (2019) 20180439,
arXiv:1912.07997 [math.NT].
[664] A. Dabholkar, F. Denef, G. W. Moore, and B. Pioline, “Precision counting of small black
holes,” JHEP 10 (2005) 096, arXiv:hep-th/0507014.
[665] D. L. Jaﬀeris and G. W. Moore, “Wall crossing in local Calabi Yau manifolds,”
arXiv:0810.4909 [hep-th].
[666] A. Okounkov, N. Reshetikhin, and C. Vafa, “Quantum Calabi-Yau and classical crystals,”
Prog. Math. 244 (2006) 597, arXiv:hep-th/0309208.
[667] V. Pestun et al., “Localization techniques in quantum ﬁeld theories,”
J. Phys. A 50 no. 44, (2017) 440301, arXiv:1608.02952 [hep-th].
[668] J. Kinney, J. M. Maldacena, S. Minwalla, and S. Raju, “An Index for 4-dimensional super
conformal theories,” Commun. Math. Phys. 275 (2007) 209–254, arXiv:hep-th/0510251.
[669] C. Romelsberger, “Counting chiral primaries in N = 1, d = 4 superconformal ﬁeld theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 747 (2006) 329–353, arXiv:hep-th/0510060.
[670] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Applications of the Superconformal Index for Protected
Operators and q-Hypergeometric Identities to N = 1 Dual Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 818 (2009) 137–178, arXiv:0801.4947 [hep-th].
[671] Felder, G. and Varchenko, A., “The elliptic gamma function and SL(3, Z) ⋉Z3,”
Adv. Math. 156 no. 1, (2000) 44–76.
[672] Spiridonov, V. P. and Vartanov, G. S., “Elliptic hypergeometric integrals and ’t Hooft
anomaly matching conditions,” JHEP 06 (2012) 016, arXiv:1203.5677 [hep-th].
[673] A. Gadde, “Modularity of supersymmetric partition functions,” JHEP 12 (2021) 181,
arXiv:2004.13490 [hep-th].
[674] V. Jejjala, Y. Lei, S. van Leuven, and W. Li, “SL(3, Z) Modularity and New Cardy limits of
the N = 4 superconformal index,” JHEP 11 (2021) 047, arXiv:2104.07030 [hep-th].
[675] A. Gadde, L. Rastelli, S. S. Razamat, and W. Yan, “Gauge Theories and Macdonald
Polynomials,” Commun. Math. Phys. 319 (2013) 147–193, arXiv:1110.3740 [hep-th].
76

[676] S. S. Razamat, “On a modular property of N = 2 superconformal theories in four
dimensions,” JHEP 10 (2012) 191, arXiv:1208.5056 [hep-th].
[677] C. Cordova, D. Gaiotto, and S.-H. Shao, “Infrared Computations of Defect Schur Indices,”
JHEP 11 (2016) 106, arXiv:1606.08429 [hep-th].
[678] C. Cordova, D. Gaiotto, and S.-H. Shao, “Surface Defects and Chiral Algebras,”
JHEP 05 (2017) 140, arXiv:1704.01955 [hep-th].
[679] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, “Stability structures, motivic Donaldson-Thomas invariants
and cluster transformations,” arXiv:0811.2435 [math.AG].
[680] T. Dimofte, S. Gukov, and Y. Soibelman, “Quantum Wall Crossing in N = 2 Gauge
Theories,” Lett. Math. Phys. 95 (2011) 1–25, arXiv:0912.1346 [hep-th].
[681] C. Beem, S. S. Razamat, and P. Singh, “Schur Indices of Class S and Quasimodular Forms,”
arXiv:2112.10715 [hep-th].
[682] Y. Pan and W. Peelaers, “The exact Schur index in closed form,”
arXiv:2112.09705 [hep-th].
[683] A. A. Beilinson and V. G. Drinfeld, “Quantization of Hitchin’s ﬁbration and Langlands’
program,” in Algebraic and geometric methods in mathematical physics (Kaciveli, 1993),
vol. 19 of Math. Phys. Stud., pp. 3–7. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1996.
[684] A. Beilinson and V. Drinfeld, “Opers,” 2005.
[685] E. Frenkel, “Aﬃne Algebras, Langlands Duality and Bethe Ansatz,”
arXiv:q-alg/9506003 [q-alg].
[686] E. Frenkel, “Elementary introduction to langlands program,” lectures at MSRI.
https://youtu.be/ihMyW7Z5SAs.
[687] E. Frenkel and D. Ben-Zvi, Vertex algebras and algebraic curves, vol. 88 of Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, second ed., 2004.
[688] E. Frenkel, “Lectures on the Langlands program and conformal ﬁeld theory,” in Frontiers in
number theory, physics, and geometry. II, pp. 387–533. Springer, Berlin, 2007.
[689] B. Feigin and E. Frenkel, “Aﬃne Kac-Moody algebras at the critical level and Gelfand-Dikii
algebras,” International Journal of Modern Physics A no. 07, (1992) 197–215.
[690] Zamolodchikov, A.B., “Inﬁnite extra symmetries in two-dimensional conformal quantum ﬁeld
theory,” 1985.
[691] B. Feigin, E. Frenkel, and N. Reshetikhin, “Gaudin model, Bethe ansatz and correlation
functions at the critical level,” Commun. Math. Phys. 166 (1994) 27–62,
arXiv:hep-th/9402022.
[692] A. Gorsky, N. Nekrasov, and V. Rubtsov, “Hilbert schemes, separated variables, and
D-branes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 222 (2001) 299–318, arXiv:hep-th/9901089.
[693] P. I. Etingof, “Quantum integrable systems and representations of Lie algebras,”
J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 2636–2651, arXiv:hep-th/9311132.
[694] A. Gorsky and N. Nekrasov, “Elliptic Calogero-Moser system from two-dimensional current
algebra,” arXiv:hep-th/9401021.
[695] R. Donagi and E. Witten, “Supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory and integrable systems,”
Nucl. Phys. B 460 (1996) 299–334, arXiv:hep-th/9510101.
[696] J. Teschner, “Quantization of the Hitchin moduli spaces, Liouville theory, and the geometric
Langlands correspondence I,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 15 no. 2, (2011) 471–564,
arXiv:1005.2846 [hep-th].
77

[697] M. Bershadsky, A. Johansen, V. Sadov, and C. Vafa, “Topological reduction of 4 −d SYM to
2 −d sigma models,” Nucl. Phys. B 448 (1995) 166–186, arXiv:hep-th/9501096.
[698] J. A. Harvey, G. W. Moore, and A. Strominger, “Reducing S-duality to T -duality,”
Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 7161–7167, arXiv:hep-th/9501022.
[699] A. Kapustin and D. Orlov, “Remarks on A-branes, mirror symmetry, and the Fukaya
category,” J. Geom. Phys. 48 (2003) 84, arXiv:hep-th/0109098.
[700] A. Balasubramanian and J. Teschner, “Supersymmetric ﬁeld theories and geometric
Langlands: The other side of the coin,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 98 (2018) 79–106,
arXiv:1702.06499 [hep-th].
[701] S. Gukov and E. Witten, “Gauge Theory, Ramiﬁcation, And The Geometric Langlands
Program,” arXiv:hep-th/0612073.
[702] E. Witten, “Gauge theory and wild ramiﬁcation,” arXiv:0710.0631 [hep-th].
[703] E. Witten, “Mirror Symmetry, Hitchin’s Equations, And Langlands Duality,”
arXiv:0802.0999 [math.RT].
[704] E. Witten, “Geometric Langlands From Six Dimensions,” arXiv:0905.2720 [hep-th].
[705] E. Witten, “Geometric Langlands And The Equations Of Nahm And Bogomolny,”
arXiv:0905.4795 [hep-th].
[706] E. Witten, “More On Gauge Theory And Geometric Langlands,”
arXiv:1506.04293 [hep-th].
[707] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Supersymmetric Boundary Conditions in N = 4 Super Yang-Mills
Theory,” J. Statist. Phys. 135 (2009) 789–855, arXiv:0804.2902 [hep-th].
[708] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Janus Conﬁgurations, Chern-Simons Couplings, And The
theta-Angle in N=4 Super Yang-Mills Theory,” JHEP 06 (2010) 097,
arXiv:0804.2907 [hep-th].
[709] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “S-Duality of Boundary Conditions In N=4 Super Yang-Mills
Theory,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 13 no. 3, (2009) 721–896, arXiv:0807.3720 [hep-th].
[710] D. Ben-Zvi, D. Nadler, and A. Preygel, “A spectral incarnation of aﬃne character sheaves,”
Compos. Math. 153 no. 9, (2017) 1908–1944, arXiv:1312.7163 [math.RT].
[711] D. Ben-Zvi and D. Nadler, “Betti Geometric Langlands,” arXiv:1606.08523 [math.RT].
[712] D. Ben-Zvi and S. Gunningham, “Symmetries of categorical representations and the quantum
NGˆO action,” arXiv:1712.01963 [math.RT].
[713] E. Frenkel and E. Witten, “Geometric endoscopy and mirror symmetry,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 2 (2008) 113–283, arXiv:0710.5939 [math.AG].
[714] J. Hilburn and S. Raskin, “Tate’s thesis in the de rham setting,” 2107.11325.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2107.11325.pdf.
[715] N. Chriss and V. Ginzburg, Representation theory and complex geometry. Modern Birkh¨auser
Classics. Birkh¨auser Boston, Ltd., Boston, MA, 2010. Reprint of the 1997 edition.
[716] E. Frenkel, “Is there an analytic theory of automorphic functions for complex algebraic
curves?,” SIGMA 16 (2020) 042, arXiv:1812.08160 [math.RT].
[717] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Gauge Theory and the Analytic Form of the Geometric
Langlands Program,” arXiv:2107.01732 [hep-th].
[718] V. Pestun, M. Zabzine, F. Benini, T. Dimofte, T. T. Dumitrescu, K. Hosomichi, S. Kim,
K. Lee, B. Le Floch, M. Mari˜no, and et al., “Localization techniques in quantum ﬁeld
theories,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 50 no. 44, (Oct, 2017) 440301.
78

[719] N. Nekrasov, “BPS/CFT correspondence: non-perturbative Dyson-Schwinger equations and
qq-characters,” Journal of High Energy Physics 2016 no. 3, (Mar, 2016) .
[720] N. Nekrasov, “BPS/CFT correspondence II: Instantons at crossroads, Moduli and
Compactness Theorem,” Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics 21 (08, 2016) .
[721] Nekrasov, N., “BPS/CFT Correspondence III: Gauge Origami Partition Function and
qq-Characters,” Communications in Mathematical Physics 358 no. 3, (Dec, 2017) 863–894.
[722] V. Knizhnik and A. Zamolodchikov, “Current Algebra and Wess-Zumino Model in
Two-Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 247 (1984) 83–103.
[723] D. Bernard, “On the Wess-Zumino-Witten Models on the Torus,”
Nucl. Phys. B 303 (1988) 77–93.
[724] Fateev, V. and Zamolodchikov, A., “Operator algebra and correlation functions in the
two-dimensional Wess-Zumino SU(2) × SU(2) Chiral Model,” Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 43 (1986)
657–664.
[725] A. Stoyanovsky, “A relation between the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov and
Belavin–Polyakov–Zamolodchikov systems of partial diﬀerential equations,”
arXiv:math-ph/0012013 [math-ph].
[726] A. Litvinov, S. Lukyanov, N. Nekrasov, and A. Zamolodchikov, “Classical Conformal Blocks
and Painleve VI,” JHEP 07 (2014) 144, arXiv:1309.4700 [hep-th].
[727] N. Nekrasov, “Five-dimensional gauge theories and relativistic integrable systems,”
Nuclear Physics B 531 no. 1-3, (Oct, 1998) 323–344.
[728] N. Nekrasov, V. Pestun, and S. Shatashvili, “Quantum geometry and quiver gauge theories,”
arXiv:1312.6689 [hep-th].
[729] M. Aganagic, E. Frenkel, and A. Okounkov, “Quantum q-Langlands Correspondence,”
Trans. Moscow Math. Soc. 79 (2018) 1–83, arXiv:1701.03146 [hep-th].
[730] Nekrasov, N., “On the BPS/CFT correspondence,” Lecture at the University of Amsterdam
string theory group seminar, February 3, 2004.
[731] D. Gaiotto and M. Rapˇc´ak, “Vertex Algebras at the Corner,” JHEP 01 (2019) 160,
arXiv:1703.00982 [hep-th].
[732] L. F. Alday, D. Gaiotto, and Y. Tachikawa, “Liouville Correlation Functions from
Four-dimensional Gauge Theories,” Lett. Math. Phys. 91 (2010) 167–197,
arXiv:0906.3219 [hep-th].
[733] A. B. Zamolodchikov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “Conformal bootstrap in Liouville ﬁeld
theory,” 1996.
[734] N. Hama and K. Hosomichi, “Seiberg-Witten Theories on Ellipsoids,” JHEP 09 (2012) 033,
arXiv:1206.6359 [hep-th]. [Addendum: JHEP 10, 051 (2012)].
[735] Pestun, V., “Localization of Gauge Theory on a Four-Sphere and Supersymmetric Wilson
Loops,” Communications in Mathematical Physics 313 no. 1, (May, 2012) 71–129.
[736] M. Wakimoto, “Fock representations of the aﬃne lie algebra A(1)
1 ,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 104 (1986) 605–609.
[737] Feigin,B. and Frenkel,E., “A family of representations of aﬃne Lie algebras,” Russ. Math.
Surv. 43 no. N 5, (1988) 221–222.
[738] A. Gerasimov, A. Marshakov, A. Morozov, M. Olshanetsky, and S. L. Shatashvili,
“Wess-Zumino-Witten model as a theory of free ﬁelds. 3. The case of arbitrary simple group,”.
[739] E. Frenkel, A. Losev, and N. Nekrasov, “in progress,”.
79

[740] N. A. Nekrasov, “Lectures on curved beta-gamma systems, pure spinors, and anomalies,”
arXiv:hep-th/0511008.
[741] A. S. Losev, A. Marshakov, and A. M. Zeitlin, “On ﬁrst order formalism in string theory,”
Phys. Lett. B 633 (2006) 375–381, arXiv:hep-th/0510065.
[742] E. Frenkel, A. Losev, and N. Nekrasov, “Instantons beyond topological theory. I,”
arXiv:hep-th/0610149.
[743] E. Frenkel, A. Losev, and N. Nekrasov, “Instantons beyond topological theory II,”
arXiv:0803.3302 [hep-th].
[744] S. Ribault and J. Teschner, “H3
+-WZNW correlators from Liouville theory,”
JHEP 06 (2005) 014, arXiv:hep-th/0502048.
[745] Y. Hikida and V. Schomerus, “H3
+-WZNW model from Liouville ﬁeld theory,”
JHEP 10 (2007) 064, arXiv:0706.1030 [hep-th].
[746] S. Jeong, N. Lee, and N. Nekrasov, “Intersecting defects in gauge theory, quantum spin
chains, and Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations,” JHEP 10 (2021) 120,
arXiv:2103.17186 [hep-th].
[747] S. Jeong, N. Lee, and N. Nekrasov, “Aligned defects in gauge theory, Hecke operators, and
generalized KZ equations,” to appear (2022) .
[748] V. Ginzburg, M. Kapranov, and E. Vasserot, “Langlands reciprocity for algebraic surfaces,”
Math. Res. Lett. 2 no. 2, (1995) 147–160.
[749] S. Ferrara, R. Kallosh, and A. Strominger, “N = 2 extremal black holes,”
Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) R5412–R5416, arXiv:hep-th/9508072.
[750] G. W. Moore, “Arithmetic and attractors,” arXiv:hep-th/9807087.
[751] G. W. Moore, “Attractors and arithmetic,” arXiv:hep-th/9807056.
[752] G. W. Moore, “Strings and Arithmetic,” in Les Houches School of Physics: Frontiers in
Number Theory, Physics and Geometry, pp. 303–359. 2007. arXiv:hep-th/0401049.
[753] I. Brunner and D. Roggenkamp, “Attractor Flows from Defect Lines,”
J. Phys. A 44 (2011) 075402, arXiv:1002.2614 [hep-th].
[754] N. Benjamin, S. Kachru, K. Ono, and L. Rolen, “Black holes and class groups,”
arXiv:1807.00797 [math.NT].
[755] Y. H. J. Lam and A. Tripathy, “Attractors are not algebraic,” arXiv:2009.12650 [math.NT].
[756] P. Candelas, X. de la Ossa, M. Elmi, and D. Van Straten, “A One Parameter Family of
Calabi-Yau Manifolds with Attractor Points of Rank Two,” JHEP 10 (2020) 202,
arXiv:1912.06146 [hep-th].
[757] S. Kondo and T. Watari, “String-theory Realization of Modular Forms for Elliptic Curves
with Complex Multiplication,” Commun. Math. Phys. 367 no. 1, (2019) 89–126,
arXiv:1801.07464 [hep-th].
[758] Noriko Yui, “Modularity of Calabi–Yau varieties: 2011 and beyond,” 2012.
[759] N. Yui, “The modularity/automorphy of Calabi–Yau varieties of CM type,”
Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 96 (2017) 265–297.
[760] S. Kachru, R. Nally, and W. Yang, “Supersymmetric Flux Compactiﬁcations and Calabi-Yau
Modularity,” arXiv:2001.06022 [hep-th].
[761] S. K. Ashok, F. Cachazo, and E. Dell’Aquila, “Children’s drawings from Seiberg-Witten
curves,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 1 (2007) 237–305, arXiv:hep-th/0611082.
80

[762] J.-B. Bae, J. A. Harvey, K. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Rayhaun, “Conformal Field Theories with
Sporadic Group Symmetry,” Commun. Math. Phys. 388 no. 1, (2021) 1–105,
arXiv:2002.02970 [hep-th].
[763] J. A. Harvey and Y. Wu, “Hecke Relations in Rational Conformal Field Theory,”
JHEP 09 (2018) 032, arXiv:1804.06860 [hep-th].
[764] J. A. Harvey, Y. Hu, and Y. Wu, “Galois Symmetry Induced by Hecke Relations in Rational
Conformal Field Theory and Associated Modular Tensor Categories,”
J. Phys. A 53 no. 33, (2020) 334003, arXiv:1912.11955 [hep-th].
[765] P. Candelas, X. de la Ossa, and F. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Calabi-Yau manifolds over ﬁnite
ﬁelds. 1.,” arXiv:hep-th/0012233.
[766] P. Candelas, X. de la Ossa, and F. Rodriguez Villegas, “Calabi-Yau manifolds over ﬁnite
ﬁelds. 2.,” Fields Inst. Commun. 38 (2013) 121–157, arXiv:hep-th/0402133.
[767] P. Candelas and X. de la Ossa, “The Zeta-Function of a p-Adic Manifold, Dwork Theory for
Physicists,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 1 (2007) 479–512, arXiv:0705.2056 [hep-th].
[768] P. Candelas, P. Kuusela, and J. McGovern, “Attractors with Large Complex Structure for
One-Parameter Families of Calabi-Yau Manifolds,” arXiv:2104.02718 [hep-th].
[769] P. Candelas, X. De La Ossa, and D. Van Straten, “Local Zeta Functions From Calabi-Yau
Diﬀerential Equations,” arXiv:2104.07816 [hep-th].
[770] M. Morishita, “Analogies between Knots and Primes, 3-Manifolds and Number Rings,” 2009.
[771] H.-J. Chung, D. Kim, M. Kim, J. Park, and H. Yoo, “Arithmetic Chern-Simons Theory II,”
arXiv:1609.03012 [math.NT].
[772] H.-J. Chung, D. Kim, M. Kim, G. Pappas, J. Park, and H. Yoo, “Abelian Arithmetic
Chern-Simons Theory and Arithmetic Linking Numbers,”
Int. Math. Res. Not. 2019 no. 18, (2019) 5674–5702.
[773] M. Kim, “Arithmetic Chern-Simons Theory I,” arXiv:1510.05818 [math.NT].
[774] M. Kim, “Arithmetic Gauge Theory: A Brief Introduction,”
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 33 no. 29, (2018) 1830012, arXiv:1712.07602 [math.NT].
[775] K. B¨onisch, A. Klemm, E. Scheidegger, and D. Zagier, “D-brane masses at special ﬁbres of
hypergeometric families of Calabi-Yau threefolds, modular forms, and periods,”
arXiv:2203.09426 [hep-th].
[776] Einstein, A., “On the Quantum Theorem of Sommerfeld and Epstein,”
Proceedings of the German Physical Society 19 (1917) 37–43.
[777] Stone, A. Douglas, “Einstein’s unknown insight and the problem of quantizing chaos,”
Physics Today 58 no. 8, (2005) 37–43.
[778] N. D. Mermin, “The topological theory of defects in ordered media,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 51 (1979) 591–648.
[779] A. D. Shapere and F. Wilczek, eds., Geometric Phases in Physics, vol. 5. 1989.
[780] E. H. Fradkin, Field Theories of Condensed Matter Physics, vol. 82. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2, 2013.
[781] M. Stone, ed., Quantum Hall eﬀect. 1992.
[782] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, “Topological Insulators,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 (2010) 3045,
arXiv:1002.3895 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
81

[783] X. L. Qi and S. C. Zhang, “Topological insulators and superconductors,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 no. 4, (2011) 1057–1110, arXiv:1008.2026 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[784] B. A. Bernevig, Topological insulators and topological superconductors. Princeton University
Press, 2013.
[785] J. Fr¨ohlich, “Chiral Anomaly, Topological Field Theory, and Novel States of Matter,”
Rev. Math. Phys. 30 no. 06, (2018) 1840007, arXiv:1802.01385 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[786] E. Rowell and Z. Wang, “Mathematics of topological quantum computing,”
Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 55 no. 2, (2018) 183–238.
[787] D. Tong, “Lectures on the Quantum Hall Eﬀect,” 6, 2016. arXiv:1606.06687 [hep-th].
[788] T. Brauner, S. A. Hartnoll, P. Kovtun, H. Liu, M. Mezei, A. Nicolis, R. Penco, S.-H. Shao,
and D. T. Son, “Snowmass White Paper: Eﬀective Field Theories for Condensed Matter
Systems,” in 2022 Snowmass Summer Study. 3, 2022. arXiv:2203.10110 [hep-th].
[789] J. McGreevy, “Generalized Symmetries in Condensed Matter,”
arXiv:2204.03045 [cond-mat.str-el].
[790] M. Pretko, X. Chen, and Y. You, “Fracton Phases of Matter,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 35 no. 06, (2020) 2030003, arXiv:2001.01722 [cond-mat.str-el].
[791] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, “A modiﬁed Villain formulation of
fractons and other exotic theories,” J. Math. Phys. 62 no. 10, (2021) 102301,
arXiv:2103.01257 [cond-mat.str-el].
[792] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, “Exotic Symmetries, Duality, and Fractons in 2 + 1-Dimensional
Quantum Field Theory,” SciPost Phys. 10 no. 2, (2021) 027,
arXiv:2003.10466 [cond-mat.str-el].
[793] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, “Exotic ZN symmetries, duality, and fractons in 3 + 1-dimensional
quantum ﬁeld theory,” SciPost Phys. 10 no. 1, (2021) 003,
arXiv:2004.06115 [cond-mat.str-el].
[794] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, “Exotic U(1) Symmetries, Duality, and Fractons in
3 + 1-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory,” SciPost Phys. 9 no. 4, (2020) 046,
arXiv:2004.00015 [cond-mat.str-el].
[795] X. Ma, W. Shirley, M. Cheng, M. Levin, J. McGreevy, and X. Chen, “Fractonic order in
inﬁnite-component Chern-Simons gauge theories,” arXiv:2010.08917 [cond-mat.str-el].
[796] W. Shirley, K. Slagle, Z. Wang, and X. Chen, “Fracton Models on General Three-Dimensional
Manifolds,” Phys. Rev. X 8 no. 3, (2018) 031051, arXiv:1712.05892 [cond-mat.str-el].
[797] W. Shirley, K. Slagle, and X. Chen, “Twisted foliated fracton phases,”
Phys. Rev. B 102 no. 11, (2020) 115103, arXiv:1907.09048 [cond-mat.str-el].
[798] D. Aasen, D. Bulmash, A. Prem, K. Slagle, and D. J. Williamson, “Topological Defect
Networks for Fractons of all Types,” Phys. Rev. Res. 2 (2020) 043165,
arXiv:2002.05166 [cond-mat.str-el].
[799] Fock, V. and Nekrasov, N. and Rosly, A. and Selivanov, K., “What we think about the higher
dimensional Chern-Simons theories,”.
[800] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “Topological gravity as large N topological gauge theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 413–442, arXiv:hep-th/9802016.
[801] Nekrasov, Nikita, “`A la recherche de la M-theorie perdue. Z- theory: Chasing m/f-theory,”
Comptes Rendus Physique 6 no. 2, (2005) 261–269, hep-th/0412021.
[802] S. S. Razamat, “Quivers and Fractons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 no. 14, (2021) 141603,
arXiv:2107.06465 [hep-th].
82

[803] S. Franco and D. Rodriguez-Gomez, “Quivers, Lattice Gauge Theories, and Fractons,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 no. 24, (2022) 241603, arXiv:2203.01335 [hep-th].
[804] H. Geng, S. Kachru, A. Karch, R. Nally, and B. C. Rayhaun, “Fractons and Exotic
Symmetries from Branes,” Fortsch. Phys. 69 no. 11-12, (2021) 2100133,
arXiv:2108.08322 [hep-th].
[805] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman, “Topological dualities in the Ising model,” Geometry & Topology
(5, 2018) , arXiv:1806.00008 [math.AT]. to appear.
[806] C. Elliott, B. Williams, and P. Yoo, “Asymptotic Freedom in the BV Formalism,”
J. Geom. Phys. 123 (2018) 246–283, arXiv:1702.05973 [math-ph].
[807] D. Grady and D. Pavlov, “The geometric cobordism hypothesis,”
arXiv:2111.01095 [math.AT].
[808] J. Kaidi, Z. Komargodski, K. Ohmori, S. Seifnashri, and S.-H. Shao, “Higher central charges
and topological boundaries in 2+1-dimensional TQFTs,” arXiv:2107.13091 [hep-th].
[809] E. Prodan and H. Schulz-Baldes,
Bulk and boundary invariants for complex topological insulators. Mathematical Physics
Studies. Springer, [Cham], 2016.
https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.1007/978-3-319-29351-6. From
K-theory to physics.
[810] J. Roe, Index theory, coarse geometry, and topology of manifolds, vol. 90 of CBMS Regional
Conference Series in Mathematics. Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical
Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1996.
[811] J. Roe, Lectures on coarse geometry, vol. 31 of University Lecture Series. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2003.
[812] N. Higson and J. Roe, Analytic K-homology. Oxford Mathematical Monographs. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2000. Oxford Science Publications.
[813] Y. Ogata, “Classiﬁcation of symmetry protected topological phases in quantum spin chains,”
2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04671.
[814] D. S. Freed, “Short-range entanglement and invertible ﬁeld theories,”
arXiv:1406.7278 [cond-mat.str-el].
[815] A. Kapustin, “Symmetry Protected Topological Phases, Anomalies, and Cobordisms: Beyond
Group Cohomology,” arXiv:1403.1467 [cond-mat.str-el].
[816] K. Yonekura, “On the cobordism classiﬁcation of symmetry protected topological phases,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 368 no. 3, (2019) 1121–1173, arXiv:1803.10796 [hep-th].
[817] K. Shiozaki, C. Z. Xiong, and K. Gomi, “Generalized homology and Atiyah-Hirzebruch
spectral sequence in crystalline symmetry protected topological phenomena,”
arXiv:1810.00801 [cond-mat.str-el].
[818] D. S. Freed and M. J. Hopkins, “Invertible phases of matter with spatial symmetry,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 24 no. 7, (2020) 1773–1788, arXiv:1901.06419 [math-ph].
[819] A. Debray, “Invertible phases for mixed spatial symmetries and the fermionic crystalline
equivalence principle,” arxiv:2102.02941. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.02941.pdf.
[820] R. Thorngren and D. V. Else, “Gauging Spatial Symmetries and the Classiﬁcation of
Topological Crystalline Phases,” Phys. Rev. X 8 no. 1, (2018) 011040,
arXiv:1612.00846 [cond-mat.str-el].
[821] D. V. Else and R. Thorngren, “Crystalline topological phases as defect networks,”
Phys. Rev. B 99 no. 11, (2019) 115116, arXiv:1810.10539 [cond-mat.str-el].
83

[822] A. Kitaev, “Periodic table for topological insulators and superconductors,”
AIP Conf. Proc. 1134 no. 1, (2009) 22–30, arXiv:0901.2686 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[823] A. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, and A. Ludwig, “Classiﬁcation of topological insulators and
superconductors in three spatial dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B 78 no. 19, (2008) 195125,
arXiv:0803.2786 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[824] A. P. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, A. W. W. Ludwig, V. Lebedev, and M. Feigel’man,
“Classiﬁcation of Topological Insulators and Superconductors,” in L.D. Landau Memorial
Conference on Advances in Theoretical Physics. 5, 2009.
arXiv:0905.2029 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[825] S. Ryu, A. P. Schnyder, A. Furusaki, and A. W. W. Ludwig, “Topological insulators and
superconductors: Tenfold way and dimensional hierarchy,” New J. Phys. 12 (2010) 065010,
arXiv:0912.2157 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[826] D. S. Freed and G. W. Moore, “Twisted equivariant matter,”
Annales Henri Poincare 14 (2013) 1927–2023, arXiv:1208.5055 [hep-th].
[827] J. Kruthoﬀ, J. de Boer, J. van Wezel, C. L. Kane, and R.-J. Slager, “Topological classiﬁcation
of crystalline insulators through band structure combinatorics,”
Phys. Rev. X 7 no. 4, (2017) 041069, arXiv:1612.02007 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[828] L. Stehouwer, J. de Boer, J. Kruthoﬀ, and H. Posthuma, “Classiﬁcation of crystalline
topological insulators through K-theory,” arXiv:1811.02592 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[829] N. Okuma, M. Sato, and K. Shiozaki, “Topological classiﬁcation under nonmagnetic and
magnetic point group symmetry: application of real-space Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral
sequence to higher-order topology,” Phys. Rev. B 99 no. 8, (2019) 085127,
arXiv:1810.12601 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
[830] H. Watanabe, H. C. Po, and A. Vishwanath, “Structure and topology of band structures in
the 1651 magnetic space groups,” Science Advances 4 no. 8, (Aug, 2018) .
[831] F. Tang, H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, and X. Wan, “Comprehensive search for topological
materials using symmetry indicators,” Nature 566 no. 7745, (Feb, 2019) 486–489.
[832] J. Cano, B. Bradlyn, Z. Wang, L. Elcoro, M. G. Vergniory, C. Felser, M. I. Aroyo, and B. A.
Bernevig, “Building blocks of topological quantum chemistry: Elementary band
representations,” Physical Review B 97 no. 3, (Jan, 2018) .
[833] M. G. Vergniory, L. Elcoro, C. Felser, N. Regnault, B. A. Bernevig, and Z. Wang, “A complete
catalogue of high-quality topological materials,” Nature 566 no. 7745, (Feb, 2019) 480–485.
[834] T. Lan and X.-G. Wen, “Classiﬁcation of 3+1D Bosonic Topological Orders (II): The Case
When Some Pointlike Excitations Are Fermions,” Phys. Rev. X 9 no. 2, (2019) 021005,
arXiv:1801.08530 [cond-mat.str-el].
[835] C. Zhu, T. Lan, and X.-G. Wen, “Topological nonlinear σ -model, higher gauge theory, and a
systematic construction of 3+1D topological orders for boson systems,”
Phys. Rev. B 100 no. 4, (2019) 045105, arXiv:1808.09394 [cond-mat.str-el].
[836] T. Lan, L. Kong, and X.-G. Wen, “Classiﬁcation of (3+1)D Bosonic Topological Orders: The
Case When Pointlike Excitations Are All Bosons,” Phys. Rev. X 8 no. 2, (2018) 021074.
[837] T. Johnson-Freyd, “On the Classiﬁcation of Topological Orders,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 393 no. 2, (2022) 989–1033, arXiv:2003.06663 [math.CT].
[838] T. Johnson-Freyd, “To appear,”.
[839] T. Johnson-Freyd and M. Yu, “Topological Orders in (4+1)-Dimensions,”
SciPost Phys. 13 no. 3, (2022) 068, arXiv:2104.04534 [hep-th].
84

[840] A. Kitaev, “Homotopy-theoretic approach to SPT phases in action: Z16 classiﬁcation of
three-dimensional superconductors,”.
http://www.ipam.ucla.edu/abstract/?tid=12389&pcode=STQ2015.
[841] P.-S. Hsin, A. Kapustin, and R. Thorngren, “Berry Phase in Quantum Field Theory:
Diabolical Points and Boundary Phenomena,” Phys. Rev. B 102 (2020) 245113,
arXiv:2004.10758 [cond-mat.str-el].
[842] A. Kapustin and L. Spodyneiko, “Higher-dimensional generalizations of Berry curvature,”
Phys. Rev. B 101 no. 23, (2020) 235130, arXiv:2001.03454 [cond-mat.str-el].
[843] A. Kapustin and L. Spodyneiko, “Higher-dimensional generalizations of the Thouless charge
pump,” arXiv:2003.09519 [cond-mat.str-el].
[844] A. Kapustin and N. Sopenko, “Local Noether theorem for quantum lattice systems and
topological invariants of gapped states,” arXiv:2201.01327 [math-ph].
[845] P. Arrighi, “An overview of Quantum Cellular Automata,” arXiv:1904.12956 [quant-ph].
[846] T. Farrelly, “A review of Quantum Cellular Automata,” Quantum 4 (2020) 368,
arXiv:1904.13318 [quant-ph].
[847] M. Freedman, J. Haah, and M. B. Hastings, “The Group Structure of Quantum Cellular
Automata,” Commun. Math. Phys. 389 no. 3, (2022) 1277–1302,
arXiv:1910.07998 [quant-ph].
[848] E. Brezin and V. A. Kazakov, “Exactly Solvable Field Theories of Closed Strings,”
Phys. Lett. B 236 (1990) 144–150.
[849] M. R. Douglas and S. H. Shenker, “Strings in Less Than One-Dimension,”
Nucl. Phys. B 335 (1990) 635.
[850] D. J. Gross and A. A. Migdal, “Nonperturbative Two-Dimensional Quantum Gravity,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 127.
[851] P. H. Ginsparg and G. W. Moore, “Lectures on 2-D gravity and 2-D string theory,” in
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute (TASI 92): From Black Holes and Strings to Particles,
pp. 277–469. 10, 1993. arXiv:hep-th/9304011.
[852] E. Witten, “Two-dimensional gravity and intersection theory on moduli space,”
Surveys Diﬀ. Geom. 1 (1991) 243–310.
[853] M. Kontsevich, “Intersection theory on the moduli space of curves and the matrix Airy
function,” Commun. Math. Phys. 147 (1992) 1–23.
[854] E. Looijenga, “Intersection theory on Deligne-Mumford compactiﬁcations (after Witten and
Kontsevich),” No. 216, pp. Exp. No. 768, 4, 187–212. 1993. S´eminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 1992/93.
[855] E. Witten, “Algebraic geometry associated with matrix models of two-dimensional gravity,” in
Topological methods in modern mathematics (Stony Brook, NY, 1991), pp. 235–269. Publish
or Perish, Houston, TX, 1993.
[856] A. Polishchuk, “Moduli spaces of curves with eﬀective r-spin structures,” in Gromov-Witten
theory of spin curves and orbifolds, vol. 403 of Contemp. Math., pp. 1–20. Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, RI, 2006.
https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.1090/conm/403/07592.
[857] Bauer, Stefan and Furuta, Mikio, “A stable cohomotopy reﬁnement of Seiberg-Witten
invariants. I,” Invent. Math. 155 no. 1, (2004) 1–19.
[858] R. L. Cohen, J. D. S. Jones, and G. B. Segal, “Floer’s inﬁnite-dimensional Morse theory and
homotopy theory,” No. 883, pp. 68–96. 1994. Geometric aspects of inﬁnite integrable systems
(Japanese) (Kyoto, 1993).
85

[859] R. L. Cohen, J. D. S. Jones, and G. B. Segal, “Floer’s inﬁnite-dimensional Morse theory and
homotopy theory,” in The Floer memorial volume, vol. 133 of Progr. Math., pp. 297–325.
Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1995.
[860] C. Manolescu, “Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology and the triangulation
conjecture,” J. Amer. Math. Soc. 29 no. 1, (2016) 147–176.
[861] A. Okounkov, “Generating functions for intersection numbers on moduli spaces of curves,”
2001.
[862] A. Okounkov and R. Pandharipande, “Gromov-Witten theory, Hurwitz numbers, and matrix
models. 1.,” arXiv:math/0101147.
[863] S. Cordes, G. W. Moore, and S. Ramgoolam, “Lectures on 2-d Yang-Mills theory, equivariant
cohomology and topological ﬁeld theories,” Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 41 (1995) 184–244,
arXiv:hep-th/9411210.
[864] G. Moore, “Two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory and topological ﬁeld theory,” in Proceedings
of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Z¨urich, 1994), pp. 1292–1303.
Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1995.
https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.1007/978-3-0348-9078-6_60.
[865] Andersen, J. and Borot, G. and Orantin, N., “Geometric recursion,” 2019.
[866] Andersen, J. and Borot, G. and Charbonnier, S. and Giacchetto, A. and Lewa´nski, D. and
Wheeler, C., “On the Kontsevich geometry of the combinatorial Teichm¨uller space,”
arXiv:2010.11806 [math.DG].
[867] V. Bouchard and M. Marino, “Hurwitz numbers, matrix models and enumerative geometry,”
Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 78 (2008) 263–283, arXiv:0709.1458 [math.AG].
[868] A. Dei and L. Eberhardt, “String correlators on AdS3: four-point functions,”
JHEP 09 (2021) 209, arXiv:2107.01481 [hep-th].
[869] O. Lunin and S. D. Mathur, “Correlation functions for M**N / S(N) orbifolds,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 219 (2001) 399–442, arXiv:hep-th/0006196.
[870] A. Pakman, L. Rastelli, and S. S. Razamat, “Diagrams for Symmetric Product Orbifolds,”
JHEP 10 (2009) 034, arXiv:0905.3448 [hep-th].
[871] E. Witten, “Quantum Field Theory and the Jones Polynomial,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 121 (1989) 351–399.
[872] N. Y. Reshetikhin and V. G. Turaev, “Ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from
quantum groups,” Commun. Math. Phys. 127 (1990) 1–26.
[873] N. Reshetikhin and V. G. Turaev, “Invariants of three manifolds via link polynomials and
quantum groups,” Invent. Math. 103 (1991) 547–597.
[874] T. Dimofte, D. Gaiotto, and S. Gukov, “Gauge Theories Labelled by Three-Manifolds,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 325 (2014) 367–419, arXiv:1108.4389 [hep-th].
[875] C. Cordova and D. L. Jaﬀeris, “Complex Chern-Simons from M5-branes on the Squashed
Three-Sphere,” JHEP 11 (2017) 119, arXiv:1305.2891 [hep-th].
[876] C. Beasley and E. Witten, “Non-abelian localization for chern-simons theory,” 2005.
[877] B. Willett, “Localization on three-dimensional manifolds,”
J. Phys. A 50 no. 44, (2017) 443006, arXiv:1608.02958 [hep-th].
[878] C. Closset and H. Kim, “Comments on twisted indices in 3d supersymmetric gauge theories,”
JHEP 08 (2016) 059, arXiv:1605.06531 [hep-th].
86

[879] C. Closset, H. Kim, and B. Willett, “Supersymmetric partition functions and the
three-dimensional A-twist,” JHEP 03 (2017) 074, arXiv:1701.03171 [hep-th].
[880] C. Closset, H. Kim, and B. Willett, “Seifert ﬁbering operators in 3d N = 2 theories,”
JHEP 11 (2018) 004, arXiv:1807.02328 [hep-th].
[881] C. Closset, L. Di Pietro, and H. Kim, “’t Hooft anomalies and the holomorphy of
supersymmetric partition functions,” JHEP 08 (2019) 035, arXiv:1905.05722 [hep-th].
[882] C. Closset and H. Kim, “Three-dimensional N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theories and
partition functions on Seifert manifolds: A review,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 34 no. 23, (2019) 1930011, arXiv:1908.08875 [hep-th].
[883] J. Eckhard, H. Kim, S. Schafer-Nameki, and B. Willett, “Higher-Form Symmetries, Bethe
Vacua, and the 3d-3d Correspondence,” JHEP 01 (2020) 101, arXiv:1910.14086 [hep-th].
[884] J. K¨all´en and M. Zabzine, “Twisted supersymmetric 5D Yang-Mills theory and contact
geometry,” JHEP 05 (2012) 125, arXiv:1202.1956 [hep-th].
[885] J. E. Andersen and R. Kashaev, “Complex Quantum Chern-Simons,”
arXiv:1409.1208 [math.QA].
[886] T. Dimofte, S. Gukov, J. Lenells, and D. Zagier, “Exact Results for Perturbative
Chern-Simons Theory with Complex Gauge Group,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 3 (2009) 363–443, arXiv:0903.2472 [hep-th].
[887] T. Dimofte, “Perturbative and nonperturbative aspects of complex Chern–Simons theory,”
J. Phys. A 50 no. 44, (2017) 443009, arXiv:1608.02961 [hep-th].
[888] E. Witten, “Quantization of Chern-Simons Gauge Theory With Complex Gauge Group,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 137 (1991) 29–66.
[889] J. Andersen and R. Kashaev, “The Teichm¨uller TQFT,” in International Congress of
Mathematicians, pp. 2527–2552. 2018. arXiv:1811.06853 [math.QA].
[890] S. Gukov and D. Pei, “Equivariant Verlinde formula from ﬁvebranes and vortices,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 355 no. 1, (2017) 1–50, arXiv:1501.01310 [hep-th].
[891] Gukov, S. and Pei, Du and Putrov, P. and Vafa, C., “BPS spectra and 3-manifold invariants,”
J. Knot Theor. Ramiﬁcations 29 no. 02, (2020) 2040003, arXiv:1701.06567 [hep-th].
[892] J. Andersen and R. Kashaev, “A TQFT from Quantum Teichm¨uller Theory,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 330 (2014) 887–934, arXiv:1109.6295 [math.QA].
[893] J. Andersen and R. Kashaev, “A new formulation of the Teichm¨uller TQFT,”
arXiv:1305.4291 [math.GT].
[894] V. Mikhaylov, “Teichm¨uller TQFT vs. Chern-Simons theory,” JHEP 04 (2018) 085,
arXiv:1710.04354 [hep-th].
[895] J. Teschner, “An Analog of a modular functor from quantized Teichm¨uller theory,”
arXiv:math/0510174.
[896] J. Andersen and R. Kashaev,
“Faddeev’s Quantum Dilogarithm and State-Integrals on Shaped Triangulations,” in Winter
School in Mathematical Physics: Mathematical Aspects of Quantum Field Theory,
pp. 131–152. Springer, 2015.
[897] R. Dijkgraaf, H. Fuji, and M. Manabe, “The Volume Conjecture, Perturbative Knot
Invariants, and Recursion Relations for Topological Strings,”
Nucl. Phys. B 849 (2011) 166–211, arXiv:1010.4542 [hep-th].
[898] T. Dimofte, “Quantum Riemann Surfaces in Chern-Simons Theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 17 no. 3, (2013) 479–599, arXiv:1102.4847 [hep-th].
87

[899] T. Dimofte, “Complex Chern–Simons Theory at Level k via the 3d–3d Correspondence,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 339 no. 2, (2015) 619–662, arXiv:1409.0857 [hep-th].
[900] T. Dimofte and S. Garoufalidis, “Quantum modularity and complex Chern–Simons theory,”
Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 12 (2018) 1–52, arXiv:1511.05628 [math.GT].
[901] S. Garoufalidis, C. D. Hodgson, J. H. Rubinstein, and H. Segerman, “1-eﬃcient triangulations
and the index of a cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold,” arXiv:1303.5278 [math.GT].
[902] K. Hikami, “Generalized Volume Conjecture and the A-Polynomials: The Neumann-Zagier
Potential Function as a Classical Limit of Quantum Invariant,”
J. Geom. Phys. 57 (2007) 1895–1940, arXiv:math/0604094.
[903] S. Gukov, P. Putrov, and C. Vafa, “Fivebranes and 3-manifold homology,”
JHEP 07 (2017) 071, arXiv:1602.05302 [hep-th].
[904] C. Beem, T. Dimofte, and S. Pasquetti, “Holomorphic Blocks in Three Dimensions,”
JHEP 12 (2014) 177, arXiv:1211.1986 [hep-th].
[905] E. Witten, “Fivebranes and Knots,” arXiv:1101.3216 [hep-th].
[906] M. Kapranov, “Rozansky-Witten invariants via Atiyah classes,”
Compositio Math. 115 no. 1, (1999) 71–113.
[907] L. Rozansky and E. Witten, “HyperKahler geometry and invariants of three manifolds,”
Selecta Math. 3 (1997) 401–458, arXiv:hep-th/9612216.
[908] I. Brunner, N. Carqueville, and D. Roggenkamp, “Truncated aﬃne Rozansky–Witten models
as extended TQFTs,” arXiv:2201.03284 [math-ph].
[909] T. Creutzig, T. Dimofte, N. Garner, and N. Geer, “A QFT for non-semisimple TQFT,”
arXiv:2112.01559 [hep-th].
[910] S. Gukov, P.-S. Hsin, H. Nakajima, S. Park, D. Pei, and N. Sopenko, “Rozansky-Witten
geometry of Coulomb branches and logarithmic knot invariants,”
J. Geom. Phys. 168 (2021) 104311, arXiv:2005.05347 [hep-th].
[911] F. Costantino, N. Geer, and B. Patureau-Mirand, “Quantum invariants of 3-manifolds via link
surgery presentations and non-semi-simple categories,” arXiv:1202.3553 [math.GT].
[912] M. Hennings, “Invariants of links and 3-manifolds obtained from Hopf algebras,”
J. London Math. Soc. (2) 54 no. 3, (1996) 594–624.
[913] R. Kashaev and N. Reshetikhin, “Invariants of tangles with ﬂat connections in their
complements.I. Invariants and holonomy R-matrices,” 2002.
[914] V. V. Lyubashenko, “Invariants of three manifolds and projective representations of mapping
class groups via quantum groups at roots of unity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 172 (1995) 467–516, arXiv:hep-th/9405167.
[915] T. Creutzig and D. Ridout, “Logarithmic Conformal Field Theory: Beyond an Introduction,”
J. Phys. A 46 (2013) 4006, arXiv:1303.0847 [hep-th].
[916] M. Flohr, “Bits and pieces in logarithmic conformal ﬁeld theory,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 18 (2003) 4497–4592, arXiv:hep-th/0111228.
[917] J. Fuchs and C. Schweigert, “Full Logarithmic Conformal Field theory — an Attempt at a
Status Report,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 8-9, (2019) 1910018, arXiv:1903.02838 [hep-th].
[918] M. R. Gaberdiel, “An Algebraic approach to logarithmic conformal ﬁeld theory,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 18 (2003) 4593–4638, arXiv:hep-th/0111260.
[919] S. Kawai, “Logarithmic conformal ﬁeld theory with boundary,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 18 (2003) 4655–4684, arXiv:hep-th/0204169.
88

[920] Bar-Natan, Dror, “On Khovanov’s categoriﬁcation of the Jones polynomial,”
Algebr. Geom. Topol. 2 (2002) 337–370.
[921] Khovanov, Mikhail, “A categoriﬁcation of the Jones polynomial,”
Duke Math. J. 101 no. 3, (2000) 359–426.
[922] E. Gorsky, S. Gukov, and M. Stosic, “Quadruply-graded colored homology of knots,”
arXiv:1304.3481 [math.QA].
[923] S. Gukov, A. S. Schwarz, and C. Vafa, “Khovanov-Rozansky homology and topological
strings,” Lett. Math. Phys. 74 (2005) 53–74, arXiv:hep-th/0412243.
[924] S. Gukov, A. Iqbal, C. Kozcaz, and C. Vafa, “Link Homologies and the Reﬁned Topological
Vertex,” Commun. Math. Phys. 298 (2010) 757–785, arXiv:0705.1368 [hep-th].
[925] S. Gukov and I. Saberi, “Lectures on Knot Homology and Quantum Curves,”
arXiv:1211.6075 [hep-th].
[926] S. Gukov, M. Khovanov, and J. Walcher, eds., Physics and Mathematics of Link Homology.
2016.
[927] E. Witten, “Two Lectures On The Jones Polynomial And Khovanov Homology,”
arXiv:1401.6996 [math.GT].
[928] R. Mazzeo and E. Witten, “The Nahm Pole Boundary Condition,”
arXiv:1311.3167 [math.DG].
[929] R. Mazzeo and E. Witten, “The KW equations and the Nahm pole boundary condition with
knots,” Commun. Anal. Geom. 28 no. 4, (2020) 871–942, arXiv:1712.00835 [math.DG].
[930] C. H. Taubes, “Growth of the Higgs ﬁeld for solutions to the Kapustin-Witten equations on
R4,” arXiv:1701.03072 [math.DG].
[931] C. H. Taubes, “The R-invariant solutions to the Kapustin-Witten equations on
(0, ∞) × R2 × R with generalized Nahm pole asymptotics,” arXiv:1903.03539 [math.DG].
[932] C. H. Taubes, “The existence of instanton solutions to the R-invariant Kapustin-Witten
equations on (0, ∞) × R2 × R,” arXiv:2102.04290 [math.DG].
[933] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Knot Invariants from Four-Dimensional Gauge Theory,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 16 no. 3, (2012) 935–1086, arXiv:1106.4789 [hep-th].
[934] D. Galakhov and G. W. Moore, “Comments On The Two-Dimensional Landau-Ginzburg
Approach To Link Homology,” arXiv:1607.04222 [hep-th].
[935] M. Aganagic, “Knot Categoriﬁcation from Mirror Symmetry, Part I: Coherent Sheaves,”
arXiv:2004.14518 [hep-th].
[936] M. Aganagic, “Knot Categoriﬁcation from Mirror Symmetry, Part II: Lagrangians,”
arXiv:2105.06039 [hep-th].
[937] M. Aganagic and A. Okounkov, “Elliptic stable envelopes,”
J. Am. Math. Soc. 34 no. 1, (2021) 79–133, arXiv:1604.00423 [math.AG].
[938] M. Aganagic and A. Okounkov, “Quasimap counts and Bethe eigenfunctions,” Moscow Math.
J. 17 no. 4, (2017) 565–600, arXiv:1704.08746 [math-ph].
[939] I. B. Frenkel and N. Y. Reshetikhin, “Quantum aﬃne algebras and holonomic diﬀerence
equations,” Commun. Math. Phys. 146 (1992) 1–60.
[940] Hamilton, Richard S., “Three-manifolds with positive Ricci curvature,” J. Diﬀerential
Geometry 17 no. 2, (1982) 255–306.
89

[941] Morgan, J. and Tian, G., Ricci ﬂow and the Poincar´e conjecture, vol. 3 of Clay Mathematics
Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; Clay Mathematics Institute,
Cambridge, MA, 2007.
[942] Morgan, J. and Tian, G., The geometrization conjecture, vol. 5 of Clay Mathematics
Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; Clay Mathematics Institute,
Cambridge, MA, 2014.
[943] G. Perelman, “The Entropy formula for the Ricci ﬂow and its geometric applications,”
arXiv:math/0211159.
[944] G. Perelman, “Ricci ﬂow with surgery on three-manifolds,” arXiv:math/0303109.
[945] G. Perelman, “Finite extinction time for the solutions to the Ricci ﬂow on certain
three-manifolds,” arXiv:math/0307245.
[946] A. Frenkel, P. Horava, and S. Randall, “Perelman’s Ricci Flow in Topological Quantum
Gravity,” arXiv:2011.11914 [hep-th].
[947] G. Y. Cho, D. Gang, and H.-C. Kim, “M-theoretic Genesis of Topological Phases,”
JHEP 11 (2020) 115, arXiv:2007.01532 [hep-th].
[948] X.-G. Wen, “A theory of 2+1d bosonic topological orders,”
National Science Review 3 no. 1, (Nov, 2015) 68–106.
[949] L. Kong and Z.-H. Zhang, “An invitation to topological orders and category theory,”
arXiv:2205.05565 [cond-mat.str-el].
[950] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov, A. S. Schwartz, and Y. S. Tyupkin, “Pseudoparticle Solutions
of the Yang-Mills Equations,” Phys. Lett. B 59 (1975) 85–87.
[951] M. F. Atiyah, N. J. Hitchin, V. G. Drinfeld, and Y. I. Manin, “Construction of Instantons,”
Phys. Lett. A 65 (1978) 185–187.
[952] Donaldson, S. K. and Kronheimer, P. B., The geometry of four-manifolds. Oxford
Mathematical Monographs. The Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 1990.
Oxford Science Publications.
[953] R. Friedman and J. W. Morgan, Smooth four-manifolds and complex surfaces, vol. 27 of
Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related
Areas (3)]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[954] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Monopoles, duality and chiral symmetry breaking in N = 2
supersymmetric QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B 431 (1994) 484–550, arXiv:hep-th/9408099.
[955] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Electric - magnetic duality, monopole condensation, and
conﬁnement in N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 426 (1994) 19–52,
arXiv:hep-th/9407087. [Erratum: Nucl.Phys.B 430, 485–486 (1994)].
[956] E. Witten, “Monopoles and four manifolds,” Math. Res. Lett. 1 (1994) 769–796,
arXiv:hep-th/9411102.
[957] S. K. Donaldson, “The Seiberg-Witten equations and 4-manifold topology,”
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 33 no. 1, (1996) 45–70.
[958] A. Losev, N. Nekrasov, and S. Shatashvili, “Issues in topological gauge theory,”
Nuclear Physics B 534 no. 3, (Nov, 1998) 549–611.
[959] M. Marino and G. W. Moore, “The Donaldson-Witten function for gauge groups of rank
larger than one,” Commun. Math. Phys. 199 (1998) 25–69, arXiv:hep-th/9802185.
[960] J. Labastida and M. Marino, Topological quantum ﬁeld theory and four manifolds, vol. 25 of
Mathematical Physics Studies. Springer, Dordrecht, 2005.
90

[961] A. Malmendier and K. Ono, “SO(3)-Donaldson invariants of CP**2 and Mock Theta
Functions,” Geom. Topol. 16 (2012) 1767–1833, arXiv:0808.1442 [math.DG].
[962] A. Malmendier and K. Ono, “Moonshine and Donaldson invariants of CP 2,”
arXiv:1207.5139 [math.DG].
[963] M. Griﬃn, A. Malmendier, and K. Ono, “SU(2)-Donaldson invariants of the complex
projective plane,” Forum Math. 27 (2015) 2003–2023, arXiv:1209.2743 [math.DG].
[964] J. Aspman, E. Furrer, and J. Manschot, “Cutting and gluing with running couplings in N=2
QCD,” Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 2, (2022) 025021, arXiv:2107.04600 [hep-th].
[965] J. Aspman, E. Furrer, and J. Manschot, “Four ﬂavors, triality, and bimodular forms,”
Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 2, (2022) 025017, arXiv:2110.11969 [hep-th].
[966] L. Gottsche, H. Nakajima, and K. Yoshioka, “Donaldson = Seiberg-Witten from Mochizuki’s
formula and instanton counting,” Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. Kyoto 47 (2011) 307–359,
arXiv:1001.5024 [math.DG].
[967] G¨ottsche, L. and Kool, M., “Sheaves on surfaces and virtual invariants,”
arXiv:2007.12730 [math.AG].
[968] M. Marino and G. W. Moore, “Three manifold topology and the Donaldson-Witten partition
function,” Nucl. Phys. B 547 (1999) 569–598, arXiv:hep-th/9811214.
[969] A. Daemi and Y. Xie, “Sutured manifolds and polynomial invariants from higher rank
bundles,” Geom. Topol. 24 no. 1, (2020) 49–178.
[970] P. B. Kronheimer, “Four-manifold invariants from higher-rank bundles,” J. Diﬀerential Geom.
70 no. 1, (2005) 59–112.
[971] S. K. Donaldson, “Yang-Mills invariants of four-manifolds,” in Geometry of low-dimensional
manifolds, 1 (Durham, 1989), vol. 150 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pp. 5–40.
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1990.
[972] T.-J. Li and A.-K. Liu, “Family Seiberg-Witten invariants and wall crossing formulas,”
Comm. Anal. Geom. 9 no. 4, (2001) 777–823.
[973] N. Nakamura, “The Seiberg-Witten equations for families and diﬀeomorphisms of
4-manifolds,” Asian J. Math. 7 no. 1, (2003) 133–138.
[974] T. Kato, H. Konno, and N. Nakamura, “Rigidity of the mod2 families Seiberg-Witten
invariants and topology of families of spin 4-manifolds,”
Compos. Math. 157 no. 4, (2021) 770–808.
[975] D. Ruberman, “A polynomial invariant of diﬀeomorphisms of 4-manifolds,” in Proceedings of
the Kirbyfest (Berkeley, CA, 1998), vol. 2 of Geom. Topol. Monogr., pp. 473–488. Geom.
Topol. Publ., Coventry, 1999.
[976] D. Baraglia, “Obstructions to smooth group actions on 4-manifolds from families
Seiberg-Witten theory,” Adv. Math. 354 (2019) 106730, 32.
[977] D. Baraglia and H. Konno, “A gluing formula for families Seiberg-Witten invariants,”
Geom. Topol. 24 no. 3, (2020) 1381–1456.
[978] D. Baraglia, “Constraints on families of smooth 4-manifolds from Bauer-Furuta invariants,”
Algebr. Geom. Topol. 21 no. 1, (2021) 317–349.
[979] H. Konno, “Characteristic classes via 4-dimensional gauge theory,”
Geom. Topol. 25 no. 2, (2021) 711–773.
[980] J. Cushing, G. W. Moore, M. Rocek, and V. Saxena,, “Superconformal Gravity And The
Topology Of Diﬀeomorphism Groups,” to appear (2022) .
91

[981] T. Watanabe, “Some exotic nontrivial elements of the rational homotopy groups of Diﬀ(s4),”
2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02448.
[982] T. Watanabe, “Theta-graph and diﬀeomorphisms of some 4-manifolds,” 2020.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.09545.
[983] T. Watanabe, “Addendum to: Some exotic nontrivial elements of the rational homotopy
groups of Diﬀ(s4) (homological interpretation),” 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01609.
[984] B. Botvinnik and T. Watanabe, “Families of diﬀeomorphisms and concordances detected by
trivalent graphs,” 2022. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11373.
[985] N. Nekrasov, “Five dimensional gauge theories and relativistic integrable systems,”
Nucl. Phys. B 531 (1998) 323–344, arXiv:hep-th/9609219.
[986] C. Closset and H. Magureanu, “The u-plane of rank-one 4d N = 2 KK theories,”
arXiv:2107.03509 [hep-th].
[987] G¨ottsche, L.
and Nakajima, H. and Yoshioka, K., “K-theoretic Donaldson invariants via instanton counting,”
Pure Appl. Math. Q. 5 no. 3, Special Issue: In honor of Friedrich Hirzebruch. Part 2, (2009) 1029–1111.
[988] L. G¨ottsche, “Blowup formulas for Segre and Verlinde numbers of surfaces and higher rank
Donaldson invariants,” arXiv:2109.13144 [math.AG].
[989] C. Closset and H. Magureanu, “Partition Functions and Fibering Operators on the Coulomb
Branch of 5d SCFTs,” arXiv:2209.13564 [hep-th].
[990] H. Kim, J. Manschot, G.
W. Moore, R. Tao, and X. Zhang, , “Path Integral Derivations Of
K-Theoretic Donaldson Invariants,” to appear (2022) .
[991] A. Losev, A. Marshakov, and N. Nekrasov, “Small Instantons, Little Strings and Free
Fermions,” 2003.
[992] N. Nekrasov and A. Okounkov, “Seiberg-Witten Theory and Random Partitions,” 2003.
[993] A. Marshakov and N. Nekrasov, “Extended Seiberg-Witten Theory and Integrable Hierarchy,”
JHEP 01 (2007) 104, arXiv:hep-th/0612019.
[994] T. Kimura and V. Pestun, “Quiver W-algebras,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 108 no. 6, (2018) 1351–1381, arXiv:1512.08533 [hep-th].
[995] T. Hollowood, A. Iqbal, and C. Vafa, “Matrix models, geometric engineering and elliptic
genera,” Journal of High Energy Physics 2008 no. 03, (Mar, 2008) 069–069,
arXiv:hep-th/0310272.
[996] H. W. Braden and T. J. Hollowood, “The curve of compactiﬁed 6D gauge theories and
integrable systems,” Journal of High Energy Physics 2003 no. 12, (Dec, 2003) 023–023,
arXiv:hep-th/0311024.
[997] L. G¨ottsche, M. Kool, and R. A. Williams, “Verlinde formulae on complex surfaces:
K-theoretic invariants,” Forum Math. Sigma 9 (2021) e5, arXiv:1903.03869 [math.AG].
[998] Dijkgraaf, R. and Moore, G. and Verlinde, E. and Verlinde, H., “Elliptic genera of symmetric
products and second quantized strings,”
Communications in Mathematical Physics 185 no. 1, (Apr, 1997) 197–209.
[999] M. Dedushenko, S. Gukov, and P. Putrov, “Vertex algebras and 4-manifold invariants,” in
Nigel Hitchin’s 70th Birthday Conference, vol. 1, pp. 249–318. 5, 2017.
arXiv:1705.01645 [hep-th].
[1000] B. Feigin and S. Gukov, “VOA[M4],” J. Math. Phys. 61 no. 1, (2020) 012302,
arXiv:1806.02470 [hep-th].
92

[1001] S. Gukov, D. Pei, P. Putrov, and C. Vafa, “4-manifolds and topological modular forms,”
JHEP 05 (2021) 084, arXiv:1811.07884 [hep-th].
[1002] N. J. Hitchin, A. Karlhede, U. Lindstrom, and M. Rocek, “Hyperkahler Metrics and
Supersymmetry,” Commun. Math. Phys. 108 (1987) 535.
[1003] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, “Four-dimensional wall-crossing via
three-dimensional ﬁeld theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 299 (2010) 163–224,
arXiv:0807.4723 [hep-th].
[1004] L. Fredrickson, “Exponential Decay for the Asymptotic Geometry of the Hitchin Metric,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 375 no. 2, (2019) 1393–1426, arXiv:1810.01554 [math.DG].
[1005] D. Dumas and A. Neitzke, “Asymptotics of Hitchin’s Metric on the Hitchin Section,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 367 no. 1, (2019) 127–150, arXiv:1802.07200 [math.DG].
[1006] D. Dumas and A. Neitzke, “Opers and nonabelian Hodge: numerical studies,”
arXiv:2007.00503 [math.DG].
[1007] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, “Wall-Crossing in Coupled 2d −4d Systems,”
JHEP 12 (2012) 082, arXiv:1103.2598 [hep-th].
[1008] T. Banks, M. R. Douglas, and N. Seiberg, “Probing F-theory with branes,”
Phys. Lett. B 387 (1996) 278–281, arXiv:hep-th/9605199.
[1009] S. Kachru, A. Tripathy, and M. Zimet, “K3-metrics,” arXiv:2006.02435 [hep-th].
[1010] A. Tripathy and M. Zimet, “A plethora of K3-metrics,” arXiv:2010.12581 [hep-th].
[1011] S. Alexandrov, B. Pioline, F. Saueressig, and S. Vandoren, “D-instantons and twistors,”
JHEP 03 (2009) 044, arXiv:0812.4219 [hep-th].
[1012] S. Alexandrov, B. Pioline, F. Saueressig, and S. Vandoren, “Linear perturbations of
quaternionic metrics,” Commun. Math. Phys. 296 (2010) 353–403,
arXiv:0810.1675 [hep-th].
[1013] S. Alexandrov, D. Persson, and B. Pioline, “Fivebrane instantons, topological wave functions
and hypermultiplet moduli spaces,” JHEP 03 (2011) 111, arXiv:1010.5792 [hep-th].
[1014] S. Alexandrov, D. Persson, and B. Pioline, “Wall-crossing, Rogers dilogarithm, and the
QK/HK correspondence,” JHEP 12 (2011) 027, arXiv:1110.0466 [hep-th].
[1015] S. Alexandrov and B. Pioline, “Heterotic-type II duality in twistor space,”
JHEP 03 (2013) 085, arXiv:1210.3037 [hep-th].
[1016] S. Alexandrov, J. Manschot, D. Persson, and B. Pioline, “Quantum hypermultiplet moduli
spaces in N = 2 string vacua: a review,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 90 (2015) 181–212,
arXiv:1304.0766 [hep-th].
[1017] S. Alexandrov and B. Pioline, “Conformal TBA for resolved conifolds,”
arXiv:2106.12006 [hep-th].
[1018] S. Alexandrov and B. Pioline, “Heavenly metrics, BPS indices and twistors,”
arXiv:2104.10540 [hep-th].
[1019] M. Alim, A. Saha, and I. Tulli, “A Hyperk¨ahler geometry associated to the BPS structure of
the resolved conifold,” arXiv:2106.11976 [math.DG].
[1020] M. Alim, A. Saha, J. Teschner, and I. Tulli, “Mathematical structures of non-perturbative
topological string theory: from GW to DT invariants,” arXiv:2109.06878 [hep-th].
[1021] T. Bridgeland, “Geometry from Donaldson-Thomas invariants,”
arXiv:1912.06504 [math.AG].
93

[1022] T. Bridgeland and I. A. B. Strachan, “Complex hyperk¨ahler structures deﬁned by
Donaldson-Thomas invariants,” arXiv:2006.13059 [math.AG].
[1023] A. Sen, “Dyon - monopole bound states, selfdual harmonic forms on the multi - monopole
moduli space, and SL(2, Z) invariance in string theory,” Phys. Lett. B 329 (1994) 217–221,
arXiv:hep-th/9402032.
[1024] G. Segal and A. Selby, “The cohomology of the space of magnetic monopoles,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 177 (1996) 775–787.
[1025] J. P. Gauntlett and J. A. Harvey, “S duality and the dyon spectrum in N=2 superYang-Mills
theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 463 (1996) 287–314, arXiv:hep-th/9508156.
[1026] G. W. Moore, A. B. Royston, and D. Van den Bleeken, “L2-Kernels Of Dirac-Type Operators
On Monopole Moduli Spaces,” Proc. Symp. Pure Math. (2015) 169–182,
arXiv:1512.08923 [hep-th].
[1027] S. Sethi and M. Stern, “D-brane bound states redux,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 194 (1998) 675–705, arXiv:hep-th/9705046.
[1028] A. Strominger, S.-T. Yau, and E. Zaslow, “Mirror symmetry is T -duality,”
Nucl. Phys. B 479 (1996) 243–259, arXiv:hep-th/9606040.
[1029] T. Hausel and M. Thaddeus, “Mirror symmetry, Langlands duality, and the Hitchin system,”
Invent. Math. 153 (2003) 197, arXiv:math/0205236.
[1030] T. Hausel and F. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Mixed hodge polynomials of character varieties,” 2008.
[1031] T. Hausel, E. Letellier, and F. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Arithmetic harmonic analysis on
character and quiver varieties,” Duke Mathematical Journal 160 no. 2, (Nov, 2011) .
[1032] T. Hausel, M. Mereb, and M. L. Wong, “Arithmetic and representation theory of wild
character varieties,” 2016.
[1033] M. A. de Cataldo, T. Hausel, and L. Migliorini, “Topology of Hitchin systems and Hodge
theory of character varieties: the case A1,” 2011.
[1034] M. A. A. de Cataldo, T. Hausel, and L. Migliorini, “Exchange between perverse and weight
ﬁltration for the Hilbert schemes of points of two surfaces,” 2010.
[1035] J. Shen and Z. Zhang, “Perverse ﬁltrations, Hilbert schemes, and the P = W conjecture for
parabolic Higgs bundles,” 2018.
[1036] M. Mauri, E. Mazzon, and M. Stevenson, “On the geometric P = W conjecture,” 2021.
[1037] S. Szabo, “Simpson’s geometric P = W conjecture in the Painlev´e VI case via abelianization,”
2019.
[1038] M. A. A. de Cataldo, D. Maulik, and J. Shen, “Hitchin ﬁbrations, abelian surfaces, and the
P = W conjecture,” 2021.
[1039] M. A. A. de Cataldo, D. Maulik, and J. Shen, “On the P = W conjecture for SLn,” 2020.
[1040] C. Felisetti and M. Mauri, “P = W conjectures for character varieties with symplectic
resolution,” 2022.
[1041] S. Szabo, “P = W conjecture in lowest degree for rank 2 over the 5-punctured sphere,” 2021.
[1042] B. Davison, “Nonabelian Hodge theory for stacks and a stacky P = W conjecture,” 2021.
[1043] W. Y. Chuang, D. E. Diaconescu, and G. Pan, “BPS states and the P = W conjecture,”
Lond. Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 411 (2014) 132–150, arXiv:1202.2039 [hep-th].
94

[1044] W.-y. Chuang, D.-E. Diaconescu, R. Donagi, and T. Pantev, “Parabolic reﬁned invariants and
Macdonald polynomials,” Commun. Math. Phys. 335 no. 3, (2015) 1323–1379,
arXiv:1311.3624 [hep-th].
[1045] D.-E. Diaconescu, R. Donagi, and T. Pantev, “BPS states, torus links and wild character
varieties,” Commun. Math. Phys. 359 no. 3, (2018) 1027–1078,
arXiv:1704.07412 [hep-th].
[1046] W.-y. Chuang, D.-E. Diaconescu, R. Donagi, S. Nawata, and T. Pantev, “Twisted spectral
correspondence and torus knots,” J. Knot Theor. Ramiﬁcations 29 no. 06, (2020) 2050040,
arXiv:1804.08364 [hep-th].
[1047] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, J. Sparks, and D. Waldram, “Supersymmetric AdS(5) solutions
of type IIB supergravity,” Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006) 4693–4718, arXiv:hep-th/0510125.
[1048] J. J. Heckman, D. R. Morrison, and C. Vafa, “On the Classiﬁcation of 6D SCFTs and
Generalized ADE Orbifolds,” JHEP 05 (2014) 028, arXiv:1312.5746 [hep-th]. [Erratum:
JHEP 06, 017 (2015)].
[1049] J. J. Heckman, D. R. Morrison, T. Rudelius, and C. Vafa, “Atomic Classiﬁcation of 6D
SCFTs,” Fortsch. Phys. 63 (2015) 468–530, arXiv:1502.05405 [hep-th].
[1050] L. Bhardwaj, “Classiﬁcation of 6d N = (1, 0) gauge theories,” JHEP 11 (2015) 002,
arXiv:1502.06594 [hep-th].
[1051] P. Jeﬀerson, H.-C. Kim, C. Vafa, and G. Zafrir, “Towards Classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs: Single
Gauge Node,” arXiv:1705.05836 [hep-th].
[1052] P. Jeﬀerson, S. Katz, H.-C. Kim, and C. Vafa, “On Geometric Classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs,”
JHEP 04 (2018) 103, arXiv:1801.04036 [hep-th].
[1053] L. Bhardwaj and P. Jeﬀerson, “Classifying 5d SCFTs via 6d SCFTs: Rank one,”
JHEP 07 (2019) 178, arXiv:1809.01650 [hep-th]. [Addendum: JHEP 01, 153 (2020)].
[1054] L. Bhardwaj and P. Jeﬀerson, “Classifying 5d SCFTs via 6d SCFTs: Arbitrary rank,”
JHEP 10 (2019) 282, arXiv:1811.10616 [hep-th].
[1055] F. Apruzzi, C. Lawrie, L. Lin, S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “Fibers add Flavor, Part
II: 5d SCFTs, Gauge Theories, and Dualities,” JHEP 03 (2020) 052,
arXiv:1909.09128 [hep-th].
[1056] F. Apruzzi, C. Lawrie, L. Lin, S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “Fibers add Flavor, Part
I: Classiﬁcation of 5d SCFTs, Flavor Symmetries and BPS States,” JHEP 11 (2019) 068,
arXiv:1907.05404 [hep-th].
[1057] F. Apruzzi, C. Lawrie, L. Lin, S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “5d Superconformal Field
Theories and Graphs,” Phys. Lett. B 800 (2020) 135077, arXiv:1906.11820 [hep-th].
[1058] L. Bhardwaj, P. Jeﬀerson, H.-C. Kim, H.-C. Tarazi, and C. Vafa, “Twisted Circle
Compactiﬁcations of 6d SCFTs,” JHEP 12 (2020) 151, arXiv:1909.11666 [hep-th].
[1059] N. Seiberg, “Five-dimensional SUSY ﬁeld theories, nontrivial ﬁxed points and string
dynamics,” Phys. Lett. B 388 (1996) 753–760, arXiv:hep-th/9608111.
[1060] D. R. Morrison and N. Seiberg, “Extremal transitions and ﬁve-dimensional supersymmetric
ﬁeld theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 483 (1997) 229–247, arXiv:hep-th/9609070.
[1061] S. Gukov, P.-S. Hsin, and D. Pei, “Generalized global symmetries of T [M] theories. Part I,”
JHEP 04 (2021) 232, arXiv:2010.15890 [hep-th].
[1062] J. J. Heckman and T. Rudelius, “Top Down Approach to 6D SCFTs,”
J. Phys. A 52 no. 9, (2019) 093001, arXiv:1805.06467 [hep-th].
95

[1063] Y. Tachikawa, “Frozen singularities in M and F theory,” JHEP 06 (2016) 128,
arXiv:1508.06679 [hep-th].
[1064] L. Bhardwaj, D. R. Morrison, Y. Tachikawa, and A. Tomasiello, “The frozen phase of
F-theory,” JHEP 08 (2018) 138, arXiv:1805.09070 [hep-th].
[1065] K. A. Intriligator, D. R. Morrison, and N. Seiberg, “Five-dimensional supersymmetric gauge
theories and degenerations of Calabi-Yau spaces,” Nucl. Phys. B 497 (1997) 56–100,
arXiv:hep-th/9702198.
[1066] M. R. Douglas, S. H. Katz, and C. Vafa, “Small instantons, Del Pezzo surfaces and type
I-prime theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 497 (1997) 155–172, arXiv:hep-th/9609071.
[1067] C. Closset, S. Schafer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “Coulomb and Higgs Branches from
Canonical Singularities: Part 0,” JHEP 02 (2021) 003, arXiv:2007.15600 [hep-th].
[1068] C. Closset, S. Giacomelli, S. Schafer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “5d and 4d SCFTs: Canonical
Singularities, Trinions and S-Dualities,” JHEP 05 (2021) 274, arXiv:2012.12827 [hep-th].
[1069] C. Closset, S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “Coulomb and Higgs branches from canonical
singularities. Part I. Hypersurfaces with smooth Calabi-Yau resolutions,”
JHEP 04 (2022) 061, arXiv:2111.13564 [hep-th].
[1070] K. Matsuki, Introduction to the Mori program. Universitext. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-5602-9.
[1071] A. Collinucci, M. De Marco, A. Sangiovanni, and R. Valandro, “Higgs branches of 5d rank-zero
theories from geometry,” JHEP 10 no. 18, (2021) 018, arXiv:2105.12177 [hep-th].
[1072] F. Benini, S. Benvenuti, and Y. Tachikawa, “Webs of ﬁve-branes and N=2 superconformal
ﬁeld theories,” JHEP 09 (2009) 052, arXiv:0906.0359 [hep-th].
[1073] S. Cabrera, A. Hanany, and F. Yagi, “Tropical Geometry and Five Dimensional Higgs
Branches at Inﬁnite Coupling,” JHEP 01 (2019) 068, arXiv:1810.01379 [hep-th].
[1074] M. Van Beest, A. Bourget, J. Eckhard, and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “(5d RG-ﬂow) Trees in the
Tropical Rain Forest,” JHEP 03 (2021) 241, arXiv:2011.07033 [hep-th].
[1075] A. D. Shapere and C. Vafa, “BPS structure of Argyres-Douglas superconformal theories,”
arXiv:hep-th/9910182.
[1076] D. Xie and S.-T. Yau, “4d N=2 SCFT and singularity theory Part I: Classiﬁcation,”
arXiv:1510.01324 [hep-th].
[1077] B. Chen, D. Xie, S.-T. Yau, S. S. T. Yau, and H. Zuo, “4D N = 2 SCFT and singularity
theory. Part II: complete intersection,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 21 (2017) 121–145,
arXiv:1604.07843 [hep-th].
[1078] Y. Wang, D. Xie, S. S. T. Yau, and S.-T. Yau, “4d N = 2 SCFT from complete intersection
singularity,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 21 (2017) 801–855, arXiv:1606.06306 [hep-th].
[1079] B. Chen, D. Xie, S. S. T. Yau, S.-T. Yau, and H. Zuo, “4d N = 2 SCFT and singularity
theory Part III: Rigid singularity,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 22 (2018) 1885–1905,
arXiv:1712.00464 [hep-th].
[1080] Cabrera, S. and Hanany, A. and Sperling, M., “Magnetic quivers, Higgs branches, and 6d
N = (1, 0) theories,” JHEP 06 (2019) 071, arXiv:1904.12293 [hep-th]. [Erratum: JHEP
07, 137 (2019)].
[1081] A. Bourget, S. Cabrera, J. F. Grimminger, A. Hanany, M. Sperling, A. Zajac, and Z. Zhong,
“The Higgs mechanism — Hasse diagrams for symplectic singularities,” JHEP 01 (2020) 157,
arXiv:1908.04245 [hep-th].
96

[1082] A. Bourget, S. Cabrera, J. F. Grimminger, A. Hanany, and Z. Zhong, “Brane Webs and
Magnetic Quivers for SQCD,” JHEP 03 (2020) 176, arXiv:1909.00667 [hep-th].
[1083] F. Benini and A. Zaﬀaroni, “A topologically twisted index for three-dimensional
supersymmetric theories,” JHEP 07 (2015) 127, arXiv:1504.03698 [hep-th].
[1084] F. Benini and A. Zaﬀaroni, “Supersymmetric partition functions on Riemann surfaces,” Proc.
Symp. Pure Math. 96 (2017) 13–46, arXiv:1605.06120 [hep-th].
[1085] S. Cremonesi, A. Hanany, and A. Zaﬀaroni, “Monopole operators and Hilbert series of
Coulomb branches of 3d N = 4 gauge theories,” JHEP 01 (2014) 005,
arXiv:1309.2657 [hep-th].
[1086] S. S. Razamat and B. Willett, “Down the rabbit hole with theories of class S,”
JHEP 10 (2014) 099, arXiv:1403.6107 [hep-th].
[1087] M. Bullimore, T. Dimofte, and D. Gaiotto, “The Coulomb Branch of 3d N = 4 Theories,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 354 no. 2, (2017) 671–751, arXiv:1503.04817 [hep-th].
[1088] H. Nakajima, “Towards a mathematical deﬁnition of Coulomb branches of 3-dimensional
N = 4 gauge theories, I,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 20 (2016) 595–669,
arXiv:1503.03676 [math-ph].
[1089] A. Braverman, M. Finkelberg, and H. Nakajima, “Towards a mathematical deﬁnition of
Coulomb branches of 3-dimensional N = 4 gauge theories, II,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 22 (2018) 1071–1147, arXiv:1601.03586 [math.RT].
[1090] D. R. Morrison, S. Schafer-Nameki, and B. Willett, “Higher-Form Symmetries in 5d,”
JHEP 09 (2020) 024, arXiv:2005.12296 [hep-th].
[1091] I. n. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, B. Heidenreich, and D. Regalado, “IIB ﬂux non-commutativity and
the global structure of ﬁeld theories,” JHEP 10 (2019) 169, arXiv:1908.08027 [hep-th].
[1092] L. Bhardwaj and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “Higher-form symmetries of 6d and 5d theories,”
JHEP 02 (2021) 159, arXiv:2008.09600 [hep-th].
[1093] F. Albertini, M. Del Zotto, I. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, and S. S. Hosseini, “Higher Form
Symmetries and M-theory,” JHEP 12 (2020) 203, arXiv:2005.12831 [hep-th].
[1094] F. Apruzzi, L. Bhardwaj, D. S. W. Gould, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “2-Group symmetries and
their classiﬁcation in 6d,” SciPost Phys. 12 no. 3, (2022) 098, arXiv:2110.14647 [hep-th].
[1095] M. Cvetic, M. Dierigl, L. Lin, and H. Y. Zhang, “Higher-form symmetries and their anomalies
in M-/F-theory duality,” Phys. Rev. D 104 no. 12, (2021) 126019,
arXiv:2106.07654 [hep-th].
[1096] M. Hubner, D. R. Morrison, S. Schafer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, “Generalized Symmetries in
F-theory and the Topology of Elliptic Fibrations,” SciPost Phys. 13 no. 2, (2022) 030,
arXiv:2203.10022 [hep-th].
[1097] M. Del Zotto, J. J. Heckman, S. N. Meynet, R. Moscrop, and H. Y. Zhang, “Higher
symmetries of 5D orbifold SCFTs,” Phys. Rev. D 106 no. 4, (2022) 046010,
arXiv:2201.08372 [hep-th].
[1098] M. Cvetiˇc, J. J. Heckman, M. H¨ubner, and E. Torres, “0-Form, 1-Form and 2-Group
Symmetries via Cutting and Gluing of Orbifolds,” arXiv:2203.10102 [hep-th].
[1099] M. Del Zotto, I. n. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “2-Group Symmetries and
M-Theory,” arXiv:2203.10097 [hep-th].
[1100] J. Cheeger and J. Simons, “Diﬀerential characters and geometric invariants,” in Geometry and
topology (College Park, Md., 1983/84), vol. 1167 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 50–80.
Springer, Berlin, 1985. https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0075216.
97

[1101] G. W. Moore and E. Witten, “Selfduality, Ramond-Ramond ﬁelds, and K theory,”
JHEP 05 (2000) 032, arXiv:hep-th/9912279.
[1102] F. Apruzzi, F. Bonetti, I. n. G. Etxebarria, S. S. Hosseini, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “Symmetry
TFTs from String Theory,” arXiv:2112.02092 [hep-th].
[1103] Bah, I. and Bonetti, F. and Minasian, R. and Nardoni, E., “Class S Anomalies from M-theory
Inﬂow,” Phys. Rev. D 99 no. 8, (2019) 086020, arXiv:1812.04016 [hep-th].
[1104] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and E. Nardoni, “Anomaly Inﬂow for M5-branes on
Punctured Riemann Surfaces,” JHEP 06 (2019) 123, arXiv:1904.07250 [hep-th].
[1105] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and E. Nardoni, “Anomalies of QFTs from M-theory and
Holography,” JHEP 01 (2020) 125, arXiv:1910.04166 [hep-th].
[1106] I. Bah and F. Bonetti, “Anomaly Inﬂow, Accidental Symmetry, and Spontaneous Symmetry
Breaking,” JHEP 01 (2020) 117, arXiv:1910.07549 [hep-th].
[1107] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and P. Weck, “Anomaly Inﬂow Methods for SCFT
Constructions in Type IIB,” JHEP 02 (2021) 116, arXiv:2002.10466 [hep-th].
[1108] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, and R. Minasian, “Discrete and higher-form symmetries in SCFTs from
wrapped M5-branes,” JHEP 03 (2021) 196, arXiv:2007.15003 [hep-th].
[1109] O. Bergman, Y. Tachikawa, and G. Zafrir, “Generalized symmetries and holography in
ABJM-type theories,” JHEP 07 (2020) 077, arXiv:2004.05350 [hep-th].
[1110] D. Gaiotto and J. Kulp, “Orbifold groupoids,” JHEP 02 (2021) 132,
arXiv:2008.05960 [hep-th].
[1111] J. J. Heckman, M. H¨ubner, E. Torres, and H. Y. Zhang, “The Branes Behind Generalized
Symmetry Operators,” arXiv:2209.03343 [hep-th].
[1112] B. Heidenreich, J. McNamara, M. Montero, M. Reece, T. Rudelius, and I. Valenzuela,
“Non-Invertible Global Symmetries and Completeness of the Spectrum,”
JHEP 09 (2021) 203, arXiv:2104.07036 [hep-th].
[1113] P. Candelas, G. T. Horowitz, A. Strominger, and E. Witten, “Vacuum Conﬁgurations for
Superstrings,” Nucl. Phys. B 258 (1985) 46–74.
[1114] S. Donaldson and G. E. Segal, “Gauge Theory in higher dimensions, II,”
arXiv:0902.3239 [math.DG].
[1115] D. Joyce, “Conjectures on counting associative 3-folds in G2-manifolds,”
arXiv:1610.09836 [math.DG].
[1116] A. Doan and T. Walpuski, “On counting associative submanifolds and Seiberg-Witten
monopoles,” Pure Appl. Math. Quart. 15 no. 4, (2019) 1047–1133,
arXiv:1712.08383 [math.DG].
[1117] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “Superpotentials and membrane instantons,”
arXiv:hep-th/9907026.
[1118] J. Halverson and D. R. Morrison, “The landscape of M-theory compactiﬁcations on
seven-manifolds with G2 holonomy,” JHEP 04 (2015) 047, arXiv:1412.4123 [hep-th].
[1119] A. P. Braun, M. Del Zotto, J. Halverson, M. Larfors, D. R. Morrison, and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki,
“Inﬁnitely many M2-instanton corrections to M-theory on G2-manifolds,”
JHEP 09 (2018) 077, arXiv:1803.02343 [hep-th].
[1120] B. S. Acharya, A. P. Braun, E. E. Svanes, and R. Valandro, “Counting associatives in
compact G2 orbifolds,” JHEP 03 (2019) 138, arXiv:1812.04008 [hep-th].
98

[1121] S. Donaldson, “Some recent developments in K¨ahler geometry and exceptional holonomy,” in
Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians—Rio de Janeiro 2018. Vol. I.
Plenary lectures, pp. 425–451. World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2018.
[1122] M. Atiyah and E. Witten, “M-theory dynamics on a manifold of G2 holonomy,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 6 (2003) 1–106, arXiv:hep-th/0107177.
[1123] M. Atiyah, J. M. Maldacena, and C. Vafa, “An M-theory ﬂop as a large N-duality,”
J. Math. Phys. 42 (2001) 3209–3220, arXiv:hep-th/0011256.
[1124] B. S. Acharya and E. Witten, “Chiral fermions from manifolds of G2 holonomy,”
arXiv:hep-th/0109152.
[1125] D. Joyce, “Compact manifolds with exceptional holonomy,” in Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. II (Berlin, 1998), no. Extra Vol. II, pp. 361–370. 1998.
[1126] D. Joyce, “Compact Riemannian manifolds with exceptional holonomy,” in Surveys in
diﬀerential geometry: essays on Einstein manifolds, vol. 6 of Surv. Diﬀer. Geom., pp. 39–65.
Int. Press, Boston, MA, 1999.
https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.4310/SDG.2001.v6.n1.a3.
[1127] A. Corti, M. Haskins, J. Nordstr¨om, and T. Pacini, “G2-manifolds and associative
submanifolds via semi-Fano 3-folds,” Duke Math. J. 164 no. 10, (2015) 1971–2092,
arXiv:1207.4470 [math.DG].
[1128] A. P. Braun and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “Compact, Singular G2-Holonomy Manifolds and
M/Heterotic/F-Theory Duality,” JHEP 04 (2018) 126, arXiv:1708.07215 [hep-th].
[1129] T. Pantev and M. Wijnholt, “Hitchin’s Equations and M-Theory Phenomenology,”
J. Geom. Phys. 61 (2011) 1223–1247, arXiv:0905.1968 [hep-th].
[1130] A. P. Braun, S. Cizel, M. H¨ubner, and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “Higgs bundles for M-theory on
G2-manifolds,” JHEP 03 (2019) 199, arXiv:1812.06072 [hep-th].
[1131] R. Barbosa, M. Cvetiˇc, J. J. Heckman, C. Lawrie, E. Torres, and G. Zoccarato, “T-branes and
G2 backgrounds,” Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 2, (2020) 026015, arXiv:1906.02212 [hep-th].
[1132] M. Cvetiˇc, J. J. Heckman, T. B. Rochais, E. Torres, and G. Zoccarato, “Geometric uniﬁcation
of Higgs bundle vacua,” Phys. Rev. D 102 no. 10, (2020) 106012,
arXiv:2003.13682 [hep-th].
[1133] E. Witten, “String theory dynamics in various dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 443 (1995) 85–126,
arXiv:hep-th/9503124.
[1134] L. Foscolo, M. Haskins, and J. Nordstr¨om, “Inﬁnitely many new families of complete
cohomogeneity one G2-manifolds: G2 analogues of the Taub-NUT and Eguchi-Hanson
spaces,” arXiv:1805.02612 [math.DG].
[1135] B. S. Acharya, L. Foscolo, M. Najjar, and E. E. Svanes, “New G2-conifolds in M-theory and
their ﬁeld theory interpretation,” JHEP 05 (2021) 250, arXiv:2011.06998 [hep-th].
[1136] D. Joyce, “A new construction of compact 8-manifolds with holonomy Spin(7),” J. Diﬀ.
Geom. 53 no. 1, (1999) 89–130, arXiv:math/9910002.
[1137] A. P. Braun and S. Sch¨afer-Nameki, “Spin(7)-manifolds as generalized connected sums and 3d
N = 1 theories,” JHEP 06 (2018) 103, arXiv:1803.10755 [hep-th].
[1138] M. Cvetiˇc, J. J. Heckman, E. Torres, and G. Zoccarato, “Reﬂections on the matter of 3D N=1
vacua and local Spin(7) compactiﬁcations,” Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 2, (2022) 026008,
arXiv:2107.00025 [hep-th].
[1139] N. Seiberg, “Electric - magnetic duality in supersymmetric non-Abelian gauge theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 435 (1995) 129–146, arXiv:hep-th/9411149.
99

[1140] R. G. Leigh and M. J. Strassler, “Exactly marginal operators and duality in four-dimensional
N=1 supersymmetric gauge theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 447 (1995) 95–136,
arXiv:hep-th/9503121.
[1141] D. Green, Z. Komargodski, N. Seiberg, Y. Tachikawa, and B. Wecht, “Exactly Marginal
Deformations and Global Symmetries,” JHEP 06 (2010) 106, arXiv:1005.3546 [hep-th].
[1142] S. S. Razamat, E. Sabag, and G. Zafrir, “Weakly coupled conformal manifolds in 4d,”
JHEP 06 (2020) 179, arXiv:2004.07097 [hep-th].
[1143] S. S. Razamat, O. Sela, and G. Zafrir, “Between Symmetry and Duality in Supersymmetric
Quantum Field Theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 no. 7, (2018) 071604,
arXiv:1711.02789 [hep-th].
[1144] T. Dimofte and D. Gaiotto, “An E7 Surprise,” JHEP 10 (2012) 129,
arXiv:1209.1404 [hep-th].
[1145] S. S. Razamat, O. Sela, and G. Zafrir, “Curious patterns of IR symmetry enhancement,”
JHEP 10 (2018) 163, arXiv:1809.00541 [hep-th].
[1146] O. Sela and G. Zafrir, “Symmetry enhancement in 4d Spin(n) gauge theories and
compactiﬁcation from 6d,” JHEP 12 (2019) 052, arXiv:1910.03629 [hep-th].
[1147] K. Maruyoshi and J. Song, “Enhancement of Supersymmetry via Renormalization Group
Flow and the Superconformal Index,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 no. 15, (2017) 151602,
arXiv:1606.05632 [hep-th].
[1148] P. Agarwal, K. Maruyoshi, and J. Song, “N =1 Deformations and RG ﬂows of N =2 SCFTs,
part II: non-principal deformations,” JHEP 12 (2016) 103, arXiv:1610.05311 [hep-th].
[Addendum: JHEP 04, 113 (2017)].
[1149] V. Niarchos, “Seiberg dualities and the 3d/4d connection,” JHEP 07 (2012) 075,
arXiv:1205.2086 [hep-th].
[1150] O. Aharony, S. S. Razamat, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, “3d dualities from 4d dualities,”
JHEP 07 (2013) 149, arXiv:1305.3924 [hep-th].
[1151] O. Aharony, S. S. Razamat, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, “3d dualities from 4d dualities for
orthogonal groups,” JHEP 08 (2013) 099, arXiv:1307.0511 [hep-th].
[1152] J. Park and K.-J. Park, “Seiberg-like Dualities for 3d N = 2 Theories with SU(N) gauge
group,” JHEP 10 (2013) 198, arXiv:1305.6280 [hep-th].
[1153] F. A. H. Dolan, V. P. Spiridonov, and G. S. Vartanov, “From 4d superconformal indices to 3d
partition functions,” Phys. Lett. B 704 (2011) 234–241, arXiv:1104.1787 [hep-th].
[1154] A. Gadde and W. Yan, “Reducing the 4d Index to the S3 Partition Function,”
JHEP 12 (2012) 003, arXiv:1104.2592 [hep-th].
[1155] S. Pasquetti, S. S. Razamat, M. Sacchi, and G. Zafrir, “Rank Q E-string on a torus with
ﬂux,” SciPost Phys. 8 no. 1, (2020) 014, arXiv:1908.03278 [hep-th].
[1156] C. Hwang, S. Pasquetti, and M. Sacchi, “4d mirror-like dualities,” JHEP 09 (2020) 047,
arXiv:2002.12897 [hep-th].
[1157] L. E. Bottini, C. Hwang, S. Pasquetti, and M. Sacchi, “4d S-duality wall and SL(2, Z)
relations,” arXiv:2110.08001 [hep-th].
[1158] K. Nii, “3d duality with adjoint matter from 4d duality,” JHEP 02 (2015) 024,
arXiv:1409.3230 [hep-th].
[1159] O. Aharony, “IR duality in d = 3 N=2 supersymmetric USp(2N(c)) and U(N(c)) gauge
theories,” Phys. Lett. B 404 (1997) 71–76, arXiv:hep-th/9703215.
100

[1160] A. Giveon and D. Kutasov, “Seiberg Duality in Chern-Simons Theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B 812 (2009) 1–11, arXiv:0808.0360 [hep-th].
[1161] K. Hori and D. Tong, “Aspects of Non-Abelian Gauge Dynamics in Two-Dimensional
N = (2, 2) Theories,” JHEP 05 (2007) 079, arXiv:hep-th/0609032.
[1162] A. Gadde, S. Gukov, and P. Putrov, “(0, 2)-trialities,” JHEP 03 (2014) 076,
arXiv:1310.0818 [hep-th].
[1163] K. Hori and C. Vafa, “Mirror symmetry,” arXiv:hep-th/0002222.
[1164] D. Jaﬀeris and X. Yin, “A Duality Appetizer,” arXiv:1103.5700 [hep-th].
[1165] M. Aganagic, K. Hori, A. Karch, and D. Tong, “Mirror symmetry in (2+1)-dimensions and
(1+1)-dimensions,” JHEP 07 (2001) 022, arXiv:hep-th/0105075.
[1166] A. Gadde, S. S. Razamat, and B. Willett, “On the reduction of 4d N = 1 theories on S2,”
JHEP 11 (2015) 163, arXiv:1506.08795 [hep-th].
[1167] M. Dedushenko and S. Gukov, “IR duality in 2D N = (0, 2) gauge theory with noncompact
dynamics,” Phys. Rev. D 99 no. 6, (2019) 066005, arXiv:1712.07659 [hep-th].
[1168] M. Sacchi, “New 2d N = (0, 2) dualities from four dimensions,” JHEP 12 (2020) 009,
arXiv:2004.13672 [hep-th].
[1169] O. Aharony, S. S. Razamat, and B. Willett, “From 3d duality to 2d duality,”
JHEP 11 (2017) 090, arXiv:1710.00926 [hep-th].
[1170] W. Nahm, “Supersymmetries and their Representations,” Nucl. Phys. B 135 (1978) 149.
[1171] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, “Deformations of Superconformal
Theories,” JHEP 11 (2016) 135, arXiv:1602.01217 [hep-th].
[1172] F. Benini, Y. Tachikawa, and B. Wecht, “Sicilian gauge theories and N=1 dualities,”
JHEP 01 (2010) 088, arXiv:0909.1327 [hep-th].
[1173] I. Bah and B. Wecht, “New N=1 Superconformal Field Theories In Four Dimensions,”
JHEP 07 (2013) 107, arXiv:1111.3402 [hep-th].
[1174] I. Bah, C. Beem, N. Bobev, and B. Wecht, “AdS/CFT Dual Pairs from M5-Branes on
Riemann Surfaces,” Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 121901, arXiv:1112.5487 [hep-th].
[1175] I. Bah, C. Beem, N. Bobev, and B. Wecht, “Four-Dimensional SCFTs from M5-Branes,”
JHEP 06 (2012) 005, arXiv:1203.0303 [hep-th].
[1176] D. Gaiotto and S. S. Razamat, “N = 1 theories of class Sk,” JHEP 07 (2015) 073,
arXiv:1503.05159 [hep-th].
[1177] H.-C. Kim, S. S. Razamat, C. Vafa, and G. Zafrir, “E-String Theory on Riemann Surfaces,”
Fortsch. Phys. 66 no. 1, (2018) 1700074, arXiv:1709.02496 [hep-th].
[1178] H.-C. Kim, S. S. Razamat, C. Vafa, and G. Zafrir, “D-type Conformal Matter and SU/USp
Quivers,” JHEP 06 (2018) 058, arXiv:1802.00620 [hep-th].
[1179] S. S. Razamat and G. Zafrir, “Compactiﬁcation of 6d minimal SCFTs on Riemann surfaces,”
Phys. Rev. D 98 no. 6, (2018) 066006, arXiv:1806.09196 [hep-th].
[1180] H.-C. Kim, S. S. Razamat, C. Vafa, and G. Zafrir, “Compactiﬁcations of ADE conformal
matter on a torus,” JHEP 09 (2018) 110, arXiv:1806.07620 [hep-th].
[1181] S. S. Razamat and E. Sabag, “SQCD and pairs of pants,” JHEP 09 (2020) 028,
arXiv:2006.03480 [hep-th].
[1182] B. Nazzal, A. Nedelin, and S. S. Razamat, “Minimal (D, D) conformal matter and
generalizations of the van Diejen model,” arXiv:2106.08335 [hep-th].
101

[1183] C. Hwang, S. S. Razamat, E. Sabag, and M. Sacchi, “Rank Q E-String on Spheres with Flux,”
arXiv:2103.09149 [hep-th].
[1184] M. Sacchi, O. Sela, and G. Zafrir, “Compactifying 5d superconformal ﬁeld theories to 3d,”
JHEP 09 (2021) 149, arXiv:2105.01497 [hep-th].
[1185] M. Sacchi, O. Sela, and G. Zafrir, “On the 3d compactiﬁcations of 5d SCFTs associated with
SU(N+1) gauge theories,” arXiv:2111.12745 [hep-th].
[1186] K. Ohmori, H. Shimizu, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, “6d N = (1, 0) theories on T 2 and
class S theories: Part I,” JHEP 07 (2015) 014, arXiv:1503.06217 [hep-th].
[1187] K. Ohmori, H. Shimizu, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, “6d N = (1, 0) theories on S1 /T2
and class S theories: part II,” JHEP 12 (2015) 131, arXiv:1508.00915 [hep-th].
[1188] F. Baume, M. J. Kang, and C. Lawrie, “Two 6d origins of 4d SCFTs: class S and 6d (1,0) on
a torus,” arXiv:2106.11990 [hep-th].
[1189] J. A. Minahan and D. Nemeschansky, “An N=2 superconformal ﬁxed point with E(6) global
symmetry,” Nucl. Phys. B 482 (1996) 142–152, arXiv:hep-th/9608047.
[1190] I. n. G. Etxebarria, B. Heidenreich, M. Lotito, and A. K. Sorout, “Deconﬁning N = 2 SCFTs,
or the Art of Brane Bending,” arXiv:2111.08022 [hep-th].
[1191] A. Gadde, S. S. Razamat, and B. Willett, “”Lagrangian” for a Non-Lagrangian Field Theory
with N = 2 Supersymmetry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 no. 17, (2015) 171604,
arXiv:1505.05834 [hep-th].
[1192] S. S. Razamat and E. Sabag, “Sequences of 6d SCFTs on generic Riemann surfaces,”
JHEP 01 (2020) 086, arXiv:1910.03603 [hep-th].
[1193] S. S. Razamat, C. Vafa, and G. Zafrir, “4d N = 1 from 6d (1, 0),” JHEP 04 (2017) 064,
arXiv:1610.09178 [hep-th].
[1194] P. Agarwal, K. Maruyoshi, and J. Song, “A “Lagrangian” for the E7 superconformal theory,”
JHEP 05 (2018) 193, arXiv:1802.05268 [hep-th].
[1195] N. Arkani-Hamed, A. G. Cohen, D. B. Kaplan, A. Karch, and L. Motl, “Deconstructing (2,0)
and little string theories,” JHEP 01 (2003) 083, arXiv:hep-th/0110146.
[1196] J. Hayling, R. Panerai, and C. Papageorgakis, “Deconstructing Little Strings with N = 1
Gauge Theories on Ellipsoids,” SciPost Phys. 4 no. 6, (2018) 042,
arXiv:1803.06177 [hep-th].
[1197] J. Hayling, C. Papageorgakis, E. Pomoni, and D. Rodr´ıguez-G´omez, “Exact Deconstruction of
the 6D (2,0) Theory,” JHEP 06 (2017) 072, arXiv:1704.02986 [hep-th].
[1198] C. Beem and A. Gadde, “The N = 1 superconformal index for class S ﬁxed points,”
JHEP 04 (2014) 036, arXiv:1212.1467 [hep-th].
[1199] C. Beem, S. S. Razamat, and G. Zafrir, “to appear,” (See S. S. Razamat, “Geometrization of
relevance”, talk at ‘Avant-garde methods for quantum ﬁeld theory and gravity, Nazareth 2/2019
(https://phsites.technion.ac.il/the-ﬁfth-israeli-indian-conference-on-string-theory/program/) .
[1200] M. Baggio, N. Bobev, S. M. Chester, E. Lauria, and S. S. Pufu, “Decoding a
Three-Dimensional Conformal Manifold,” JHEP 02 (2018) 062,
arXiv:1712.02698 [hep-th].
[1201] C. Bachas, I. Lavdas, and B. Le Floch, “Marginal Deformations of 3d N = 4 Linear Quiver
Theories,” JHEP 10 (2019) 253, arXiv:1905.06297 [hep-th].
[1202] E. Beratto, N. Mekareeya, and M. Sacchi, “Marginal operators and supersymmetry
enhancement in 3d S-fold SCFTs,” JHEP 12 (2020) 017, arXiv:2009.10123 [hep-th].
102

[1203] P. Argyres, M. Lotito, Y. L¨u, and M. Martone, “Geometric constraints on the space of N = 2
SCFTs. Part I: physical constraints on relevant deformations,” JHEP 02 (2018) 001,
arXiv:1505.04814 [hep-th].
[1204] Argyres, P. and Lotito, M. and L¨u, Y. and Martone, M., “Geometric constraints on the space
of N = 2 SCFTs. Part II: construction of special K¨ahler geometries and RG ﬂows,”
JHEP 02 (2018) 002, arXiv:1601.00011 [hep-th].
[1205] P. C. Argyres, Y. L¨u, and M. Martone, “Seiberg-Witten geometries for Coulomb branch chiral
rings which are not freely generated,” JHEP 06 (2017) 144, arXiv:1704.05110 [hep-th].
[1206] P. C. Argyres, C. Long, and M. Martone, “The Singularity Structure of Scale-Invariant
Rank-2 Coulomb Branches,” JHEP 05 (2018) 086, arXiv:1801.01122 [hep-th].
[1207] P. C. Argyres, A. Bourget, and M. Martone, “Classiﬁcation of all N ≥3 moduli space orbifold
geometries at rank 2,” SciPost Phys. 9 no. 6, (2020) 083, arXiv:1904.10969 [hep-th].
[1208] P. C. Argyres and M. Martone, “Towards a classiﬁcation of rank r N = 2 SCFTs. Part II.
Special K¨ahler stratiﬁcation of the Coulomb branch,” JHEP 12 (2020) 022,
arXiv:2007.00012 [hep-th].
[1209] M. Martone, “Testing our understanding of SCFTs: a catalogue of rank-2 N=2 theories in
four dimensions,” arXiv:2102.02443 [hep-th].
[1210] E. Gerchkovitz, J. Gomis, N. Ishtiaque, A. Karasik, Z. Komargodski, and S. S. Pufu,
“Correlation Functions of Coulomb Branch Operators,” JHEP 01 (2017) 103,
arXiv:1602.05971 [hep-th].
[1211] A. Bourget, J. F. Grimminger, A. Hanany, M. Sperling, G. Zafrir, and Z. Zhong, “Magnetic
quivers for rank 1 theories,” JHEP 09 (2020) 189, arXiv:2006.16994 [hep-th].
[1212] M. van Beest, A. Bourget, J. Eckhard, and S. Schafer-Nameki, “(Symplectic) Leaves and (5d
Higgs) Branches in the Poly(go)nesian Tropical Rain Forest,” JHEP 11 (2020) 124,
arXiv:2008.05577 [hep-th].
[1213] S. S. Razamat, E. Sabag, and G. Zafrir, “From 6d ﬂows to 4d ﬂows,” JHEP 12 (2019) 108,
arXiv:1907.04870 [hep-th].
[1214] E. M. Rains, “Transformations of elliptic hypergeometric integrals,”
Ann. of Math. (2) 171 no. 1, (2010) 169–243, arXiv:math/0309252 [math].
[1215] S. Ruijsenaars, “On Razamat’s A2 and A3 kernel identities,”
J. Phys. A 53 no. 33, (2020) 334002, arXiv:2003.11353 [math-ph].
[1216] S. S. Razamat, “Flavored surface defects in 4d N = 1 SCFTs,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 109 no. 6, (2019) 1377–1395, arXiv:1808.09509 [hep-th].
[1217] E. M. Rains, “Multivariate Quadratic Transformations and the Interpolation Kernel,”
SIGMA 14 (2018) 019, arXiv:1408.0305 [math.CA].
[1218] F. J. van de Bult, “Hyperbolic hypergeometric functions,”.
http://math.caltech.edu/~vdbult/Thesis.pdf.
[1219] F. Benini, C. Closset, and S. Cremonesi, “Comments on 3d Seiberg-like dualities,”
JHEP 10 (2011) 075, arXiv:1108.5373 [hep-th].
[1220] F. J. van de Bult, “An elliptic hypergeometric integral with W(F4) symmetry,”
Ramanujan J. 25 no. 1, (2011) 1–20.
[1221] A. Gadde, E. Pomoni, L. Rastelli, and S. S. Razamat, “S-duality and 2d Topological QFT,”
JHEP 03 (2010) 032, arXiv:0910.2225 [hep-th].
103

[1222] L. F. Alday, D. Gaiotto, S. Gukov, Y. Tachikawa, and H. Verlinde, “Loop and surface
operators in N=2 gauge theory and Liouville modular geometry,” JHEP 01 (2010) 113,
arXiv:0909.0945 [hep-th].
[1223] N. Drukker, D. R. Morrison, and T. Okuda, “Loop operators and S-duality from curves on
Riemann surfaces,” JHEP 09 (2009) 031, arXiv:0907.2593 [hep-th].
[1224] C. Kozcaz, S. Pasquetti, and N. Wyllard, “A & B model approaches to surface operators and
Toda theories,” JHEP 08 (2010) 042, arXiv:1004.2025 [hep-th].
[1225] T. Dimofte, S. Gukov, and L. Hollands, “Vortex Counting and Lagrangian 3-manifolds,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 98 (2011) 225–287, arXiv:1006.0977 [hep-th].
[1226] B. Le Floch, “A slow review of the AGT correspondence,” arXiv:2006.14025 [hep-th].
[1227] D. Gaiotto, L. Rastelli, and S. S. Razamat, “Bootstrapping the superconformal index with
surface defects,” JHEP 01 (2013) 022, arXiv:1207.3577 [hep-th].
[1228] K. Maruyoshi and J. Yagi, “Surface defects as transfer matrices,”
PTEP 2016 no. 11, (2016) 113B01, arXiv:1606.01041 [hep-th].
[1229] J. Yagi, “Surface defects and elliptic quantum groups,” JHEP 06 (2017) 013,
arXiv:1701.05562 [hep-th].
[1230] B. Nazzal and S. S. Razamat, “Surface Defects in E-String Compactiﬁcations and the van
Diejen Model,” SIGMA 14 (2018) 036, arXiv:1801.00960 [hep-th].
[1231] J. Chen, B. Haghighat, H.-C. Kim, and M. Sperling, “Elliptic quantum curves of class Sk,”
JHEP 03 (2021) 028, arXiv:2008.05155 [hep-th].
[1232] J. Chen, B. Haghighat, H.-C. Kim, M. Sperling, and X. Wang, “E-string quantum curve,”
Nucl. Phys. B 973 (2021) 115602, arXiv:2103.16996 [hep-th].
[1233] J. Chen, B. Haghighat, H.-C. Kim, K. Lee, M. Sperling, and X. Wang, “Elliptic Quantum
Curves of 6d SO(N) theories,” arXiv:2110.13487 [hep-th].
[1234] M. Buican, L. Li, and T. Nishinaka, “Peculiar Index Relations, 2D TQFT, and Universality of
SUSY Enhancement,” JHEP 01 (2020) 187, arXiv:1907.01579 [hep-th].
[1235] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, J. Sparks, and D. Waldram, “Supersymmetric AdS5 solutions of
M-theory,” Class. Quant. Grav. 21 (2004) 4335–4366, arXiv:hep-th/0402153.
[1236] I. Bah, “Quarter-BPS AdS5 solutions in M-theory with a T 2 bundle over a Riemann surface,”
JHEP 08 (2013) 137, arXiv:1304.4954 [hep-th].
[1237] I. Bah, “AdS5 solutions from M5-branes on Riemann surface and D6-branes sources,”
JHEP 09 (2015) 163, arXiv:1501.06072 [hep-th].
[1238] I. Bah, A. Passias, and A. Tomasiello, “AdS5 compactiﬁcations with punctures in massive IIA
supergravity,” JHEP 11 (2017) 050, arXiv:1704.07389 [hep-th].
[1239] J. M. Maldacena and C. Nunez, “Supergravity description of ﬁeld theories on curved manifolds
and a no go theorem,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16 (2001) 822–855, arXiv:hep-th/0007018.
[1240] P. Ferrero, J. P. Gauntlett, J. M. P´erez Ipi˜na, D. Martelli, and J. Sparks, “D3-Branes
Wrapped on a Spindle,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 no. 11, (2021) 111601,
arXiv:2011.10579 [hep-th].
[1241] F. Faedo and D. Martelli, “D4-branes wrapped on a spindle,” arXiv:2111.13660 [hep-th].
[1242] P. Ferrero, J. P. Gauntlett, and J. Sparks, “Supersymmetric spindles,” JHEP 01 (2022) 102,
arXiv:2112.01543 [hep-th].
104

[1243] P. Ferrero, J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, and J. Sparks, “M5-branes wrapped on a spindle,”
JHEP 11 (2021) 002, arXiv:2105.13344 [hep-th].
[1244] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and E. Nardoni, “M5-brane sources, holography, and
Argyres-Douglas theories,” JHEP 11 (2021) 140, arXiv:2106.01322 [hep-th].
[1245] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and E. Nardoni, “Holographic Duals of Argyres-Douglas
Theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 no. 21, (2021) 211601, arXiv:2105.11567 [hep-th].
[1246] C. Couzens, K. Stemerdink, and D. van de Heisteeg, “M2-branes on Discs and Multi-Charged
Spindles,” arXiv:2110.00571 [hep-th].
[1247] M. Suh, “D4-D8-branes wrapped on a manifold with non-constant curvature,”
arXiv:2108.08326 [hep-th].
[1248] C. Couzens, “A tale of (M)2 twists,” arXiv:2112.04462 [hep-th].
[1249] P. Karndumri and P. Nuchino, “Five-branes wrapped on topological disks from 7D N =2
gauged supergravity,” arXiv:2201.05037 [hep-th].
[1250] M. Suh, “M2-branes wrapped on a topological disc,” arXiv:2109.13278 [hep-th].
[1251] J. P. Gauntlett, “Branes, calibrations and supergravity,” Clay Math. Proc. 3 (2004) 79–126,
arXiv:hep-th/0305074.
[1252] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, S. Pakis, and D. Waldram, “G-structures and wrapped
NS5-branes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 247 (2004) 421–445, arXiv:hep-th/0205050.
[1253] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, J. Sparks, and D. Waldram, “Supersymmetric AdS backgrounds
in string and M-theory,” IRMA Lect. Math. Theor. Phys. 8 (2005) 217–252,
arXiv:hep-th/0411194.
[1254] J. P. Gauntlett, O. A. P. Mac Conamhna, T. Mateos, and D. Waldram, “AdS spacetimes from
wrapped M5 branes,” JHEP 11 (2006) 053, arXiv:hep-th/0605146.
[1255] J. P. Gauntlett, O. A. P. Mac Conamhna, T. Mateos, and D. Waldram, “Supersymmetric
AdS(3) solutions of type IIB supergravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 171601,
arXiv:hep-th/0606221.
[1256] J. P. Gauntlett, O. A. P. Mac Conamhna, T. Mateos, and D. Waldram, “New supersymmetric
AdS3 solutions,” Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 106007, arXiv:hep-th/0608055.
[1257] J. P. Gauntlett, N. Kim, and D. Waldram, “Supersymmetric AdS(3), AdS(2) and Bubble
Solutions,” JHEP 04 (2007) 005, arXiv:hep-th/0612253.
[1258] M. Gabella, J. P. Gauntlett, E. Palti, J. Sparks, and D. Waldram, “AdS(5) Solutions of Type
IIB Supergravity and Generalized Complex Geometry,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 299 (2010) 365–408, arXiv:0906.4109 [hep-th].
[1259] M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini, and A. Tomasiello, “Supersymmetric backgrounds from
generalized Calabi-Yau manifolds,” JHEP 08 (2004) 046, arXiv:hep-th/0406137.
[1260] F. Apruzzi, M. Fazzi, D. Rosa, and A. Tomasiello, “All AdS7 solutions of type II
supergravity,” JHEP 04 (2014) 064, arXiv:1309.2949 [hep-th].
[1261] D. Gaiotto and A. Tomasiello, “Holography for (1,0) theories in six dimensions,”
JHEP 12 (2014) 003, arXiv:1404.0711 [hep-th].
[1262] F. Apruzzi, M. Fazzi, A. Passias, D. Rosa, and A. Tomasiello, “AdS6 solutions of type II
supergravity,” JHEP 11 (2014) 099, arXiv:1406.0852 [hep-th]. [Erratum: JHEP 05, 012
(2015)].
[1263] O. Bergman and D. Rodriguez-Gomez, “5d quivers and their AdS(6) duals,”
JHEP 07 (2012) 171, arXiv:1206.3503 [hep-th].
105

[1264] O. Bergman, D. Rodr´ıguez-G´omez, and G. Zafrir, “5-Brane Webs, Symmetry Enhancement,
and Duality in 5d Supersymmetric Gauge Theory,” JHEP 03 (2014) 112,
arXiv:1311.4199 [hep-th].
[1265] E. D’Hoker, M. Gutperle, and C. F. Uhlemann, “Holographic duals for ﬁve-dimensional
superconformal quantum ﬁeld theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 no. 10, (2017) 101601,
arXiv:1611.09411 [hep-th].
[1266] E. D’Hoker, M. Gutperle, A. Karch, and C. F. Uhlemann, “Warped AdS6 × S2 in Type IIB
supergravity I: Local solutions,” JHEP 08 (2016) 046, arXiv:1606.01254 [hep-th].
[1267] E. D’Hoker, M. Gutperle, and C. F. Uhlemann, “Warped AdS6 × S2 in Type IIB supergravity
II: Global solutions and ﬁve-brane webs,” JHEP 05 (2017) 131,
arXiv:1703.08186 [hep-th].
[1268] E. D’Hoker, M. Gutperle, and C. F. Uhlemann, “Warped AdS6 × S2 in Type IIB supergravity
III: Global solutions with seven-branes,” JHEP 11 (2017) 200, arXiv:1706.00433 [hep-th].
[1269] D. Z. Freedman, S. S. Gubser, K. Pilch, and N. P. Warner, “Renormalization group ﬂows from
holography supersymmetry and a c theorem,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3 (1999) 363–417,
arXiv:hep-th/9904017.
[1270] M. T. Anderson, C. Beem, N. Bobev, and L. Rastelli, “Holographic Uniformization,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 318 (2013) 429–471, arXiv:1109.3724 [hep-th].
[1271] D. Martelli, J. Sparks, and S.-T. Yau, “Sasaki-Einstein manifolds and volume minimisation,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 280 (2008) 611–673, arXiv:hep-th/0603021.
[1272] C. Couzens, J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, and J. Sparks, “A geometric dual of
c-extremization,” JHEP 01 (2019) 212, arXiv:1810.11026 [hep-th].
[1273] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, and J. Sparks, “Toric geometry and the dual of I-extremization,”
JHEP 06 (2019) 140, arXiv:1904.04282 [hep-th].
[1274] K. A. Intriligator and B. Wecht, “The Exact superconformal R symmetry maximizes a,”
Nucl. Phys. B 667 (2003) 183–200, arXiv:hep-th/0304128.
[1275] F. Benini and N. Bobev, “Two-dimensional SCFTs from wrapped branes and
c-extremization,” JHEP 06 (2013) 005, arXiv:1302.4451 [hep-th].
[1276] F. Benini and N. Bobev, “Exact two-dimensional superconformal R-symmetry and
c-extremization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 no. 6, (2013) 061601, arXiv:1211.4030 [hep-th].
106

