The Timelike Tube Theorem in Curved Spacetime
Alexander Strohmaier1 and Edward Witten2
1 School of Mathematics, University of Leeds, Leeds, Yorkshire, LS2 9JT,UK
2 School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540
USA
Abstract: The timelike tube theorem asserts that in quantum ﬁeld theory without gravity,
the algebra of observables in an open set U is the same as the corresponding algebra of
observables in its “timelike envelope” E(U), which is an open set that is in general larger.
The theorem was originally proved in the 1960’s by Borchers and Araki for quantum ﬁelds
in Minkowski space. Here we sketch the proof of a version of the theorem for quantum
ﬁelds in a general real analytic spacetime. Details have appeared elsewhere.
arXiv:2303.16380v1  [hep-th]  29 Mar 2023

Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
A Useful Reformulation
3
3
The Wavefront Set
4
4
Analytic Vectors and the Proof of the Timelike Tube Theorem
9
4.1
Analytic Vectors
9
4.2
The Proof
11
4.3
The Reeh-Schlieder Theorem
13
5
Construction of Analytic Vectors
14
5.1
Tempered Analytic States
14
5.2
Direct Construction Of Analytic States
15
1
Introduction
In ordinary quantum ﬁeld theory without gravity, one can associate an algebra of observ-
ables A(U) to any open set U in spacetime.1 However, there are two principles that assert,
under certain conditions, that the algebra of some given open set is the same as the algebra
of some larger open set.
The ﬁrst and most familiar is relativistic causality. Let D(U) be the domain of de-
pendence of the open set U. Classically, one would say that ﬁelds in D(U) are uniquely
determined by ﬁelds in U. The quantum analog of this assertion is the statement that
A(U) = A(D(U)).
However, in a real analytic spacetime, the extension from U to D(U) has a remarkable
“dual” version, given by the timelike tube theorem [1–4]. The statement of this theorem
involves the timelike envelope E(U) of an open set U, which is deﬁned to consist of all points
that can be reached by starting with a timelike curve γ ⊂U and deforming it through a
family of timelike curves, keeping its endpoints ﬁxed. The timelike tube theorem asserts
that, in a real analytic2 spacetime M, A(U) = A(E(U)). For examples of the relation of U
to D(U) or E(U), see ﬁg. 1.
The timelike tube theorem can be viewed as a quantum version of the Holmgren
uniqueness theorem for partial diﬀerential equations. (For an accessible account of this
theorem, see [5].) According to this theorem, in a real analytic spacetime, if a solution is
given in U of any standard relativistic wave equation, such as Maxwell’s equations, then
1In the present article, spacetime is always assumed to be globally hyperbolic.
2By contrast, causality – the extension from U to D(U) – does not depend on real analyticity.
– 1 –

Figure 1. In these ﬁgures, time runs vertically. Illustrated in (a) is the extension in a timelike direction
from U to D(U) and in (b) the extension in a spacelike direction from U to E(U).
the extension of this solution over E(U) is unique, if it exists. The quantum analog of this
statement is that operators in E(U) are determined by operators in U in the sense that
A(E(U)) = A(U). For some further qualitative discussion, see [6].
The timelike tube theorem was originally proved by Borchers [1] and Araki [2] for
quantum ﬁelds in Minkowski space. The proof by Borchers relied on fairly subtle properties
of holomorphic functions of several complex variables. Araki’s proof relied on Holmgren
uniqueness, more speciﬁcally on the fact that a solution of the massless scalar wave equation
that vanishes in an open set U also vanishes in E(U). (The theory under study was not
assumed to be free or weakly coupled, but nonetheless the theorem was deduced from
properties of a linear wave equation.) The timelike tube theorem for free ﬁeld theories in
a real analytic curved spacetime3 was proved by one of us in [3].
In [4], we have proved a version of the theorem for not necessarily free theories in a
real analytic curved spacetime. The purpose of the present article is to give an informal
explanation of this proof. In section 2, we explain a convenient formulation of the timelike
tube theorem that has been used in all work on the subject. In section 3, we explain the
tools in microlocal analysis that are needed in the proof. The results in microlocal analysis
that we require imply the facts that were used in Araki’s proof, but are more general. In
section 4, we explain the proof. As we will see, the proof of the timelike tube theorem
in curved spacetime is rather short, once the appropriate tools are available and once one
understands what one should be assuming about quantum ﬁelds in curved spacetime. In
particular, the proof requires the concept of an “analytic state,” which is roughly a state
from which it is exponentially unlikely to extract an asymptotically large amount of energy.
The notion of an analytic state also suﬃces for the proof in [7] of a version of the Reeh-
Schlieder theorem in curved spacetime (though a stronger condition was actually assumed
in that paper). The Reeh-Schlieder theorem is the basic result governing entanglement in
quantum ﬁeld theory; we sketch its proof in curved spacetime in section 4.3. In section 5,
we elaborate on the notion of an analytic state and explain why one would expect that, in
a real analytic spacetime, the Hilbert space of a theory has a dense set of analytic states.
3The hypothesis required was somewhat weaker than real analyticity. It was suﬃcient to know that, in
some coordinate system, the spacetime metric depends on the time in a real analytic fashion.
– 2 –

In this introduction, we have elided an important point. As will become clear when
we explain the proof, the algebra of an open set that enters in the timelike tube theorem is
the algebra generated by local ﬁelds. In contemporary literature, this is sometimes called
the additive algebra Aadd(U) [9, 10], but in the present article we simplify the notation by
writing simply A rather than Aadd. In some quantum ﬁeld theories, the full algebra A(U)
of observables in a general open set U is slightly larger than Aadd(U), because of operators
such as topologically nontrivial Wilson loop operators that can be deﬁned in the region
U but cannot be constructed from local ﬁelds. In general, A(U) can be constructed from
Aadd(U) given a knowledge of topological properties of the theory and of the region U. It
is believed that the distinction between Aadd(U) and A(U) is absent in theories that arise
as long distance approximations to ultraviolet complete theories of quantum gravity. See
[6] for further discussion and references.
2
A Useful Reformulation
What are the operators in an open set U? Most obvious are the operators that are directly
constructed from local ﬁelds. For example, if φ is a real scalar ﬁeld in the theory under
consideration, and f is a smooth function with support in U, we can consider the operator
φf =
R
dµf(x)φ(x) (where dµ is the Riemannian measure of the spacetime M).
This
makes sense as a densely-deﬁned unbounded operator.
Bounded functions of φf, such
as exp(iφf) or in general F(φf), where F is any bounded function of a real variable,
are bounded operators. To deﬁne an algebra of operators, one really wants to consider
bounded operators, because bounded operators are deﬁned on all of Hilbert space, and can
be straightforwardly added or multiplied to deﬁne an algebra.
Let A0(U) be the algebra of polynomial functions of operators of the form F(φf). We
might think of A0(U) as an algebra of simple operators in U. However, a simple statement
like causality A(U) = A(D(U)) or the timelike tube theorem A(U) = A(E(U)) will not
be true if by A(U) we mean an algebra of simple operators such as those in A0(U). The
reason is that a simple operator in D(U) or E(U) might be equivalent to a more complicated
operator in U. For causality or the timelike tube theorem, we need to consider all operators
(or at least all “topologically trivial” operators, in a sense explained in the last paragraph
of the introduction) in the region U. One approach to getting all operators is to “complete”
A0(U) by taking limits. The relevant notion of limit is deﬁned by convergence of matrix
elements; if a is a bounded operator, we say that a sequence a1, a2, · · · ∈A0(U) converges
to a if limi→∞⟨χ|ai|ψ⟩= ⟨χ|a|ψ⟩for all states ψ, χ in the Hilbert space H of the theory. By
adjoining such limits, we complete A0(U) to an algebra A(U) that (assuming we consider
all possible local ﬁelds in this construction) is in fact the algebra to which the timelike
tube theorem applies. A(U) is a von Neumann algebra, which just means an algebra of
bounded operators that is closed under limits and under taking adjoints.4
However, a slightly diﬀerent description of A(U) is more useful. In general, if B is any
collection of operators, one deﬁnes its commutant B′ to consist of all (bounded) operators
that commute with B. B′ is always an algebra, because the sum or product of two operators
4See [11] for a thorough introduction to von Neumann algebras for physicists.
– 3 –

that commute with B also commutes with B; and in fact (assuming that B is closed under
taking adjoints), it is a von Neumann algebra, since a limit of operators that commute
with B also commutes with B. We can iterate this construction and deﬁne B′′ = (B′)′, the
commutant of B′. One has always B ⊂B′′ (B′ was deﬁned to commute with B, while B′′
consists of all operators that commute with B′, so B ⊂B′′). B′′ is always a von Neumann
algebra, since the commutant of anything is a von Neumann algebra, as already noted.
In fact, B′′ is the smallest von Neumann algebra containing B.
A special case of this
statement is an important result of von Neumann: if B is already a von Neumann algebra
then B′′ = B. In particular, since B′ is always a von Neumann algebra, one has always
B′ = B′′′.
Going back to the algebra A0(U) of simple operators in U, its completion A(U) by
taking limits is the smallest von Neumann algebra containing A0(U) and therefore is the
same as A0(U)′′. Likewise A(E(U)) = A0(E(U))′′. Hence the timelike tube theorem A(U) =
A(E(U)) is equivalent to A0(U)′′ = A0(E(U))′′. But this statement follows from A0(U)′ =
A0(E(U))′, by taking commutants. The converse of this is also true; if A0(U)′′ = A0(E(U))′′,
then, taking commutants again, A0(U)′′′ = A0(E(U))′′′. But as B′ = B′′′ for all B, this
implies that A0(U)′ = A0(E(U))′.
The upshot is that the timelike tube theorem is completely equivalent to the statement
that A0(U)′ = A0(E(U))′.
In other words, the timelike tube theorem is equivalent to
the statement that an operator b commutes with all operators in A0(U) if and only if
it commutes with all operators in A0(E(U)).
Recalling that A0(U) and A0(E(U)) are
generated by local ﬁelds, an equivalent statement is that if an operator b commutes with
all local operators φ(x) with x ∈U then it commutes with all local operators φ(x) with
x ∈E(U).
In fact, here it suﬃces to consider matrix elements of this statement among a dense
set of states. So ﬁnally we arrive at the formulation of the timelike tube theorem that is
most useful in practice. The timelike tube theorem is true if there is a dense set S of states
with the property that if b is an operator such that
⟨χ|[φ(x), b]|ψ⟩= 0
(2.1)
for all χ, ψ ∈S and all local operators φ(x) with x ∈U, then in fact the same matrix
elements vanish for all x in the possibly larger open set E(U).
In other words, if the timelike tube theorem is false, this means that there is some
matrix element (2.1) that vanishes identically in the open set U, but not in the larger open
set E(U)). In a real analytic spacetime, if this occurs, that represents a failure of real
analyticity. To prove the timelike tube theorem, we will need to know something about
the extent to which matrix elements or correlation functions of local operators can fail to
be real analytic.
3
The Wavefront Set
Let φ(x) be a function, or more generally a distribution, on Rn. Suppose ﬁrst that we are
interested in whether φ is smooth, meaning that it can be diﬀerentiated any number of
– 4 –

times. Assuming that φ and its derivatives vanish suﬃciently rapidly at inﬁnity, there is a
well-known criterion for smoothness: φ is smooth if and only if its Fourier transform eφ(p)
vanishes faster than any power of p for p →∞. In one direction, this follows from the
formula
eφ(p) =
Z
Rn dnx e−ip·xφ(x) =
Z
Rn dnx e−ip·x

−i
p2 p · ∂
∂x
k
φ(x),
(3.1)
which holds for arbitrary positive integer k (if there is no problem in integrating by parts)
and shows that if all derivatives of φ exist and vanish fast enough at inﬁnity, then eφ(p)
vanishes faster than any power of p. In the opposite direction, one has the Fourier inversion
formula
φ(x) =
Z
dnp
(2π)n eip·xeφ(p).
(3.2)
If eφ(p) vanishes faster than any power of p, this formula can be diﬀerentiated with respect
to x any number of times, showing that φ is smooth.
As a criterion for smoothness, this has two drawbacks. First, φ might not behave well
enough at inﬁnity to make this discussion applicable; second, we might be interested in the
smoothness of a function or distribution φ on a general manifold M, on which there is no
natural notion of a Fourier transform. There is a simple way to circumvent this diﬃculty.
Let F be any smooth function supported in a ball around a point x0 where we want to
probe for the smoothness of φ(x) and equal to 1 in a neighborhood of x0. Then φ is smooth
at x = x0 if and only if Fφ is smooth at x = x0. As Fφ has compact support, there is no
problem in deﬁning its Fourier transform or in integrating by parts, and moreover since a
small ball in any manifold M can be embedded in Rn, the discussion is applicable for any
M. Thus we learn in general that a function or distribution φ is smooth at x = x0 if and
only if there is a cutoﬀfunction F that is 1 in a neighborhood of x0 and such that the
Fourier transform f
Fφ(p) vanishes at large p faster than any power of p.
If φ is not smooth at x = x0, we can get more reﬁned information by asking in which
directions in momentum space f
Fφ(p) fails to decay faster than any power of p. A convenient
formulation is to introduce a positive parameter h and, keeping p ̸= 0 ﬁxed, to consider
the behavior of f
Fφ(p/h) for h →0. Then φ is smooth at x if and only if, for some cutoﬀ
function F that is 1 near x, and for all p ̸= 0, there is a bound
| f
Fφ(p/h)| < CNhN
(3.3)
for any N > 0, with an N-dependent constant CN. We say that a nonzero momentum
vector p is a wavefront vector of φ at x if such a bound does not hold, regardless of the
choice of F. The set of wavefront vectors is deﬁned to be a closed set, so p is also deﬁned
to be a wavefront vector at x if there are vectors pi arbitrarily close to p such that a bound
(3.3) does not hold. The wavefront vectors at x capture information about the directions
in which φ fails to be smooth at x. The wavefront set WF(φ) of a function or distribution
φ consists of all phase space points (x, p) such that p is a wavefront vector at x. WF(φ)
does not depend on the coordinate system used to deﬁne the Fourier transform, and is a
well-deﬁned subset of the cotangent bundle T ∗M. Note that WF(φ) is always invariant
under rescaling of p and that by deﬁnition p is required to be nonzero.
– 5 –

Suppose that we are interested in assessing the real analyticity, rather than smoothness,
of φ. A function or distribution φ on Rn is real analytic if it can be analytically continued to
a neighborhood of Rn ⊂Cn. As in the case of smoothness, if φ behaves suﬃciently well at
inﬁnity, there is a simple criterion for real analyticity in terms of the Fourier transform eφ(p):
φ is analytic in a neighborhood |Im x| < ϵ of Rn if and only if eφ(p) vanishes exponentially for
p →∞. In one direction, if eφ(p) decays exponentially for large p, the inversion formula (3.2)
remains convergent if x has a small imaginary part and shows the claimed real analyticity
of φ. In the other direction, if φ is holomorphic for |Im x| < ϵ and decays fast enough for
Re x →∞, then a simple shift of the contour in eqn. (3.1) by x →x −iαp/|p| (for small
positive α) shows that eφ(p) vanishes exponentially for large p.
As in the discussion of smoothness, this criterion for real analyticity has two drawbacks.
First, we would like a local criterion for real analyticity of φ(x) irrespective of how φ behaves
for x →∞. Second, we want a criterion that makes sense on a general manifold M. Here
actually we should pause for a moment to explain what it means for a spacetime M to
be real analytic and for a function on M to be real analytic. A real analytic structure
on M can be deﬁned by specifying an embedding of M as a real subspace of a complex
manifold5 MC of the same dimension (thus, the embedding should be such that there is
an antiholomorphic symmetry λ : MC →MC with λ2 = 1 and M as the ﬁxed point set
of λ). Then functions on M are called real analytic if they can be analytically continued
to holomorphic functions on a neighborhood of M ⊂MC.
A Riemannian (or pseudo-
Riemannian) manifold M is called real analytic if in a real analytic coordinate system on
M, the components of the metric tensor are real analytic.
In contrast to the discussion of smoothness, we cannot get a criterion for real analyticity
of φ by replacing φ with Fφ, for a compactly supported cutoﬀfunction F. Since a compactly
supported F is never real analytic, it will never happen that f
Fφ(p) decays exponentially
for p →∞. However, there is a simple cure for this: instead of the Fourier transform, we
have to use the Fourier-Bros-Iagolnitzer (FBI) transform. While the Fourier transform of
a function φ(x) is a function on momentum space, the FBI transform of φ(x) is a function
on phase space. The FBI transform also depends on a positive parameter h, usually taken
to be asymptotically small. The FBI transform Thφ of a function φ is deﬁned by6
(Thφ)(x, p) =
Z
dny e−(x−y)2/2h−ip·y/hφ(y).
(3.4)
In terms of the FBI transform, there is a simple criterion for real analyticity of φ: φ is real
analytic in a neighborhood of a point x if and only if, for some cutoﬀfunction F that is 1
in a neighborhood of x and any nonzero p, (Th(Fφ))(x, p) vanishes exponentially as h →0.
This exponential vanishing, to be precise, means that
(Th(Fφ))(x, p)
 < Ce−δ/h
(3.5)
5No global properties of MC are assumed; in general MC might develop very severe singularities outside
a small neighborhood of M.
6A multiplicative factor (depending only on h) is often included in this formula to ensure that Th is an
isometry from functions on Rn to functions on phase space. We omit this factor, which would play no role
in our discussion.
– 6 –

Figure 2. A distribution φ vanishes to the left of the hypersurface G = 0 and not to the right. φ does
not vanish in any neighborhood of the point x0.
with positive constants C, δ which can be chosen to depend continuously on x and p. In one
direction, if φ is real analytic at x, then a bound as in (3.5) is easily proved by deforming the
integration cycle in eqn. (3.4) by giving y a small imaginary part near x. In the opposite
direction, to show that a bound (3.5) implies that φ is real analytic at x requires a more
involved contour deformation argument. Qualitatively, the reason that such a result is
possible with the FBI transform and not with the Fourier transform is that, if F is a cutoﬀ
function that is 1 near x, then because of the Gaussian factor e−(x−y)2/2h, the contribution
to
(Th(Fφ))(x, p) =
Z
dny e−(x−y)2/2h−ip·y/hF(y)φ(y).
(3.6)
from the region in which F(y) is not real analytic is exponentially small in h. Hence for
the FBI transform, unlike the Fourier transform, modulo an exponentially small error it is
not important that the cutoﬀviolates real analyticity.
As in the case of smoothness, we say that p ̸= 0 is an analytic wavefront vector of φ
at x if a bound as in (3.5) does not hold, for any choice of F (and more generally if that is
the case for vectors pi that are arbitrarily close to p). The analytic wavefront vectors at x
capture information about how φ fails to be real analytic at x. The analytic wavefront set
WFa(φ) consists of all phase space points (x, p) such that p is an analytic wavefront vector
at x. As in the smooth case, WFa(φ) does not depend on the coordinate system used to
deﬁne the FBI transform, and is a well-deﬁned subset of T ∗M, invariant under rescaling
of p.
For our purposes, the most important property of the analytic wavefront set is the
following. Suppose that a function or distribution φ vanishes identically on one side of
a hypersurface H and not on the other side. For example, if H is deﬁned locally by the
vanishing of a function G, we can assume that φ vanishes identically for G > 0 but not for
G < 0. Let x0 be a point in H such that φ does not vanish identically in any neighborhood
of x0 (ﬁg. 2). The diﬀerential dG of G can be interpreted as a momentum vector along G.
– 7 –

Then
(x0, ±dG) ∈WFa(φ).
(3.7)
Since WFa(φ) is invariant under scaling of p, it actually contains points (x0, t dG) for any
nonzero real t. The assertion (3.7) follows from Theorem 8.5.6′ of [12], but we will just
illustrate the idea with some representative examples.
A basic example, in one dimension, of a function that vanishes on one side of a hyper-
surface and not on the other is
θ(x) =
(
1
x ≥0
0
x < 0.
(3.8)
Here as in the following examples, the behavior of θ(x) for large |x| is mild enough so that
in analyzing the FBI transform, it is not important to include a cutoﬀfunction. One has
(Thθ)(x, p) =
Z ∞
0
dy e−(x−y)2/h−ipy/h.
(3.9)
For any x ̸= 0 and any nonzero p, this integral is exponentially small for h →0. However,
at x = 0 and p ̸= 0, the integral is not exponentially small. In fact, it is asymptotic to h/ip
for h →0. Thus WFa(θ) consists of phase space points (x, p) = (0, p) with any nonzero
p. There are no wavefront vectors (x, p) with x ̸= 0 because θ(x) is real analytic except
at x = 0, and there are wavefront vectors (0, p) for either sign of p in keeping with the
assertion in eqn. (3.7).
A more challenging example of a function that vanishes on one side of a hypersur-
face and not the other is a smooth function that vanishes identically on one side of the
hypersurface. For example, in one dimension, we can consider
φ(x) =
(
exp(−1/x)
x ≥0
0
x < 0.
(3.10)
Thφ(x, p) vanishes exponentially for x ̸= 0 because of real analyticity. At x = 0, one has
Thφ(0, p) =
Z ∞
0
dy exp(−y2/2h −ipy/h −1/y).
(3.11)
The exponent f(y) = −y2/2h −ipy/h −1/y has three critical points in the complex plane,
which for small h are at approximately y = −ip and y = ±(ip/h)1/2.
Associated to
each critical point q is a steepest descent contour γq, with the property that for small h,
R
γq dy exp(−y2/2h −ipy/h −1/y) can be approximated by an integral near q. The integral
(3.11) can be expressed by contour deformation as a linear combination of the three steepest
descent integrals, with the conclusion that
(Thφ)(0, p) h→0
∼exp(iπ/4)h3/2√π exp(i/2) exp(−2eiπsign(p)/4(|p|/h)1/2),
(3.12)
dominated by the value at one of the three critical points. Thus, (Thφ)(0, p) vanishes for
h →0 faster than any power of h, but not exponentially fast. WFa(φ) therefore contains
– 8 –

the phase space points (0, p) for any nonzero p. This is expected, since φ(x) is nonzero
for x > 0 and vanishes for x < 0. The reader can verify that by contrast the ordinary or
smooth wavefront set WF(φ) is empty, in keeping with the fact that φ is smooth.
We will consider one more example, chosen to illustrate the consequences of holomor-
phy in a half-plane. Again in one dimension, consider the distribution
ϕ+(x) =
1
x + iϵ = P 1
x −iπδ(x),
(3.13)
which can be analytically continued from real x into the upper half plane. Because ϕ+(x)
is real analytic for x ̸= 0, WFa(ϕ+) vanishes away from x = 0. At x = 0, we have
Thϕ+(0, p) =
Z ∞
−∞
dye−y2/2h−ipy/h
1
y + iϵ.
(3.14)
To attempt to show that Thϕ(0, p) vanishes exponentially for h →0, we deform the in-
tegration contour near y = 0 to give y an imaginary part. For p < 0, to make e−ipy/h
small, we give y a positive imaginary part. This means deforming the contour in the up-
per half plane, where ϕ+ is holomorphic; we succeed in proving that Thϕ+(0, p) vanishes
exponentially for h →0. For p > 0, to make e−ipy/h small, we have to deform the contour
in the lower half plane. We pick up a contribution from the pole at y = −iϵ, and we learn
that the integral is equal to −2πi plus an exponentially small remainder. Thus WFa(ϕ+)
consists of the points (0, p) with p > 0.
The same applies for any distribution φ that
can be analytically continued in the upper half plane near x = x0 but is not analytic at
x = x0: WFa(φ) must contain some points (x0, p), since φ is not analytic at x = x0; on
the other hand, holomorphy of φ in the upper half plane near x = x0 implies, by contour
deformation, that (x0, p) /∈WFa(φ) if p < 0. Hence (x0, p) ∈WFa(φ) precisely if p > 0.
Of course, for a distribution such as ϕ−= 1/(x −iϵ) that is holomorphic in the lower half
plane, the analytic wavefront set contains instead only points with p < 0.
4
Analytic Vectors and the Proof of the Timelike Tube Theorem
4.1
Analytic Vectors
Now let us go back to quantum ﬁeld theory. In Minkowski space, a basic axiom of quantum
ﬁeld theory is that there is a unique state Ω, the vacuum state, with minimum energy; all
other states have positive energy. In a general curved spacetime M, there is no conserved
energy, and also no distinguished state such as Ω.
But in going to curved spacetime,
we cannot just discard the condition that in Minkowski space says that the energy is
bounded below. We need to replace it by something that makes sense in general and that
in Minkowski space reduces to the usual statement.
In a generic M, there is no notion of energy-momentum, but the notion of energy-
momentum makes sense asymptotically at high energies and short distances. To generalize
the usual axioms of quantum ﬁeld theory to curved spacetime, we need to somehow make
use of this asymptotic fact to state a condition that, in Minkowski space, will reduce to
– 9 –

the usual positivity of the energy. It has been found that this can be conveniently done in
terms of the wavefront set [13–15].
The basic idea is the following. Consider the n point function of a local ﬁeld φ in the
Minkowski space vacuum:
φ(x1, x2, · · · , xn) = ⟨Ω|φ(x1)φ(x2) · · · φ(xn)|Ω⟩.
(4.1)
This is a function (or really a distribution) on RD × RD × · · · × RD = RnD. It is not
real analytic. It has singularities due to the emission and absorption of particles that can
have arbitrarily large energy. Accordingly, the analytic wavefront set WFa(φ) is nonempty.
However, using positivity of energy, one can prove the following. If
(x1, p1; x2, p2; · · · ; xn, pn) ∈WFa(φ)
(4.2)
then the rightmost nonzero pk is future-directed causal (the leftmost nonzero pk is past-
directed causal). In other words, if pn is nonzero, then it is future-directed causal; if pn = 0
but pn−1 ̸= 0, then pn−1 is future-directed causal; and so on. The rough idea is that the
rightmost operator that is creating a state of very high energy, leading to a singularity,
has to create a state of null or timelike momentum, since those are the states that the
theory has. Similarly the leftmost operator that is annihilating a state of asymptotically
high energy has to annihilate a state of null or timelike momentum.
In curved spacetime, we do not have a distinguished state Ω. But we can consider the
n-point function in a state Ψ:
φ(x1, x2, · · · , xn) = ⟨Ψ|φ(x1)φ(x2) · · · φ(xn)|Ψ⟩.
(4.3)
φ will again not be real analytic; it will have singularities due to the possibility that particles
of arbitrarily high energy can be created and annihilated by the operators. In general,
these singularities will depend on the state Ψ. If the state Ψ has a nonnegligible (not
exponentially small) amplitude to contain a particle of asymptotically high energy, then this
will contribute to the singularities of φ. However, if Ψ has exponentially small amplitude
to contain a particle of asymptotically high energy, then we expect singularities to come
only from particles of asymptotically high energy created by one or more of the operators
and annihilated by others. Then we can expect the wavefront set to be independent of
Ψ and to satisfy conditions somewhat like those that hold for the vacuum in Minkowski
space.
This motivates the following deﬁnition: in a real analytic spacetime M, the state Ψ is
“analytic” if its analytic wavefront set WFa(φ) satisﬁes conditions similar to what hold for
the vacuum vector in Minkowski space: if (x1, p1; x2, p2; · · · ; xn, pn) ∈WFa(φ), then the
rightmost (leftmost) nonzero p is future-directed (past-directed) and causal. This condition
roughly states that the probability to extract an asymptotically high energy from the state
is exponentially small. Analytic wavefront set conditions of this type were introduced in [7]
and used to prove the Reeh-Schlieder property (this argument will be sketched in section
4.3).
– 10 –

The notion of an analytic state suﬃces for our purposes here, but it is actually a rather
weak condition. Authors who have tried to systematically describe the properties of the
wavefront set or the analytic wavefront set of the correlation functions of a quantum ﬁeld
theory in curved spacetime have proposed much stronger conditions [14, 15].
We will describe in section 5 some constructions of analytic states. For now, we just
remark that any state deﬁned by a reasonable Euclidean construction, such as the Hartle-
Hawking state of a black hole, is expected to be analytic.
The analog of an analytic state in ordinary quantum mechanics is a wavefunction that
is real analytic as a function of the particle positions. By this deﬁnition, analytic states
are dense in Hilbert space in ordinary quantum mechanics, and the same is expected in
quantum ﬁeld theory.
Before trying to prove the timelike tube theorem, we note a few further properties of
analytic states. Consider a general matrix element of a local ﬁeld φ:
Λ(x) = ⟨Ψ′|φ(x)|Ψ⟩.
(4.4)
If the states Ψ and Ψ′ are both analytic, then Λ(x) is a real analytic function: φ(x)
cannot annihilate particles of asymptotically high energy (since these are absent in Ψ) and
cannot create such particles (since they would not be absorbed by Ψ′). So WFa(Λ) is
empty and Λ(x) is real analytic. Suppose instead that Ψ is analytic but Ψ′ is a completely
general state. Then φ(x) can create high energy particles but cannot annihilate them, so
if (x, p) ∈WFa(Λ), p must be future-directed causal. Similarly, if Ψ′ is analytic, then
regardless of Ψ, if (x, p) ∈WFa(Λ), then p must be past-directed causal. More generally,
in the case of an n-point matrix element
Λ(x1, x2, · · · , xn) = ⟨Ψ′|φ(x1)φ(x2) · · · φ(xn)|Ψ⟩,
(4.5)
suppose that (x1, p1; x2, p2; · · · ; xn, pn) ∈WFa(Λ). If Ψ is analytic, it follows that the
rightmost nonzero p is future-directed timelike; if Ψ′ is analytic, it follows that the leftmost
nonzero p is past-directed timelike.
4.2
The Proof
Now we are ready to discuss the proof of the timelike tube theorem. Assuming that a
theory has a dense set S of analytic states, as is expected to be true for any reasonable
theory, then one can give a very short proof of the timelike tube theorem, as follows. As in
eqn. (2.1), we have to show that if the operator b has the property that for any χ, ψ ∈S,
the distribution
Υ(x) = ⟨χ|[φ(x), b]|ψ⟩= ⟨χ|φ(x)|bψ⟩−⟨b†χ|φ(x)|ψ⟩
(4.6)
vanishes for x ∈U, then actually Υ(x) vanishes for x ∈E(U). In order for a phase space
point (x, p) to be in WFa(Υ), it must be in the analytic wavefront set of one of the two
terms on the right hand side of eqn. (4.6). By virtue of what was explained in the discussion
of eqn. (4.4), for (x, p) to be in the analytic wavefront set of ⟨χ|φ(x)|bψ⟩, p must be past-
directed causal; for (x, p) to be in the analytic wavefront set of ⟨b†χ|φ(x)|ψ⟩, p must be
future-directed causal. Either way, p is causal – timelike or null.
– 11 –

Figure 3. The hypersurface U can “grow” outward to eU in such a way that its normal vector is always
everywhere spacelike. This can continue until U expands to ﬁll out the timelike envelope E(U), which has
null boundaries.
However, we can “expand” U outward into E(U) by gradually growing U outward in
such a way that the boundary of U is always a timelike hypersurface H, and the normal
vector n to H is spacelike (ﬁg. 3). As in eqn. (3.7), if vanishing of Υ(x) is going to fail
along such a hypersurface H, then the points (x, ±n) will be in WFa(Υ). This cannot
happen, since we just learned that WFa(Υ) contains only causal momentum vectors, not
spacelike vectors such as n. So Υ continues to vanish as we expand U outward until it ﬁlls
out all of E(U). (We cannot in this way deduce any vanishing beyond E(U), since E(U) has
null boundaries.) That concludes the proof of the timelike tube theorem.
The argument given in [4] was slightly diﬀerent. Rather than the existence of a dense
set of analytic states, what was assumed was the existence of a single analytic state Ψ that
also is “cyclic.” A vector is called cyclic if the states
Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn = φ(x1)φ(x2) · · · φ(xn)|Ψ⟩
(4.7)
are dense in the Hilbert space H of a theory.7
The Wightman axioms assert that the
vacuum is a cyclic vector for quantum ﬁelds in Minkowski space, and it is expected that
cyclic vectors exist in quantum ﬁeld theory in any spacetime. The existence of a single
cyclic vector actually implies that a generic vector is cyclic. The construction of analytic
vectors that we will discuss in section 5 is expected to produce cyclic analytic vectors in
any theory.
Given the existence of a cyclic analytic vector, let S be the dense set of states of the
form of eqn. (4.7). The timelike tube theorem can be proved by showing that for ψ, χ ∈S,
if b is such that the distribution Υ(x) deﬁned in eqn. (4.6) vanishes for all x ∈U, then
it vanishes for all x ∈E(U). The proof of this in [4] was based on ideas that we have
already explained, notably the properties stated earlier for the analytic wavefront set of
the distribution Λ(x1, x2, · · · , xn) deﬁned in eqn. (4.5) and the fact that U can be expanded
outward to ﬁll out E(U) in such a way that its normal vector is always spacelike.
7To be more precise, in a theory with superselection sectors because of, for example, the existence of
conserved gauge charges, the Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn are dense in the vacuum sector of Hilbert space. For our purposes,
since the algebra of observables A(U) that appears in the timelike tube theorem is the additive algebra,
generated by local ﬁelds, we work in the vacuum sector.
– 12 –

4.3
The Reeh-Schlieder Theorem
What we have explained in the course of generalizing the timelike tube theorem to curved
spacetime also makes it possible to generalize the Reeh-Schlieder theorem [8] to an arbitrary
(connected) real analytic spacetime M [7]. As remarked earlier, the Reeh-Schlieder theorem
is the basic result about entanglement in quantum ﬁeld theory. What we have deﬁned as
a cyclic vector in eqn. (4.7) is, in more detail, a cyclic vector for the full algebra A(M)
generated by all local ﬁelds in M. In other words, the deﬁnition of a cyclic vector asserts
that the states Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn, with arbitrary xi ∈M, are dense. An equivalent statement is
the following: if χ is any state such that the inner products
Π(x1, x2, · · · , xn) = ⟨χ|Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn⟩= ⟨χ|φ(x1)φ(x2) · · · φ(xn)|Ψ⟩
(4.8)
vanish for all xi ∈M, then χ = 0. Indeed, the existence of a nonzero vector χ orthogonal
to all Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn implies that the Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn are not dense; conversely, if the Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn
are not dense, then they generate a proper subspace H′ ⊂H and any vector χ in the
orthocomplement of H′ is orthogonal to all Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn.
The original Reeh-Schlieder theorem makes the remarkable assertion that the vacuum
vector of a quantum ﬁeld theory in Minkowski space is cyclic not just for the full ﬁeld
algebra A(M) but for the algebra A(U) of any open set U, no matter how small. In other
words, states created by acting on the vacuum with ﬁelds in a small open set U are dense
in H. The generalization of this theorem to curved spacetime, as formulated in [7], asserts
that if an analytic vector Ψ is cyclic for A(M), then it is cyclic for the algebra A(U) of
any open set U. In other words, if the states Ψx1,x2,··· ,xn are dense, then they remain dense
if restricted to xi ∈U. Equivalently, if the distribution Π(x1, x2, · · · , xn) on Mn that was
deﬁned in eqn. (4.8) vanishes for all xi ∈U, then it vanishes for all xi ∈M. To prove
this, we ﬁrst consider the constraint on WFa(Π) that follows from the assumed analyticity
of Ψ. As in the discussion of eqn. (4.5), if (x1, p1; x2, p2; · · · ; xn, pn) ∈WFa(Π), then the
rightmost nonzero pk is future-directed and causal. This has the following consequence.
Schematically, set X = (x1, x2, · · · , xn), P = (p1, p2, · · · , pn). Then there is no pair (X, P)
such that (X, P) ∈WFa(Π) and also (X, −P) ∈WFa(Π), since the rightmost nonzero
component of any wavefront momentum vector is future-directed.
We can exploit this as follows. Since M is assumed connected, we can continuously
enlarge U until it ﬁlls out all of M. (In contrast to the proof of the timelike tube theorem,
here it does not matter whether U is expanded outward in timelike or spacelike directions.)
Suppose that the distribution Π vanishes identically if all points xi are in U. In other
words, suppose that as a distribution on Mn, Π vanishes on Un. Does this continue to be
true as U expands outward? If U can be enlarged to bU with Π still vanishing in bUn, but
ceases to vanish if bU is enlarged further, then let H be the boundary of bUn ⊂Mn. Π is
then a distribution on Mn that vanishes identically on one side of H and not on the other
side. As in the discussion of eqn. (3.7), it follows that if H is deﬁned locally by an equation
G = 0, and X0 is a point in H such that Π does not vanish identically in any neighborhood
of X0, then the phase space points (X0, ±dG) are both in WFa(Π). But we learned in the
last paragraph that there is no pair (X, P) with (X, P) and (X, −P) both in WFa(Π). So
– 13 –

vanishing of Π is never lost as U is continuously enlarged. Thus Π is identically zero and
the Reeh-Schlieder theorem holds.
5
Construction of Analytic Vectors
In this concluding section, we explain some additional facts to help orient the reader to the
notion of an analyic state.
5.1
Tempered Analytic States
In Minkowski space, there is a natural distinguished state, the vacuum vector Ω. In a
general time-dependent spacetime, with no conserved energy, there is no natural state and
there is not even a small preferred set of natural states. In particular, it is not reasonable
to expect that, in a general real analytic spacetime M, a theory has a unique analytic
state, or a distinguished small set of such states. If analytic states exist at all, there must
be many of them.
This line of thought leads to the following question: given one analytic state, can we
construct more? An obvious idea is that given an analytic state Ψ, one might be able
to make additional analytic states by acting on Ψ by a ﬁeld operator, smeared by a real
analytic function. Thus, if f is a real analytic function on M that vanishes suﬃciently
rapidly at inﬁnity (where here “vanishing suﬃciently rapidly at inﬁnity” includes a condi-
tion on the behavior of f near singularities of M, if any), and φf =
R
M dµf(x)φ(x) is a
corresponding smeared ﬁeld, then one can hope that φfΨ will be again an analytic state.
If true, this is useful, because in a real analytic spacetime, there are many real analytic
functions that vanish rapidly at inﬁnity. For example, in Minkowski space with coordinates
t, ⃗x, a simple example of a real analytic function that vanishes rapidly at inﬁnity is a Gaus-
sian function exp(−t2 −⃗x2). This can be multiplied by any polynomial to produce a very
large set of rapidly decaying real analytic functions. In fact, among smooth functions that
vanish rapidly at inﬁnity, the real analytic ones are dense; this is true in any real analytic
spacetime.
So if acting on an analytic vector with an operator such as φf will give a new analytic
vector, then there will be many analytic vectors. However, it appears diﬃcult to prove
this based only on the Wightman axioms of quantum ﬁeld theory.8 As a substitute, in [4],
we deﬁned a notion of a tempered analytic state, which is roughly an analytic state that
behaves suﬃciently well at inﬁnity. For example, the vacuum state in Minkowski space
is tempered analytic. If Ψ is a tempered analytic state and f1, · · · , fn are real analytic
functions that vanish suﬃciently rapidly at inﬁnity, then if is possible to prove (Theorem
4.6 in [4]) that the vectors φf1φf2 · · · φfnΨ are tempered analytic. So if a theory has a
single tempered analytic state, then it has many such states. Moreover, if a theory has a
single tempered analytic state that is cyclic for the ﬁeld algebra, then it has a dense set
of tempered analytic states. For a state to be cyclic for the full ﬁeld algebra is a mild
condition that is satisﬁed by a generic state.
8A counterexample at the end of Appendix C of [4] shows the diﬃculty in one attempt at a proof,
– 14 –

If M satisﬁes certain technical conditions, then in free ﬁeld theory on M, every analytic
state is tempered analytic (Proposition 4.9 in [4]). It is conceivable that this is also true in
non-free theories that satisfy physically realistic conditions, even if the statement does not
follow from the Wightman axioms. Physically realistic theories satisfy conditions (such as
the existence of an energy-momentum tensor) that go beyond the Wightman axioms.
5.2
Direct Construction Of Analytic States
In free ﬁeld theory, there is a direct rigorous construction of analytic states [16].
One
actually expects this construction to be applicable in general in realistic quantum ﬁeld
theories.
The construction is easiest to explain for a spacetime M that has a Cauchy hypersurface
S that is invariant under a time-reﬂection symmetry ϱ. We can assume that M has a real
analytic time coordinate t such that ϱ acts by t →−t, leaving ﬁxed S.
By deﬁnition, a real analytic spacetime M can be analytically continued to a complex
manifold MC.
This means, in particular, that t can be continued to complex values,
keeping the space coordinates real. MC is only guaranteed to exist in a small neighborhood
of M, beyond which all sorts of singularities may develop. Therefore, when we continue
t to complex values, we are only guaranteed holomorphy if Im t is suﬃciently small. To
avoid encountering possible singularities of MC, we restrict the complexiﬁcation of M to9
|Im t| ≤ϵ for some small ϵ > 0.
We can now deﬁne a Euclidean signature manifold ME by taking t = itE to be imagi-
nary, while keeping the spatial coordinates of S real. ME can be described more intrinsically
as the ﬁxed point set of λϱ, where ϱ is the same time-reversal symmetry as before (an-
alytically continued to act holomorphically on MC) and λ is complex conjugation of the
coordinates (in other words, λ is the antiholomorphic symmetry of MC that has M as a
ﬁxed point set). In what follows, we restrict ME to the portion with 0 ≥tE ≥−ϵ, which
in particular serves to avoid the singularities of MC.
The idea is now that Euclidean propagation on ME from tE = −ϵ to tE = 0 will map
any state at all at tE = −ϵ to an analytic state at tE = 0. An analogous statement in
ordinary quantum mechanics is that, if the Hamiltonian H is real analytic (meaning that
it maps real analytic wavefunctions to real analytic wavefunctions) and bounded below,
then acting with exp(−ϵH), ϵ > 0, will map any state to a real analytic one. (For ex-
ample, if H is the Laplacian on Rn, then exp(−ϵH) maps a delta function to the heat
kernel, which is a real analytic Gaussian function on Rn.)
Since in general we do not
assume M to be time-independent, a closer analog in ordinary quantum mechanics would
be imaginary time propagation via a time-dependent Hamiltonian H(tE), still assumed
to be real analytic and bounded below. Propagation in imaginary time from tE = −ϵ to
tE = 0 with a time-dependent Hamiltonian can be described by a path-ordered product
P exp(−
R 0
−ϵ dtEH(tE)), still mapping any state to a real analytic state.
9Here in the case of a spatially closed universe, we can assume ϵ to be a positive constant, but in an
open universe, in general it might be necessary to take ϵ to be a positive function on S. Since t could be
multiplied by any ϱ-invariant positive real analytic function on M, for ϵ to be constant or non-constant is
not really a natural condition in the absence of further information about the function t.
– 15 –

Figure 4. The lightly shaded region is the t > 0 portion of a real analytic spacetime of Lorentz signature.
From t = 0, we continue the spacetime in the direction of imaginary time, truncating it at t = −iϵ. The
Euclidean part of the picture is more darkly shaded.
In the case of quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime, since the real time and
imaginary time spaces M and ME meet at t = tE = 0, after propagation through imaginary
time from tE = −ϵ to tE = 0, the state can be continued onto M and interpreted as a state
in the original Lorentz signature spacetime. Any initial state at tE = −ϵ is expected to
propagate to a real analytic state on M. One method to deﬁne the initial condition in the
Euclidean evolution is to impose a local boundary condition at tE = −ϵ. In [16], in free
scalar ﬁeld theory, the state at tE = −ϵ was deﬁned by Dirichlet or Neumann boundary
conditions, and it was proved that the resulting state on M is analytic.
Heuristically, one would expect the same construction, with a suitable choice of local
boundary condition at tE = −ϵ, to work in any physically realistic quantum ﬁeld theory.
For example, for gauge ﬁelds, one can again assume Dirichlet or Neumann boundary con-
ditions at tE = −ϵ. At ﬁrst, one might think that this construction would not apply in a
theory such as the Standard Model of particle physics that has chiral fermions, since there
is no gauge-invariant local boundary condition for the fermions of such a theory. However,
if one assumes Dirichlet boundary conditions for the gauge ﬁelds, then there is no reason to
require the fermion boundary condition to be gauge-invariant. So in fact this construction
can apply perfectly well in the Standard Model.
What about a spacetime M that does not have a time-reﬂection symmetry? In such a
spacetime, one can still pick a real analytic coordinate t such that t = 0 deﬁnes a Cauchy
hypersurface S and near S, the metric takes the form
ds2 = −dt2 +
d
X
i,j=1
gij(⃗x, t)dxidxj,
(5.1)
with a time-dependent spatial metric gij(⃗x, t). And one can still analytically continue t to
complex values. The diﬀerence from the previous case is that the manifold ME deﬁned
by keeping ⃗x real and taking t = itE to be imaginary no longer has a real Euclidean
signature metric. However, for small tE, the metric on ME is almost real, and its real part
is positive-deﬁnite. A consequence is that the same construction as before is applicable for
suﬃciently small ϵ, as shown rigorously for bosonic free ﬁeld theory in [16]. A prototype
of this situation in ordinary quantum mechanics, again assuming that H is real analytic
– 16 –

and bounded below, is that propagation by exp(−(ϵ ± iϵ2)H) will map any state to a real
analytic one. Again, heuristically, one expects that this construction applies equally to
non-free theories.
For free theories, the analytic states obtained this way can be characterized as being
annihilated by a maximal commuting subalgebra of the ﬁeld algebra (analogous to a full set
of annihilation operators in Minkowski space), and therefore are cyclic for the ﬁeld algebra.
One expects the same for non-free theories, if only because a generic state is cyclic.
Acknowledgements Research of EW supported in part by NSF Grant PHY-2207584.
References
[1] H. J. Borchers, “¨Uber die Vollst¨andigkeit lorentzinvarianter Felder in einer zeitartigen
R¨ohre,” Il Nuovo Cimento 19 (1961) 787.
[2] H. Araki, “A Generalization Of Borchers’ Theorem,” Helv. Phys. Acta 36 (1963) 132-9.
[3] A. Strohmaier, “On the Local Structure of the Klein-Gordon Field on Curved Spacetimes,”
Lett. Math. Phys. 54 (2000) 249-61.
[4] A. Strohmaier and E. Witten, “Analytic States in Quantum Field Theory on Curved
Spacetimes,” arXiv:2302.02709.
[5] J. Smoller, Shock Waves and Reaction-Diﬀusion Equations, second edition (Springer-Verlag,
2012).
[6] E. Witten, “Algebras, Regions, and Observers,” arXiv:2303.02837.
[7] A. Strohmaier, R. Verch, and M. Wollenberg, “Microlocal Analysis of Quantum Fields on
Curved Spacetimes: Analytic Wavefront Sets and Reeh-Schlieder Theorems,” J. Math. Phys.
43 (2002) 5514-5530, arXiv:math-ph/0202003.
[8] H. Reeh and S. Schlieder, “Bemerkungen zur Unit¨ar¨aquivalenz von Lorentz-invarianten
Feldern,” Nuovo Cimento 22 (1961) 1051.
[9] H. Casini, M. Huerta, J. M. Magan, and D. Pontello, “Entropic Order Parameters for the
Phases of QFT,” JHEP 04 (2021) 277, arXiv:2008.11748.
[10] H. Casini and J. M. Magan, “On Completeness and Generalized Symmetries in Quantum
Field Theory,” arXiv:2110.11358.
[11] J. Sorce, “Notes on the Type Classiﬁcation of Von Neumann Algebras,” arXiv:2302.01958.
[12] L. H¨ormander, The Analysis of Linear Partial Diﬀerential Operators, I: Distribution Theory
and Fourier Analysis , 2nd ed. (Springer Study Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990).
[13] M. J. Radzikowski, “Micro-Local Approach to the Hadamard Condition in Quantum Field
Theory on Curved Space-Time,” Comm. Math. Phys. 179 (1996) 529–53.
[14] R. Brunetti, K. Fredenhagen, and M. K¨ohler, “The Microlocal Spectrum Condition and Wick
Polynomials of Free Fields on Curved Spacetimes,” Comm. Math. Phys. 180 (1996) 633–52.
[15] S. Hollands and R. M. Wald, “Axiomatic Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime,”
Comm. Math. Phys. 293 (2010) 85–125,
– 17 –

[16] C. G´erard and M. Wrochna, “Analytic Hadamard States, Calder´on Projectors and Wick
Rotation Near Analytic Cauchy Surfaces,” Comm. Math. Phys. 366 (2019) 29–65.
– 18 –

