preprint
An aperiodic monotile
David Smith1, Joseph Samuel Myers∗2, Craig S. Kaplan3, and Chaim Goodman-Strauss4
1Yorkshire, UK
ds.orangery@gmail.com
2Cambridge, UK
jsm@polyomino.org.uk
3School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
csk@uwaterloo.ca
4National Museum of Mathematics, New York, New York, U.S.A.
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, U.S.A.
chaimgoodmanstrauss@gmail.com
Preprint: March 2023
© The authors.
Abstract. A longstanding open problem asks for an aperiodic monotile, also known as an
“einstein”: a shape that admits tilings of the plane, but never periodic tilings. We answer this
problem for topological disk tiles by exhibiting a continuum of combinatorially equivalent
aperiodic polygons. We ﬁrst show that a representative example, the “hat” polykite, can form
clusters called “metatiles”, for which substitution rules can be deﬁned. Because the metatiles
admit tilings of the plane, so too does the hat. We then prove that generic members of our
continuum of polygons are aperiodic, through a new kind of geometric incommensurability
argument. Separately, we give a combinatorial, computer-assisted proof that the hat must
form hierarchical—and hence aperiodic—tilings.
Keywords. Tilings, aperiodic order, polyforms
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcations. 05B45, 52C20, 05B50
1. Introduction
Given a set of two-dimensional tiles, the nature of the planar tilings that they admit arises from
a deep interaction between the local and the global. Constraints on the ways that pairs of tiles
can be neighbours determine the structure of an inﬁnite tiling, at all large scales. Constraints
encoded in a set of tiles determine the structure of the space of the tilings that it admits, in subtle
ways.
∗Development of software used in this work was supported in part by a Senior Rouse Ball Studentship for 2002–3
from Trinity College, Cambridge.
arXiv:2303.10798v1  [math.CO]  20 Mar 2023

2
David Smith et al.
Figure 1.1: The gray “hat” polykite tile is an “einstein”, an aperiodic monotile. In other words,
copies of this tile may be assembled into tilings of the plane (the tile “admits” tilings), yet copies
of the tile cannot form periodic tilings, tilings that have translational symmetry. In fact, the tile
admits uncountably many tilings. In Sections 2, 4, and 5 we describe how these tilings all arise
from substitution rules, showing that they all have the same local structure.
Aperiodic sets of tiles walk a ﬁne line between order and disorder, admitting tilings, but only
those without any translational symmetry, never permitting the simple repetition of periodic
tiling. Their study dates to Wang’s work [Wan61] on the then remaining open cases of Hilbert’s
Entscheidungsproblem. Wang encoded logical fragments by what are now known as Wang tiles,
congruent squares with coloured edges, to be tiled by translation only with colours matching on
adjoining edges. He conjectured that every set of Wang tiles that admits a tiling (possibly using
only a subset of the tiles) must also admit a periodic tiling, and showed that this would imply
the decidability of the tiling problem (or domino problem): the question of whether a given set
of Wang tiles admits any tilings at all. The algorithm would consist of enumerating all possible
ways to cover larger and larger disks. Eventually one either will run out of ways to continue, and
the tiles do not admit a tiling; or, if there is a fundamental domain for a periodic tiling, one will
eventually discover it. If Wang’s conjecture held and aperiodic sets of tiles did not exist, this
algorithm would always terminate.
Berger [Ber66] then showed that it was undecidable whether a set of Wang tiles admits a
tiling of the plane. He constructed the ﬁrst aperiodic set of 20426 Wang tiles, which he used as
a kind of scaﬀolding for encoding ﬁnite but unbounded runs of arbitrary computation.
Subsequent decades have spawned a rich literature on aperiodic tiling, touching many dif-
ferent mathematical and scientiﬁc settings—we do not attempt a broad survey here. Yet there
remain remarkably few really distinct methods of proving aperiodicity in the plane, despite or
due to the underlying undecidability of the tiling problem.

preprint
3
Berger’s initial set comprised thousands of tiles, naturally prompting the question of how
small a set of tiles could be while still forcing aperiodicity. Professional and amateur math-
ematicians produced successively smaller aperiodic sets, culminating in discoveries by Pen-
rose [Pen78] and others of several consisting of just two tiles. Surveys of these sets appear
in Chapters 10 and 11 of Gr¨unbaum and Shephard [GS16] and in an account of the Trilobite and
Cross tiles [GS99]. A recent table appears in the work of Greenfeld and Tao [GT21].
The obvious conclusion of this reduction in size would be to arrive at an “einstein”,1 a single
shape that tiles aperiodically. It has long been an open question whether such a tile exists. Can
one tile embody enough complexity to forcibly disrupt periodic order at all scales?
1.1. The search for an einstein
Several candidate tiles have been proposed as einsteins, but they all challenge in some way the
concepts of “tile”, “tiling”, or “aperiodic”.
Gummelt [Gum96] and Jeong and Steinhardt [SJ96, JS97] describe a single regular decagon
that can cover the plane with copies that are allowed to overlap by prescribed rules, but only
non-periodically, in a manner tightly coupled to the Penrose tiling. Senechal [Sen] similarly
describes simple rules that allow copies of the Penrose dart to overlap and cover the plane, but
never periodically. The result is an ingenious route to aperiodicity, but not a tiling in the usual
sense.
The Taylor-Socolar tile [ST11] comes within a hair’s breadth of being aperiodic. Their
hexagonal prototile tiles aperiodically, but only when additional matching conditions are en-
forced, preventing certain adjacencies that would otherwise be permitted. These matching con-
ditions mandate relationships between non-adjacent tiles, making it impossible to encode the
global aperiodicity in the shape of a two-dimensional topological disk. The matching condi-
tions can be expressed purely geometrically, but doing so requires either a disconnected tile, a
three-dimensional tile, or one with cutpoints [ST12].
The structure of the Taylor-Socolar tiling is closely related to Penrose’s 1+ϵ+ϵ2 tiling [Pen97].
Like the Trilobite and Crab tiles [GS99], these can be adjusted so that an arbitrarily high fraction
of the area lies in copies of just one kind of tile, but no matter how thin or small, the other tiles
remain necessary.
The Schmitt-Conway-Danzer tile [Sen96, Section 7.2] tiles R3, with tilings that have a screw
symmetry but not translations as symmetries; no periodic tiling by copies of this tile has a com-
pact fundamental domain, and we call this tile weakly aperiodic. Weak aperiodicity is indeed
weak, and readily appears in the hyperbolic plane and other non-amenable spaces—as early
as 1974, B¨or¨oczky exhibited a weakly aperiodic monotile in the hyperbolic plane [B¨or74], the
elegantly simple basis of the “binary tilings” [BW92, GS09, MM98, Moz97].
Following Mozes [Moz97], we say a set of tiles is strongly aperiodic if it admits tilings but
none with any inﬁnite cyclic symmetry. In the plane, for sets of “normal” tiles, these concepts
coincide [GS16, Theorem 3.7.1] and we do not need to make this distinction.
Matching rules for how tiles may ﬁt together have taken many diﬀerent forms in the literature,
and, loosely speaking, it is often possible to shift the complexity in a construction from the tiles
1A pun from the German “ein stein”, roughly “one shape”, popularized by Danzer.

4
David Smith et al.
to the matching rules or vice versa. For example, if we use a ﬁnite atlas of ﬁnite conﬁgurations as
our allowed matching rules, even the lowly 2×1 rectangle is an aperiodic monotile!2 The plainest
possible rules are just that the tiles must ﬁt together without gaps or overlapping interiors, and
these remain the gold standard for an aperiodic monotile.
Moving to higher dimensional space permits richer forms of aperiodicity to arise. Recently,
Greenfeld and Tao [GT22] showed that in suﬃciently high dimensions, a single tile, tiling only
by translation, can be aperiodic in Zn (and thus in Rn). They also showed that it is undecidable
whether a single tile, again tiling by translation, admits a tiling of a periodic subset of Z2 × G
for some nonabelian group G [GT21]. By contrast, in R2, Kenyon [Ken92, Ken93, Ken96],
building on the work of Girault-Beauquier and Nivat [GBN91], showed that any topological
disk that admits a tiling by translation also admits a periodic tiling, while Bhattacharya [Bha20]
showed the same for any set in Z2.
Little is known about limits on what sorts of shapes could potentially be aperiodic monotiles.
Rao [Rao17] showed through a computer search that the list of 15 known families of convex
pentagons that tile the plane is complete, thereby eliminating any remaining possibility that a
convex polygon could be an einstein. Jeandel and Rao [JR21] showed that the smallest aperiodic
set of Wang tiles is of size 11.
Even when a single tile admits periodic tilings, that periodicity may be more or less abstruse,
in a way that oﬀers tantalizing hints about aperiodicity. Here, the isohedral number of a tile is the
minimum number of transitivity classes in any tiling it admits; a tile is anisohedral if its isohedral
number is greater than one. The second part of Hilbert’s 18th problem [Hil02] asked whether
there exist anisohedral polyhedra in R3. Gr¨unbaum and Shephard suggest [GS16, Section 9.6]
that this question was asked in R3 because Hilbert assumed that no such tiles exist in the plane,
yet Reinhardt [Rei28] found an example of such a polyhedron, and Heesch [Hee35] then gave an
example of such a tile in the plane. Many anisohedral prototiles are known today. The computer
enumeration by Myers [Mye19] furnished numerous anisohedral polyominoes, polyhexes, and
polyiamonds, including a record-holding 16-hex that tiles with a minimum of ten transitivity
classes. It is unknown whether there is an upper bound on isohedral numbers of monotiles.3
Related insights can be gleaned from the study of shapes that do not tile the plane. A shape’s
Heesch number is the largest possible combinatorial radius of any patch formed by copies of
the shape (or equivalently, the maximum number of complete concentric rings that can be con-
structed around it). A shape that tiles the plane is said to have a Heesch number of ∞. Heesch
ﬁrst exhibited a shape with Heesch number 1, and a few isolated examples with Heesch numbers
up to three were discovered thereafter [Man04]. Mann and Thomas discovered marked poly-
forms with Heesch numbers up to 5 through a brute-force computer search [MT16]. Kaplan
conducted a search on unmarked polyforms [Kap22], yielding examples with Heesch numbers
2Beginning with an aperiodic set of tiles with, say, geometric matching rules, pixelate pictures of the tiles and
how they ﬁt together, in some black and white bit-map. Take an atlas of these pictures, splitting black pixels
vertically and white ones horizontally into identical rectangles. The rectangle is an aperiodic monotile with this
atlas of matching rules.
3The problem of determining whether or not a given set of tiles admits a periodic tiling is also undecidable, at
least for larger sets of tiles [GK72]. If we enumerate sets of tiles, and deﬁne I(n) to be the isohedral number of the
nth set, if it admits a periodic tiling, and let I(n) = −1 otherwise, then I(n) cannot be bounded by any computable
function. This deﬁes our imagination.

preprint
5
up to 4. Baˇsi´c discovered the current record-holder, a shape with Heesch number 6 [Baˇs21].
Heesch’s problem asks which positive integers can be Heesch numbers; beyond speciﬁc exam-
ples with Heesch numbers up to 6, nothing is known about the solution. An upper bound on
ﬁnite Heesch numbers would imply the decidability of the tiling problem for monotiles. The
algorithm would simply consist of generating all possible concentric rings around a central tile;
eventually you will either fail (in which case the shape does not tile the plane) or exceed the
upper bound on Heesch numbers (in which case it must tile the plane).
1.2. Outline
Polykites with pe-
riodic tilings have
aligned periodic tilings
(Lemma A.5)
Polyforms with
aligned weakly pe-
riodic tilings have
aligned strongly pe-
riodic tilings (simi-
lar to [GS16, Theo-
rem 3.7.1])
The hat polykite does
not have aligned
strongly periodic
tilings (Section 3)
Clusters of hat
polykites can form
metatiles (Section 2)
Metatiles have a sub-
stitution system form-
ing combinatorially
equivalent supertiles
(Sections 2 and 5)
Metatiles tile the plane
Hat polykites tile the
plane
The hat polykite is
strongly aperiodic
All Tile(a, b) for posi-
tive a ̸= b are strongly
aperiodic
Tilings by Tile(a, b)
are combinatorially
equivalent to those
by the hat polykite
for positive a ̸= b
(Section 6)
Figure 1.2: The high-level structure of the ﬁrst proof of aperiodicity in this paper
In this paper, we prove the following:
Theorem 1.1. The shape shown shaded in Figure 1.1, a polykite that we call “the hat”, is an
aperiodic monotile.

6
David Smith et al.
Polykites with pe-
riodic tilings have
aligned periodic tilings
(Lemma A.5)
Clusters of hat
polykites must form
metatiles, adjoin-
ing in accordance
with matching rules
(Section 4 and Ap-
pendix B)
Metatiles must follow
a substitution system
forming combinato-
rially equivalent su-
pertiles (Sections 2
and 5)
The metatiles are
strongly aperiodic
The hat polykite is
strongly aperiodic
All Tile(a, b) for posi-
tive a ̸= b are strongly
aperiodic
Tilings by Tile(a, b)
are combinatorially
equivalent to those
by the hat polykite
for positive a ̸= b
(Section 6)
Figure 1.3: The high-level structure of the second proof of aperiodicity in this paper
No special qualiﬁcations or additional matching conditions are required: as shown, this shape
tiles the plane, but never with any translational symmetries. The shape is almost mundane in its
simplicity. It is a polykite: the union of eight kites in the Laves tiling [3.4.6.4], the dual to the
(3.4.6.4) Archimedean tiling.
We provide two diﬀerent proofs of aperiodicity, both with novel aspects. The ﬁrst proof
follows the structure shown in Figure 1.2, centred on a new approach in Section 3 for proving
aperiodicity in the plane. We observe that any tiling by the hat corresponds to tilings by two
diﬀerent polyiamonds, one with twice the area of the other. If there were a strongly periodic
tiling by the hat, the other two tilings would also be strongly periodic. We prove that if so, the
lattices of translations in the polyiamond tilings would necessarily be related by a similarity; but
no similarity between lattices of translations on the regular triangular tiling can have the scale
factor
√
2 required by the ratio of the areas. This does not show that a tiling exists, and so must
be combined with an explicit construction of a tiling (outlined in Section 2 and given in detail
in Sections 4 and 5) to complete the proof of aperiodicity.
The second proof presented (but the ﬁrst one found) follows the structure shown in Figure 1.3.
Here we generally adhere to Berger’s approach, but we must begin with a novel step to get to

preprint
7
the point where such a proof is possible. We ﬁrst show that in any tiling by the hat polykite,
every tile belongs uniquely to one of four distinct clusters (Section 4), and that those clusters
ﬁt together following certain matching rules. It is then the clusters that allow a more standard
style of hierarchical construction. This remarkable behaviour has not been seen previously in
the literature.
Deﬁning matching rules on the boundaries of the clusters allows us to discard details of how
the clusters are made up of hats, and instead consider simpliﬁed outlines we refer to as metatiles.
Following Berger et al., we then give an inductive proof in Section 5 showing that any tile in any
tiling by these four metatiles lies in a unique hierarchy of larger and larger supertiles, eﬀectively
combinatorial copies of the metatiles, at larger and larger scales. The proof is constructive: we
ﬁrst show the metatiles can only lie within larger clusters, the 1-level supertiles, uniquely, and
that these clusters have the same combinatorial structure as the metatiles. In turn, in the same
manner, the 1-level supertiles can only lie uniquely within 2-level supertiles, again clusters with
the same combinatorics, and so on for subsequent levels. This construction proves that tilings by
copies of the metatiles can only be non-periodic, because if there were a translational symmetry,
these hierarchies of supertiles could not be unique. It also shows that the metatiles (and hence the
hats) admit tilings of the plane, because we construct clusters of arbitrary size [GS16, Theorem
3.8.1].
Because of the combinatorial complexity of the hat polykite, a signiﬁcant fraction of our
second proof relies on exhaustive enumeration of cases, which we carried out and cross-checked
with two independent software implementations developed by two of the authors in isolation.
These calculations are necessarily ad hoc, and are essentially unenlightening. This case analy-
sis is only needed to show that all tilings follow the substitution structure; it is not needed for
showing that a tiling exists, and thus is not needed to show that the tile is aperiodic, given the
proof in Section 3 that no periodic tiling exists.
We close this introduction with deﬁnitions of the essential terminology we will need for
the rest of the article. In Section 2, we then present a compendium of provisional observations
about this polykite, including an explicit construction of a tiling and aspects of its structure
that deserve further study. Our two proofs of aperiodicity follow: we show that there are no
periodic tilings (Section 3), then that tiles must group into clusters that deﬁne metatiles equipped
with matching rules (Section 4), and ﬁnally that metatiles must compose into supertiles with
combinatorially equivalent matching rules (Section 5). In Section 6, we oﬀer additional remarks
about the continuum of tiles that contains the hat polykite. As noted there, computer search
shows that the hat is the smallest aperiodic polykite.
1.3. Terminology
Terminology used for tilings generally follows that of Gr¨unbaum and Shephard [GS16].
A tile in a metric space is a closed set of points from that space. A tiling by a set of tiles is a
collection of images of tiles from that set under isometries, the interiors of which are pairwise
disjoint and the union of which is the whole space; we say a set of tiles admits the tiling, or in
the case of a single tile that it admits the tiling. For most purposes, it is convenient for tiles to
be nonempty compact sets that are the closures of their interiors; the tiles considered here are

8
David Smith et al.
polygons, or more generally closed topological disks. A tiling is monohedral if all its tiles are
congruent. All tilings considered here are also locally ﬁnite: every point has some open neigh-
bourhood that meets only ﬁnitely many tiles (all monohedral plane tilings by closed topological
disks are locally ﬁnite).
In any locally ﬁnite tiling of the plane by closed topological disks, the connected components
of the intersection of two or more tiles are isolated points, which are called vertices of the tiling,
and Jordan arcs, which are called edges of the tiling, and the boundary of any tile is divided into
ﬁnitely many edges, alternating with vertices. Each edge lies on the boundary of exactly two
tiles, which we refer to as lying on opposite sides of the edge. Two distinct tiles are neighbours
if they share any point of their boundaries, and adjacents if they share an edge.
When a (closed topological disk) tile has a polygonal boundary, we refer to it as having
sides (maximal straight line segments lying on that boundary) and corners (between two sides),
to distinguish from the edges and vertices of a tiling. We rely on context to distinguish the
meanings of “side” as referring to sides of a polygon or the two sides of an edge of a tiling.
A tiling by polygons is edge-to-edge if the corners and sides of the polygons coincide with the
vertices and edges of the tiling.
A patch of tiles is a collection of non-overlapping tiles whose union is a topological disk.
More speciﬁcally, a 0-patch is a patch containing a single tile, and an (n + 1)-patch is a patch
formed from the union of an n-patch P and a set S of additional tiles, so that P lies in the interior
of the patch and no proper subset of S yields a patch with P in its interior. (In other words, an
(n + 1)-patch is a tile surrounded by n concentric rings of tiles.) In a ﬁxed tiling, every tile
generates an n-patch for all ﬁnite n, by recursively constructing an (n −1)-patch and adjoining
all its neighbours in the tiling, along with any other tiles required to ﬁll in holes left by adding
neighbours.
Given a tiling T , a poly-T -tile is a closed topological disk that is the union of ﬁnitely many
tiles from T . Poly-T -tiles are also referred to generically as polyforms. Poly-T -tiles may also be
deﬁned so that they are permitted to have holes. Because we are mainly concerned with tiles that
admit monohedral tilings, it is not generally signiﬁcant for the purposes of this paper whether
shapes with holes are allowed or not.
The symmetry group of a tiling is the group of those isometries that act as a permutation on
the tiles of the tiling. A tiling is weakly periodic if its symmetry group has an element of inﬁnite
order; in the plane, this means it includes a nonzero translation. A tiling is strongly periodic
if the symmetry group has a discrete subgroup with cocompact action on the space tiled. In
Euclidean space, all strongly periodic tilings are also weakly periodic. A set of tiles (or a single
tile) is weakly aperiodic if it admits a tiling but does not admit a strongly periodic tiling, and
strongly aperiodic if it admits a tiling but does not admit a weakly periodic tiling.
Any ﬁnite set of polygons in the plane that admits a weakly periodic edge-to-edge tiling also
admits a strongly periodic tiling [GS16, Theorem 3.7.1], and a similar but simpler argument
shows the same to be the case for a ﬁnite set of poly-T -tiles where T is itself a strongly periodic
tiling and the weakly periodic tiling consists of copies of the tiles all aligned to the same un-
derlying copy of T , instead of being edge-to-edge. Thus in such contexts it is not necessary to
distinguish weak and strong aperiodicity and we refer to tiles and sets of tiles simply as aperiodic.
A uniform tiling [GS16, Section 2.1] is an edge-to-edge tiling by regular polygons with

preprint
9
vertex-transitive symmetry group; notation such as (3.4.6.4), listing the sequence of regular
polygons round each vertex, denotes a uniform tiling. A Laves tiling [GS16, Section 2.7] is
an edge-to-edge monohedral tiling by convex polygons with regular vertices (all angles between
consecutive edges at a vertex equal) and tile-transitive symmetry group; analogous notation such
as [3.4.6.4] is used for Laves tilings, listing the sequence of vertex degrees round each tile, and
in an appropriate sense Laves tilings are dual to uniform tilings.
2. The hat polykite and its tilings
Before proceeding to the full proof of aperiodicity, we ﬁrst oﬀer a less formal presentation of the
hat, including an explicit construction of a tiling. This section fulﬁlls three goals. First, it oﬀers
an abundance of visual intuition, which provides context for the technical machinery that will
follow. Second, it gives some sense of our process of discovery and analysis, though it should
not be interpreted as an ordered timeline. Third, it includes a few observations that will not
be considered further in this article, but which might provide opportunities for future work by
others.
One of the authors (Smith) began investigating the hat polykite as part of his open-ended
visual exploration of shapes and their tiling properties. Working largely by hand, with the
assistance of Scherphuis’s PolyForm Puzzle Solver software (www.jaapsch.net/puzzles/
polysolver.htm), he could ﬁnd no obvious barriers to the construction of large patches, and
yet no clear cluster of tiles that ﬁlled the plane periodically.
Because the hat is a polyform, it was natural at this point to obtain an initial diagnosis of
its tiling properties computationally. We modiﬁed Kaplan’s SAT-based Heesch number soft-
ware [Kap22] to determine that if the hat does not tile the plane, then its Heesch number must
be at least 16. Similarly, we modiﬁed Myers’ polyform tiling software [Mye19] to determine
that if the hat admits periodic tilings, then its isohedral number must be at least 64. These two
computations already establish that the hat is of extreme interest—if it had turned out not to be
an einstein, then it would have shattered either the record for Heesch numbers or the record for
isohedral numbers, in both cases by a wide margin!
Figure 2.1 (left) shows a computer-generated 10-patch (i.e., ten concentric rings of tiles
around a shaded central tile, where each tile in a ring touches the ring it encloses in at least
one point). It was constructed by allowing Kaplan’s software to work outward to that radius,
and then stopping it manually. At ﬁrst glance, it can be diﬃcult to discern any structure at all in
this patch. However, by colouring the tiles in diﬀerent ways, clear “features” begin to emerge.
Of course, we cannot infer any conclusive properties of inﬁnite tilings from a ﬁnite computed
patch. We must be particularly wary of tiles near the periphery of the patch, where features
may break down under the extra freedom aﬀorded by the proximity to empty space. However,
for a suﬃciently large patch, we might hope that tiles near the centre will be representative of
conﬁgurations that arise in generic tilings.
The most important colouring for the purposes of this article is the one shown on the right
in Figure 2.1. A single hat is asymmetric, and so in any patch we can distinguish between
“unreﬂected” and “reﬂected” orientations of tiles. In the patches we computed, reﬂected tiles,
shown in dark blue, are always distributed sparsely and evenly within a ﬁeld of unreﬂected tiles.

10
David Smith et al.
Figure 2.1: A computer-generated 10-patch of 392 hats (left), arranged in ten concentric rings
around a central shaded hat. The tiles can be coloured (right), showing that the reﬂected hats
(dark blue) are sparsely distributed and each is surrounded by a congruent “shell” of three unre-
ﬂected hats (light blue). A thickened outline shows the boundary of the maximal cluster of tiles
that appears congruently around every reﬂected tile.
Figure 2.2: Long chains of similarly oriented tiles pass through reﬂected tiles in six directions
(left). We can merge each reﬂected tile with one of its neighbours in its chain (centre), yielding
a structure that can be placed into one-to-one correspondence with a patch of regular hexagons
(right).

preprint
11
Furthermore, every reﬂected tile is contained within a congruent cluster of nine tiles, where
the other eight tiles in the cluster are unreﬂected. One such cluster is outlined in bold in the
illustration. The interior of the patch can be covered completely by overlapping copies of that
cluster. Within the cluster, we are particularly interested in the “shell” of three light blue tiles
adjacent to each reﬂected tile. Every reﬂected tile resides in a congruent, non-overlapping copy
of this shell.
We have also observed that unreﬂected tiles tend to form long “chains” of like orientation,
occasionally interrupted by reﬂected tiles. The chains contained in the example patch are shown
coloured on the left in Figure 2.2. Because the hats are aligned with the underlying kite grid,
unreﬂected tiles come in six orientations, all of which also appear as chain directions. Chains
may end at reﬂected tiles or pass through them, but each reﬂected tile is a hub for at least two, and
at most ﬁve spokes. Long segments of these chains have boundaries with halfturn symmetry. It is
tempting to seek parallels between these chains and linear features in other aperiodic tilings, such
as Ammann bars [GS16, Section 10.6] and Conway worms [GS16, Section 10.5]. Finally, we
have noticed that these chains seem to impart a rough hexagonal arrangement to the hats, which
is particularly clear in the triangular and parallelogram-shaped structures that are surrounded by
chains. We have found that if we merge each reﬂected tile with its immediate neighbour as shown
in Figure 2.2 (centre), then the tiles in any patch can be put into one-to-one correspondence with
a patch of hexagons, as in Figure 2.2 (right). The hexagonal grid may provide a convenient
domain in which to perform computations on the combinatorial structure of tilings by hats.
Figure 2.3: The two edge lengths in the hat polykite can be manipulated independently, produc-
ing a continuum of shapes. A selection of those shapes is shown here, normalized for scale.
Tile(0, 1), Tile(1, 1), and Tile(1, 0) admit periodic tilings; all others are aperiodic.
In the course of his explorations, the ﬁrst author discovered a second polykite that did not
seem to have a ﬁnite isohedral number or a ﬁnite Heesch number, this one a union of ten kites.
The idea of identifying two einsteins back-to-back seemed too good to be true! It was both a
relief and a revelation when we determined that not only were the hat and the 10-kite related,
they were in fact two points from a continuum of shapes that all tile the plane the same way.
The hat is derived from the [3, 4, 6, 4] grid, and therefore its edges come in two lengths, which
we can take to be 1 and
√
3. Furthermore, these edges come in parallel pairs, allowing us to set
the two lengths independently to any non-negative values. We use the notation Tile(a, b) with
a and b not both zero to refer to the shape produced when the length-1 and length-
√
3 edges
are altered to have lengths a and b, respectively. Note that Tile(a, b) is similar to Tile(ka, kb)
for any k ̸= 0. In Figure 2.3 we show a selection of shapes along this continuum, normalized
for scale. By this reckoning, the hat is Tile(1,
√
3) and the 10-kite is Tile(
√
3, 1). We have also

12
David Smith et al.
created an animation showing a continuous evolution of Tile(a, 1−a) as a moves from 0 to 1 and
back—see youtu.be/W-ECvtIA-5A. The tetriamond Tile(0, 1), the octiamond Tile(1, 0), and
the equilateral Tile(1, 1) admit simple periodic tilings; in Section 6, we will show that all other
shapes in this continuum are aperiodic monotiles with combinatorially equivalent tilings. In
Section 3, Tile(0, 1) and Tile(1, 0) will play a crucial role in establishing that the hat is aperiodic.
Inspired by cut-and-project methods [DB81a, DB81b], we are also left wondering whether it
would be productive to construct a closed path in four or six dimensions, which projects down
to this family of tiles from a suitable set of directions.
Figure 2.4: A grouping of tiles into clusters in the example patch. In addition to four-tile clusters
consisting of a reﬂected hat and its three-hat shell, we identify clusters consisting of a single tile,
and parallelogram-shaped clusters consisting of pairs of tiles. The parallelograms come in two
varieties: one separates two nearby shells, and the other joins up with two rotated copies to make
a three-armed propeller shape called a fylfot. An isolated fylfot is shown shaded in grey in the
lower right.
Given the colouring in Figure 2.2 showing non-overlapping clusters of reﬂected tiles and their
shells, it is natural to wonder whether the remaining unaﬃliated tiles in the patch reliably form
clusters of other kinds. Figure 2.4 illustrates that we can account for all remaining tiles using
two additional cluster types (shown separately on the right). First, where three shells meet they
enclose a single isolated tile, which must be accepted as a cluster of size one. Then the remaining
tiles group into congruent clusters of size two, which are roughly parallelogram-shaped. These
appear in two varieties, depending on the local arrangement of clusters around them. In the ﬁrst
case, coloured white in the drawing, the parallelogram is adjacent to two shells along its long
edges. In the second case, coloured grey, one end of the parallelogram is plugged into a local
centre of threefold rotation, joining six hats into a three-armed propeller shape called a fylfot. A
fylfot is shown in isolation on the bottom right of Figure 2.4.
These clusters are the starting point for the deﬁnition of a substitution system, one that can

preprint
13
be iterated to produce a patch of hats of arbitrary size. Interestingly, the substitution rules do
not apply to the hats directly. Instead, we derive new metatiles from the clusters, and build a
substitution system based on the metatiles. The underlying hats are simply brought along for the
ride.
Figure 2.5: The H, T, P, and F metatiles (top), constructed by simplifying the boundaries of
clusters of hats. We mark the H, T, and P metatiles with arrows when needed (bottom), to
distinguish between otherwise symmetric orientations.
Figure 2.5 shows the shapes of the metatiles. Each one is constructed by simplifying the
boundary of one of the clusters of hats in Figure 2.4. In order to ensure that the metatiles do
not overlap, we must distinguish between the two varieties of two-hat parallelograms discussed
above. Speciﬁcally, we remove a triangular notch from the parallelogram associated with each
blade of a fylfot. Thus the three clusters yield four metatiles: an irregular hexagon (H), an
equilateral triangle (T), a parallelogram (P), and a pentagonal fylfot blade (F). The original
clusters can now be seen as endowing the metatiles with matching conditions along their edges;
these matching conditions will be formalized in Section 4.
The H, T, and P metatiles have rotational symmetries. In the bottom row of Figure 2.5, we
mark tiles with arrows showing their intended orientations. In each case, the arrow points to
the (unique) side of the metatile from which two adjacent kites protrude. The arrows suﬃce to
distinguish symmetric rotations and our construction will not use reﬂections. (We will not need
these arrows in later sections, as metatile orientations will be implied by labels on their edges.)
We can now deﬁne a family of supertiles that are analogous to the metatiles, following the
procedure illustrated in Figure 2.6. We ﬁrst assemble the patch of oriented metatiles shown on
the left. It can easily be checked that the elided hat polykites borne by these tiles ﬁt together
with no gaps and no overlaps. This patch is large enough to pick out one or more copies of each
supertile, drawn in red in the central diagram. The supertile shapes are fully determined by two
constraints: the red dots coincide with the centres of fylfots, and all interior angles of the hexag-
onal outlines are 120◦. The diagram on the right shows the supercluster outlines in isolation,
with their inherited orientation markings. Here, each arrow points to the unique supertile edge
that passes through an outward-pointing P tile from the previous generation.
At ﬁrst glance, these supertiles appear to be scaled-up copies of the metatiles. If that were so,
we could perhaps proceed to deﬁne a typical substitution tiling, where each scaled-up supertile

14
David Smith et al.
Figure 2.6: The construction of a family of supertiles from a patch of metatiles. The patch of
metatiles on the left can be used to locate key vertices of the supertiles, marked with red dots in
the central diagram. Those dots, together with constraints on angles, fully determine the shapes
of the supertiles, which are not merely scaled-up copies of their progenitors. On the right, the
supertiles are marked with arrows indicating their orientations.
is associated with a set of rigidly transformed tiles. However, with the obvious exception of the
T, none of the supertiles is truly similar to its corresponding metatile. Despite that discrepancy,
the supertiles are fully compatible with the construction in Figure 2.6—they can be arranged
in the same conﬁguration shown on the left, and used as a scaﬀolding for deriving outlines of
super-supertiles (implicitly yielding a much larger patch of hats along the way). Indeed, the con-
struction can be iterated any number of times, with slightly diﬀerent outlines in every generation.
We are not aware of other substitution systems that use rules like these, where successive gener-
ations are combinatorially but not geometrically compatible. To see this construction in action,
please try our interactive browser-based visualization tool at cs.uwaterloo.ca/~csk/hat/.
We know from Figure 2.5 that each of the four metatiles can be associated with a cluster of
hats. The construction in Figure 2.6 can then be iterated any number of times to form ever-larger
patches of metatiles, and hence of hats. We can, for example, consider the H supertiles formed
through this process of iteration, and the patch of hats each one contains. These patches form a
sequence that grows in radius without bound, each patch a subset of its successor. The Extension
Theorem [GS16, Section 3.8] allows us to continue this iteration process “to inﬁnity”, yielding
the following result.
Theorem 2.1. The hat polykite admits tilings of the plane.
Of course, this theorem is not suﬃcient to establish aperiodicity on its own—we must also
show that the hat does not also admit periodic tilings. In Section 5 we revisit this substitution
process, tracking matching conditions on supertile edges after every step. There we show that
all tilings by the hat necessarily obey the substitution rules given here (Theorem 5.1). The
construction in that section also incidentally leads to a more detailed proof that the hat tiles the
plane.

preprint
15
Figure 2.7: The ﬁrst four iterations of the H metatile and its supertiles. At each level, tiles
partially overlap the boundary of their supertile. Overlaps are acceptable here, because the su-
pertile will be met by neighbouring supertiles with the same conﬁguration of smaller tiles on its
boundary.
The shapes of each generation of supertiles are diﬀerent from those of the generation before
it. However, by normalizing the tiles for size, we have computed that they quickly converge on
a ﬁxed point, a set of tiles that truly do yield scaled copies of themselves under the construc-
tion in Figure 2.6. These converged tile shapes are particularly interesting because they can be
used to deﬁne a geometric substitution system that operates via inﬂation and replacement. The
converged tiles, together with their substitution rules, are shown in Figure 2.8. By virtue of its
connection to the original metatiles in Figure 2.5, we know that this substitution tiling is ape-
riodic when the tiles are endowed with suitable matching conditions on their edges. We can
also use this system as an alternative means of constructing patches of hats. We cannot sim-
ply associate a cluster of hats rigidly with each converged tile, but a patch of converged tiles is
combinatorially equivalent to a corresponding patch of metatiles, which are equipped with hats.
If we rescale the converged tiles so that the short H edges have unit length, then all tile
edges except the two F edges adjacent to a fylfot centre will have lengths in Z[φ], where φ is
the golden ratio. Furthermore, this substitution system has an inﬂation factor of φ2. The factor
of φ2 can also be derived algebraically, through an eigenvalue computation on the substitution

16
David Smith et al.
Figure 2.8: A substitution system based on converged tile shapes. Scaling the tiles so that the
the short edges of the H tile have unit length, all tile edges except the two adjacent to fylfot
centres have lengths in Z[φ], where φ is the golden ratio. In each substitution rule, tiles shown
with dashed boundaries can be omitted, leading to patches in which there are no duplicate tiles
contributed by supertiles sharing an edge.
matrix corresponding to the system presented in this section.
At ﬁrst blush, it may be surprising to see φ arise in a tiling closely associated with the Laves
tiling [3.4.6.4]; it appears more naturally in contexts such as Penrose tilings, which feature angles
derived from the regular pentagon. The involvement of φ appears to be closely related to the
appearance of
√
2 in the argument of Section 3; that number is also not expected on the regular
triangular tiling or related contexts (where distances are the square roots of integers that can be
expressed by the quadratic form x2 + xy + y2, so expected square roots are of 3 and primes of
the form 6k + 1). However, 1 + φ−1 + φ−2 = 2, from which it follows that a triangle with a
120◦angle between sides of lengths 1 and φ−1 has a third side of length
√
2 (Figure 2.9, left).
And indeed, by aligning corresponding tiles of tilings using Tile(1, 0) and Tile(0,
√
2), it appears
that there is an angle tan−1 p
3/5, which is one of the angles of the triangle with sides 1, φ−1,
and
√
2, between the edges of the regular triangular tilings underlying Tile(1, 0) and Tile(0,
√
2)
(Figure 2.9, right).
The arrangement of three H tiles and a T tile inside of an H supertile mimics the arrangement
of a reﬂected hat and its three unreﬂected neighbours in a single H metatile. We are naturally
led to wonder whether the clusters of hats that make up the metatiles are primordial, or whether
they are preceded by a set of “subclusters” that launch the substitution process one step earlier.
A possible form for such subclusters is shown in Figure 2.10. The labels on the edges denote
matching conditions that will be explained in detail in Section 4. Note that subclusters P0 and F0
have zero area; their boundaries are shown split into multiple parts to clarify the sequence of

preprint
17
Figure 2.9: A demonstration of how the golden ratio φ might arise in the context of tilings by
hats. The triangle on the left has an angle of 120◦between sides of lengths 1 and φ−1; from
trigonometric identities we can compute that x =
√
2 and θ = tan−1 p
3/5. On the right
we show portions of tilings by Tile(1, 0) (green) and Tile(0,
√
2) (blue), registered to the same
centres of local threefold rotation. The angle between the edges of the triangle tilings underlying
these two polyiamond tilings is approximately θ, and we believe this approximation converges
as we register larger patches of the two tilings.
edges (in the case of F0, some of those edges intersect others); note also that the X+ and X−
edges from Figure 4.1 have length zero in the subclusters and are not shown in the diagram.
Deﬁning what exactly it means to partition a tiling into subclusters following matching rules,
when some subclusters have area zero and some edges have length zero but must still adjoin
in the correct orientations, seems more awkward than the corresponding argument based on
metatiles, so we do not pursue the subclusters further.
Finally, in Figure 2.11 we exhibit a second substitution system in which hats are grouped into
only two clusters instead of the four shown in Figure 2.5. The cluster H7 comprises seven hats:
a reﬂected hat, its three-hat shell, and three additional neighbours. The cluster H8 contains all
of H7 plus one additional neighbour. As illustrated in the ﬁgure, H7 and H8 can be replaced by
superclusters, each containing a single H7 and ﬁve or six copies of H8. This process can then
be iterated to produce a patch of hats of any size. This substitution system is attractive for its
minimality, though we believe it would be more cumbersome for proving aperiodicity. Although
the tilings themselves are MLD (mutually locally derivable) [BSJ91] with those by the H, T, P,
and F metatiles presented earlier, deriving those metatiles from the H7 and H8 clusters requires
considering a radius larger than a single cluster. H7 is always equivalent to the union of an H
tile, a T tile, and an F tile, but H8 corresponds to three diﬀerent combinations of H, P, and
F. Alternatively, to establish an MLD system, we could deﬁne three congruent but inequivalent
copies of H8.
The ideas presented in this section are suﬃcient to show that the hat does in fact tile the
plane. Figure 2.12 oﬀers a ﬁnal large patch of tiles as a demonstration. On the right side of
the illustration we observe that the tiles belonging to fylfots form a connected tree structure that
interlocks with a tree formed from the remaining tiles. This structure is reminiscent of those

18
David Smith et al.
Figure 2.10: Four subclusters that may be thought of as preceding the clusters making up the
metatiles in Figure 2.5. Edges are marked with the labels that will be used in Section 4. The
P0 and F0 subclusters have zero area; dotted lines indicate vertices that should be regarded as
coincident.
Figure 2.11: An alternative substitution system that yields the same tiling by hats as the system
presented earlier. Here there are clusters H7 and H8, made up of seven and eight hats, respec-
tively. Each one can be iteratively replaced by a supercluster made up of copies of H7 and H8.

preprint
19
Figure 2.12: An excerpt from a very large patch generated using the substitution system presented
in this section. In the right half of the drawing, hats belonging to F metatiles are coloured black,
to highlight the interlocking tree structures formed by the fylfots and the other metatiles.
found in other aperiodic tilings, such as the Taylor-Socolar tiling and the 1 + ϵ + ϵ2 tiling.
However, exhibiting a tiling is usually the easy part of a proof of aperiodicity; it is also
necessary to prove that none of the tilings admitted by the hat can be periodic. In the next
section we present a novel geometric proof of aperiodicity. Then, in Sections 4 and 5 we turn
to a more standard combinatorial argument that the matching rules implied by the substitution
system shown earlier are forced in tilings by the hat.
3. Aperiodicity via coupling of polyiamond tilings
In this section, we prove the following result:
Theorem 3.1. Let T be a tiling by the hat polykite. Then T is not strongly periodic.
As noted in Section 1.3, a tile that does not admit strongly periodic tilings also cannot admit
weakly periodic tilings. Therefore, together with the substitution system outlined in Section 2,
and described in detail in Sections 4 and 5, this theorem establishes that the hat is an aperiodic
monotile, thus proving Theorem 1.1. The latter two sections provide a detailed case analysis
showing that all tilings by the hat polykite are given by the substitution system, and as a conse-
quence giving an alternative proof that it is an aperiodic monotile. Deducing aperiodicity from

20
David Smith et al.
Figure 3.1: A patch from a hat tiling T (left), which in this section, for eventual contradiction,
is hypothesized to be strongly periodic. By contracting edges we can construct patches from
corresponding T4 (centre) and T8 (right) tilings. Equivalent reference tiles are marked with
asterisks in the three patches.
the result of this section does not rely on that case analysis, only on the existence of tilings.
We require only the description of the substitution system and the clusters of tiles used in that
system, not the proof that all tilings necessarily obey that system.
We suppose throughout this section that there is a strongly periodic tiling T by the hat
polykite, and derive a contradiction. We also suppose this tiling is aligned to an underlying
[3.4.6.4] Laves tiling; this supposition is justiﬁed by Lemma A.6, which shows that all tilings by
the hat polykite are aligned to such an underlying Laves tiling.
Contracting the polykite sides of length 1 or 2 to length 0 produces a strongly periodic
tiling T4 by tetriamonds; contracting the polykite sides of length
√
3 to length 0 produces a
strongly periodic tiling T8 by octiamonds. (Because this contraction process is well-deﬁned
around any tile, edge or vertex, it yields a combinatorial tiling of the plane, and a combinatorial
tiling corresponds to a geometrical tiling of the entire plane [GS09, Lemma 1.1].) We suppose
that T4 and T8 use the same side lengths as the corresponding sides of the polykite, and have
corresponding tiles in the same orientation. Figure 3.1 shows a patch from an example tiling
T , together with corresponding patches from T4 and T8. This mapping to tiles of diﬀerent side
lengths is discussed in more detail in Section 6, where the tetriamond is described as Tile(0,
√
3)
and the octiamond is described as Tile(1, 0).
The tilings T , T4, and T8 are coupled, in the sense that there is a bijection between their tiles,
with corresponding tiles in corresponding orientations and translation symmetries of any one
mapping directly to translation symmetries of the others. They also have close combinatorial
relationships: any neighbours in the original polykite tiling are also neighbours in both polyia-
mond tilings. Furthermore, there must exist aﬃne maps between the lattices of translations of
the T4 and T8 tilings, such that each translation maps to a corresponding translation (one between
corresponding pairs of tiles). The aﬃne map sending the translations for T4 to those for T8 must
scale areas by 2/3.

preprint
21
That aﬃne map cannot be a similarity. Any distance d between vertices of a regular triangular
tiling with edge length 1 must have d2 of the form x2 + xy + y2 for integers x and y, and if
2k ∥x2 + xy + y2 then k must be even. Therefore, a scale factor of
√
2 is not possible between
translations on two triangular tilings with the same edge length, and a scale factor of
p
2/3 is
not possible between translations on two triangular tilings with edge lengths
√
3 and 1.
Using the fact that the six translation classes of kites must appear with equal frequency in
any aligned tiling by polykites, we now proceed to show that the aﬃne map from T4 to T8 must
in fact be a similarity, which gives the required contradiction.
In Figure 3.2, we show the hat polykite, with sides of length 1 or 2 shown as thin black line
segments and sides of length
√
3 shown as thick orange line segments; the two orientations of
kite of which it has two kites (it has exactly one kite of each other orientation); and the two
polyiamonds, in orientations corresponding to those of the polykite.
Figure 3.2: The hat polykite, its imbalance in kites, and corresponding polyiamonds
The imbalance in kites of diﬀerent orientations partitions the twelve orientations of the hat
polykite (that can occur while aligned to an underlying [3.4.6.4] Laves tiling) into three sets of
four, such that any tiling must have equal proportions of polykites from each set of orientations
(meaning that in any patch with perimeter x, the imbalance between the numbers of polykites
with orientations from any two of the sets is O(x)). The same applies to tilings by either polyi-
amond derived from tilings by the polykite. (The tetriamond is symmetric, so two orientations
of the polykite in one of those sets can give rise to identical-looking tetriamonds. Those should
still be considered as diﬀerent orientations of the tetriamond, as if it were given an asymmetric
marking.)
Note that given any two sides of polyiamonds in T4, the corresponding vector in T8 between
those two sides is well-deﬁned: a side of a tile in T4 corresponds to a point on the boundary of
the corresponding tile in T8 (and adjoining sides on adjacent tiles correspond to the same point
on the boundaries of two neighbouring tiles in T8), so the vector is just the vector between those
corresponding points. It is also convenient for some purposes to divide the tetriamond into two
congruent rhombi, resulting in a tiling T ′
4. The four orientations of the tetriamond in one of
the three sets of orientations all contain rhombi in the same two orientations (out of a possible
three), so T ′
4 contains equal proportions of rhombi in each orientation.
The edges of the equilateral triangles (of side length
√
3) in the regular triangular tiling
underlying T4 and T ′
4 lie in three sets of parallel lines; call those sets L1, L2, and L3. For
each i ∈{1, 2, 3}, we now form an inﬁnite graph Gi. The vertices of Gi are those rhombi
of T ′
4 that include an edge lying in some line in Li, thereby encompassing rhombi in two of
the three orientations. Two vertices in Gi are connected by an edge exactly when the rhombi

22
David Smith et al.
Figure 3.3: A visualization of the three families of i-strips in each of T ′
4 and T4, for the sample
patch shown in Figure 3.1 (centre). The i-strips run along the channels between the heavy black
boundaries.
corresponding to those vertices are adjacent along an edge of T ′
4 lying on some line in Li. The
connected components of this graph are two-way inﬁnite paths, which we refer to as i-strips
in T ′
4. We then partition the tiles of T4 into a related set of i-strips by assigning each polyiamond
to the same strip as one of its rhombi. If a polyiamond has both rhombi in an orientation that
appears in i-strips, they must be in the same i-strip, because the line segment between those two
rhombi lies in a line in Li. Note that this assignment must constitute a partition of the tiles in T4.
Clearly, the i-strips cannot cross, and any line parallel to those in Li passes through the i-strips
in T ′
4 in the same order as any other such line passes through them. Furthermore, any translation
preserves both i-strips themselves and that ordering of i-strips. Figure 3.3 shows examples of
the three families of i-strips for sample patches of T ′
4 and T4.
Let vi be a vector between two consecutive lines in Li, orthogonal to those lines, chosen so
the pairwise angles between those vectors are all 120◦. Let v′
i be a vector orthogonal to vi and
with length 1/
√
3 times that of vi, again chosen so the pairwise angles between those vectors
are all 120◦. Note that P
i vi = 0 and P
i v′
i = 0. Considering the sides of rhombi in an i-strip
in T ′
4 that lie in consecutive lines of Li, the vector between the midpoints of such sides is vi±v′
i,
where the sign depends on the orientation of the rhombus. Thus, if the vector between any two

preprint
23
such midpoints is avi + bv′
i, then between those two sides there are (a + b)/2 rhombi of one
orientation and (a −b)/2 of the other orientation that can appear in an i-strip in T ′
4.
Considering as symmetries of T ′
4 only those translations that correspond to translation sym-
metries of the strongly periodic tiling T , there are only ﬁnitely many orbits of rhombi under
the action of the group of such translations, so in any i-strip S there must be two rhombi in the
same orbit. The translation mapping one to the other is a translation symmetry of the tiling,
and therefore maps i-strips to i-strips. Because it maps S to itself and preserves the ordering of
i-strips, it must map every i-strip to itself. If that translation is by a vector avi + bv′
i, it follows
that b = 0, because otherwise rhombi of the two orientations that appear in i-strips would appear
in the tiling in diﬀerent proportions.
Thus for each i we have some positive integer ai, such that a translation by aivi is a symmetry
of T ′
4 and of T4 (corresponding to a translation symmetry of T , and thus to one of T8) that sends
each i-strip to itself. We may replace each ai by their lowest common multiple, so we have a
positive integer a such that for each i a translation by avi is a symmetry that sends each i-strip
to itself.
We now examine the translation vectors in T8 corresponding to avi in T4 or T ′
4. These may
be calculated based on the tiles in any i-strip in T4 (between any two lines in Li related by a
translation by that vector), and every i-strip (and choice of lines) must produce the same vector
in T8. Figure 3.4 shows the corresponding translations for three vectors between opposite pairs
of parallel sides of the tetriamond. For each such pair, ﬁrst the vector within the tetriamond is
indicated, then the corresponding octiamond vector as a sequence of octiamond sides, then that
vector decomposed into parts parallel to and orthogonal to the sides between which the vector
is drawn. Rotating, reﬂecting or reversing the direction of the tetriamond vector has the same
eﬀect on the octiamond vector.
Figure 3.4: Corresponding translations for the two polyiamonds
Note that in the ﬁrst case, the octiamond vector is parallel to the sides between which the
tetriamond vector is drawn; the second and third cases have equal components orthogonal to
those sides. For the orthogonal component of the corresponding translations in T8 to be equal
for all i-strips, it follows that every i-strip must have the same proportion of the second and
third cases relative to the ﬁrst case. As the ﬁrst case corresponds exactly to one of the three sets
of orientations that occur in equal proportions in any tiling, the ﬁrst case must thus be a third
of the tetriamonds in any i-strip, while the second and third cases (which together correspond
to the other two sets of orientations; however, each case does not correspond to a single set of

24
David Smith et al.
orientations) in that ﬁgure must add to two thirds of the tetriamonds.
Since that proportion is independent of i, the orthogonal components of the translation vec-
tors in T8 corresponding to avi (which are a
2vi) add to zero. Since the avi add to zero, the vectors
in T8 also add to zero, and so their parallel components must also add to zero. But P
i biv′
i = 0 if
and only if all the bi are equal; say they all equal b. That means the three translation vectors in T8
(which are a
2vi + bv′
i) are at 120◦angles to each other, and so the aﬃne map between lattices of
translations is a similarity, which is a contradiction as discussed above.
4. Clustering of tiles
As discussed in Section 2, tilings by the hat polykite are composed of certain clusters of tiles.
These clusters can be used to deﬁne simpliﬁed tile shapes that we call metatiles. The metatiles
inherit matching conditions from boundaries of the hats that they contain. Furthermore, through
a set of substitution rules they form larger, combinatorially equivalent supertiles that ﬁt together
following the same matching conditions. In this section, we give a precise deﬁnition of how tiles
are assigned to clusters, and a computer-assisted proof by case analysis that this assignment does
result in the clusters claimed, ﬁtting together in accordance with the matching rules given.
The clusters and their associated metatiles are shown in Figure 4.1. Each metatile is a convex
polyiamond outlined in lime; its hats are overlaid, and each is given a unique label. The union of
the polykites in a cluster approximates the shape of its metatile, but with some indentations and
protrusions along its boundary. At two corners of cluster T, and one of cluster P, an additional
line is drawn from a corner of a polykite to a corner of the boundary of the polyiamond; this
shows how an indentation to a corner of the polyiamond is considered to be associated with a
particular side of the polyiamond.
The boundaries of the four metatiles are divided into labeled segments by marked points.
The labels represent matching conditions to be obeyed in tilings by the metatiles. To satisfy
the matching conditions, the four metatiles must form a tiling using copies that are only rotated
and not reﬂected; edge segments marked A+ and A−must adjoin on adjacent tiles of the tiling;
likewise, edge segments B+ and B−, X+ and X−, F + and F −, and L and L must adjoin. We
will show in Section 5 that any tiling by the metatiles has a substitution structure: the tiles may
be grouped (after bisecting some tiles) into supertiles that satisfy combinatorially equivalent
matching conditions. From this structure, it is deduced that no tiling by the metatiles is periodic;
also, the substitution structure implies that the metatiles can tile arbitrarily large regions of the
plane, and so the whole plane, implying that they form an aperiodic set.
We now show the following result:
Theorem 4.1. Any tiling by the hat polykite can be divided into the clusters shown in Figure 4.1
(or reﬂections thereof, but not mixing reﬂected and non-reﬂected clusters), satisfying the given
matching conditions, with the resulting tiling by metatiles having the same symmetries as the
original tiling by polykites.
Since inspection of the cluster shapes shows that, conversely, any tiling by metatiles induces
one by the hat polykite (for example, A+ and A−are equal and opposite modiﬁcations to the

preprint
25
T1
B+
A−
A−
Cluster T
H1
H2
H3
H4
X+
B−
X−
X+
B−
X−
X+
A+
X−
Cluster H
P1
P2
L
X−
X+
A−
L
X−
X+
B+
Cluster P
F1
F2
L
X−
X+
L
X−
F +
F −
X+
B+
Cluster F
Figure 4.1: The four clusters
shape of an edge and are consistent wherever they appear in the clusters), that suﬃces to show
that the hat polykite is an aperiodic monotile.
This proof that any tiling can be divided into clusters, satisfying the matching conditions,
is computer-assisted. We deﬁne rules (Section 4.1) for assigning labels to tiles in any tiling by
the hat polykite, corresponding to the labels shown for the tiles in the four clusters. Those rules
assign a label to a tile based only on its immediate neighbours, and because no arbitrary choices
are involved in the rules, they preserve all symmetries of the tiling. It then remains to show that
(a) the labels assigned do induce a division into the clusters shown, and (b) the clusters adjoin
other clusters in accordance with the matching rules.
Both (a) and (b) may be demonstrated by a computer case analysis of 2-patches of hats.
This analysis is not very sensitive to the precise list of 2-patches used, as long as it includes
all 2-patches that can actually occur in a tiling. It may also include some 2-patches that cannot
occur in a tiling, since many such 2-patches do in fact also satisfy the conditions that need to be
checked. For the purposes of this proof we worked with the 188 “surroundable 2-patches”, i.e.,

26
David Smith et al.
2-patches that can be surrounded at least once more to form a 3-patch. To generate this set of 188
patches we modiﬁed Kaplan’s SAT-based software [Kap22] to enumerate all distinct 3-patches
of hats, and extracted the unique 2-patches in their centres. We validated this list by creating
an independent implementation based on brute-force search with backtracking; the source code
for this implementation is available with our article. A more sophisticated case analysis can be
carried out to show that at most 63 of the 188 surroundable 2-patches can actually appear in a
tiling by hats. However, all 188 of them satisfy the conditions given in this section, allowing us
to obtain the results we need with simpler and more transparent computations.
It is also possible to demonstrate both (a) and (b) by a shorter case analysis using only 1-
patches. However, the analysis using only 1-patches is more complicated because the classiﬁca-
tion rules assume that all the neighbours of a tile are known. Those rules can therefore not be
applied directly to the outer tiles in a 1-patch, making it necessary to work with partial informa-
tion about which labels are consistent with such a tile. For more details of this alternative case
analysis, see Appendix B.
The computer analyses of 2-patches and 1-patches depend on an assumption that it is only
necessary to consider tilings where all polykites are aligned to the same underlying [3.4.6.4]
Laves tiling. This assumption is not in fact obvious for tilings by polykites or other polyforms
in general; it is justiﬁed in Appendix A.
To demonstrate (a), for each of the kinds of cluster, form a connected graph whose vertices
are the tiles of that cluster, and such that, where the graph has an edge between two tiles, those
tiles are neighbours in the cluster. (This does not uniquely determine the graph for cluster H;
below we use a spanning tree where H1 has edges to each other tile.) For each ordered pair
L1 and L2 of two labels in a cluster, with an edge between their tiles in the graph for that cluster,
we check (Section 4.2) that, in every 2-patch centred on a tile with label L1, there is a tile with
label L2 in the expected position and orientation relative to that with label L1. If this relationship
holds for all such pairs, for every 2-patch that might occur in a tiling and that has L1 at its centre,
it follows that the labels assigned in any tiling do indeed induce a division into clusters as desired.
In fact, the rules given do not distinguish between labels P1 and F1; they assign all such
tiles the common label FP1. However, this does not aﬀect the argument; it simply means that
in a certain position and orientation relative to a tile FP1, there must be a tile that may be P2
or F2, and, conversely, in a certain position and orientation relative to P2 or F2, there must be a
tile FP1. Given that this is true in all tilings, each FP1 tile may then be relabeled as F1 or P1
based on whether its neighbour is F2 or P2.
To demonstrate (b), for each marked edge segment (referred to here as E) of each kind of
cluster (referred to here as C), we identify all the edge segments E′ in all the kinds of cluster C′
that could adjoin it, consistent with the matching rules. If any one tile in C′ adjoining E′ is in the
correct position and orientation relative to any one tile in C that adjoins E, it follows as a result
of (a) that the entire edge segment properly matches between the two clusters. Furthermore,
because the matching conditions on the boundaries of F1 and P1 are identical, it is not a problem
that those are both handled as a single label FP1. So for each E we pick one tile in C, and for each
choice of E′, we pick one tile in C′ that would be a neighbour of the tile picked in C (Section 4.3).
The computer analysis of 2-patches then veriﬁes that, in each 2-patch whose central tile has the
label of the tile picked in C, there is a neighbour in a position and orientation and with a label

preprint
27
that matches the tile picked in C′ for one choice of E′.
We now present details of the classiﬁcation rules for tiles, and of the exact checks imple-
mented that satisfy the requirements described above: the ordered pairs of tiles in a spanning
tree for each cluster, and those associated with each edge segment of each cluster. The refer-
ence software implementation mentioned above also performs all of these checks on the 188
surroundable 2-patches.
4.1. Classiﬁcation rules for the hat polykite
Each diagram in Figure 4.2 shows a central tile and some number of neighbours of that tile, and
represents a classiﬁcation rule. The order of the rules is signiﬁcant; the ﬁrst rule that matches
determines the label on the central tile. If all the neighbours shown are present, and no previous
rule matched, the tile has the label indicated. The last rule has no neighbours shown, so always
matches if no previous rule matched. Thus every tile is assigned some label.
H1
Rule #1, label H1
H2
Rule #2, label H2
H3
Rule #3, label H3
H4
Rule #4, label H4
T1
Rule #5, label T1
P2
Rule #6, label P2
Figure 4.2: Classiﬁcation rules (part 1)

28
David Smith et al.
F2
Rule #7, label F2
FP1
Rule #8, label FP1
Figure 4.2: Classiﬁcation rules (part 2)
4.2. Within-cluster matching checks for the hat polykite
Each diagram in Figure 4.3 shows a central tile (shaded) and a neighbour, with labels on both.
The central tile in every 2-patch that can occur in a tiling should be checked against all ﬁgures
shown here with that central tile’s label on the shaded tile; if, for all such 2-patches, the neighbour
indicated is present with the correct label, then the labels assigned by the classiﬁcation rules do
induce a division into the clusters shown, as explained above.
H1
H2
H1 neighbour H2
H1
H3
H1 neighbour H3
H1
H4
H1 neighbour H4
H2
H1
H2 neighbour H1
H3
H1
H3 neighbour H1
H4
H1
H4 neighbour H1
Figure 4.3: Within-cluster matching checks (part 1)

preprint
29
FP1
Z
FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 (Z ∈{P2, F2})
Y
FP1
P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 (Y ∈{P2, F2})
Figure 4.3: Within-cluster matching checks (part 2)
4.3. Between-cluster matching checks for the hat polykite
Each diagram in Figure 4.4 shows a central tile (shaded) and a neighbour, with labels on both,
and represents a tile on one side of a cluster edge and some options for a tile on the other side of
that edge. In some cases, there are two alternatives listed for the same edge, with separate ﬁgures
for each, marked in the form “(alternative k of 2)”. Also, in some cases there are multiple options
for the labels on one or both tiles, shown in a single ﬁgure. The central tile in every 2-patch that
can occur in a tiling should be checked against all ﬁgures shown here with that central tile’s label
as one of the options for the shaded tile; if, for all such 2-patches, one of the alternatives listed
for that edge is present with one of the labels indicated, then the clusters adjoin other clusters in
accordance with the matching rules. (Where multiple alternatives are listed for the same edge,
only one of those alternatives needs to pass the check.)
H2
Z
H edge A+ (alternative 1 of 2)
(Z ∈{T1, P2})
H2
T1
H edge A+ (alternative 2 of 2)
H1
Z
H upper edge B−(Z ∈{T1, FP1})
H3
Z
H lower edge B−(Z ∈{T1, FP1})
Figure 4.4: Between-cluster matching checks (part 1)

30
David Smith et al.
T1
H2
T upper edge A−
Y
H2
T or P lower edge A−(Y ∈{T1, P2})
Y
Z
T, P or F edge B+ (Y ∈{T1, FP1})
(Z ∈{H3, H4})
F2
F2
F edge F +
F2
F2
F edge F −
Y
Z
X+ edge at top of polykite
(Y ∈{H2, P2, F2}) (alternative 1 of 2)
(Z ∈{H2, P2})
Y
Z
X+ edge at top of polykite
(Y ∈{H2, P2, F2}) (alternative 2 of 2)
(Z ∈{H3, H4, FP1, F2})
Y
Z
X+ edge at right of polykite
(Y ∈{H3, H4, FP1}) (alternative 1 of 2)
(Z ∈{H2, P2})
Figure 4.4: Between-cluster matching checks (part 2)

preprint
31
Y
Z
X+ edge at right of polykite
(Y ∈{H3, H4, FP1}) (alternative 2 of 2)
(Z ∈{H3, H4, FP1, F2})
Y
Z
X−edge at right of polykite
(Y ∈{H2, P2}) (alternative 1 of 2)
(Z ∈{H2, F2, P2})
Y
Z
X−edge at right of polykite
(Y ∈{H2, P2}) (alternative 2 of 2)
(Z ∈{H3, H4, FP1})
Y
Z
X−edge at bottom of polykite
(Y ∈{H3, H4, FP1, F2}) (alternative 1
of 2) (Z ∈{H2, F2, P2})
Y
Z
X−edge at bottom of polykite
(Y ∈{H3, H4, FP1, F2}) (alternative 2
of 2) (Z ∈{H3, H4, FP1})
P2
P2
L edge at right of polykite (alternative 1 of
2)
P2
Z
L edge at right of polykite (alternative 2 of
2) (Z ∈{FP1, F2})
Y
P2
L edge at bottom of polykite
(Y ∈{FP1, F2}) (alternative 1 of 2)
Figure 4.4: Between-cluster matching checks (part 3)

32
David Smith et al.
Y
Z
L edge at bottom of polykite
(Y ∈{FP1, F2}) (alternative 2 of 2)
(Z ∈{FP1, F2})
Figure 4.4: Between-cluster matching checks (part 4)
5. A four-tile substitution system
Consider the four metatiles, with matching conditions as in Figure 4.1, which are depicted in
this section in the form shown in Figure 5.1. Edges A are red, B are blue, X are green, F
are pink, and L are gray. Edges are marked with small geometrical decorations to indicate the
signs (outward on the + side, inward on the −side): equilateral triangles for A, semicircles for B,
orthogonal line segments for X, short slanted line segments for F. Note that the A and B on H
are the opposite signs to those on T, P, and F. Also note that the tiles in this substitution system
may not be reﬂected, only rotated.
T
H
P
F
Figure 5.1: Metatiles T, H, P, and F
Later in the argument it is convenient to bisect some tiles P and F, as shown in Figure 5.2. We
refer to the edges resulting from the bisection of P as P + (in the sub-tile that has an edge B+) and
P −, coloured yellow and decorated with a rectangle, and to the edges resulting from the bisection
of F as G+ (in the sub-tile that has an edge B+) and G−, coloured violet and decorated with an
obtuse triangle. We also refer to the halves with a B+ edge as the upper halves, and the other
halves as the lower halves. We will show the following:
Theorem 5.1. In any tiling by the four metatiles, after such bisection of P and F metatiles,
the metatiles ﬁt together to form larger, combinatorially equivalent supertiles, thereby forming
a substitution system. The tiling by the supertiles has the same symmetries as the tiling by the
metatiles.
The bisection of tiles is not strictly necessary, in that the bisecting lines can be arbitrary
curves—and, in particular, can go entirely along one side or other of the F or P tiles (keeping
the same end points), eﬀectively allocating an entire tile to one of two neighbouring supertiles.

preprint
33
Figure 5.2: Bisection of tiles P and F
However, the bisected tiles are convenient for proving that the supertiles obey matching rules
equivalent to those of the original tiles. In particular, bisection causes adjacencies between
supertiles to be more clearly encoded in the boundaries of the supertiles themselves, without also
relying on information about forced tiles that are not part of the supertiles. In some situations
it may be more useful to assign whole tiles to supertiles at every level of substitution, with
no bisection. For example, these whole tiles may be more convenient for analyzing sizes or
growth rates of patches in the inﬂation process. If needed, we can deﬁne a symmetry-preserving
bijection between the supertiles shown here and any alternative choice of supertiles that avoids
bisection.
Diagrams for analysis of cases should be interpreted as follows. There are some unnumbered
tiles that deﬁne the case being considered, then some numbered tiles that are forced in the se-
quence given by their numbers. If it is then necessary to split into multiple cases, the position at
which multiple choices of tile must be considered is marked on the diagram with a ﬁlled circle,
and there are then separate diagrams for each choice (on which the previous forced tiles are now
unnumbered, but newly forced tiles are numbered).
The conﬁguration in Figure 5.3, referred to as PP, often appears in the case analysis; the two
adjoining copies of P in the same orientation force a contradiction because nothing ﬁts at the
marked point. Subsequently, when identifying forced tiles, as well as considering a tile as forced
when it is the only one that would ﬁt in a given place consistent with the matching conditions, we
also consider a tile as forced when the only alternative consistent with the matching conditions
would be to place a P tile in a way that produces this PP conﬁguration.
1
2
Figure 5.3: A common impossible conﬁguration, referred to as PP

34
David Smith et al.
5.1. Cases involving T
The two A−edges of T must be adjacent to the A+ edge of H, while the B+ edge of T may be
adjacent to either of the B−edges of H. Thus we have two cases for the conﬁguration around
a T tile, which we refer to as T1 and T2 (Figure 5.4). As explained in the captions to this
and subsequent ﬁgures, a sequence of deductions shows that any T in a tiling must occur in
case T1PF (Figure 5.9).
Case T1
Case T2
Figure 5.4: Cases T1 and T2. Consider the three marked places in each of T1 and T2. These can
be ﬁlled with either P or H. On a side of the ﬁgure where there are two B−edges, the marked
place cannot be ﬁlled with H, because that would result in a 60◦angle between two B−edges,
which cannot be ﬁlled. So both those sides must have P in the marked place, while the third
side may have H (oriented to avoid such a 60◦angle between two B−edges; subsequently, when
the same situation arises, we just consider the orientation of the H to be forced without further
comment) or P. This results in four cases, which we call T1P (Figure 5.5), T2P (Figure 5.6),
T1H (Figure 5.7) and T2H (Figure 5.8), and we proceed to draw further forced tiles in each of
those cases.

preprint
35
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.5: Case T1P. The marked place can be ﬁlled with F or P, resulting in cases we call
T1PF (Figure 5.9) and T1PP (Figure 5.10).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 5.6: Case T2P, eliminated because PP occurs at the marked point.

36
David Smith et al.
1
2
3
Figure 5.7: Case T1H, eliminated because PP occurs at the marked point.
1
2
3
Figure 5.8: Case T2H, eliminated because PP occurs at the marked point.

preprint
37
1
Figure 5.9: Case T1PF. Any T in a tiling must occur in this case. Bisecting the P and F tiles in
that case produces the conﬁguration of Figure 5.16, which we call H′ and which combinatorially
acts like H (with the edge segments indicated marked for matching conditions) in a tiling along
with conﬁgurations T ′, P ′, and F ′.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 5.10: Case T1PP, eliminated because PP occurs at the marked point.

38
David Smith et al.
5.2. Cases with H not adjacent to T
Any H not adjacent to a T tile must have a P tile adjacent to its A+ edge, while the B−edges
may each be adjacent to P or F. This results in four cases, which we call HPP (Figure 5.11),
HPF (Figure 5.12), HFP (Figure 5.13), and HFF (Figure 5.14), and we proceed to draw
further forced tiles in each of those cases, with consequences explained in the captions to those
ﬁgures.
1
2
3
Figure 5.11: Case HPP. Bisecting the P tiles and removing the forced F tiles produces the
conﬁguration of Figure 5.15, which we call T ′ and which combinatorially acts like T (with the
edge segments indicated marked for matching conditions) in a tiling with the other supertiles.
Although the forced F tiles are not included in T ′, the fact that they are forced will be used in
the proof that the supertiles must follow the matching conditions where they are adjacent to each
other.

preprint
39
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.12: Case HPF. The second H cannot be adjacent to a T; it must thus itself be in case
HFP or HFF, and each of those cases turns out to force the H tile in case HPF.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 5.13: Case HFP. Bisecting the P and F tiles produces the conﬁguration of Figure 5.17,
which we call P ′ and which combinatorially acts like P (with the edge segments indicated
marked for matching conditions) in a tiling with the other supertiles.

40
David Smith et al.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 5.14: Case HFF. Bisecting the P and F tiles produces the conﬁguration of Figure 5.18,
which we call F ′ and which combinatorially acts like F (with the edge segments indicated
marked for matching conditions) in a tiling with the other supertiles.
5.3. The supertiles
A−
2
A−
2
B+
2
T
Figure 5.15: Supertile T ′, alongside corresponding T
The previous arguments have shown that every H or T tile appears in a conﬁguration corre-
sponding to the supertiles T ′, H′, P ′ or T ′. We now provide more detailed rules for allocating
each H or T tile, and, after bisecting all P and F tiles, each half of such a tile, to groupings
of tiles, such that each tile is allocated to exactly one grouping, the groupings all have the form
of one of the supertiles, all symmetries of the original tiling are also symmetries of the tiling
by supertiles (this property follows immediately from the form of the rules, which do not in-
volve any arbitrary choices that could break symmetry), and the supertiles adjoin each other in
accordance with the matching conditions indicated (A+
2 adjoining A−
2 , B+
2 adjoining B−
2 , X+
2
adjoining X−
2 , F +
2 adjoining F −
2 , and L2 adjoining L2).
• Each T tile is allocated to a H′ supertile, along with all the H tiles adjacent to that T.
• Each H tile in case HPP is allocated to a T ′ supertile.
• Each H tile in case HFP is allocated to a P ′ supertile, along with the H tile in case HPF
shown in Figure 5.13.

preprint
41
A+
2
X−
2
X+
2
B−
2
X−
2
X+
2
B−
2
X−
2
X+
2
H
Figure 5.16: Supertile H′, alongside corresponding H
L2
X−
2
X+
2
A−
2
L2
X−
2
X+
2
B+
2
P
Figure 5.17: Supertile P ′, alongside corresponding P
L2
X−
2
X+
2
L2
X−
2
F +
2
F −
2
X+
2
B+
2
F
Figure 5.18: Supertile F ′, alongside corresponding F

42
David Smith et al.
• Each H tile in case HFF is allocated to an F ′ supertile, along with the H tile in case HPF
shown in Figure 5.14.
• Each H tile in case HPF was allocated to a supertile by exactly one of the previous two
rules.
• Each half of a P tile, and the upper half of each F tile, is adjacent to exactly one H tile
along its A−or B+ edge, and is allocated to the same supertile as that H tile. (Where both
halves are allocated to the same supertile, the bisection isn’t shown in the diagrams of the
supertiles, to simplify those diagrams.)
• It remains to allocate the lower halves of F tiles. Each such lower half has a X−edge
between a L edge and a F + edge; it is allocated to the same supertile as the H tile adjacent
to that X−edge. For this allocation rule to be well deﬁned, we need to show that this X−
edge is indeed adjacent to a H tile. The only other possibility not violating the matching
rules would be adjacency to another F tile, as shown in Figure 5.19, but nothing ﬁts at the
marked point without violating the matching rules, so that cannot occur.
The X−edge referenced in the last allocation rule cannot be adjacent to any of the exposed
X+ edges of H tiles in supertiles T ′, P ′ or F ′ without violating the matching rules. Thus all
lower halves of F tiles are the ones that appear on the diagrams of the supertiles, and we have
shown that the tiling is partitioned into the supertiles.
Figure 5.19: Impossible adjacency of two F tiles
We now show that the supertiles adjoin each other in accordance with the matching condi-
tions indicated. First, we examine P + edges (appearing in A−
2 and B−
2 ) and P −edges (appearing
in A+
2 and B+
2 ). B−
2 and A+
2 appear only in H′, where their P + and P −edges cannot meet with-
out tiles intersecting. So B−
2 can only join to B+
2 and A+
2 can only join to A−
2 .
Next we show that the converse holds: A−
2 can only join to A+
2 and B+
2 can only join to B−
2 .
For a contradiction, suppose that the P + and P −edges in some A−
2 and B+
2 are joined. If the
B+
2 comes from a P ′ supertile, then that P −bisects tile 5 in case HFP. Adjacent tiles 5 and 1 in
that conﬁguration both have B+ edges, which must both be adjacent to H tiles; those H tiles are
adjacent to each other, which can only occur in a supertile H′, which does not have an A−
2 edge.
The same argument applies in the case of an F ′ supertile, considering tiles 6 and 2 in case HFF.
If the P + in an A−
2 from P ′ is joined to a B+
2 , a similar argument applies (considering tile 2 and
an adjacent unnumbered tile in case HFP). So the only remaining case would be if both edges
come from supertile T ′, but that is inconsistent with the F tiles forced in case HPP.

preprint
43
Having shown that A+
2 , A−
2 , B+
2 , and B−
2 must meet the matching conditions for the super-
tiles, now note that the only X+ and X−edges on the boundaries of the supertiles that are not
part of A+
2 , A−
2 , B+
2 or B−
2 are those forming part of F +
2 and F −
2 . Thus it follows that F +
2 and F −
2
must also adjoin each other. The only remaining G+ and G−edges of the tiles are then those
that form X−
2 and X+
2 edges of the supertiles, so those also match, and the remaining L edges
form L2, so those also match.
To show that the supertiles are fully combinatorially equivalent to the original tiles, one
more thing must be checked: that the same combinations of supertiles ﬁt together at vertices as
combinations of tiles ﬁt together at vertices. Each supertile has been drawn with a copy of the
corresponding tile alongside it, in a corresponding orientation. By inspection, if you take any
class of edges of the tiles, including both sides of the edge (for example, A+ and A−), and take
any line segment in the corresponding edges of the supertiles, the (directed) angle between the
(directed) edges in the tile and in the supertile is consistent across all the diagrams.
This consistency of angles between edges of tiles and of supertiles means that the angles at
vertices of supertiles around a point, each consecutive pair having matching edges, add up to
the same amount as the corresponding angles for the corresponding tiles (an angle at a vertex
of a supertile equals the angle at the corresponding vertex of the corresponding tile, plus the
diﬀerence between the tile–supertile angles for the two edges, and those diﬀerences cancel when
adding up around the point).
So the supertiles are combinatorially equivalent to the tiles, and thus the above arguments
apply inductively to ensure that the composition of tiles into supertiles may be applied n times for
all n. Since the radius of a ball contained in the supertiles goes to inﬁnity with n (and this does
not depend on how the bisection of supertiles is deﬁned geometrically, although it may be easier
to see if an alternative choice of supertiles is made at this stage that does not involve bisecting
tiles), and the tilings by supertiles have all the symmetries of the original tiling, it follows that the
original tiling cannot have a translation as a symmetry. Furthermore, the substitution structure
implies that the metatiles tile arbitrarily large ﬁnite regions of the plane, and hence the whole
plane.
6. A family of aperiodic monotiles
In the previous sections, we showed that the hat polykite is an aperiodic monotile. This polykite
is formed of 8 kites from the [3.4.6.4] Laves tiling. Another small polykite, formed of 10 kites
and shown in Figure 6.1, is also aperiodic. We have veriﬁed via a computer search that there are
no other aperiodic n-kites for n ⩽21.
These two aperiodic polykites are two examples of a family of aperiodic monotiles, all of
which have combinatorially equivalent sets of tilings, and which are determined by the choice
of two side lengths.
The hat polykite has sides of lengths 1, 2, and
√
3; for the purposes of this section, we
consider the side of length 2 as two consecutive sides of length 1 with a 180◦angle between
them. The tile of Figure 6.1 has the same angles, but with the side lengths of 1 and
√
3 swapped.
Let a and b be nonnegative reals, not both zero, and if a ̸= 0 write r = b/a. Deﬁne Tile(a, b)
to be the polygon resulting from replacing the sides of length 1 in the hat polykite with sides of

44
David Smith et al.
Figure 6.1: An aperiodic 10-kite
length a (we refer to the resulting sides as 1-sides) and replacing the sides of length
√
3 in the hat
polykite with sides of length b (we refer to the resulting sides as r-sides). This process results
in a closed curve (because the vectors of the 1-sides add up to 0, as do those of the r-sides), and
it is also straightforward to see that this curve is not self-intersecting; it is a 13-gon (or one with
a smaller number of sides if a or b is zero), but considered as a 14-gon for the purposes of this
section. This tile has area
√
3(2a2 +
√
3ab + b2). The hat polykite is then Tile(1,
√
3) in this
notation, while the tile of Figure 6.1 is Tile(
√
3, 1).
For nonzero a, the value of r determines the tile up to similarity. In acknowledgment of
these similarity classes, we write Tile(r) as a shorthand for Tile(1, r). We will show this tile is
aperiodic for any positive r ̸= 1. In fact, Tile(1, k
√
3) and Tile(k
√
3, 1) are polykites for all odd
positive integers k, so this continuum of aperiodic monotiles also contains a countably inﬁnite
family of aperiodic polykites.
Figure 6.2: Periodic tiling by Tile(1, 1)
We deﬁne a notion of combinatorial equivalence between tilings of these tiles, for two posi-
tive values of r, as follows: two tilings are combinatorially equivalent if there exists a bijection
between their tiles, and a bijection between the maximal line segments in the unions of the
boundaries of the tiles, such that corresponding tiles and line segments in the two tilings are in
the same orientation, corresponding tiles adjoin corresponding line segments, on the same side
of those line segments, in the two tilings, and corresponding tiles on the corresponding sides

preprint
45
of corresponding line segments appear in the same order along those segments. All the interior
angles of the tile are at least 90◦, and no two 90◦angles appear consecutively, so any maximal
line segment has at most two sides of tiles on each side of the line segment (and in particular is
ﬁnite).
We now prove the following result:
Theorem 6.1. Suppose r ̸= 1 and r′ ̸= 1 are positive. Then there is a bijection between
combinatorially equivalent tilings for Tile(r) and Tile(r′), given by changing the lengths of
all r-sides from r to r′, while preserving angles, orientations and adjacency to maximal line
segments.
Suppose ﬁrst that r is irrational. If a maximal line segment in the union of the boundaries
of the tiles has p 1-sides and q r-sides on one side of the line segment, it also has p 1-sides and
q r-sides on the other side of the line segment. Because a maximal line segment has at most
two sides of tiles on each side of the segment, the same argument also applies for any rational r
except possibly 1
2, 1, and 2.
If r = 2, there is the additional possibility that two 1-sides align with one r-side. When there
are two consecutive 1-sides on one side of a line, with 90◦corners of the two tiles between those
two sides (or the 180◦corner of a single tile), the other ends of those sides have corners with
angles 120◦or 240◦. But for every r-side, one corner has angle 90◦or 270◦, and the angles of
the tile do not permit 120◦or 240◦at the same vertex of a tiling as 90◦or 270◦.
Similarly, in the case r = 1
2, the only additional possibility is that two r-sides align with one
1-side. The outer corners of the two r-sides have angles 120◦or 240◦, one corner of every 1-side
has angle 90◦, 180◦or 270◦, and those cannot appear at the same vertex.
Thus for any positive r ̸= 1, we have shown that if a maximal line segment in the union of
the boundaries of the tiles has p 1-sides and q r-sides on one side of the line segment, it also has
p 1-sides and q r-sides on the other side of the line segment. We can now construct the required
bijection. Because side vectors around any tile add up to zero, and the sides of tiles on both sides
of a maximal line segment add up to the same length, the speciﬁed process converts a tiling by
Tile(r) into one by Tile(r′) that is combinatorially equivalent [GS09, Lemma 1.1].
(This argument relies on the fact that the plane is simply connected; a tiling by Tile(r) of a
region with a hole that cannot be ﬁlled with tiles might not convert to a tiling by Tile(r′) of a
region with a combinatorially equivalent hole, and indeed the side vectors of the hole might be
such that no combinatorially equivalent hole exists, if the vectors of the 1-sides among the sides
of the hole do not add up to 0.)
As shown in Lemma A.6, all tilings by Tile(
√
3) are aligned to an underlying [3.4.6.4] Laves
tiling, so in fact each maximal line segment is made up only of 1-sides or only of r-sides.
Finally, Tile(1), or more generally Tile(a, a), is not aperiodic, as shown by the periodic tiling
in Figure 6.2. The polyiamonds Tile(a, 0) and Tile(0, b) are also not aperiodic. A tiling by
Tile(r) for positive r ̸= 1 can still be mapped to a corresponding tiling by Tile(a, a), Tile(a, 0)
or Tile(0, b) following the process described above, but the map is not a bijection.

46
David Smith et al.
7. Conclusion
We have exhibited an einstein, the ﬁrst topological disk that tiles aperiodically with no additional
constraints or matching conditions. The hat polykite is in fact a member of a continuous family
of aperiodic monotiles that admit combinatorially equivalent tilings. The hat forces tilings with
hierarchical structure, as is the case for many aperiodic sets of tiles in the plane, but a new
method introduced in Section 3 also suﬃces to show the lack of periodic tilings without needing
that hierarchical structure, beyond demonstrating the existence of a tiling.
The hat is a 13-sided non-convex polygon. A convex polygon cannot be an aperiodic monotile,
and all non-convex quadrilaterals can easily be seen to tile periodically. Therefore, in terms of
number of sides, the “simplest” aperiodic n-gon must have 5 ⩽n ⩽13. Subsequent research
could chip away at this range, by ﬁnding aperiodic n-gons for n < 13 or ruling them out for
n ⩾5.
Finding such a monotile pushes the boundaries of complexity known to be achievable by the
tiling behaviour of a single closed topological disk. It does not, however, settle various other
unresolved questions about that complexity. For example, all of the following questions remain
open.
• Are Heesch numbers unbounded? That is, does there exist, for every positive integer n,
a topological disk that does not tile the plane and has Heesch number at least n? We
conjecture that there is no bound on Heesch numbers.
• Are isohedral numbers unbounded? That is, does there exist, for every positive integer n,
a topological disk that tiles the plane periodically but only admits tilings with at least n
transitivity classes? Again, we conjecture that no bound exists. If the requirement of peri-
odicity is omitted here, then the hat polykite requires inﬁnitely many transitivity classes in
any tiling. Socolar [Soc07] showed that if the tile is not required to be a closed topological
disk, then tiles exist with every positive isohedral number.
• Is it undecidable whether a single closed topological disk (or indeed a more general single
tile in the plane) admits a tiling? It would again be reasonable to conjecture yes, which
would also imply unbounded Heesch numbers. Greenfeld and Tao [GT21] demonstrated
undecidability in a more general context. For sets of tiles in the plane, Ollinger [Oll09]
proved undecidability for sets of ﬁve polyominoes.
• Is it undecidable whether a single closed topological disk (or indeed a more general single
tile in the plane) admits a periodic tiling? It would again be reasonable to conjecture yes.
Such an answer would imply unbounded isohedral numbers.
Although we have provided a complete classiﬁcation of tilings by the hat polykite and related
tiles described here (all such tilings are given by the substitution system of Section 5, as applied
to the clusters of tiles from Section 4), there are various informal observations in Section 2 that
have not been fully explored or given a precise statement. Those observations could provide
starting points for possible future investigation of the tiles described here and their tilings, the
metatiles used in classifying tilings by the hat polykite, and other related substitution tilings.

preprint
47
It is not clear which ideas from this work will be most promising for future work, so we have
generally erred on the side of including observations that might be of use, rather than making
the paper focus more narrowly on a single proof of a single main result.
We believe the approach of Section 3, of coupling two separate tilings to show that a third
tiling cannot be periodic, is a new approach for proving such a result about plane tilings. It would
be worth investigating whether it can be applied to other tiles and tilings. In particular, polykites
(and, more generally, poly-[4.6.12]-tiles, a subset of the shapes known as polydrafters) may be
unusually well-suited to this method of proof, because their edges can naturally be split into those
falling in two sets of lines, with each set of lines forming a regular triangular tiling. It might
also be applicable to some poly-[4.8.8]-tiles (a subset of the polyaboloes).4 This style of proof
might help explain how small polykites proved to be aperiodic when polyominoes, polyiamonds
and polyhexes up to high orders yielded no aperiodic monotiles. However, as noted in Section 6,
searches of polykites have not found other aperiodic examples outside the family described in
this paper.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Ava Pun for her work on software for computing Heesch numbers and displaying
patches. Thanks also to Jaap Scherphuis for creating a number of useful free software tools for
exploring tilings. These tools all played a crucial role in the explorations that led to the discovery
of our polykite.
A. Aligned and unaligned tilings of polyforms
The proof that the hat polykite is aperiodic involves a case analysis for ways of surrounding a copy
of that tile, and that case analysis in turn involves considering possibilities for how an individual
kite in a copy of the hat polykite could ﬁll a particular kite on an underlying [3.4.6.4] Laves tiling.
By itself a proof founded on such a case analysis shows the absence of periodic tilings only when
all tiles are aligned to the same underlying [3.4.6.4] Laves tiling. This argument leaves open the
possibility that polykites might be able to tile periodically if they may be translated, rotated and
reﬂected without regard to the underlying grid. Here we provide the necessary justiﬁcation that
it is suﬃcient to consider aligned tilings: for classes of polyforms that include polykites, if a tile
admits a periodic tiling then it also admits one that is aligned (in a suitable precisely deﬁned
sense); the same is also shown for some other tiling properties such as “isohedral” in place of
“periodic”, although for the purposes of the main result of the paper, this fact is needed only for
the “periodic” case (in which case the result and proof are slightly simpler). We further show
that the hat in particular does not admit any unaligned tilings.
In principle, the same issue arises for polyominoes and polyiamonds. However, the only
unaligned tilings by congruent squares consist of parallel rows of squares slid relative to each
4Note that if Lemma A.3 is applied to poly-[4.6.12]-tiles or poly-[4.8.8]-tiles, the conclusion is weaker than that
of Lemma A.5 for polykites, so tilings may need to be considered that are only aligned in such a weaker sense.

48
David Smith et al.
other (Figure A.1), and much the same applies to tilings by congruent equilateral triangles (Fig-
ure A.2), and so it is clear that no interesting examples of unaligned tilings by polyominoes
or polyiamonds can arise. However, kites can form nontrivial unaligned tilings such as that of
Figure A.3, and so there is genuinely something to be proved here, less obvious than it is for
polyominoes and polyiamonds.
Figure A.1: Sliding rows of squares
Figure A.2: Sliding columns of equilateral triangles
In order to apply the results presented here to other classes of polyforms such as polyaboloes,
we state the required conditions on the tiles in fairly general and technical form.
Let S be a set of real numbers that are linearly independent over Q. Let P be a ﬁnite set
of closed topological disk polygonal tiles, such that all the angles of corners of tiles in P are
rational sub-multiples of π, all the lengths of sides of tiles in P are integer multiples of elements
of S, and such that, if a polygon in P has two or more collinear sides, the lengths of those sides
are integer multiples of the same element of S, as are the distances between their endpoints.
We now consider clusters of tiles built using copies of the polygons in P. Let Q be a
nonempty set of tiles, each one congruent to one of the polygons in P, with disjoint interi-
ors. The set Q may cover the entire plane, or just part of it. The union of the boundaries of the
tiles in Q decomposes into a set of maximal line segments, rays, and inﬁnite lines, which we
will refer to generically as segments. These segments are maximal in the sense that no segment
is a subset of a longer line contained in the union of the tile boundaries.

preprint
49
Figure A.3: Unaligned tiling of kites
Given one such maximal segment ℓ, and two tiles A, B ∈Q (which may be identical), we
say that A and B are ℓ-aligned if they both have sides that are subsets of ℓ, all sides of A or B
that lie in ℓhave lengths that are integer multiples of the same s ∈S, and the distance between
any endpoint of one of those sides that lies in ℓand any other such endpoint is also an integer
multiple of s.
The set Q naturally induces a graph whose vertices correspond to the tiles in the set. Two
tiles A and B are connected by an edge in the graph if there is a maximal segment ℓsuch that A
and B are ℓ-aligned and intersect in a line segment of positive length that is a subset of ℓ. We
say that Q is weakly aligned if this graph is connected. We say that it is strongly aligned if it is
weakly aligned and, for every maximal segment ℓdetermined by Q, and all tiles A and B that
have sides lying in ℓ, A and B are ℓ-aligned. We say that P has the alignment property for side
lengths S if every weakly aligned set is strongly aligned. Here we drop the qualiﬁers “strongly”
and “weakly” and refer to Q, given the combination of P and S, simply as aligned.
Lemma A.1. Any ﬁnite set of polykites, where the underlying kites have side lengths 1 and
√
3,
has the alignment property for side lengths {1,
√
3}.
Proof. In the Laves tiling [3.4.6.4], subdivide each kite into 30◦–60◦–90◦triangles as shown in
Figure A.4, forming a [4.6.12] Laves tiling. Furthermore, if a kite congruent to one of those from
the original [3.4.6.4] adjoins edge-to-edge a kite that is a union of triangles from that [4.6.12]
tiling, then it too is such a union. Thus all polykites in any weakly aligned set are unions of
tiles from the same [4.6.12] tiling. On any line in the union of the boundaries of the tiles from
[4.6.12] that contains sides with rational length, sides of such kites can only be at integer oﬀsets
from each other, and on the other lines (containing sides with length a rational multiple of
√
3),
sides of such kites can only be at oﬀsets from each other that are integer multiples of
√
3 (both of
these facts follow from consideration of which vertices have the correct angles to form a corner

50
David Smith et al.
of such a kite). So every weakly aligned set is strongly aligned.
Figure A.4: Decomposition of a kite into 24 triangles
We now consider P that has the alignment property for side lengths S, and proceed to
showing that, in an appropriate sense, only aligned tilings need to be considered. Note that
for polykites, at this point “aligned” means only that the kites adjoin edge-to-edge, which is
weaker than all tiles coming from the same underlying [3.4.6.4] tiling; there will be further lem-
mas speciﬁc to polykites to show that we need only consider tilings where all tiles come from
the same underlying [3.4.6.4].
The alignment property implies that the tiles of any tiling can be partitioned into strongly
aligned sets such that for any maximal line segment ℓin the union of the boundaries of the tiles,
and any two tiles in diﬀerent sets that have sides sharing a segment of positive length lying on ℓ,
those two tiles are not ℓ-aligned. We refer to these as the aligned components of the tiling. Each
aligned component is a connected set (possibly unbounded), with connected interior.
Suppose C is an aligned component in a tiling, and D is a connected component of the
complement of C (D might be the interior of another aligned component, or might be the interior
of the union of more than one aligned component). The boundary of D consists of a single
polygonal curve, either closed or inﬁnite, and as with any other polygon we may speak of its
corners and sides. Furthermore, that curve cannot pass through the same point more than once;
if it did, either D (an open set) would not be connected, or C would not have connected interior.
Consider traversing the boundary of D; note that D always lies on the same side of the
boundary during that traversal. When the traversal encounters a corner, say that corner is convex
if an open line segment between two points on the curve suﬃciently close to that corner but on
opposite sides of it is entirely within D.
When the boundary of D is a closed curve, we must also initially allow for D being inside
that curve (a hole in C) or outside (in which case C is bounded). The following lemma shows
that the ﬁrst of those cases cannot occur, since if D is inside the curve it must have at least three
convex corners.
Lemma A.2. The boundary of D has no convex corners if it is a closed curve (so in that case C
must be a bounded convex set), and at most one convex corner if it is an inﬁnite curve.

preprint
51
Proof. If we consider any ﬁnite side of the boundary of D, lying in some maximal line segment ℓ,
all the tiles lying on the other side of the side from D are not ℓ-aligned with any of those in D,
meaning that at least one of the two corners at the ends of that side lies in the middle of a side of
such a tile. If v is a convex corner, and v1, v2, ... are successive vertices traversing the boundary
curve in one direction from v, then we conclude that v1 lies in the middle of a side of a tile on
the same line as vv1, then that v2 lies in the middle of a side of a tile on the same line as v1v2,
and so on. This results in a contradiction if we encounter another convex corner (see Figure A.5
for an illustration), or encounter v again on a closed curve (see Figure A.6).
v
v1
v2
Figure A.5: Boundary curve with two convex corners
v
v1
v2
v3
v4
Figure A.6: Closed boundary curve with a convex corner
Now we need to list the tiling properties for which our argument says we do not need to
consider unaligned tilings. Let H be one of the following predicates on a tiling T ; here, k may
be any positive integer.
• T is a tiling (the trivial predicate).
• T is a strongly periodic tiling.
• T is a weakly periodic tiling.
• T is a tiling with at most k orbits of tiles under the action of its symmetry group.
• T is an isohedral tiling by 180◦rotation.
• T is an isohedral tiling by translation.
Lemma A.3. If P admits a tiling with property H, it admits an aligned tiling with property H.

52
David Smith et al.
Proof. Consider a tiling T with property H and look at the forms aligned components take in that
tiling. By the previous lemma, such components must be simply connected; either bounded, or
unbounded and with each boundary curve having at most one convex corner (in the sense deﬁned
above, i.e., convex considered as a corner of a connected component of the complement of the
aligned component).
If such a component is the whole plane, the tiling is aligned and we are done. If it is a half-
plane, form an aligned tiling of that component and its reﬂection, and that tiling has property H
(which can only be the trivial property or “weakly periodic” in that case). If it is a strip inﬁnite in
both directions, with straight lines as its boundaries on both sides, repeat that strip by translation
if there is such a tiling that is aligned, and otherwise repeat it by 180◦rotation; by considering
separately for each possible predicate H, the resulting aligned tiling has property H.
Otherwise, if there is any unbounded component, it does not have a translation as a symmetry
and H is the trivial predicate. If an unbounded component contains balls of radius R for all R,
there are aligned tilings of arbitrarily large regions of the plane, and so of the whole plane. The
only way an unbounded component can avoid containing such balls (given that each boundary
curve has at most one convex corner and all angles are rational sub-multiples of π, which implies
that all boundary curves end in rays in ﬁnitely many directions) is for it to include a semi-inﬁnite
strip (bounded on either side by rays). But there are only ﬁnitely many ways for aligned tiles to
cross the width of the strip at any point, so tiling a semi-inﬁnite strip implies the existence of a
periodic aligned tiling of an inﬁnite strip, and thus a periodic aligned tiling of the whole plane.
It remains to consider the case where there is no unbounded component. If some component
is a triangle or a quadrilateral, tiling that by 180◦rotation yields an aligned tiling of the whole
plane, which must have property H (if property H is ‘isohedral tiling by translation’, this case
cannot occur; a component could be an inﬁnite strip, but not a single parallelogram). If com-
ponents contain unbounded balls, the tiling has no translation as a symmetry and aligned tilings
of arbitrarily large regions of the plane imply aligned tilings of the whole plane. If components
do not contain unbounded balls but also are not contained in bounded balls (i.e., they are of
unbounded size in one direction only), they must have pairs of opposite parallel sides, of un-
bounded length but a bounded distance apart; the tiling is at most weakly periodic, and the same
argument as for components including a semi-inﬁnite strip applies since there are only ﬁnitely
many possible distances between those opposite parallel sides.
Otherwise, all components are convex polygons of bounded size with at least ﬁve sides; we
will show this case leads to a contradiction. Observe that every vertex of the induced tiling by
these polygons lies in the middle of a side of one of the polygons and has degree exactly 3. If
a vertex does not lie in the middle of a side, or has degree 4 or more, there is a vertex v of
a polygon P, either not in the middle of a side or in the middle of a side that is not collinear
with either of the sides vv1 and vv2 of P next to v, and the same argument that excluded convex
corners on a closed curve earlier serves to exclude this possibility as well.
We now apply Euler’s theorem for plane maps. Suppose, for some suﬃciently large R, a
ball of radius R contains tk components that are k-gons (where P
k tk = Ω(R2)). A vertex of
the tiling is incident with two corners of tiles and a point in the middle of a side, so there are
P
k ktk/2 + O(R) vertices in that ball. The number of sides of edges in the tiling in that ball
(i.e., twice the number of edges) is P
k
3
2ktk + O(R), since there are P
k ktk + O(R) sides of

preprint
53
polygons, and each vertex is in the middle of a side so serves to increase the number of sides of
edges by 1. But now P
k tk + P
k ktk/2 = P
k
3
4ktk + O(R), so P
k tk = P
k ktk/4 + O(R).
Since all k ⩾5, we have P
k ktk/4 ⩾P
k
5
4tk, contradicting that equality.
Now we strengthen this lemma to a stricter notion of aligned tilings by polykites, by consid-
ering what edge-to-edge tilings by the monokite are possible.
Lemma A.4. The only edge-to-edge tilings by the monokite are (a) the tiling resulting from a
180◦rotation about the midpoint of each side (Figure A.7), and (b) tilings composed of rows of
equilateral triangles each composed of three kites, where some of those rows may be slid relative
to each other (by the length of the long side of the kite) so they are no longer aligned as in the
Laves tiling.
Figure A.7: 180◦tiling by kites
Proof. There are exactly two possible vertex ﬁgures in an edge-to-edge tiling by the monokite
that do not appear in the Laves tiling: one with angles of 90◦, 120◦, 90◦, and 60◦in that order
(Figure A.8), and one with angles of 90◦, 90◦, 60◦, 60◦, and 60◦in that order (Figure A.9). If
the ﬁrst one occurs in a tiling, successive surrounding tiles are forced (in the order numbered)
that force all neighbouring vertices, and so all vertices, to have that vertex ﬁgure. If the other
one occurs in a tiling, successive surrounding tiles are forced (in the order numbered, taking
into account that the ﬁrst vertex ﬁgure cannot appear anywhere in the tiling) that force two
neighbouring vertices to have that vertex ﬁgure, and thus force two rows of equilateral triangles,
slid relative to each other, and then the only possibilities on either side of such a row are another
such row in either of two positions.
Lemma A.5. If P is a ﬁnite set of closed topological disk polykites, all from the same underlying
Laves tiling, and P admits a tiling with property H, it admits a tiling with property H where all
polykites in the tiling are aligned to the same underlying Laves tiling, except possibly when P
contains the monokite and H is “isohedral tiling by 180◦rotation”.

54
David Smith et al.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Figure A.8: Vertex with angles of 90◦, 120◦, 90◦, and 60◦in that order
1
2
3 4
5 6
7
8
9
10 11
Figure A.9: Vertex with angles of 90◦, 90◦, 60◦, 60◦, and 60◦in that order
Proof. If the edge-to-edge tiling with property H (“aligned” in the more general sense) is the
180◦tiling by the monokite, we are done because the monokite admits an isohedral tiling. Oth-
erwise, taking a minimal block of consecutive rows of equilateral triangles ﬁlled exactly with
tiles from P and translating it so as to be aligned with the underlying Laves tiling produces a
tiling with property H.
Lemma A.6. All tilings by the hat polykite are aligned to an underlying [3.4.6.4] Laves tiling.
Proof. Note that any maximal segment in the union of the boundaries of tiles in such a tiling can
contain no more than two sides of tiles, since any 90◦angle is adjacent on either side to angles
greater than 90◦. In particular, there are no inﬁnite rays contained in the union of the boundaries
of tiles.
This constraint immediately excludes the case of aligned tilings decomposing into rows of
equilateral triangles slid relative to each other, and no two adjacent kites in the polykite are con-
sistent with the 180◦rotation tiling by the monokite. So any tiling not aligned with an underlying
[3.4.6.4] is also unaligned in the more general sense, and we consider aligned components. Be-
cause there are no inﬁnite rays among the boundaries of tiles, such aligned components must be
bounded convex sets. The corners of those sets must be corners of a single polykite (since any
two angles of the polykite add to at least 180◦). But no corner of the polykite can be a corner of
a convex set tiled by the polykite: four have reﬂex angles, seven are adjacent to a reﬂex angle,
and for the remaining two, extending one of the sides from that vertex cuts oﬀa region too small
to be ﬁlled by polykites (Figure A.10).

preprint
55
Figure A.10: Extending a side of the polykite from either vertex that is neither a reﬂex angle nor
adjacent to one
B. Case analysis for 1-patches
We present here details of a computer-generated but human-veriﬁable case analysis, based on
consideration of 1-patches rather than 2-patches. This analysis can be used to complete a variant
of the proof in Section 4 that, when tiles in a tiling by the hat polykite are assigned labels fol-
lowing the rules given there, (a) the labels assigned do induce a division into the clusters shown,
and (b) the clusters adjoin other clusters in accordance with the matching rules. As is justiﬁed
in Appendix A, we only consider tilings where all tiles are aligned with an underlying [3.4.6.4]
Laves tiling.
B.1. Enumeration of neighbours
First we produce a list of possible neighbours of the hat polykite in a tiling. There are 58 possible
neighbours when we only require such a neighbour not to intersect the original polykite; these are
shown in Figure B.1, with that original polykite shaded. The ﬁrst 41 of these neighbours remain
in consideration for the enumeration of 1-patches. The ﬁnal 17 are immediately eliminated
(in the order shown) because they cannot be extended to a tiling: either there is no possible
neighbour that can contain the shaded kite (without resulting in an intersection, or a pair of tiles
that were previously eliminated as possible neighbours), or we eliminated Y as a neighbour of X
and so can also eliminate X as a neighbour of Y .
Possible neighbour 1
Possible neighbour 2
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 1)

56
David Smith et al.
Possible neighbour 3
Possible neighbour 4
Possible neighbour 5
Possible neighbour 6
Possible neighbour 7
Possible neighbour 8
Possible neighbour 9
Possible neighbour 10
Possible neighbour 11
Possible neighbour 12
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 2)

preprint
57
Possible neighbour 13
Possible neighbour 14
Possible neighbour 15
Possible neighbour 16
Possible neighbour 17
Possible neighbour 18
Possible neighbour 19
Possible neighbour 20
Possible neighbour 21
Possible neighbour 22
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 3)

58
David Smith et al.
Possible neighbour 23
Possible neighbour 24
Possible neighbour 25
Possible neighbour 26
Possible neighbour 27
Possible neighbour 28
Possible neighbour 29
Possible neighbour 30
Possible neighbour 31
Possible neighbour 32
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 4)

preprint
59
Possible neighbour 33
Possible neighbour 34
Possible neighbour 35
Possible neighbour 36
Possible neighbour 37
Possible neighbour 38
Possible neighbour 39
Possible neighbour 40
Possible neighbour 41
Possible neighbour 42 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 5)

60
David Smith et al.
Possible neighbour 43 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 44 (eliminated
together with possible neighbour 43)
Possible neighbour 45 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 46 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 47 (eliminated
together with possible neighbour 46)
Possible neighbour 48 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 49 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 50 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 6)

preprint
61
Possible neighbour 51 (eliminated
together with possible neighbour 50)
Possible neighbour 52 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 53 (eliminated
together with possible neighbour 52)
Possible neighbour 54 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 55 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 56 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 57 (eliminated by
considering neighbours containing the
shaded kite)
Possible neighbour 58 (eliminated
together with possible neighbour 57)
Figure B.1: Possible neighbours (part 7)

62
David Smith et al.
B.2. Enumeration of 1-patches
Having produced a list of possible neighbours, we now proceed to enumerating possible 1-
patches. When we have a partial 1-patch (some number of neighbours for the original, shaded
polykite), we pick some kite neighbouring that original polykite and enumerate the possible
neighbouring polykites containing that kite, excluding any that would result in the patch con-
taining two polykites that either intersect or form a pair of neighbours previously ruled out; the
kite we use is chosen so that the number of choices for the neighbour added is minimal. This
process results in 37 possible 1-patches; the partial patches from the search process are shown
in Figure B.2 and the 1-patches are shown in Figures B.3.
Some of the 1-patches found can be immediately eliminated at this point, by identifying a
tile in the 1-patch that cannot itself be surrounded by any of the 1-patches (that has not yet been
eliminated) without resulting in either an intersection or a pair of neighbours that were previously
ruled out. In the 12 cases implicated here, the tile that cannot be surrounded is shaded, and they
are eliminated in the order shown, leaving 25 remaining 1-patches. For each of those remaining
1-patches, the classiﬁcation of the central tile by the rules in Section 4 is shown.
Partial patch 1 (extends to partial patches
2–4)
Partial patch 2 (extends to partial patches
5–6)
Partial patch 3 (extends to partial patches
7–8)
Partial patch 4 (extends to partial patches
9–10)
Partial patch 5 (extends to partial patches
11–12)
Partial patch 6 (extends to partial patches
13–14)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 1)

preprint
63
Partial patch 7 (extends to partial patch 15)
Partial patch 8 (extends to partial patches
16–17)
Partial patch 9 (extends to partial patches
18–19)
Partial patch 10 (extends to partial patches
20–21)
Partial patch 11 (extends to partial patch
22)
Partial patch 12 (extends to partial patches
23–24)
Partial patch 13 (extends to partial patch
25)
Partial patch 14 (extends to partial patch
26)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 2)

64
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 15 (extends to partial patches
27–28)
Partial patch 16 (extends to partial patches
29–30)
Partial patch 17 (extends to partial patches
31–33)
Partial patch 18 (extends to partial patch
34)
Partial patch 19 (extends to partial patch
35)
Partial patch 20 (extends to partial patch
36)
Partial patch 21 (extends to partial patch
37)
Partial patch 22 (extends to partial patches
38–39)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 3)

preprint
65
Partial patch 23 (extends to partial patches
40–41)
Partial patch 24 (extends to partial patch
42)
Partial patch 25 (extends to partial patches
43–44)
Partial patch 26 (extends to partial patches
45–46)
Partial patch 27 (extends to partial patch
47)
Partial patch 28 (extends to partial patch
48)
Partial patch 29 (extends to partial patches
49–50)
Partial patch 30 (extends to partial patch
51)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 4)

66
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 31 (extends to partial patch
52)
Partial patch 32 (extends to partial patches
53–54)
Partial patch 33 (extends to partial patch
55)
Partial patch 34 (extends to partial patches
56–57)
Partial patch 35 (extends to partial patches
58–60)
Partial patch 36 (extends to partial patches
61–62)
Partial patch 37 (extends to partial patches
63–64)
Partial patch 38 (extends to partial patch
65)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 5)

preprint
67
Partial patch 39 (extends to partial patch
66)
Partial patch 40 (extends to partial patches
67–68)
Partial patch 41 (extends to partial patch
69, 1-patch 1)
Partial patch 42 (extends to partial patches
70–71)
Partial patch 43 (extends to partial patch
72)
Partial patch 44 (extends to partial patch
73)
Partial patch 45 (extends to 1-patch 2)
Partial patch 46 (extends to 1-patch 3)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 6)

68
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 47 (extends to partial patches
74–75)
Partial patch 48 (extends to partial patch
76)
Partial patch 49 (extends to partial patches
77–78)
Partial patch 50 (extends to partial patch
79, 1-patch 4)
Partial patch 51 (extends to partial patches
80–81)
Partial patch 52 (extends to partial patch
82)
Partial patch 53 (extends to partial patches
83–84)
Partial patch 54 (extends to partial patch
85, 1-patch 5)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 7)

preprint
69
Partial patch 55 (extends to partial patch
86, 1-patch 6)
Partial patch 56 (extends to 1-patches 7–8)
Partial patch 57 (extends to partial patches
87–88)
Partial patch 58 (no extensions)
Partial patch 59 (extends to partial patch
89)
Partial patch 60 (extends to partial patch
90)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 8)

70
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 61 (extends to partial patch
91)
Partial patch 62 (extends to partial patch
92)
Partial patch 63 (no extensions)
Partial patch 64 (extends to 1-patch 9)
Partial patch 65 (extends to 1-patches
10–11)
Partial patch 66 (no extensions)
Partial patch 67 (extends to 1-patch 12)
Partial patch 68 (extends to 1-patch 13)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 9)

preprint
71
Partial patch 69 (extends to 1-patch 14)
Partial patch 70 (extends to 1-patch 15)
Partial patch 71 (extends to 1-patch 16)
Partial patch 72 (extends to 1-patches
17–18)
Partial patch 73 (no extensions)
Partial patch 74 (extends to 1-patches
19–20)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 10)

72
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 75 (extends to 1-patch 21)
Partial patch 76 (extends to 1-patch 22)
Partial patch 77 (extends to 1-patch 23)
Partial patch 78 (extends to 1-patch 24)
Partial patch 79 (extends to 1-patch 25)
Partial patch 80 (extends to 1-patch 26)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 11)

preprint
73
Partial patch 81 (extends to 1-patch 27)
Partial patch 82 (extends to 1-patch 28)
Partial patch 83 (extends to 1-patch 29)
Partial patch 84 (extends to 1-patch 30)
Partial patch 85 (extends to 1-patch 31)
Partial patch 86 (extends to 1-patch 32)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 12)

74
David Smith et al.
Partial patch 87 (extends to 1-patch 33)
Partial patch 88 (extends to 1-patch 34)
Partial patch 89 (extends to 1-patch 35)
Partial patch 90 (extends to 1-patch 36)
Partial patch 91 (no extensions)
Partial patch 92 (extends to 1-patch 37)
Figure B.2: Partial patches (part 13)

preprint
75
1-patch 1 (central tile class F2)
1-patch 2 (central tile class H3)
1-patch 3 (central tile class H3)
1-patch 4 (central tile class F2)
1-patch 5 (central tile class P2)
1-patch 6 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 1)

76
David Smith et al.
1-patch 7 (central tile class H2)
1-patch 8 (central tile class H2)
1-patch 9 (central tile class H1)
1-patch 10 (central tile class H4)
1-patch 11 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 12 (central tile class FP1)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 2)

preprint
77
1-patch 13 (central tile class FP1)
1-patch 14 (central tile class F2)
1-patch 15 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 16 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 17 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 18 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 3)

78
David Smith et al.
1-patch 19 (central tile class H4)
1-patch 20 (central tile class H4)
1-patch 21 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 22 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 23 (central tile class FP1)
1-patch 24 (central tile class FP1)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 4)

preprint
79
1-patch 25 (central tile class F2)
1-patch 26 (central tile class FP1)
1-patch 27 (central tile class FP1)
1-patch 28 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 29 (central tile class T1)
1-patch 30 (central tile class T1)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 5)

80
David Smith et al.
1-patch 31 (central tile class P2)
1-patch 32 (central tile class P2)
1-patch 33 (central tile class H2)
1-patch 34 (central tile class H2)
1-patch 35 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
1-patch 36 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 6)

preprint
81
1-patch 37 (eliminated by trying to
surround shaded tile)
Figure B.3: 1-patches (part 7)
B.3. Classiﬁcation of outer tiles
For each of the possible neighbours that actually occurs in some of the remaining 1-patches, we
can now list the possible classiﬁcations of a central tile that has such a neighbour; see Table B.1.
For each of the outer tiles in a 1-patch, we have some but not all of its neighbours, and can take
the intersection of the sets from Table B.1 to produce a set of possible classes for that outer tile.
Although this is not a single class, it can still be used for the within-cluster and between-cluster
checks. In each case, it turns out that the set of possible classes for a neighbour appearing in
one of those checks is a subset of the classes permitted by that check, and so we have a complete
proof of the within-cluster and between-cluster matching properties that depends only on the
enumeration of 1-patches presented here and not on a larger enumeration of 2-patches; the lists
of checks and corresponding sets of classes appear below.
• 1-patch 1 (class F2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– F edge F + OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– F edge F −OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H3} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{P2}
• 1-patch 2 (class H3)
– H3 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H lower edge B−OK: {FP1, T1} ⊆{FP1, T1}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}

82
David Smith et al.
Possible neighbour
Possible classes for central tile
2
{FP1, F2, H4}
3
{H2}
4
{H4}
6
{H3}
7
{H1}
8
{H3}
9
{FP1, F2, H2, P2, T1}
11
{H4}
12
{FP1, T1}
13
{FP1, F2, H3, H4}
14
{FP1, F2, H4, P2, T1}
15
{H2}
16
{H1}
17
{F2, H2, P2}
18
{FP1, T1}
19
{H4}
20
{H2}
22
{F2, H2, P2}
23
{FP1, T1}
24
{H1, H3}
25
{FP1, T1}
26
{FP1, F2, H4}
27
{P2, T1}
28
{H1, H2}
29
{FP1, H3, H4, T1}
30
{H1}
32
{F2, H2, P2}
33
{H2}
34
{FP1, F2, H3, H4}
36
{H2, P2}
37
{FP1, H3, H4}
38
{P2, T1}
39
{H1}
40
{F2, P2}
41
{P2}
Table B.1

preprint
83
• 1-patch 3 (class H3)
– H3 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H lower edge B−OK: {FP1, T1} ⊆{FP1, T1}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {F2, FP1, H4} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
• 1-patch 4 (class F2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– F edge F + OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– F edge F −OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H3} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 5 (class P2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– T or P lower edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H3} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at right of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 7 (class H2)
– H2 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H edge A+ OK: {P2, T1} ⊆{P2, T1}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {F2, FP1, H4} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {F2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
• 1-patch 8 (class H2)
– H2 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H edge A+ OK: {T1} ⊆{T1}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H3} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {F2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
• 1-patch 9 (class H1)
– H1 neighbour H2 OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}

84
David Smith et al.
– H1 neighbour H3 OK: {H3} ⊆{H3}
– H1 neighbour H4 OK: {H4} ⊆{H4}
– H upper edge B−OK: {FP1, T1} ⊆{FP1, T1}
• 1-patch 10 (class H4)
– H4 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
• 1-patch 12 (class FP1)
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H4} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{P2}
• 1-patch 13 (class FP1)
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H3} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{P2}
• 1-patch 14 (class F2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– F edge F + OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– F edge F −OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{P2}
• 1-patch 19 (class H4)
– H4 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}

preprint
85
• 1-patch 20 (class H4)
– H4 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
• 1-patch 23 (class FP1)
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H4} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 24 (class FP1)
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H3} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 25 (class F2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– F edge F + OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– F edge F −OK: {F2} ⊆{F2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 26 (class FP1)
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2, P2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H4} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 27 (class FP1)

86
David Smith et al.
– FP1 neighbour P2 or F2 OK: {F2, P2} ⊆{F2, P2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H3} ⊆{H3, H4}
– X+ edge at right of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{F2, FP1, H3, H4}
– X−edge at bottom of polykite OK: {FP1, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at bottom of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 29 (class T1)
– T upper edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– T or P lower edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H4} ⊆{H3, H4}
• 1-patch 30 (class T1)
– T upper edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– T or P lower edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– T, P or F edge B+ OK: {H3} ⊆{H3, H4}
• 1-patch 31 (class P2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– T or P lower edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {FP1, H3, H4} ⊆{FP1, H3, H4}
– L edge at right of polykite OK: {F2, FP1} ⊆{F2, FP1}
• 1-patch 32 (class P2)
– P2 or F2 neighbour FP1 OK: {FP1} ⊆{FP1}
– T or P lower edge A−OK: {H2} ⊆{H2}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
– L edge at right of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{P2}
• 1-patch 33 (class H2)
– H2 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H edge A+ OK: {P2} ⊆{P2, T1}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {P2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {H2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}

preprint
87
• 1-patch 34 (class H2)
– H2 neighbour H1 OK: {H1} ⊆{H1}
– H edge A+ OK: {T1} ⊆{T1}
– X+ edge at top of polykite OK: {H2} ⊆{H2, P2}
– X−edge at right of polykite OK: {H2, P2} ⊆{F2, H2, P2}
References
[Baˇs21]
Bojan Baˇsi´c. A ﬁgure with Heesch number 6: pushing a two-decade-old boundary.
Math. Intelligencer, 43(3):50–53, 2021. doi:10.1007/s00283-020-10034-w.
[Ber66]
Robert Berger. The undecidability of the domino problem. Number 66 in Memoirs
of the American Mathematical Society. American Mathematical Soc., 1966. doi:
10.1090/memo/0066.
[Bha20]
Siddhartha Bhattacharya. Periodicity and decidability of tilings of Z2. Amer. J. Math.,
142(1):255–266, 2020. doi:10.1353/ajm.2020.0006.
[B¨or74]
K´aroly B¨or¨oczky.
G¨ombkit¨olt´esek ´alland´o g¨orb¨ulet˝u terekben I.
Mat.
Lapok, 25(3–4):265–306, 1974.
URL: http://real-j.mtak.hu/9373/1/MTA_
MatematikaiLapok_1974.pdf#page=273.
[BSJ91]
M. Baake, M. Schlottmann, and P. D. Jarvis. Quasiperiodic tilings with tenfold sym-
metry and equivalence with respect to local derivability. J. Phys. A, 24(19):4637–
4654, 1991. doi:10.1088/0305-4470/24/19/025.
[BW92]
Jonathan Block and Shmuel Weinberger. Aperiodic tilings, positive scalar curvature
and amenability of spaces. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 5(4):907–918, 1992. doi:10.2307/
2152713.
[DB81a] Nicolaas Govert De Bruijn. Algebraic theory of Penrose’s non-periodic tilings of
the plane. I. Kon. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A, 43(84):39–52, 1981. doi:
10.1016/1385-7258(81)90016-0.
[DB81b] Nicolaas Govert De Bruijn. Algebraic theory of Penrose’s non-periodic tilings of
the plane. II. Kon. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A, 43(84):53–66, 1981. doi:
10.1016/1385-7258(81)90017-2.
[GBN91] D. Girault-Beauquier and M. Nivat. Tiling the plane with one tile. In Topology and
category theory in computer science (Oxford, 1989), Oxford Sci. Publ., pages 291–
333. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1991.
[GK72]
Yu. Sh. Gurevich and I. O. Koryakov. Remarks on Berger’s paper on the domino
problem. Sib. Math. J., 13(2):319–321, 1972. doi:10.1007/BF00971620.
[GS99]
Chaim Goodman-Strauss. A small aperiodic set of planar tiles. European Journal of
Combinatorics, 20(5):375–384, July 1999. doi:10.1006/eujc.1998.0281.
[GS09]
Chaim Goodman-Strauss. Regular production systems and triangle tilings. Theoret.
Comput. Sci., 410(16):1534–1549, 2009. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2008.12.012.

88
David Smith et al.
[GS16]
Branko Gr¨unbaum and G.C. Shephard. Tilings and Patterns. Dover, second edition,
2016.
[GT21]
Rachel Greenfeld and Terence Tao. Undecidable translational tilings with only two
tiles, or one nonabelian tile. 2021. arXiv:2108.07902.
[GT22]
Rachel Greenfeld and Terence Tao. A counterexample to the periodic tiling conjec-
ture. 2022. arXiv:2211.15847.
[Gum96] Petra Gummelt. Penrose tilings as coverings of congruent decagons. Geom. Dedicata,
62(1):1–17, 1996. doi:10.1007/BF00239998.
[Hee35]
H. Heesch.
Aufbau der Ebene aus kongruenten Bereichen.
Nachr. Ges. Wiss.
G¨ottingen, Math.-Phys. Kl. I, N. F., 1:115–117, 1935.
[Hil02]
David Hilbert. Mathematical problems. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 8(10):437–479, 1902.
doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1902-00923-3.
[JR21]
Emmanuel Jeandel and Micha¨el Rao. An aperiodic set of 11 Wang tiles. Adv. Comb.,
(1):1–37, 2021. doi:10.19086/aic.18614.
[JS97]
Hyeong-Chai Jeong and Paul J. Steinhardt. Constructing Penrose-like tilings from a
single prototile and the implications for quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. B, 55:3520–3532,
Feb 1997. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.55.3520.
[Kap22]
Craig S. Kaplan. Heesch numbers of unmarked polyforms. Contributions to Discrete
Mathematics, 17(2):150–171, 2022. URL: https://cdm.ucalgary.ca/article/
view/72886.
[Ken92]
Richard Kenyon. Rigidity of planar tilings. Invent. Math., 107(3):637–651, 1992.
doi:10.1007/BF01231905.
[Ken93]
Richard Kenyon. Erratum: “Rigidity of planar tilings”. Invent. Math., 112(1):223,
1993. doi:10.1007/BF01232432.
[Ken96]
Richard Kenyon. A group of paths in R2. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 348(8):3155–3172,
1996. doi:10.1090/S0002-9947-96-01562-0.
[Man04] Casey Mann.
Heesch’s tiling problem.
The American Mathematical Monthly,
111(6):509–517, 2004. doi:10.1080/00029890.2004.11920105.
[MM98]
G. A. Margulis and S. Mozes. Aperiodic tilings of the hyperbolic plane by convex
polygons. Israel J. Math., 107:319–325, 1998. doi:10.1007/BF02764015.
[Moz97] Shahar Mozes. Aperiodic tilings. Invent. Math., 128(3):603–611, 1997. doi:10.
1007/s002220050153.
[MT16]
Casey Mann and B. Charles Thomas. Heesch numbers of edge-marked polyforms.
Experimental Mathematics, 25(3):281–294, 2016. doi:10.1080/10586458.2015.
1096867.
[Mye19]
Joseph Myers. Polyomino, polyhex and polyiamond tiling, 2000–2019. Accessed:
February 19th, 2023.
URL: https://www.polyomino.org.uk/mathematics/
polyform-tiling/.

preprint
89
[Oll09]
Nicolas Ollinger. Tiling the plane with a ﬁxed number of polyominoes. In Language
and automata theory and applications, volume 5457 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
pages 638–647. Springer, Berlin, 2009. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-00982-2_54.
[Pen78]
Roger Penrose. Pentaplexity. Eureka, 39:16–22, 1978. URL: https://www.archim.
org.uk/eureka/archive/Eureka-39.pdf#page=19.
[Pen97]
Roger Penrose. Remarks on tiling: details of a (1 + ϵ + ϵ2)-aperiodic set. In The
mathematics of long-range aperiodic order (Waterloo, ON, 1995), volume 489 of
NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C: Math. Phys. Sci., pages 467–497. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
Dordrecht, 1997.
[Rao17]
Michael Rao. Exhaustive search of convex pentagons which tile the plane. 2017.
arXiv:1708.00274.
[Rei28]
Karl Reinhardt.
Zur Zerlegung der euklidischen R¨aume in kongruente Polytope.
Sitzungsber. Preuß. Akad. Wiss., Phys.-Math. Kl., pages 150–155, 1928.
[Sen]
Marjorie Senechal. Personal communication.
[Sen96]
Marjorie Senechal. Quasicrystals and geometry. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[SJ96]
Paul J. Steinhardt and Hyeong-Chai Jeong. A simpler approach to Penrose tiling with
implications for quasicrystal formation. Nature, 382:431–433, 1996. doi:10.1038/
382431a0.
[Soc07]
Joshua E. S. Socolar.
The hexagonal parquet tiling: k-isohedral monotiles with
arbitrarily large k.
Math. Intelligencer, 29(2):33–38, 2007.
arXiv:0708.2663,
doi:10.1007/BF02986203.
[ST11]
Joshua E. S. Socolar and Joan M. Taylor. An aperiodic hexagonal tile. J. Combin.
Theory Ser. A, 118(8):2207–2231, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.jcta.2011.05.001.
[ST12]
Joshua E. S. Socolar and Joan M. Taylor. Forcing nonperiodicity with a single tile.
Math. Intelligencer, 34(1):18–28, 2012. doi:10.1007/s00283-011-9255-y.
[Wan61] Hao Wang. Proving theorems by pattern recognition – II. The Bell System Technical
Journal, 40(1):1–41, 1961. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1961.tb03975.x.

