111
A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
YIHAN CAO∗, Lehigh University & Carnegie Mellon University, USA
SIYU LI, Lehigh University, USA
YIXIN LIU, Lehigh University, USA
ZHILING YAN, Lehigh University, USA
YUTONG DAI, Lehigh University, USA
PHILIP S. YU, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
LICHAO SUN, Lehigh University, USA
Recently, ChatGPT, along with DALL-E-2 [1] and Codex [2],has been gaining significant attention from society.
As a result, many individuals have become interested in related resources and are seeking to uncover the
background and secrets behind its impressive performance. In fact, ChatGPT and other Generative AI (GAI)
techniques belong to the category of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC), which involves the
creation of digital content, such as images, music, and natural language, through AI models. The goal of
AIGC is to make the content creation process more efficient and accessible, allowing for the production of
high-quality content at a faster pace. AIGC is achieved by extracting and understanding intent information
from instructions provided by human, and generating the content according to its knowledge and the intent
information. In recent years, large-scale models have become increasingly important in AIGC as they provide
better intent extraction and thus, improved generation results. With the growth of data and the size of the
models, the distribution that the model can learn becomes more comprehensive and closer to reality, leading
to more realistic and high-quality content generation. This survey provides a comprehensive review on the
history of generative models, and basic components, recent advances in AIGC from unimodal interaction and
multimodal interaction. From the perspective of unimodality, we introduce the generation tasks and relative
models of text and image. From the perspective of multimodality, we introduce the cross-application between
the modalities mentioned above. Finally, we discuss the existing open problems and future challenges in AIGC.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →Embedded systems; Redundancy; Robotics; • Net-
works →Network reliability.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: datasets, neural networks, gaze detection, text tagging
ACM Reference Format:
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun. 2018. A Comprehensive
Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC): A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT. J. ACM 37, 4,
Article 111 (August 2018), 44 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
∗Incoming Ph.D. student at Lehigh University.
Authors’ addresses: Yihan Cao, yihanc@andrew.cmu.edu, Lehigh University & Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA; Siyu Li, applicantlisiyu@hotmail.com, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA; Yixin Liu, lis221@lehigh.edu, Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, PA, USA; Zhiling Yan, zhilingyan724@outlook.com, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA; Yutong
Dai, lis221@lehigh.edu, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA; Philip S. Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, USA, psyu@uic.edu; Lichao Sun, lis221@lehigh.edu, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
0004-5411/2018/8-ART111 $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.
arXiv:2303.04226v1  [cs.AI]  7 Mar 2023

111:2
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) has gained much attention beyond
the computer science community, where the whole society begins to be interested in the various
content generation products built by large tech companies [3], such as ChatGPT [4] and DALL-E-
2 [5]. AIGC refers to content that is generated using advanced Generative AI (GAI) techniques, as
opposed to being created by human authors, which can automate the creation of large amounts
of content in a short amount of time. For example, ChatGPT is a language model developed by
OpenAI for building conversational AI systems, which can efficiently understand and respond to
human language inputs in a meaningful way. In addition, DALL-E-2 is another state-of-the-art GAI
model also developed by OpenAI, which is capable of creating unique and high-quality images
from textual descriptions in a few minutes, such as "an astronaut riding a horse ina photorealistic
style" as shown in Figure 1. As the remarkable achievements in AIGC, many people believe it will
be the new era of AI and make significant impacts on the whole world.
Instruction 2:
Teddy bears working on 
new AI research on the 
moon in the 1980s.
DALL·E 2
Instruction 1:
An astronaut riding a 
horse in a photorealistic 
style.
Figure 1
Figure 2
Fig. 1. Examples of AIGC in image generation. Text instructions are given to OpenAI DALL-E-2 model, and it
generates two images according to the instructions.
Technically, AIGC refers to, given human instructions which could help teach and guide the model
to complete the task, utilizing GAI algorithms to generate content that satisfies the instruction.
This generation process usually consists of two steps: extracting intent information from human
instructions and generating content according to the extracted intentions. However, the paradigm
of GAI models containing the above two steps is not entirely novel, as demonstrated by previous
studies [6, 7]. The core advancements in recent AIGC compared to prior works are the result of
training more sophisticated generative models on larger datasets, using larger foundation model
architectures, and having access to extensive computational resources. For example, the main
framework of GPT-3 maintains the same as GPT-2, but the pre-training data size grows from
WebText [8](38GB) to CommonCrawl [9](570GB after filtering), and the foundation model size
grows from 1.5B to 175B. Therefore, GPT-3 has better generalization ability than GPT-2 on various
tasks, such as human intent extraction.
In addition to the benefits brought by the increase in data volume and computational power,
researchers are also exploring ways to integrate new technologies with GAI algorithms. For example,
ChatGPT utilizes reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [10–12] to determine the
most appropriate response for a given instruction, thus improving model’s reliability and accuracy
over time. This approach allows ChatGPT to better understand human preferences in long dialogues.
Meanwhile, in computer vision, stable diffusion [13], proposed by Stability.AI in 2022, has also
shown great success in image generation. Unlike prior methods, generative diffusion models
can help generate high-resolution images by controlling the trade-off between exploration and
exploitation, resulting in a harmonious combination of diversity in the generated images and
similarity to the training data.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:3
Unimodal
Multimodal
Data
Generative AI Models
Generative AI Models
Pre-train
Data
Pre-train
Please write a 
story about a cat.
Once upon a time, 
there was a cat 
named 
Jessy….
Prompt
Decode
Describe this 
picture.
Draw a picture
of a cat.
Instruction 𝐼!
Result 𝑅!
Instruction 𝐼"
Instruction 𝐼#
Instruction 𝐼$
Write a song 
about a cat.
Prompt
Prompt
Prompt
Result 𝑅"
Result 𝑅#
Result 𝑅$
This is a cat.
Fig. 2. Overview of AIGC. Generally, GAI models can be categorized into two types: unimodal models and
multimodal models. Unimodal models receive instructions from the same modality as the generated content
modality, whereas multimodal models accept cross-modal instructions and produce results of different
modalities.
By combining these advancements, models have made significant progress in AIGC tasks and
have been adopted in various industries, including art [14], advertising [15], and education [16]. In
the near future, AIGC will continue to be a significant area of research in machine learning. It is
therefore crucial to conduct an extensive review of past research and identify the open problems in
this field. This survey is the first one that focuses on the core technologies and applications in the
field of AIGC.
1.1
Major Contributions
This is the first comprehensive survey of AIGC that summarizes GAI in the aspects of techniques
and applications. Previous surveys have focused on GAI from various angles, including natural
language generation [17], image generation[18], generation in multimodal machine learning [7, 19].
However, these prior works only focus on a specific part of AIGC. In this survey, we first provide
a review of foundation techniques commonly used in AIGC. Then, we further offer a thorough
summary of advanced GAI algorithms, both in terms of unimodal generation and multimodal
generation, as shown in Figure 2. In addition, we examine the applications and potential challenges
of AIGC. Finally, we highlight the open problems and future directions in this field. In summary,
the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• To our best knowledge, we are the first to provide a formal definition and a thorough survey
for AIGC and AI-enhanced generation process.
• We review the history, foundation techniques of AIGC and conduct a comprehensive analysis
of recent advances in GAI tasks and models from the perspective of unimodal generation
and multimodal generation.
• We discuss the main challenges facing AIGC and future research trends confronting AIGC.
1.2
Organization
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the history of AIGC mainly from
the view of vision and language modalities. Section 3 introduces the basic components that are
widely used in nowadays GAI model training. Section 4 summarizes recent advances of GAI models,
among which, Section 4.1 reviews the advances from unimodal perspective and Section 4.2 reviews
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:4
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
the advances from the perspective of multimodal generation. Among multimodal generation, we
introduce vision language models, text audio models, text graph models and text code models.
Section 5 and Section 6 introduce the applications of GAI models in AIGC and some other important
research that are related to this area. Furthermore, Sections 7, 8 reveal the risk, open problems and
future directions of AIGC technologies. Finally, we conclude our research in 9.
2
HISTORY OF GENERATIVE AI
Generative models have a long history in artificial intelligence, dating back to the 1950s with the
development of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [20] and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) [21].
These models generated sequential data such as speech and time series. However, it wasn’t until
the advent of deep learning that generative models saw significant improvements in performance.
In early years of deep generative models, different areas do not have much overlap in general.
In natural language processing (NLP), a traditional method to generate sentences is to learn
word distribution using N-gram language modeling [22] and then search for the best sequence.
However, this method cannot effectively adapt to long sentences. To solve this problem, recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) [23] were later introduced for language modeling tasks , allowing for
modeling relatively long dependency. This was followed by the development of Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) [24] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [25], which leveraged gating mechanism to
control memory during training. These methods are capable of attending to around 200 tokens in a
sample [26], which marks a significant improvement compared to N-gram language models.
Meanwhile, in computer vision (CV), before the advent of deep learning-based methods, tra-
ditional image generation algorithms used techniques such as texture synthesis [27] and texture
mapping [28]. These algorithms were based on hand-designed features, and were limited in their abil-
ity to generate complex and diverse images. In 2014, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [29]
was first proposed, which was a significant milestone in this area, due to its impressive results
in various applications. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [30] and other methods like diffusion
generative models [31] have also been developed for more fine-grained control over the image
generation process and the ability to generate high-quality images.
The advancement of generative models in various domains has followed different paths, but
eventually, the intersection emerged: the transformer architecture [32]. Introduced by Vaswani et
al. for NLP tasks in 2017, Transformer has later been applied in CV and then become the dominant
backbone for many generative models in various domains [9, 33, 34]. In the field of NLP, many
prominent large language models, e.g., BERT and GPT, adopt the transformer architecture as
their primary building block, offering advantages over previous building blocks, i.e., LSTM and
GRU. In CV, Vision Transformer (ViT) [35] and Swin Transformer [36] later takes this concept
even further by combining the transformer architecture with visual components, allowing it to
be applied to image based downstreams. Except for the improvement that transformer brought
to individual modalities, this intersection also enabled models from different domains to be fused
together for multimodal tasks. One such example of multimodal models is CLIP [37]. CLIP is a
joint vision-language model that combines the transformer architecture with visual components,
allowing it to be trained on a massive amount of text and image data. Since it combines visual
and language knowledge during pre-training, it can also be used as image encoders in multimodal
prompting for generation. In all, the emergence of transformer based models revolutionized AI
generation and led to the possibility of large-scale training.
In recent years, researchers have also begun to introduce new techniques based on these models.
For instance, in NLP, instead of fine-tuning, people sometimes prefer few-shot prompting [38],
which refers to including a few examples selected from the dataset in the prompt, to help the
model better understand task requirements. And in visual language, researchers often combine
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:5
2014
2020
2018
2016
NLP
N-Gram
NLP
LSTM/GRU
NLP
Transformer
NLP
NLP
NLP
CV
StyleGAN 
BigBiGAN
DDPM 
ViT
MoCo
BiGAN
RevNet
Show-Tell
DALL-E
BLIP2
DALL-E 2
CV
CV
CV
VL
VL
VL
VisualBERT
ViLBERT
UNITER
VL
VL
Unimodal- CV & NLP
Multimodal – Vision Language
CLIP
ALBEF
BLIP
VQ-GAN
VL
GAN 
VAE
Flow
ELMO 
BERT 
GPT-2
StyleNet
StackGAN
CAVP
DMGAN
VQ-VAE
Sparrow 
chatGPT
GPT-3 
OPT 
BART 
T5
Fig. 3. The history of Generative AI in CV, NLP and VL.
modality-specific models with self-supervised contrastive learning objectives to provide more
robust representations.
In the future, as AIGC becomes increasingly important, more and more technologies shall be
introduced, empowering this area with vitality.
3
FOUNDATIONS FOR AIGC
In this section, we introduce foundation models that are commonly used in AIGC.
3.1
Foundation Model
3.1.1
Transformer. Transformer is the backbone architecture for many state-of-the-art models,
such as GPT-3 [9], DALL-E-2 [5], Codex [2], and Gopher [39]. It was first proposed to solve the
limitations of traditional models such as RNNs in handling variable-length sequences and context-
awareness. Transformer architecture is mainly based on a self-attention mechanism that allows
the model to attend to different parts in a input sequence. Transformer consists of an encoder and
a decoder. The encoder takes in the input sequence and generates hidden representations, while
the decoder takes in the hidden representation and generates output sequence. Each layer of the
encoder and decoder consists of a multi-head attention and a feed-forward neural network. The
multi-head attention is the core component of Transformer, which learns to assign different weights
to tokens according their relevance. This information routing method allows the model to be better
at handling long term dependency, hence, improving the performance in a wide range of NLP tasks.
Another advantage of transformer is that its architecture makes it highly parallelizable, and allows
data to trump inductive biases [40]. This property makes transformer well-suited for large-scale
pre-training, enabling transformer based models to become adaptable to different downstream
tasks.
3.1.2
Pre-trained Language Models. Since the introduction of the Transformer architecture, it has
become the dominant choice in natural language processing due to its parallelism and learning
capabilities. Generally, these transformer based pre-trained language models can be commonly
classified into two types based on their training tasks: autoregressive language modeling and
masked language modeling [41]. Given a sentence, which is composed of several tokens, the
objective of masked language modeling, e.g., BERT [42] and RoBERTa [43], refers to predicting the
probability of a masked token given context information. The most notable example of masked
language modeling is BERT [42], which includes masked language modeling and next sentence
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:6
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
Decoder (GPT)
𝐸!
𝐸"
𝐸#
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
𝑇!
𝑇"
𝑇#
…
…
…
…
𝐸!
𝐸"
𝐸#
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
Trm
𝑇!
𝑇"
𝑇#
…
…
…
…
Encoder (BERT)
𝐸!
𝐸"
𝐸#
…
Trm
Trm
Trm
…
Trm
Trm
Trm
…
Trm
Trm
Trm
…
𝑇!
𝑇"
𝑇#
…
Encoder-Decoder (T5/BART)
Fig. 4. Categories of pre-trained LLMs. Black line represents information flow in bidirectional models, while
gray line representas left-to-right information flow. Encoder models, e.g. BERT, are trained with context-aware
objectives. Decoder models, e.g. GPT, are trained with autoregressive objectives. Encoder-decoder models, e.g.
T5 and BART, combines the two, which use context-aware structures as encoders and left-to-right structures
as decoders.
prediction tasks. RoBERTa [43], which uses the same architecture as BERT, improves its performance
by increasing the amount of pre-training data and incorporating more challenging pre-training
objectives. XL-Net [44], which is also based on BERT, incorporates permutation operations to change
the prediction order for each training iteration, allowing the model to learn more information
across tokens. While autoregressive language modeling, e.g., GPT-3 [9] and OPT [45], is to model
the probability of the next token given previous tokens, hence, left-to-right language modeling.
Different from masked language models, autoregressive models are more suitable for generative
tasks. We will introduce more about autoregressive models in Section 4.1.1.
3.2
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
Despite being trained on large-scale data, the AIGC may not always produce output that aligns
with the user’s intent, which includes considerations of usefulness and truthfulness. In order to
better align AIGC output with human preferences, reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has been applied to fine-tune models in various applications such as Sparrow, InstructGPT,
and ChatGPT [10, 46].
Typically, the whole pipeline of RLHF includes the following three steps: pre-training, reward
learning, and fine-tuning with reinforcement learning. First, a language model 𝜃0 is pre-trained
on large-scale datasets as an initial language model. Since the (prompt-answer) pair given by 𝜃0
might not align with human purposes, in the second step we train a reward model to encode
the diversified and complex human preference. Specifically, given the same prompt 𝑥, different
generated answers {𝑦1,𝑦2, · · · ,𝑦3} are evaluated by humans in a pairwise manner. The pairwise
comparison relationships are later transferred to pointwise reward scalars, {𝑟1,𝑟2, · · · ,𝑟3}, using
an algorithm such as ELO [47]. In the final step, the language model 𝜃is fine-tuned to maximize
the learned reward function using reinforcement learning. To stabilize the RL training, Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) is often used as the RL algorithm. In each episode of RL training,
an empirically-estimated KL penalty term is considered to prevent the model from outputting
something peculiar to trick the reward model. Specifically, the total reward 𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙at each step is
given by 𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥,𝑦) = 𝑟𝑅𝑀(𝑥,𝑦) −𝜆KL𝐷KL
 𝜋𝜃|𝜋𝜃0
, where 𝑟𝑅𝑀is the learned reward model, 𝐷KL
is the KL penalty term, and 𝜋· is the trained policy. For more details on RLHF, please refer to [48].
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:7
#Parameters
Training Speed (based on V100 16G)
100M
1B
10B
1T
100B
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
GPT
BERT
GPT-2
T5
GPT-3
Megatron
RoBERTa
ERNIE
BART
Switch
PaLM
BLOOM
2023
ChatGPT
DALL-E-2
VisualBERT
CLIP
GLIDE
Imagen
1x
3x
5x
7x
9x
RTX 
8000
RTX
4090
A100
40G
V100
16G
RTX
3090
A100
80G
H100
80G Gen5
DALL-E
H100
80G SXM5
Fig. 5. Statistics of model size [52] and training speed 1across different models and computing devices.
Although RLHF has shown promising results by incorporating fluency, progress in this field is
impeded by a lack of publicly available benchmarks and implementation resources, leading to a
perception that RL is a challenging approach for NLP. To address this issue, an open-source library
named RL4LMs [49] has recently been introduced, consisting of building blocks for fine-tuning
and evaluating RL algorithms on LM-based generation.
Beyond human feedback, the latest dialogue agent, Claude, favors Constitutional AI [50], where
the reward model is learned via RL from AI Feedback (RLAIF). Both the critiques and the AI
feedback are guided by a small set of principles drawn from a “constitution”, which is the only
thing provided by humans in Claude. The AI feedback focuses on controlling the outputs to be
less harmful by explaining its objections to dangerous queries. Moreover, recently a preliminary
theoretical analysis of the RLAIF [51] justifies the empirical success of RLHF and provides new
insights for specialized RLHF algorithm design for language models.
3.3
Computing
3.3.1
Hardware. In recent years, there have been significant hardware advancements that have
facilitated the training of large-scale models. In the past, training a large neural network using
CPUs could take several days or even weeks. However, with the emergence of more powerful
computing resources, this process has been accelerated by several orders of magnitude. For instance,
the NVIDIA A100 GPU achieves seven times faster during BERT-large inference compared to the
V100 and 11 times faster than the T42. Additionally, Google’s Tensor Processing Units (TPUs), which
are designed specifically for deep learning, offer even higher computing performance compared to
the current generation of A100 GPUs3. This rapid progress in computing power has significantly
increased the efficiency of AI model training and opened up new possibilities for developing large
and complex models.
3.3.2
Distributed training. Another significant improvement is distributed training. In traditional
machine learning, training is typically performed on a single machine using a single processor.
This approach can work well for small datasets and models, but it becomes impractical when
1https://lambdalabs.com/gpu-benchmarks
2https://www.nvidia.com/content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/Data-Center/a100/pdf/nvidia-a100-datasheet-nvidia-us-2188504-
web.pdf
3https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/google-wins-mlperf-benchmarks-with-tpu-v4
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:8
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
dealing with large datasets and complex models. In distributed training, the training workload is
split among multiple processors or machines, allowing the model to be trained much faster. Some
companies have also released frameworks that simplify the process of distributed training on deep
learning stacks [53–55]. These frameworks provide tools and APIs that allow developers to easily
distribute their training workloads across multiple processors or machines, without having to
manage the underlying infrastructure.
3.3.3
Cloud computing. Cloud computing has also played a vital role in training large-scale models.
Previously, models are often trained locally. Now with the cloud computing services like AWS
and Azure providing access to powerful computing resources, deep learning researchers and
practitioners could spin up large clusters of GPUs or TPUs as needed for training large-scale models.
Overall, these advancements have enabled the development of more complex and accurate models,
unlocking new possibilities in various areas of AI research and applications.
4
GENERATIVE AI
4.1
Unimodal Models
In this section, we will introduce state-of-the-art unimodal generative models. These models
are designed to accept a specific raw data modality as input, such as text or images, and then
generate predictions in the same modality as the input. We will discuss some of the most promising
approaches and techniques used in these models, including generative language models, e.g., GPT-
3 [9], BART [34], T5 [56], and generative vision models, e.g., GAN [29], VAE [30], and normalizng
flow [57].
4.1.1
Generative Language Models. Generative language models (GLMs) are a type of NLP models
that are trained to generate readable human language based on patterns and structures in input
data that they have been exposed to. These models can be used for a wide range of NLP tasks such
as dialogue systems [58], , translation [59] and question answering [60].
Recently, The use of pre-trained language models has emerged as the prevailing technique
in the domain of NLP. Generally, current state-of-the-art pre-trained language models could be
categorized as masked language models (encoders), autoregressive language models (decoders)
and encoder-decoder language models, as shown in Figure 4. Decoder models are widely used for
text generation, while encoder models are mainly applied to classification tasks. By combining
the strengths of both structures, encoder-decoder models can leverage both context information
and autoregressive properties to improve performance across a variety of tasks. The primary
focus of this survey is on generative models. In the following sections, we will delve into recent
advancements in decoder and encoder-decoder architectures.
Decoder Models. One of the most prominent examples of autoregressive decoder-based language
models is GPT [61], which is a transformer-based model that utilizes self-attention mechanisms to
process all words in a sequence simultaneously. GPT is trained on next word prediction task based
on previous words, allowing it to generate coherent text. Subsequently, GPT-2 [62] and GPT-3 [9]
maintains the autoregressive left-to-right training method, while scaling up model parameters and
leveraging diverse datasets beyond basic web text, achieving state-of-the-art results on numerous
datasets. Gopher [39] uses a GPT-like structure but replace LayerNorm [63] with RSNorm, where
a residual connection is added to the original layernorm structure to maintain the information.
In addition to enhancing the normalization function, several other studies have concentrated on
optimizing the attention mechanism. BLOOM [64] shares the same structure as GPT-3 but instead
of using sparse attention, BLOOM uses a full attention network, which is better suited for modeling
long dependencies. [65] proposes Megatron, which extends commonly used architectures like
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:9
Fig. 6. The architecture of InstructGPT [10]. First, demonstration data are collected with human labelers
and is used to fine-tune GPT-3. Then prompts and corresponding answers are sampled from the language
model and human labelers will rank the answers from best to worst. This data is used to train a reward model.
Finally, with the trained reward model, the language model could be optimized according to the preference
of human labelers.
GPT-3, BERT and T5 with distributed training objectives to process large amount of data. This
method is also later adopted by MT-NLG [66] and OPT [45]. Except for the advancements in model
architecture and pre-training tasks, there has also been significant efforts put into improving
the fine-tuning process for language models. For example, InstructGPT [10] takes advantage of
pre-trained GPT-3 and uses RLHF for fine-tuning, allowing the model to learn preference according
to ranking feedback labeled by human.
Encoder-Decoder Models. One of the main encoder-decoder methods is Text-to-Text Transfer
Transformer (T5) [56], which combines transformer-based encoders and decoders together for
pre-training. T5 employs a "text-to-text" approach, which means that it transforms both the input
and output data into a standardized text format. This allows T5 to be trained on a wide range
of NLP tasks, such as machine translation, question-answering, summarization, and more, using
the same model architecture. Switch Transformer [67], as stated in its name, utilizes "switching",
which refers to a simplified MoE routing algorithm, for parallelized training on T5. This model
successfully obtained larger scale and better performance with the same computational resources
compared to the base model. Another widely-used method that improves upon T5 is ExT5 [68],
which is proposed by Google in 2021, extending the scale of previous T5 model. Compared to T5,
ExT5 is continue pre-trained on C4 and ExMix, which is a combinition of 107 supervised NLP
tasks across diverse domains. Another widely used encoder-decoder method is BART [34], which
blends the bidirectional encoder from BERT and the autoregressive decoder from GPT, allowing it
to leverage the bidirectional modeling abilities of the encoder while retaining the autoregressive
properties for generation tasks. HTLM [69] leverages BART denoising objectives for modeling
hyper-text language, which contains valuable information regarding document-level structure. This
model also achieves state-of-the-art performance on zero-shot learning on various generation tasks.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:10
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
Fig. 7. Categories of vision generative models.
While DQ-BART [70], instead, aims at compressing BART into a smaller model using distillation
and quantization, which achieves the BART original performance on various downstream tasks.
4.1.2
Vision Generative Models.
GAN. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have gained popularity in the field of image
generation research. GANs consist of two parts, a generator and a discriminator. The generator
attempts to learn the distribution of real examples in order to generate new data, while the
discriminator determines whether the input is from the real data space or not.
Structure. The structure of the generator and the discriminator highly influence GAN’s training
stability and performance. LAPGAN [71] generates high-quality images in a coarse-to-fine fashion
using a cascade of convolutional networks within a Laplacian pyramid framework [72]. A. Radford
et al. [73] propose DCGANs structure, a class of CNNs with architectural constraints, as a powerful
solution for unsupervised learning. Progressive GAN [74] progressively grows the generator and
discriminator, starting from low resolution and adding layers to model finer details, resulting in faster
and more stable training and producing high-quality images. As traditional convolutional GANs
generate high-resolution details based only on spatially local points in lower-resolution feature
maps, SAGAN [75] introduces attention-driven, long-range dependency modeling and spectral
normalization for improved training dynamics. In addition, generating high-resolution and diverse
samples from complex datasets remains a challenge. To address this, BigGAN [76] is proposed as a
large scale TPU implementation of GANs. StyleGAN [77] improves GANs by separating high-level
attributes and variations, allowing for intuitive control and better performance in terms of quality
metrics, interpolation, and disentanglement. [78, 79] focus on inverse mapping - projecting data
back into the latent space, resulting in a useful feature representation for auxiliary discrimination
tasks. To address mode collapse and improve the generative model, both the D2GAN [80] and
GMAN [81] methods extend the traditional GANs by combining extra discriminators. MGAN [82]
and MAD-GAN [83] address the mode collapse problem by incorporating multiple generators and
one discriminator. CoGAN [84] is composed of a pair of GANs with a weight-sharing constraint,
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:11
allowing for learning the joint distribution from separate marginal distributions without requiring
corresponding images in the training set.
Representative variants. As the latent vector 𝑧of the generator is highly unstructured, Info-
GAN [85] proposes another latent code 𝑐to extract the significant structured features of the actual
data space. In CGANs [86–88], the generator and discriminator are conditioned on additional infor-
mation, such as class labels or data from other modalities, to generate samples that are conditioned
on specific attributes. f-GAN [89] allows for the use of any f-divergence as the objective function
for training the generative model. The choice of f-divergence provides a flexible framework for
controlling the trade-off between the quality of the generated samples and the difficulty of training
the model.
Objective function. The goal of generative models is to match the real data distribution. WGAN [90]
and LS-GAN [91, 92] aim to regularize the loss function with a Lipschitz regularity condition
on the density of real data in order to better generalize and produce realistic new data. [93]
is a weight normalization technique proposed to stabilize the training of the discriminator in
GANs. Che et al. [94] regularize the objective, which can stabilize the training of GAN models.
UGAN [95] stabilizes training of GANs by defining the generator objective with respect to an
unrolled optimization of the discriminator. [96] makes discriminator relativistic by sampling from
real/generated data pairs to improve stability and coverage of the data distribution generated by
the generator.
VAE. Following variational bayes inference [97], Variational Autoencoders (VAE) are generative
models that attempt to reflect data to a probabilistic distribution and learn reconstruction that is
close to its original input.
Complex priors. Rewriting the variational evidence lower bound objective (ELBO) of variational
autoencoders contributes to improve the variational bounds [98]. Since the true aggregate posterior
is intractable, VampPrior [99] introduces a variational mixture of posteriors priors conditioned
on learnable pseudo-inputs. [100–102] propose skip connections around the stochastic sampling
process to capture different aspects of the data distribution.
Regularized Autoencoders. [1, 103, 104] introduce regularisation to the latent space of the encoder
and lead to a smooth and representative latent space without conforming to an arbitrarily chosen
prior. [105] propose a multi-scale hierarchical organization to model larger images.
Flow. A Normalizing Flow is a distribution transformation from simple to complex by a sequence
of invertible and differentiable mappings.
Coupling and autoregressive flows. A non-linear deterministic transformation of the data is learned
through a coupling method in [57] to make the transformed data conform to a factorized distribution.
Dinh et al. [106] proposes multi-scale flow to gradually introduce dimensions to the distribution in
the generative direction. A more flexible generalisation of coupling layers is the autoregressive
flow [107–109], which permits parallel density estimation as a universal approximator.
Convolutional and Residual Flows. Zheng et al. [110] used 1D convolutions (ConvFlow) and
Hoogeboom et al. [111] have provided a more general solution for modelling d×d convolutions. They
exploited the triangular structure to improve the interaction among inputs and efficiently compute
the determinant. RevNets [112] and iRevNets [113] are the first to build a reversible network
architecture based on residual connections, which alleviate the vanishing gradients problem.
In addition, the residual connections can be viewed as discretizations of a first order ordinary
differential equation (ODE) [114] to improve parameter efficiency.
Diffusion. The Generative Diffusion Model (GDM) is a cutting-edge class of generative models
based on probability, which demonstrates state-of-the-art results in the field of computer vision. It
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:12
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
works by progressively corrupting data with multiple-level noise perturbations and then learning
to reverse this process for sample generation.
Model Formulations. Diffusion Models are mainly formulated into three categories. DDPM [115]
applies two Markov chains respectively to progressively corrupt data with Gaussian noise and
reverse the forward diffusion process by learning Markov transition kernels. Score-based generative
models (SGMs) directly work on the gradient of log density of data a.k.a score function. NCSN
[31] perturbs data with multi-scale intensifying noise and jointly estimates score function of all
such noisy data distribution by a neural network conditioned on all noise levels. It enjoys flexible
sampling due to the completely decoupled training and inference steps. Score SDE [116] generalizes
previous two formulations into continuous settings, where noise perturbations and denoising
processes are solutions to stochastic differential equations. It is proved that probability flow ODE
could also be used to model the reverse process.
Training Enhancement. Training enhancement aims to improve sampling by introducing prior
knowledge from another pre-trained model or extra trainable hyper-parameters. Inspired from the
idea of knowledge distillation, Salimans et al. [117] propose to progressively distill knowledge from
a pre-trained complicated teacher model to a faster student model, which could cut sampling steps in
half. TDPM [118] and ES-DDPM [119] improve sampling speed by truncating the diffusion process
with early stop. To generate sample from reverse process initialized by a non-Gaussian distribution,
another pre-trained generative model such as VAE or GAN is introduced to approximate such
distribution. Franzese et al. [120] formulate the number of training steps as a variable to realize
an optimal trade-off. Improved DDPM [121] first introduces noise scale tuning by adding noise
scale term into loss function.Meanwhile, San Romans et al [122] introduce a noise prediction
network to enable noise schedule adjustment step-by-step. Such noise schedule learning improves
reconstruction by efficiently guiding the random walk of noise during training and inference.
Efficient Training-free Sampling. Instead of additional training, training-free sampling directly
reduce the number of discretized time steps while minimizing discretization errors. Under same
training objective, DDIM [123] generalizes DDPM to a class of non-Markovian diffusion process and
introduces jump-step acceleration. This could provide shorter generative Markov chains. Analytic-
DPM [124] provides more efficient inference by estimating the analytic form of optimal model
reverse variance and KL-divergence w.r.t its score function. There are also works [125, 126] which
directly figure out optimal sampling trajectories via dynamic programming.
Noise Distribution. The distribution of noise perturbations is an essential part of diffusion models
and most of them are Gaussian. Meanwhile, fitting such distribution with more degrees of freedom
could benefit performance. Nachmani et al. [127] prove that Gamma distribution could improve
image and speech generation and a mixture of Gaussian distribution also outperforms a single
distribution.Furthermore, cold diffusion [128] proposes a more generalized conclusion that noise can
be set to any distribution as the generative behavior of diffusion model is not strongly dependent on
the choice of noise distribution. Apart from noise perturbation, CCDF [129] shows it is unnecessary
to initialize from Gaussian distribution and it could reduce sampling steps with a simple forward
diffusion but better noise initialization.
Mixed Modeling. Mixed-modeling is aimed at combining diffusion model with another category of
generative model to take all their advantages, which could provide stronger expressiveness or higher
sampling speed. DiffuseVAE [130] merges a standard VAE into the DDPM pipeline by conditioning
diffusion sampling process with blurry image reconstructions generated by VAE. LSGM [131] trains
SGMs in the latent space of VAE, which generalizes SGMs into non-continuous data and enables
smoother SGMs learning in a small space. Denoising diffusion GANs [132] introduces conditional
GANs into DDPM pipeline to parameterize denoising process with a more expressive multimodal
distribution, which provides large denoising steps. DiffFlow [133] integrates flow function into
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:13
Inputs
Encoder
Decoder
Representation
Output
To-image
“Generate a 
cartoon cat.”
To-text
VL Pre-trained 
Encoders
Representation
Transformer 
Decoders
“This is a cat.”
VL Pre-trained 
Encoders
Representation
Vision Decoders 
(GANs, Diffusions)
Encoder-
Decoder
Fig. 8. The general structure of generative vision language. We separate the generation process into encoder
part and decoder part. Encoder models will encode the inputs into a latent representation and then the
decoder will decode this representation into a generated output.
trajectories of SDE-based diffusion model, which makes forward steps also trainable. The introduced
randomness from noise perturbation endows normalizing flow with stronger expression power
while the trainable forward process substantially reduce the diffusion trajectory length. Therefore,
DiffFlow is able to learn distribution with sharper boundaries with better sampling efficiency.
4.2
Multimodal Models
Multimodal generation serves as an essential part in nowadays AIGC. The goal of multimodal
generation is to learn a model that generates raw modalities by learning the multimodal connection
and interaction from data [7]. This connection and interaction between modalities can sometimes
be very intricate, which makes the multimodal representation space hard to learn compared to
the unimodal one. However, with the emergence of the powerful modality-specific foundation
architectures mentioned in previous sections, a growing number of methods are proposed in
response to this challenge. In this section, we introduce the state-of-the-art multimodal models in
vision language generation, text audio generation, text graph generation and text code generation.
Since most multimodal generative models are always highly related to real-world applications, this
section will mainly introduce from the perspective of downstream tasks.
4.2.1
Vision Language Generation. The encoder-decoder architecture is a widely used framework
for solving unimodal generation problems in computer vision and natural language processing. In
multimodal generation, particularly in vision-language generation, this method is often used as a
foundation architecture. The encoder is responsible for learning a contextualized representation
of the input data, while the decoder is used to generate raw modalities that reflect cross-modal
interactions, structure, and coherence in the representation. In the following, we present a com-
prehensive survey of state-of-the-art vision-language encoders, followed by an exposition of the
decoder component.
Vision Language Encoders. Recently, the development of encoders for single modalities has
advanced significantly, leading to the question of how to learn contextualized representations
from multiple modalities. A common way to do this is to combine modality-specific encoders
using a fusion function and then leverage multiple pre-training tasks to align the representation
space [37, 134, 135]. Generally. these encoder models could be separated into two categories,
concatenated encoders and cross-aligned encoders [7].
Concatenated Encoders. A straight-forward solution to this problem is by concatenating the
embeddings from single encoders. An early example is VisualBERT [134], which leverages BERT
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:14
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
Transformer Self-Attention Encoder
[CLS]
This
is
a
[MASK]
.
[IMG]
[SEP]
Feature 
Extractor
“This is a cat.”
Objective 1
Objective 2
……
……
“This is a cat.”
Text Encoder
Image Encoder
Cross-Modal 
Transformer
Cross-Modal 
Transformer
Text Output
Cross
Output
Image Output
(a) Concatenated Encoder
(b) Cross-aligned Encoder
Fig. 9. Two types of vision language encoders: concatenated encoders and cross-aligned encoders. Concate-
nated encoders accepts concatenated embeddings from different raw modalities, and cross-aligned encoders
are aligned in abstract modalities.
as text encoder, CNN as image encoder. The embeddings from the image encoder will be directly
incorporated into BERT input embeddings, allowing the model to implicitly learn the aligned joint
representation space. VisualBERT also leverages the multi-task pre-training paradigm as BERT,
using two visually-grounded language model objectives: masked language modeling with image
and sentence image prediction. Additionally, VisualBERT also incorporated some modality-specific
pre-trianing objectives. Another example is VL-BERT [136], which shares the similar architecture
as VisualBERT. Different from VisualBERT, VL-BERT uses Faster R-CNN [137] as regions of interest
(ROI) extractor, and leverages this extracted ROI information as the image region embedding.
VL-BERT also includes an additional pre-training task, masked ROI classification with linguistic
clues, for better incoporating the visual information. Later, UNITER [138] was proposed based
on the same architecture as VisualBERT, but with different training objectives. UNITER uses
masked language modeling, masked region modeling, image text matching prediction and word
region alignment prediction as its pre-training tasks. In this way, UNITER could learn informative
contextualized embeddings. To this end, we see that concatenated encoders are generally based on
the same BERT architecture, and pre-trained with BERT-like tasks. However, these models always
involves a very complicated pre-training process, data collection and loss design. To solve this
problem, [135] proposed SimVLM, which simplified the pre-training procedure of vision language
models by setting PrefixLM as the training objective and directly using ViT as both text encoder
and image encoder. SimVLM achieved state-of-the-art performance on multiple vision language
tasks compared with previous methods with a much simplified architecture.
Cross-aligned Encoders. In addition to concatenating embeddings as input to encoders, another
way to learn contextualized representations is to look at pairwise interactions between modalities [7].
Different from concatenated encoders, cross-aligned encoders always use a two-tower structure,
where one tower for each modality and then learn a joint representation space using a cross-
modality encoder. LXMERT [139] uses Transformers to extract image features and text features,
and then adds a multimodal cross-attention module for coordination learning. The resulting output
embeddings would be visual embeddings, language embeddings and multimodal embeddings. The
model is also pre-trained with several multimodal tasks. Similarly, ViLBERT [140] leverages a
cross-transformer module to align the two modalities. Given vision and language embeddings, the
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:15
Embedding
(a) Jointly-trained Models 
Pre-trained 
Encoder
Pre-train
Decoder
“This is a cat with 
black background.”
“This is a cat.”
Image Encoder
Embedding
“What is this?”
LLMs
“This is a cat with 
black background.”
(b) Frozen Models
Prompt
Fig. 10. Two types of to-language decoder models: jointly-trained models and frozen models. Jointly-trained
models are normally trained end-to-end, while frozen models normally keep the language decoder frozen and
only train the image encoder.
keys and values of one certain modality will be input into another modality’s attention module to
generate a pooled attention embedding that incorporates both information. In general, these models
all leverage a cross layer to fuse the information into a joint representation space. Nevertheless,
employing a transformer architecture in this context would be inefficient due to its large number
of parameters. To simplify the training process and calculation, CLIP [37] uses dot product as the
cross layer, which is more efficient than the transformer encoder, enabling efficient large-scale
downstream training. Furthermore, CLIP is trained on copious amounts of pairwise data, which
has been shown to outperform numerous other models.
Vision Language Decoders. Given a representation from a certain modality, vision language
decoder mainly aims to transform it into a certain raw modality as specified by the task. In this
section, we will mainly focus on to-text and to-image decoders.
To-text decoders. To-text decoders generally take in contextualized representations from the
encoder and decode the representation into a sentence. With the emergence and proven effectiveness
of large language models, many architectures are now selectively freezing the language decoder
component. As a result, to-text decoders can be broadly categorized into two types: jointly-trained
models and frozen models.
Jointly-trained decoders. Jointly-trained decoders refer to decoders that require complete cross-
modal training when decoding representation. The challenge of text-to-text generation typically
lies in aligning the two modalities during pre-training. As a result, the model requires a stronger
encoder rather than a decoder. To address this challenge, many models prioritize constructing
a strong encoder and then combine it with a relatively lightweight decoder model. For example,
VLP [138] and ALBEF [141] leverage a simple transformer decoder to decode the information.
BLIP [142] combines an encoder and decoder together during pre-training, allowing for multimodal
space alignment for both understanding and generation objectives. BLIP is composed of three parts,
a unimodal encoder for extracting image and text features, an image-grounded text encoder which
accepts image and text features as input, and an image-grounded text decoder, which accepts image
features and outputs text. Except for the aligned encoder and decoder structure, the authors also
designed several corresponding pre-training tasks to help the model better learn the multimodal
dependency.
Frozen deocders. Another way to efficiently perform to-text generation tasks is to freeze the large
language model and train an image encoder only, which can also be seen as a way to perform
multimodal prompting. Due to the success of prompting and in-context learning in NLP, there has
been increased attention towards methods of this nature. This has led people to question whether
such methods could be effective in multimodal settings as well. Frozen [143] first introduced in-
context learning into vision language tasks. It freezes the language model and only trains the
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:16
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
image encoder. The produced image representations will be embeded in the input embeddings
of the language model. This method achieves state-of-the-art performance in various zero-shot
and few-shot vision language tasks. Later, Alayrac et al. proposed Flamingo [144], which further
explored multimodal in-context learning. Flamingo involves a frozen vision encoder and a frozen
language encoder to get vision language representations, and utilizes gated cross-attention-dense
layer to fuse the image representation into text representation. Recently, [145] proposed a method
to realize VL dialogue with frozen language models, enabling the model to generate interleaved
multimodal data. This method also freezes input encoders and train text-to-image and image-to-text
linear maps to further encode and decode produced embeddings. However, it still remains a question
why this kind of prompting based method work in multimodal generation. Some works have also
been proposed to answer this question. Merullo et al. proposed a method [146] that injects a linear
projection between the frozen image encoder and the text encoder. During training, only the linear
projection is tuned. The experiment results show that frozen language models with similar sizes
generally perform equally well at transferring visual information into language, but image encoders
pre-trained with linguistic supervision like CLIP text encoder, could encode extra information and
thus perform significantly better on vision language tasks.
To-image decoders. To-image generation refers to given an instruction, generating an image
that corresponds to the instruction. Similarly, commonly used models in image generation also
follow an encoder-decoder architecture, where the encoders are more focused on learning language
information and the decoders are more focused on leveraging the learned information to restrict
image synthesis. Generally, recent works could be separated into two categories, GAN-based
methods and diffusion-based methods.
GAN-based decoders. Given a text encoder 𝜙(𝑡), GAN-based methods combine a discriminator
𝐷and a generator 𝐺, where the generator 𝐺accepts the text embedding generated by 𝜙(𝑡) and
noise vector 𝑧to generate output 𝑋𝑔, which are input to the discriminator 𝐷with the real sample
distribution 𝑋𝑟[147]. A notable model in this area is StackGAN [148]. StackGAN architecture
consists of two stages: a conditioning stage and a refinement stage. In the conditioning stage,
the model takes in the textual description as input and generates a low-resolution image. This
image is then fed into the refinement stage, where it is further refined to produce a high-resolution
image that matches the textual description. AttnGAN [149] is another text-to-image synthesis
model that builds upon the StackGAN architecture. Attngan adds an attention mechanism to
the StackGAN architecture to further improve the quality of generated images. However, these
models mainly uses a comparatively simple text encoder during instruction learning, which could
lead to certain information loss. StyleCLIP [150] is a recent model for text-to-image synthesis
that uses contrastive learning to align text and image features. It is based on the StyleGAN [77]
architecture and represents a significant advancement over previous text-to-image synthesis models
such as StackGAN. StyleCLIP also follows the encoder-decoder structure that use a text encoder to
encode instructions and an image decoder to synthesize a new image. One of the key innovations
of StyleCLIP is its use of contrastive learning to align the text and image features. By training
the model to maximize the similarity between the text and image features while minimizing the
similarity between different text and image pairs, StyleCLIP is able to learn a more effective mapping
between text and image features, resulting in higher-quality image synthesis.
Diffusion-based decoders. Generative image modelling has recently seen great success with the
use of diffusion models. These models have also been applied in text-to-image generation. For
example, GLIDE [151] introduces ablated diffusion model (ADM) into text-to-image generation.
Compared to previous diffusion based methods, GLIDE uses larger model with 3.5B parameters
and larger pairwise datasets, which achieved better results on many benchmarks. Different from
GLIDE, Imagen [152] combines a frozen T5 language model with a super-resolution diffusion model.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:17
Fig. 11. The model structure of DALL-E-2. Above the dotted line is the CLIP pre-training process, which aims
to align the vision and language modalities. And below the dotted line is the image generation process. The
text encoder accepts an instruction and encodes it into a representation, then the prior network and diffusion
model decodes this representation to generate the final output.
The frozen encoder will encode the text instruction and generates an embedding, then the first
diffusion model will accordingly generate an low-resolution image. The second diffusion model
accepts this image with the text embedding and outputs a high-resolution image. DALL-E-2 [5]
combines CLIP encoder with diffusion decoder for image genration and editing tasks. Compared
with Imagen, DALL-E-2 leverages a prior network to translation between text embedding and
image embedding. Except for advancement in model design, another major difference between
these diffusion based models and previous generative methods is that these diffusion based models
are commonly trained on larger dataset with much more parameters, which make them possible to
learn better representations over others.
In addition to previously mentioned methods, there are also works that use VAE as the decoder.
For example, Ramesh et al. proposed DALL-E [33], a zero-shot image generator that utilizes dVAE
as image encoder and decoder, BPE as text encoder and pre-trained CLIP during inference.
4.2.2
Text Audio Generation. The field of text-audio multimodal processing has seen significant
growth in recent years. Most models in this field focus on either synthesis tasks, such as speech
synthesis, or recognition tasks, such as automatic speech recognition. They refer to the process of
converting written text into spoken speech or accurately transcribing human speech into machine-
readable text. However, text audio generation is a distinct task that involves creating novel audio
or text using multimodal models. While related, text-audio generation, synthesis, and recognition
tasks differ in their goals and the techniques used to achieve them. In this work, we focus on
text-audio generation rather than synthesis or recognition tasks.
Text-Audio Generation. AdaSpeech [153] is proposed to efficiently customize new voices with
high quality using limited speech data by utilizing two acoustic encoders and conditional layer
normalization in the mel-spectrogram decoder. Since previous studies have limitations in style
conversion, Lombard [154] exploits the Spectral Shaping and Dynamic Range Compression [155]
to generate highly intelligible speech in the presence of noise. Cross-lingual generation is an-
other Influential work to transfer voices across languages. [156] can produce high-quality speech
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:18
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
in multiple languages and transfer voices across languages through the use of phonemic input
representation and adversarial loss term to disentangle speaker identity from speech content.
Text-Music Generation. [157] proposes a deep cross-modal correlation learning architecture for
audio and lyrics, where intermodal canonical correlation analysis is used to calculate the similarity of
temporal structures between audio and lyrics. To better learn social media content, JTAV [158] fuses
textual, acoustic, and visual information using cross-modal fusion and attentive pooling techniques.
Different from JTAV, [159] combines multiple types of information more related to music, such as
playlists-track interactions and genre metadata, and align their latent representations to model
unique music piece. In addition, there are some works focusing on generating text information, such
as descriptions and captions, given the audio as input. [160] is proposed to generate descriptions
for music playlists by combining audio content analysis and natural language processing to utilize
the information of each track. MusCaps [161] is a music audio captioning model that generates
descriptions of music audio content by processing audio-text inputs through a multimodal encoder
and leveraging audio data pre-training to obtain effective musical feature representations. For
music and language pre-training, Manco et al. [162] propose a multimodal architecture, which
uses weakly aligned text as the only supervisory signal to learn general-purpose music audio
representations. CLAP [163] is another method for learning audio concepts from natural language
supervision that utilizes two encoders and contrastive learning to bring audio and text descriptions
into a joint multimodal space.
4.2.3
Text Graph Generation. Text-graph generation is an essential multi-modal topic which could
largely free the potential of NLP systems. Natural language text is intrinsically vague as it carries
various redundant information and is also weakly organized in logic. Meanwhile, it is favorable for
machines to work with structured, well-organized and compressed form of contents. Knowledge
graph (KG) is structural meaning representation which reflects relationships among semantic
internal states as graph structure in a language processing system. And there are increasing number
of works extracting KG from text to assist text generation which incorporates complicated ideas
across multiple sentences. Semantic parsing can also be formulated into a problem of text-to-graph
generation. It aims to convert natural language text to a logical form, mostly abstract meaning
representation (AMR) [164], which is a broad-coverage sentence-level semantic representation.
Compared to text-to-KG generation, it emphasizes on providing machine interpretable represen-
tations rather than constructing a semantic network. Conversely, KG-to-text generation aims to
generate fluent and logically-coherent text based on already constructed KG. Apart from the domain
of NLP, text-graph generation could also push forward the boundary of computer aided drug design.
There are emerging works bridging highly structured molecule graph with language descriptions,
which facilitates human understanding of profound molecular knowledge and novel molecule
exploration. In the following, we briefly overview some representative works in these four topics.
Text To Knowledge Graph Generation. Li et al. [165] treat text-to-KG construction as a process of
knowledge graph completion (KGC), where missing terms are progressively covered by inference.
A bilinear model and another DNN-based model are adopted to embed terms and compute score of
arbitrary tuples for additive operation. KG-BERT [166] utilizes the power of pre-trained language
models to capture more contextualized information during KGC. The idea is to represent triplets
as textual sequences and models graph completion as a sequence classification problem by fine-
tuned BERT model. Malaviya et al. [167] propose an approach incorporating graph convolutional
network (GCN) for to extract more structural and semantic context. It also tackles graph sparsity
and scalability issues by introducing graph augmentation and progressive masking strategies.
Alternatively, another line of works [168–170] directly query pre-trained language models to obtain
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:19
a semantic knowledge network. Specifically, language models are repeatedly prompted to predict the
masked terms in cloze sentence to acquire relational knowledge. CycleGT [171] is an unsupervised
method allowing text-KG translation in both directions. An unsupervised cycle training strategy
is adopted to provide self-supervision, which enables the entire training process possible with
non-parallel text and graph data. Utilizing similar strategy, DualTKB [172] further proves that
model performance could be largely improved even under a weakly supervised setting. Lu et al.
[173] propose a unified text-to-graph framework which incorporates most information extraction
tasks. Meanwhile, the use of a pre-defined schema may limit its generalization to diverse text
forms of nodes and edges. Grapher [174] performs end-to-end text-to-KG construction efficiently
by generating node and edge in two separate stages. Specifically, a pre-trained language model
is first fine-tuned with entity extraction tasks for node generation. Subsequently, focal loss and
sparse adjacency matrix are introduced to address the skewed edge distribution issue during edge
construction.
Fig. 12. DUALENC [175]: a KG-to-text generation model that bridges the structural gap between KG and
graph via dual-encoding.
Knowledge Graph To Text Generation. GTR-LSTM [176] is a sequence-to-sequence encoder-
decoder framework which generates text from linearized KG triples. It could handle cycles in
KGs for capturing global information. Meanwhile, its linearized graph nature could still result
in considerable structural information loss, especially for large graphs. To address this issue,
Song et al. [177] encode graph semantics with a graph-state LSTM which enables information
propagation between nodes during a series of state transitions. It proves to be capable of modeling
non-local interactions between nodes while also efficient due to high parallelization. Zhao et al.
[175] propose DUALENC, a dual encoding model, to bridge the structural discrepancy between
input graph and output text. Specifically, it utilizes a GCN-based graph encoder to extract structural
information, while a neural planner is also adopted to create a sequential content plan of a graph for
generating linear output text. Alternatively, Koncel-Kedziorski et al. [178] encode graph structure
for text generation with a transformer-based architecture extended from the graph attention
network (GAT) [179]. The idea is to compute the node representations of KG by traversing its local
neighborhood with self-attention mechanism. In contrast, Ribeiro et al. [180] focus on utilizing
local and global node encoding strategies jointly to capture complementary information from
graph contexts. Adapted from transformer, HetGT [181] aims at modeling different relationships
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:20
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
in the graph independently to avoid information loss by simply mixing them. The input graph
is first transformed into a heterogeneous Levi graph and then split into sub-graphs based on the
heterogeneity of each part for future information aggregation.
Semantic Parsing. Early works [182, 183] formulate semantic parsing as sequence-to-sequence
generation problems. However, AMR is a structured object by its nature. Sequence-to-sequence
problem setup could only capture shallow word sequence information meanwhile potentially ignore
abundant syntax and semantic information. Lyu et al. [184] model semantic parsing as a graph
prediction problem by expressing AMR as a root labeled directed acyclic graph (DAG) This would
require an alignment between node in the graph and word in the sentences. A neural parser which
treat alignments as a latent variable in a joint probabilistic model is proposed for node alignment
and edge prediction during AMR parsing. Chen et al. [185] construct semantic graph with an action
set via a neural sequence-to-action RNN model. Parsing process are reinforced by integrating both
structural and semantic constraints during decoding. Zhang et al. [186] tackle issues emerged
from the reentrancy property in AMR parsing via an aligner-free attention based model which
formulate the problem into sequence-to-graph transduction. Utilizing a pointer-generator network,
it is proved that the model can be trained effectively with limited labeled AMR data. Fancellu et
al. [187] propose a graph-aware sequential model to construct linearized graph for AMR graph
prediction. Without a latent variable, it ensures each well-formed string will be only paired with
exactly only one derivation by a novel graph-aware string rewriting strategy.
Paired graph-
text data
Graph Encoder
Relation 
bridge
Text Encoder
Contrastive 
Learning
Input text
MoMu
Fig. 13. MoMu [188]: A cross-modal text-molecule generation model.
Text Molecule Generation. Text2Mol [189] is a cross-modal information retrieval system to retrieve
molecule graph based on language description. A BERT-based text encoder and a MLP-GCN
combined molecule encoder are utilized to create multi-modal embedding in a semantic space,
which is aligned by contrast learning with paired data. Instead of retrieving from existing molecules,
MolT5 [190] proposes a self-supervised learning framework for text-conditioned de-novo molecule
generation and molecule captioning. It tackles the scarcity of cross-modal data pair with a pre-
train and fine-tune strategy. Specifically, it pre-trains the model on unpaired text and molecule
strings with a denoising objective, followed by fine-tuning with limited paired data. However,
restricted by its linearized graph nature, string-based representation of a molecule is not unique
and could result in structural information loss. To tackle this issue, MoMu [188] introduces a graph
based multi-modal framework which trains two separate encoders jointly by contrast learning for
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:21
semantic space alignment with weakly-paired cross-modal data. It can also be adapted to various
downstream tasks apart from de-novo molecule graph generation.
4.2.4
Text Code Generation. Text-code generation aims to automatically generate valid program-
ming code from natural language description or provide coding assist. LLMs have recently exhibited
great potential in programming language (PL) code generation from natural language (NL) de-
scriptions. Early works directly formulate text-code generation as a pure language generation task.
However, NL and PL are data types with inherently different modalities, additional strategies are
essential in capturing mutual dependencies between NL and PL during semantic space alignment.
Compared to NL data, PL data also encapsulates rich structural information and different syn-
tax, which makes it more challenging to understand semantic information from the PL context.
Furthermore, text-code models are also expected to be multi-lingual as they could provide better
generalization. In the following, we mainly introduce code generation models conditioned on NL
description. We also review other coding assist models based on language.
Text-conditioned Programming Code Generation. CodeBERT [191] is a bimodal Transformer-based
pre-trained text-code model which could capture the semantic connection between NL and PL.
It adopts a hybrid objective function by utilizing binomial NL-PL paired data for model training
and unimodal PL code data for learning better generators respectively to align NL and PL in
semantic space. This model is further pre-trained on six multi-lingual PL for better generalization.
CuBERT [192] shares similar model architecture with CodeBERT meanwhile it is not required
to perform sentence separation between the natural-language description of a function and its
body for sentence-pair representation. CodeT5 [193] proposes a pre-trained encoder-decoder Trans-
former model which better captures contextualized semantic information from code. Specifically, it
introduces novel identifier-aware pre-training tasks to preserve crucial token type information
by discriminating identifiers from code tokens and recover them when masked. PLBART [194]
extends bimodal text-code model from generative tasks to a broader categories of discriminative
tasks such as clone and vulnerable code detection under a unified framework. Another line of
works [195, 196] introduce the notion of program graphs [197] to explicitly model the structures
underlying PL code to assist generation. The program graphs are constructed as Abstract Syntax
Trees (AST) to encapsulate knowledge from program-specific semantic and syntax.
Interactive Programming System. Text-code generation are jointly challenged by the intractable
searching space of programming code generation and improper specification of user intent due to
the intrinsic ambiguity of NL. CODEGEN [198] propose a multi-turn program synthesis approach
which factorizes program synthesis conditioned on a single complicated NL specification into
progressive generation controlled by a series of user intents. It is constructed in the form of
autoregressive transformers learning a conditional distribution of the next token given previous
tokens and it is trained on both PL and NL data. TDUIF [199] extends interactive programming
framework by formalizing the user intent and providing more understandable user feedback. It
further realizes scalable automatic algorithm evaluation which does not require user in loop with
high-fidelity user interaction modeling.
5
APPLICATIONS
5.1
ChatBot
A chatbot is a computer program designed to simulate conversation with human users through
text-based interfaces. Chatbots normally use language models to understand and respond to user
queries and inpus in a conversational manner. They can be programmed to perform a wide range
of tasks, for example, providing customer support and answering frequently asked questions. One
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:22
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
develops
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belongs
belo…
Microsoft
Google
Meta
OpenAI
Amazon
Aiva Tech
CodeParot
DeepMind
Stability
ChatBot
Music
Code
Education
Algorithm
Art
Xiaoice
Meena
BlenderBot
ChatGPT
Alexa
Lex
AIVA
Jukebox
CodeGen
CodeParot
Codex
CoPilot
Minerva
AlphaTensor
DALLE-2
DreamStudio
craiyon
Imagen
Fig. 14. A relation graph of a current research areas, applications and related companies, where dark blue
circles represent research areas, light blue circles represent applications and green circles represents companies.
Application
Platform/Software
Company
Year
Papaer
Link
ChatBot
Xiaoice
Microsoft
2018
[200]
Xiaoice
ChatBot
Meena
Google
2020
[201]
Meena Blog
ChatBot
BlenderBot
Meta
2022
[202]
Blenderbot
ChatBot
ChatGPT
OpenAI
2022
[10]
ChatGPT
ChatBot
Alexa
Amazon
2014
-
Amazon Alexa
ChatBot
Lex
Amazon
2017
-
Amazon Lex
Music
AIVA
Aiva Tech
2016
-
AIVA
Music
Jukebox
OpenAI
2020
[203]
Jukebox
Code
CodeGPT
Microsoft
2021
[204]
CodeGPT
Code
CodeParrot
CodeParrot
2022
[205]
CodeParrot
Code
Codex
OpenAI
2021
[206]
Codex blog
Code
CoPilot
Microsoft
2021
[206]
CoPilot
Art
DALL-E-2
OpenAI
2022
[5]
DALL-E-2 Blog
Art
DreamStudio
Stability
2022
[13]
Dreamstudio
Art
craiyon
OpenAI
2021
[1]
Craiyon
Art
Imagen
Google
2022
[152]
Imagen
Education
Minerva
Google
2022
[207]
Minerva Blog
Algorithm
AlphaTensor
DeepMind
2022
[208]
AlphaTensor
Table 1. Applications of Generative AI models.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:23
of the most prominent example is Xiaoice [200]. XiaoIce was developed by a team of researchers
and engineers from Microsoft, using state-of-the-art techniques in natural language processing,
machine learning, and knowledge representation. An important feature of Xiaoice is that it is able to
express empathy, which is achieved by using sentiment analysis methods, to make Xiaoice perform
like a human. In 2020, Google proposed Meena [201], a multi-turn open-domain chatbot trained on
social media conversations, which achieves state-of-the-art interactive SSA score and perplexity.
Recently, Microsoft released their newest version Bing, which incorporates ChatGPT, enabling
its users to ask open domain or conditioned questions and get results through conversation. This
presents new possibilities for the development of chatbots in the future.
5.2
Art
AI art generation refers to using computer algorithms to create original works of art. These
algorithms are trained on large datasets of existing artwork and use machine learning techniques to
generate new pieces that mimic the styles and techniques of famous artists or explore new artistic
styles. With the rapid development in diffusion based models, more and more companies have
launched their art generation products. One of the most notable advancements in the field is the
DALL-E series, which was introduced by OpenAI. DALL-E [1], which is now Craiyon, was first
built on VQ-VAE and CLIP, then diffusion was also applied to this product, becoming DALL-E-
2 [5]. DreamStudio [13], created by Stability.ai, is a text-to-image generation service that utilizes
stable diffusion to generate images based on given phrases or sentences. This technology offers
comparable performance to that of DALL-E-2, but with even faster processing speeds, making it
a popular choice for many users. Imagen [152], developed by Google, uses diffusion in its image
editing and generation service. In a blog post, Google reported that they conducted a study with
human raters to evaluate the quality of AI-generated images. The results showed that Imagen
outperformed other models in side-by-side comparisons, with higher ratings for sample quality
and image-text alignment preferred by the human raters.
5.3
Music
Deep music generation refers to the use of deep learning techniques and artificial intelligence
algorithms to generate novel and original pieces of music. A prominent approach is to produce a
symbolic representation of the music in the form of a piano roll. This approach entails specifying the
timing, pitch, velocity, and instrument for each note to be played. AIVA 4 is one of the most notable
examples, which is developed by Aiva Technologies in 2016. It can generate music clips in multiple
styles including electronic, pop, jazz, etc. and can be used in various contexts. As the world’s
first artificial intelligence composer recognized by symphonic organizations, AIVA obtained the
global status of Composer in the SACEM music society. OpenAI develops Jukebox [203] in 2020. It
generates music with singing in the raw audio domain in diverse genres and artistic styles. Jukebox
is considered as a leap forward in terms of musical quality, coherence, audio sample duration, and
the capacity to be conditioned by artist, genre, and lyrics.
5.4
Code
AI-based programming systems generally aim for tasks including code completion, source code to
pseudo-code mapping, program repair, API sequence prediction, user feedback, and natural language
to code generation. Recently, the emergence of powerful LLMs has pushed the boundary of AI-
based programming a large step forward. CodeGPT [204] is an open-source code generation model
developed by OpenAI which follows the transformer architecture as many other models in the GPT
4http://www.aiva.ai
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:24
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
family. It can be fine-tuned for various code generation tasks such as code completion, summary,
or translation based on a vast amount of source code data. CodeParrot [205] is a programming
learning platform that provides user with personalized feedback and assistance during coding.
A variety of interactive exercises and programming challenges are designed in the fashion of
progressive human-machine interaction. One unique feature is the scaffolding strategy which splits
complicated tasks into smaller and manageable steps to help students gradually build their coding
skills. Trained on a much larger and more diverse corpus of data, Codex [206] is a significant step
forward compared to most previous models. Specifically, it is designed to generate complete coding
programs from scratch while CodeGPT is only able to generate code fragments that complete a
given prompt. It also enjoys the benefits of being adapted to multiple programming languages,
which could provide better flexibility and generalization.
5.5
Education
AIGC has the potential to achieve significant advancements in education by leveraging multi-
modality data, for example, tutorial videos, academic papers, and other high-quality information,
thereby improving the personalized education experience. On the academic side, Google Research
introduced Minerva [207], which is built upon PaLM general language models [209] and an ad-
ditional science-and-math-focused dataset, to solve college-level multi-step quantitative tasks,
covering algebra, probability, physics, number theory, precalculus, geometry, biology, electric
engineering, chemistry, astronomy, and machine learning. For example, it can give step-by-step
details of proving the inequality 𝑎2 + 𝑏2 ≥2𝑎𝑏for any (𝑎,𝑏) ∈R2 and it can also correctly identify
Americium as the radioactive element among other three choices, including Sodium, Chromium,
and Aluminum. As is described in the blog5, Minerva achieves state-of-the-art performance on
reasoning tasks by combing techniques, including few-shot prompting, a chain of thought or
scratchpad prompting, and majority voting. Although Minerva’s performance is still below human
performance, with continuous improvement and future advancement, AIGC could provide afford-
able personalized math tutors. On the commercial side, Skillful Craftsman Education Technology
announced to develop a class bot product powered by AIGC and featuring auto curriculum, AI
tutor, and self-adaptive learning for online education, which is expected to be shipped by the fourth
quarter of 2023.
6
EFFICIENCY IN AIGC
Deep generative AI models with neural networks has dominated the field of machine learning
for the past decade, with its rise attributed to the ImageNet competition in 2012 [210], which led
to a race to create deeper and more complex models. This trend is also seen in natural language
understanding, where models like BERT and GPT-3 have been developed with a large number
of parameters. However, the increasing model footprint and complexity, as well as the cost and
resources required for training and deployment, pose challenges for practical deployment in the
real world. The core challenge is efficiency, which can be broken it down as follows:
• Inference efficiency: This is concerned with the practical considerations of deploying a
model for inference, i.e., computing the model’s outputs for a given input. Inference efficiency
is mostly related to the model’s size, speed, and resource consumption (e.g., disk and RAM
usage) during inference.
• Training efficiency: This covers factors that affect the speed and resource requirements of
training a model, such as training time, memory footprint, and scalability across multiple
5https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/06/minerva-solving-quantitative-reasoning.html
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:25
Step I  Prompt Engineer
Step II  Inference
Step III  Label Mapping
I love this movie. 
Overall, it was a _____ movie.
Prompt 𝑥′:
Input 𝑥
Template
LLM
prompt
Good 0.6
Great 0.3
Bad
0.05
Boring 0.05
……
Positive
Negative
Verbalizer
Example: I hate this movie. Overall,…
Context
Example: I hate this movie. Because …, 
overall…
CoT
𝑃(𝑦|𝑥')
Fig. 15. General procedure of prompt learning for emotion detection examples. First, the user need to construct
a prompt that fits the problem well, the user can also use in-context learning and chain-of-thought (CoT) to
help improve the performance. Then, an LLM will generate suitable words for the blank space in the prompt.
Finally, a verbalizer will project the generated word to a specific classification category.
devices. It may also encompass considerations around the amount of data required to achieve
optimal performance on a given task.
6.1
Prompt Learning
Prompt learning is a relatively new concept that has been proposed in recent years within the
context of pre-trained large language models. Previously, to make a prediction 𝑦given input 𝑥, the
goal of traditional supervised learning is to find a language model that predicts the probability
𝑃(𝑦|𝑥). With prompt learning, the goal becomes finding a template 𝑥′ that directly predicts the
probability 𝑃(𝑦|𝑥′) [211]. Hence, the objective of using a language model becomes encouraging
a pre-trained model to make predictions by providing a prompt specifying the task to be done.
Normally, prompt learning will freeze the language model and directly perform few-shot or zero-
shot learning on it. This enables the language models to be pre-trained on large amount of raw text
data and be adapted to new domains without tuning it again. Hence, prompt learning could help
save much time and efforts.
6.1.1
Traditional Prompt Learning. The process of utilizing prompt learning with a language model
can be divided into two main stages: prompt engineering and answer engineering.
• Prompt engineering. In general, there are two commonly used forms of prompt engineering:
discrete prompt and continuous prompt. Discrete prompts are typically manually designed
by humans for specific tasks, while continuous prompts are added to the input embeddings
to convey task-specific information.
• Answer engineering. After the task has been reformulated, the answer generated by the
language model based on the provided prompt needs to be mapped to the ground truth space.
There are different paradigms for answering engineering, including discrete search space
and continuous search space. As this topic is more closely related to classification tasks, we
refer interested readers to for further information.
In addition to single-prompt learning methods, there are also multi-prompt methods. These
approaches primarily focus on ensembling multiple prompts together as input during inference to
improve prediction robustness, which is more effective than relying on a single prompt. Another
approach to multi-prompt learning is prompt augmentation, which aims to assist the model in
answering questions by providing additional prompts that have already been answered.
6.1.2
In-context Learning. Recently, in-context learning has received significant attention as an
effective method for improving language models’ performance. This approach is a subset of prompt
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:26
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
learning and involves using a pre-trained language model as the backbone, along with adding a
few input-label demonstration pairs and instructions to the prompt. In-context learning has been
shown to be highly effective in guiding language models to produce better answers that are more
closely aligned with the given prompt. Some recent studies have also suggested that in-context
learning can be viewed as a form of implicit fine-tuning, as it enables the model to learn how to
generate answers more accurately based on the input prompt.
6.2
Efficiency in Pretrained Foundation Models
Within the context of the AIGC framework, a fundamental component of each proposed method
involves utilizing large pretrained foundation models (PFMs) [212]. PFMs, such as BERT [42], GPT-
2 [62], and RoBERTa [43], have revolutionized the field of natural language processing by achieving
state-of-the-art results on a wide range of NLP tasks. However, these models are incredibly large
and computationally expensive, which can lead to efficiency problems. This is especially true
when working with limited computational resources, such as on personal computers or in cloud
environments with limited processing power. In order to address these efficiency problems, recent
numerous works have been dedicated to exploring more cost-effective pretraining methods to
pretrain large-scale PFMs. The effectiveness of learning algorithms is contingent upon both training
methods and model architecture efficiency. For example, ELECTRA [213] introduces an RTD task
that predicts whether each input marker is replaced by other tokens, thereby enabling ELECTRA
to train against all input tokens. In addition to effective training methods, model architecture
efficiency can also contribute to improved PFMs efficiency. Most PFMs based on the Transformer
algorithm may benefit from a more efficient model architecture by reducing the complexity of the
Transformer algorithm.
6.3
Model Compression
Model compression is an effective approach to reduce model size and improve computation ef-
ficiency. It requires fewer computing resources and memory and can better meet the needs of
various applications than the original model, where its strategies can be divided into two categories:
parameter compression and structure compression. Parameter compression methods include param-
eter pruning, parameter quantization, low-rank decomposition, and parameter sharing. Parameter
pruning deletes redundant parameters based on a sizeable PFM, while parameter quantization re-
duces model parameters to lower-order numbers without significant impact on model performance.
Low-rank decomposition reduces the dimension of a high-dimensional parameter vector, and
parameter sharing maps model parameters to reduce their number. Structure compression refers
to designing new compact network structures and employing knowledge distillation, where the
knowledge learned from a larger teacher model is transferred to a smaller student model through
soft labels, among other techniques. DistilBERT [214], for instance, uses knowledge distillation to
compress BERT, reducing its size by 40% while maintaining 97% of its language comprehension.
ALBERT uses decomposition-embedded parameterization and cross-layer parameter sharing to
reduce the number of model parameters.
7
TRUSTWORTHY & RESPONSIBLE AIGC
While AIGC has the potential to be incredibly useful in many different applications, it also raises
significant concerns about security and privacy. In this section, we will discuss studies that disclose
the "dark" side of AIGC and countermeasures proposed to ensure that AIGC can be used in a safe
and responsible way.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:27
7.1
Security
Factuality. Although tools like ChatGPT [4] is capable of generating content that usually appears
or sounds reasonable, they are often unreliable in terms of factuality [215]. Sometimes, the model
outputs counterfactual or even absurd answers, which pose a serious threat to the truthfulness of
information on the internet. Recently, NewsGuard’s Misinformation Monitor [216] has indicated
the possibility that AI-generated content tools are being weaponized to spread misinformation at an
unprecedented scale. Presented with 100 samples from NewsGuard’s proprietary misinformation
database, the tested model, ChatGPT, generated false narratives for 80 of the 100 previously identified
false arguments, which could easily come across as legitimate and authoritative for those unfamiliar
with the topics [216]. Moreover, Alex [217] offers a more specific example by demonstrating how
to leverage ChatGPT [4] to generate a newspaper. Besides natural language processing, factuality
concerns also exist in the computer vision domain. For example, stable diffusion [13], which has
been demonstrated to be a powerful vision-generated model, has trouble drawing realistic human
hands with the correct number of fingers [218]. To prevent the spread of misinformation on the
internet, websites like Stackoverflow [219] propose policies that ban users from using AI-generated
content as an answer to reduce the risk of being overwhelmed by inaccurate and biased content.
Earlier studies have shown that AI models suffer from factual incorrectness and hallucination
of knowledge [220]. To evaluate and improve the factual accuracy of AI-generated content, [221]
proposed model-based metrics that measure the factualness of generated text, complementing
traditional metrics such as ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) [222] and
BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy) [223]. Specifically, [221] proposed a Transformer-based
end-to-end fact extraction model, which enables the structured prediction of relation tuples for
factualness assessment. More systematic definitions of truthfulness standards and approaches for
governing AI-generated content were later proposed in Truthful AI [224]. The standard proposed
by Truthful AI aims to avoid "negligent falsehoods" and explicitly train AI systems to be truthful
via curated datasets and human interaction. Based on GPT-3, WebGPT [225] proposed a humanoid
prototype that models the AI answering process into web searching and evidence-composing
phrases. Since the model is trained to cite its sources, the factual accuracy of AI-generated content is
significantly improved in multiple benchmark datasets [226, 227]. Specifically, the model is obtained
by fine-tuning GPT-3 using imitation learning, which leverages human feedback to optimize answer
quality. Furthermore, [228] measures and improves the factual accuracy of large-scale language
models for open-ended text generation. [228] proposed the factual-nucleus sampling algorithm
that dynamically adapts the randomness to balance the factuality and quality of AI-generated
content. A factuality-enhanced training method that uses TOPICPREFIX for better awareness of
facts and sentence completion is designed as the training objective, which vastly reduces factual
errors. Despite these preliminary advances in developing more truthful AI, challenges still remain.
For example, AI-generated content might be problematic on unfamiliar types of questions and
contexts that involve contradictions [215].
Toxicity. Besides utility, it is important for AI-generated content (AIGC) to be helpful, harmless,
unbiased, and non-toxic. Extensive research has been conducted on the potential harm caused by
deployed models [229–231], which can include biased outputs [232, 233], stereotypes [234], and
misinformation [235]. To address this issue of toxicity in the language domain, OpenAI proposes
InstructGPT [10], which aligns language models with human preferences by using human feedback
as a reward signal to fine-tune the models, ensuring more relevant and safe responses. Concurrently,
Google proposes LaMDA [236], a family of neural language models specialized for safe and factual
dialog by leveraging fine-tuning and external knowledge sources. To improve model safety, LaMDA
[236] designs a set of metrics (Appendix A.1 in the original paper) that quantify model safety based
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:28
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
on an illustrative set of human values derived from Google’s AI Principles 6. Furthermore, Ganguli
et al. [237] study and improve the safety of language models in an adversarial way. Specifically, they
investigate the scaling behaviors for red teaming across models with different sizes (2.7B, 13B, and
52B parameters) and training schemes (plain LM, fine-tuned LM, LM with rejection sampling, and
LM trained with RLHF). They found that models trained with RLHF scale better and are increasingly
difficult to red team.
7.2
Privacy
Membership inference. The goal of the membership inference attack (MIA) is to determine whether
an image 𝑥belongs to the set of training data. Wu et al. [238] investigated the membership leakage in
text-to-image (diffusion-based and sequence-to-sequence-based) generation models under realistic
black-box settings. Specifically, three kinds of intuitions including quality, reconstruction error,
and faithfulness are considered to design the attack algorithms. However, Wu et al. [238] assumed
that the member set and the hold-out set come from different distributions, which makes the MIA
much easier. Under a more practical setting [239], where the member set and the hold-out set
are in the same distribution, Duan et al. [240] propose Step-wise Error Comparing Membership
Inference (SecMI), a black-box MIA that infers memberships by assessing the matching of forward
process posterior estimation at each timestep. Concurrently, Hu and Pang [241] propose two attack
approaches, including loss-based and likelihood-based MIA. Furthermore, Matsumoto et al. [242]
introduce more comparisons with GANs.
Data Extraction. The objective of a data extraction attack is to retrieve an image from the set of
training data, denoted as 𝑥∈𝐷. The attack can be considered a success if the attacker is able to
obtain an image ˆ𝑥that closely resembles image 𝑥∈𝐷. Compared to the membership inference
attack, the data extraction attack poses stronger privacy risks to the model. The feasibility of such an
attack might be due to the memorization property of large-scale models [243], in which they turn to
memorize parts of their training data. When prompted appropriately, the memorized training data
that might contain sensitive information will be emitted verbatim. Earlier, in the language domain,
Carlini et al. [244] demonstrated that large language models (specifically, GPT-2 [245]) memorize
and leak individual training examples. Specifically, they proposed a simple and efficient method for
extracting verbatim sequences from a language model’s training set using only black-box query
access. Recently, in the vision domain, Somepalli et al. [246] showed that the data replication
problem existed in diffusion models, where the generated images are close to the training data in
terms of semantic similarity. To disclose worse-case privacy risk, Carlini et al. [247] further explored
the privacy vulnerabilities of state-of-the-art diffusion models by leveraging a generate-and-filter
pipeline to extract over a thousand training examples from the models. Specifically, the extraction
approach first samples 500 candidate images by querying the generation function in a black-box
manner using selected prompts. Based on the intuition that generations of memorized data are
nearly identical, a similarity graph is then constructed to determine whether an image belongs to
the training set. The results in [247] show that diffusion models, including Stable Diffusion [13]
and Imagen [152], are more susceptible to privacy breaches compared to earlier generative models
like GANs [29]. These results highlight the necessity of developing new techniques for preserving
privacy during training to address these vulnerabilities.
8
OPEN PROBLEMS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss some challenges in AIGC and potential ways to address them.
6https://ai.google/principles/
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:29
High-stakes Applications. Although the community has witnessed the huge success of AIGC
in images, texts, and audio generations, these areas are arguably more fault-tolerant. On the
contrary, AIGC for high-stakes applications, including healthcare [248], financial services [249],
autonomous vehicles [250], and science discovery [251], are still challenging. In these domains,
tasks are mission-critical and require a high degree of accuracy, reliability, transparency, and less
or near zero fault-tolerant. For example, the large language model Galactica [252], which is made
for automatically organizing science, can perform knowledge-intensive scientific tasks and have
promising performances on several benchmark tasks. Its public demo were taken down from the
service only three days after its initial release, due to the intensive criticism on its generated biased
and incorrect results in an authoritative tone. It would be crucial for generative models in these
high-stakes applications to give confidence scores, reasoning, and source information along with
generated results. Only when professionals understand how and where these results are coming
from, they can confidently utilize these tools in their tasks.
Specialization and Generalization. AIGC relies on the choice of foundation models, which
are trained on different datasets, including crawl-based [37] one and carefully curated [252]. And it
is argued in [230] that “training on a more diverse dataset is not always better for downstream
performance than a more specialized foundation model." However, the curation of highly specialized
dataset can be both time-consuming and cost-ineffective. A better understanding of cross-domain
representations and how they are resilient to testing-time distribution-shift may guide the design
of training datasets that balance specialization and generalization.
Continual Learning and Retraining. The human knowledge base keeps expanding and new
tasks continue emerging. To generate the contents with up-to-date information, it not only requires
model to “remember" the learned knowledge, but also be able to learn and infer from newly acquired
information. For some scenarios [253], it suffices to perform the continual learning on downstream
tasks while keeping the pre-trained foundation model unchanged. When necessary [254], one can
perform continual learning on foundation models. However, it is also observed that the continual
learning may not always outperform the retrained models [255]. This calls for the need to understand
when should one choose continual learning strategy and when to choose to the retraining strategy.
Also, training foundation models from scratch may be prohibitive, so modularized design of next
generation of foundation models for AIGC may elucidate which parts of the model should be
retrained.
Reasoning. Reasoning is a crucial component of human intelligence that enables us to draw
inferences, make decisions, and solve complex problems. However, even trained with large scale
dataset, sometimes GAI models could still fail at common sense reasoning tasks [256, 257]. Recently,
more and more researchers began to focus on this problem. Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [256]
is a promising solution to the challenge of reasoning in generative AI models. It is designed to
enhance the ability of large language models to learn about logical reasoning in the context of
question answering. By explaining the logical reasoning process that humans use to arrive at
answers to models, they can follow the same road that humans take in processing their reasoning.
By incorporating this approach, large language models can achieve higher accuracy and better
performance in tasks that require logical reasoning. CoT has also been applied to other areas like
vision language question answering [257] and code generation [258]. However, it still remains a
problem that how to construct these CoT prompts according to specific tasks.
Scaling up. Scaling up has been a common problem in large-scale pretraining. Model training
is always limited by compute budget, available dataset and model size. As the size of pretraining
models increases, the time and resources required for training also increases significantly. This
poses a challenge for researchers and organizations that seek to utilize large-scale pretraining for
various tasks, such as natural language understanding, computer vision, and speech recognition.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:30
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
Another issue pertains to the efficacy of pretraining with large-scale datasets, which may not
yield optimal results if experimental hyperparameters, such as model size and data volume, are
not thoughtfully designed. As such, suboptimal hyperparameters can result in wasteful resource
consumption and the failure to achieve desired outcomes through further training. Several works
have been proposed to solve these problems. Hoffmann et al. [259] introduce a formal scaling law
to predict model performance based on the number of parameters and dataset size. This work
provides a useful framework for understanding the relationship between these key factors when
scaling up. Aghajanyan et al. [260] conduct empirical analyses to validate the Hoffmann scaling law
and propose an additional formula that explores the relationship between different training tasks in
multimodal model training settings. These findings provide valuable insights into the complexities
of large-scale model training and the nuances of optimizing performance across diverse training
domains.
Social issues. As AIGC continues to proliferate across various domains, social concerns re-
garding its use have become increasingly prominent. These concerns relate to issues such as bias,
ethics, and the impact of AI-generated content on various stakeholders. One major concern is the
potential for bias in AI-generated content, particularly in areas such as natural language processing
and computer vision. AI models can inadvertently perpetuate or amplify existing societal biases,
particularly if the training data used to develop the models are themselves biased. This can have
significant negative consequences, such as perpetuating discrimination and inequities in areas
such as hiring, loan approvals, and criminal justice. Ethical concerns also arise with the use of
AI-generated content, particularly in cases where the technology is used to generate deepfakes or
other forms of manipulated media. Such content can be used to spread false information, incite
violence, or harm individuals or organizations. Additionally, there are concerns around the potential
for AI-generated content to infringe on copyright and intellectual property rights, as well as issues
around privacy and data security. Overall, while AI-generated content holds significant promise in
various domains, it is crucial to address these social concerns to ensure that its use is responsible
and beneficial for society as a whole.
9
CONCLUSION
This survey provides a comprehensive overview of the history and recent advancements in AIGC,
with a particular focus on both unimodality and multimodality generative models. In addition, we
discuss the recent applications of generative AI models, commonly used techniques in AIGC, and
address concerns surrounding trustworthiness and responsibility in the field. Finally, we explore
open problems and future directions for AIGC, highlighting potential avenues for innovation and
progress. The primary objective of this survey is to provide readers with a comprehensive under-
standing of recent developments and future challenges in generative AI. Our analysis of the general
framework of AI generation aims to distinguish contemporary generative AI models from their
predecessors. Ultimately, we hope this survey will aid readers in gaining deeper insights into this
field. Moving forward, we would further investigate this topic and provide a more comprehensive
analysis of AIGC.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, M. Chen, and I. Sutskever, “Zero-shot text-to-image
generation,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8821–8831, PMLR, 2021.
[2] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman, et al.,
“Evaluating large language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[3] L. Yunjiu, W. Wei, and Y. Zheng, “Artificial intelligence-generated and human expert-designed vocabulary tests: A
comparative study,” SAGE Open, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 21582440221082130, 2022.
[4] “Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue,” Nov. 2022.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:31
[5] A. Ramesh, P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, C. Chu, and M. Chen, “Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation with
CLIP Latents,” Apr. 2022. arXiv:2204.06125 [cs].
[6] M. Stefanini, M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, S. Cascianelli, G. Fiameni, and R. Cucchiara, “From Show to Tell: A Survey on
Deep Learning-based Image Captioning,” Nov. 2021. arXiv:2107.06912 [cs].
[7] P. P. Liang, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, “Foundations and Recent Trends in Multimodal Machine Learning: Principles,
Challenges, and Open Questions,” Sept. 2022. arXiv:2209.03430 [cs].
[8] A. Gokaslan and V. Cohen, “Openwebtext corpus,” 2019.
[9] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell,
S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse,
M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and
D. Amodei, “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33,
pp. 1877–1901, Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[10] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray,
J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe,
“Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Mar. 2022. arXiv:2203.02155 [cs].
[11] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei, “Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human
Preferences,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[12] N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. M. Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. Voss, A. Radford, D. Amodei, and P. Christiano, “Learning to
summarize from human feedback,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS’20, (Red Hook, NY, USA), pp. 3008–3021, Curran Associates Inc., Dec. 2020.
[13] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion
Models,” Apr. 2022. arXiv:2112.10752 [cs].
[14] N. Anantrasirichai and D. Bull, “Artificial intelligence in the creative industries: a review,” Artificial Intelligence Review,
vol. 55, pp. 589–656, jul 2021.
[15] J. Kietzmann, J. Paschen, and E. Treen, “Artificial Intelligence in Advertising,” Journal of Advertis-
ing Research, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 263–267, 2018.
Publisher: Journal of Advertising Research _eprint:
https://www.journalofadvertisingresearch.com/content/58/3/263.full.pdf.
[16] M. Kandlhofer, G. Steinbauer, S. Hirschmugl-Gaisch, and P. Huber, “Artificial intelligence and computer science in
education: From kindergarten to university,” in 2016 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), pp. 1–9, 2016.
[17] J. Li, T. Tang, W. X. Zhao, J.-Y. Nie, and J.-R. Wen, “Pretrained language models for text generation: A survey,” 2022.
[18] J. Agnese, J. Herrera, H. Tao, and X. Zhu, “A survey and taxonomy of adversarial neural networks for text-to-image
synthesis,” 2019.
[19] M. Suzuki and Y. Matsuo, “A survey of multimodal deep generative models,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 36, pp. 261–278,
feb 2022.
[20] K. Knill and S. Young, “Hidden Markov Models in Speech and Language Processing,” in Corpus-Based Methods in
Language and Speech Processing (S. Young and G. Bloothooft, eds.), pp. 27–68, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1997.
[21] D. A. Reynolds et al., “Gaussian mixture models.,” Encyclopedia of biometrics, vol. 741, no. 659-663, 2009.
[22] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Janvin, “A neural probabilistic language model,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3,
p. 1137–1155, mar 2003.
[23] T. Mikolov, M. Karafiát, L. Burget, J. Cernock`y, and S. Khudanpur, “Recurrent neural network based language model.,”
in Interspeech, vol. 2, pp. 1045–1048, Makuhari, 2010.
[24] A. Graves and A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural networks,
pp. 37–45, 2012.
[25] R. Dey and F. M. Salem, “Gate-variants of gated recurrent unit (gru) neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE 60th international
midwest symposium on circuits and systems (MWSCAS), pp. 1597–1600, IEEE, 2017.
[26] U. Khandelwal, H. He, P. Qi, and D. Jurafsky, “Sharp nearby, fuzzy far away: How neural language models use context,”
2018.
[27] A. A. Efros and T. K. Leung, “Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling,” in Proceedings of the seventh IEEE
international conference on computer vision, vol. 2, pp. 1033–1038, IEEE, 1999.
[28] P. S. Heckbert, “Survey of texture mapping,” IEEE computer graphics and applications, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 56–67, 1986.
[29] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative
adversarial networks,” 2014.
[30] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[31] Y. Song and S. Ermon, “Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[32] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is
all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:32
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, eds.), vol. 30, Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[33] A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, M. Chen, and I. Sutskever, “Zero-shot text-to-image
generation,” 2021.
[34] M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed, O. Levy, V. Stoyanov, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Bart: Denoising
sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.13461, 2019.
[35] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold,
S. Gelly, et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[36] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer
using shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022,
2021.
[37] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger,
and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” 2021.
[38] Q. Dong, L. Li, D. Dai, C. Zheng, Z. Wu, B. Chang, X. Sun, J. Xu, L. Li, and Z. Sui, “A survey on in-context learning,”
2023.
[39] J. W. Rae, S. Borgeaud, T. Cai, K. Millican, J. Hoffmann, F. Song, J. Aslanides, S. Henderson, R. Ring, S. Young, et al.,
“Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
[40] N. Elhage, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, T. Henighan, N. Joseph, B. Mann, A. Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, T. Conerly, N. DasSarma,
D. Drain, D. Ganguli, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Hernandez, A. Jones, J. Kernion, L. Lovitt, K. Ndousse, D. Amodei, T. Brown,
J. Clark, J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, and C. Olah, “A mathematical framework for transformer circuits,” Transformer
Circuits Thread, 2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
[41] X. Qiu, T. Sun, Y. Xu, Y. Shao, N. Dai, and X. Huang, “Pre-trained models for natural language processing: A survey,”
Science China Technological Sciences, vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 1872–1897, 2020.
[42] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[43] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A
robustly optimized bert pretraining approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[44] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V. Le, “Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining
for language understanding,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[45] S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen, C. Dewan, M. Diab, X. Li, X. V. Lin, T. Mihaylov, M. Ott,
S. Shleifer, K. Shuster, D. Simig, P. S. Koura, A. Sridhar, T. Wang, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
language models,” 2022.
[46] A. Glaese, N. McAleese, M. Trębacz, J. Aslanides, V. Firoiu, T. Ewalds, M. Rauh, L. Weidinger, M. Chadwick, P. Thacker,
et al., “Improving alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
[47] R. Coulom, “Whole-history rating: A bayesian rating system for players of time-varying strength,” in Computers and
Games: 6th International Conference, CG 2008, Beijing, China, September 29-October 1, 2008. Proceedings 6, pp. 113–124,
Springer, 2008.
[48] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei, “Deep reinforcement learning from human
preferences,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[49] R. Ramamurthy, P. Ammanabrolu, K. Brantley, J. Hessel, R. Sifa, C. Bauckhage, H. Hajishirzi, and Y. Choi, “Is
reinforcement learning (not) for natural language processing?: Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural
language policy optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01241, 2022.
[50] Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, S. Kundu, A. Askell, J. Kernion, A. Jones, A. Chen, A. Goldie, A. Mirhoseini, C. McKinnon, et al.,
“Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
[51] B. Zhu, J. Jiao, and M. I. Jordan, “Principled reinforcement learning with human feedback from pairwise or 𝑘-wise
comparisons,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11270, 2023.
[52] X. Amatriain, “Transformer models: an introduction and catalog,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07730, 2023.
[53] A. Sergeev and M. Del Balso, “Horovod: fast and easy distributed deep learning in tensorflow,” 2018.
[54] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models
with over 100 billion parameters,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 3505–3506, 2020.
[55] J. J. Dai, D. Ding, D. Shi, S. Huang, J. Wang, X. Qiu, K. Huang, G. Song, Y. Wang, Q. Gong, et al., “Bigdl 2.0: Seamless
scaling of ai pipelines from laptops to distributed cluster,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 21439–21446, 2022.
[56] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of
transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 21, no. 1,
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:33
pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
[57] L. Dinh, D. Krueger, and Y. Bengio, “Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
[58] J. Ni, T. Young, V. Pandelea, F. Xue, and E. Cambria, “Recent advances in deep learning based dialogue systems: A
systematic survey,” Artificial intelligence review, pp. 1–101, 2022.
[59] S. Yang, Y. Wang, and X. Chu, “A survey of deep learning techniques for neural machine translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.07526, 2020.
[60] F. Zhu, W. Lei, C. Wang, J. Zheng, S. Poria, and T.-S. Chua, “Retrieving and reading: A comprehensive survey on
open-domain question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00774, 2021.
[61] A. Radford and K. Narasimhan, “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training,” 2018.
[62] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners,” 2019.
[63] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
[64] T. L. Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, E. Pavlick, S. Ilić, D. Hesslow, R. Castagné, A. S. Luccioni, F. Yvon, M. Gallé, et al., “Bloom:
A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.
[65] M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, J. Casper, and B. Catanzaro, “Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion
parameter language models using model parallelism,” 2019.
[66] S. Smith, M. Patwary, B. Norick, P. LeGresley, S. Rajbhandari, J. Casper, Z. Liu, S. Prabhumoye, G. Zerveas, V. Korthikanti,
E. Zhang, R. Child, R. Y. Aminabadi, J. Bernauer, X. Song, M. Shoeybi, Y. He, M. Houston, S. Tiwary, and B. Catanzaro,
“Using deepspeed and megatron to train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model,” 2022.
[67] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer, “Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and
efficient sparsity,” J. Mach. Learn. Res, vol. 23, pp. 1–40, 2021.
[68] V. Aribandi, Y. Tay, T. Schuster, J. Rao, H. S. Zheng, S. V. Mehta, H. Zhuang, V. Q. Tran, D. Bahri, J. Ni, et al., “Ext5:
Towards extreme multi-task scaling for transfer learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10952, 2021.
[69] A. Aghajanyan, D. Okhonko, M. Lewis, M. Joshi, H. Xu, G. Ghosh, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Htlm: Hyper-text pre-training
and prompting of language models,” 2021.
[70] Z. Li, Z. Wang, M. Tan, R. Nallapati, P. Bhatia, A. Arnold, B. Xiang, and D. Roth, “Dq-bart: Efficient sequence-to-
sequence model via joint distillation and quantization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11239, 2022.
[71] E. L. Denton, S. Chintala, R. Fergus, et al., “Deep generative image models using a laplacian pyramid of adversarial
networks,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
[72] P. J. Burt and E. H. Adelson, “The laplacian pyramid as a compact image code,” in Readings in computer vision,
pp. 671–679, Elsevier, 1987.
[73] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative
adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[74] T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen, “Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.
[75] H. Zhang, I. Goodfellow, D. Metaxas, and A. Odena, “Self-attention generative adversarial networks,” in International
conference on machine learning, pp. 7354–7363, PMLR, 2019.
[76] A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan, “Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural image synthesis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
[77] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
[78] J. Donahue, P. Krähenbühl, and T. Darrell, “Adversarial feature learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09782, 2016.
[79] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky, “It takes (only) two: Adversarial generator-encoder networks,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32, 2018.
[80] T. Nguyen, T. Le, H. Vu, and D. Phung, “Dual discriminator generative adversarial nets,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[81] I. Durugkar, I. Gemp, and S. Mahadevan, “Generative multi-adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01673,
2016.
[82] Q. Hoang, T. D. Nguyen, T. Le, and D. Phung, “Multi-generator generative adversarial nets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.02556, 2017.
[83] A. Ghosh, V. Kulharia, V. P. Namboodiri, P. H. Torr, and P. K. Dokania, “Multi-agent diverse generative adversarial
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8513–8521, 2018.
[84] M.-Y. Liu and O. Tuzel, “Coupled generative adversarial networks,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 29, 2016.
[85] X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and P. Abbeel, “Infogan: Interpretable representation
learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:34
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
vol. 29, 2016.
[86] M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional generative adversarial nets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784, 2014.
[87] Y. Lu, Y.-W. Tai, and C.-K. Tang, “Attribute-guided face generation using conditional cyclegan,” in Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 282–297, 2018.
[88] Q. Mao, H.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Tseng, S. Ma, and M.-H. Yang, “Mode seeking generative adversarial networks for diverse
image synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1429–1437,
2019.
[89] S. Nowozin, B. Cseke, and R. Tomioka, “f-gan: Training generative neural samplers using variational divergence
minimization,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[90] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V. Dumoulin, and A. C. Courville, “Improved training of wasserstein gans,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[91] G.-J. Qi, “Loss-sensitive generative adversarial networks on lipschitz densities,” International Journal of Computer
Vision, vol. 128, no. 5, pp. 1118–1140, 2020.
[92] X. Mao, Q. Li, H. Xie, R. Y. Lau, Z. Wang, and S. Paul Smolley, “Least squares generative adversarial networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2794–2802, 2017.
[93] T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y. Yoshida, “Spectral normalization for generative adversarial networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05957, 2018.
[94] T. Che, Y. Li, A. P. Jacob, Y. Bengio, and W. Li, “Mode regularized generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.02136, 2016.
[95] L. Metz, B. Poole, D. Pfau, and J. Sohl-Dickstein, “Unrolled generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02163, 2016.
[96] A. Jolicoeur-Martineau, “The relativistic discriminator: a key element missing from standard gan,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.00734, 2018.
[97] C. W. Fox and S. J. Roberts, “A tutorial on variational bayesian inference,” Artificial intelligence review, vol. 38, pp. 85–95,
2012.
[98] M. D. Hoffman and M. J. Johnson, “Elbo surgery: yet another way to carve up the variational evidence lower bound,”
in Workshop in Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, NIPS, vol. 1, 2016.
[99] J. Tomczak and M. Welling, “Vae with a vampprior,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
pp. 1214–1223, PMLR, 2018.
[100] L. Maaløe, M. Fraccaro, V. Liévin, and O. Winther, “Biva: A very deep hierarchy of latent variables for generative
modeling,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[101] A. Vahdat and J. Kautz, “Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 33, pp. 19667–19679, 2020.
[102] B. Wu, S. Nair, R. Martin-Martin, L. Fei-Fei, and C. Finn, “Greedy hierarchical variational autoencoders for large-scale
video prediction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2318–2328,
2021.
[103] P. Ghosh, M. S. Sajjadi, A. Vergari, M. Black, and B. Schölkopf, “From variational to deterministic autoencoders,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.12436, 2019.
[104] A. Van Den Oord, O. Vinyals, et al., “Neural discrete representation learning,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[105] A. Razavi, A. Van den Oord, and O. Vinyals, “Generating diverse high-fidelity images with vq-vae-2,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[106] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using real nvp,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
[107] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked autoregressive flow for density estimation,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[108] C.-W. Huang, D. Krueger, A. Lacoste, and A. Courville, “Neural autoregressive flows,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 2078–2087, PMLR, 2018.
[109] N. De Cao, W. Aziz, and I. Titov, “Block neural autoregressive flow,” in Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp. 1263–
1273, PMLR, 2020.
[110] G. Zheng, Y. Yang, and J. Carbonell, “Convolutional normalizing flows,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02255, 2017.
[111] E. Hoogeboom, R. Van Den Berg, and M. Welling, “Emerging convolutions for generative normalizing flows,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2771–2780, PMLR, 2019.
[112] A. N. Gomez, M. Ren, R. Urtasun, and R. B. Grosse, “The reversible residual network: Backpropagation without storing
activations,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[113] J.-H. Jacobsen, A. Smeulders, and E. Oyallon, “i-revnet: Deep invertible networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07088,
2018.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:35
[114] E. Haber, L. Ruthotto, E. Holtham, and S.-H. Jun, “Learning across scales—multiscale methods for convolution neural
networks,” in Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
[115] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
[116] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through
stochastic differential equations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
[117] T. Salimans and J. Ho, “Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00512,
2022.
[118] H. Zheng, P. He, W. Chen, and M. Zhou, “Truncated diffusion probabilistic models,” stat, vol. 1050, p. 7, 2022.
[119] Z. Lyu, X. Xu, C. Yang, D. Lin, and B. Dai, “Accelerating diffusion models via early stop of the diffusion process,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.12524, 2022.
[120] G. Franzese, S. Rossi, L. Yang, A. Finamore, D. Rossi, M. Filippone, and P. Michiardi, “How much is enough? a study
on diffusion times in score-based generative models,” 2022.
[121] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171, PMLR, 2021.
[122] R. San-Roman, E. Nachmani, and L. Wolf, “Noise estimation for generative diffusion models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.02600, 2021.
[123] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
[124] F. Bao, C. Li, J. Zhu, and B. Zhang, “Analytic-dpm: an analytic estimate of the optimal reverse variance in diffusion
probabilistic models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.06503, 2022.
[125] D. Watson, J. Ho, M. Norouzi, and W. Chan, “Learning to efficiently sample from diffusion probabilistic models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.03802, 2021.
[126] D. Watson, W. Chan, J. Ho, and M. Norouzi, “Learning fast samplers for diffusion models by differentiating through
sample quality,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[127] E. Nachmani, R. S. Roman, and L. Wolf, “Non gaussian denoising diffusion models,” 2021.
[128] A. Bansal, E. Borgnia, H.-M. Chu, J. S. Li, H. Kazemi, F. Huang, M. Goldblum, J. Geiping, and T. Goldstein, “Cold
diffusion: Inverting arbitrary image transforms without noise,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09392, 2022.
[129] H. Chung, B. Sim, and J. C. Ye, “Come-closer-diffuse-faster: Accelerating conditional diffusion models for inverse
problems through stochastic contraction,” 2021.
[130] K. Pandey, A. Mukherjee, P. Rai, and A. Kumar, “Diffusevae: Efficient, controllable and high-fidelity generation from
low-dimensional latents,” 2022.
[131] A. Vahdat, K. Kreis, and J. Kautz, “Score-based generative modeling in latent space,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 11287–11302, 2021.
[132] Z. Xiao, K. Kreis, and A. Vahdat, “Tackling the generative learning trilemma with denoising diffusion gans,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.07804, 2021.
[133] Q. Zhang and Y. Chen, “Diffusion normalizing flow,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34,
pp. 16280–16291, 2021.
[134] L. H. Li, M. Yatskar, D. Yin, C.-J. Hsieh, and K.-W. Chang, “Visualbert: A simple and performant baseline for vision
and language,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557, 2019.
[135] Z. Wang, J. Yu, A. W. Yu, Z. Dai, Y. Tsvetkov, and Y. Cao, “Simvlm: Simple visual language model pretraining with
weak supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10904, 2021.
[136] W. Su, X. Zhu, Y. Cao, B. Li, L. Lu, F. Wei, and J. Dai, “Vl-bert: Pre-training of generic visual-linguistic representations,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08530, 2019.
[137] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
[138] L. Zhou, H. Palangi, L. Zhang, H. Hu, J. Corso, and J. Gao, “Unified vision-language pre-training for image captioning
and vqa,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 13041–13049, 2020.
[139] H. Tan and M. Bansal, “Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from transformers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.07490, 2019.
[140] J. Lu, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee, ViLBERT: Pretraining Task-Agnostic Visiolinguistic Representations for Vision-and-
Language Tasks. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
[141] J. Li, R. Selvaraju, A. Gotmare, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi, “Align before fuse: Vision and language representation
learning with momentum distillation,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 9694–9705, 2021.
[142] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language
understanding and generation,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900, PMLR, 2022.
[143] M. Tsimpoukelli, J. Menick, S. Cabi, S. Eslami, O. Vinyals, and F. Hill, “Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen
language models,” Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:36
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
[144] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds, et al.,
“Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
[145] J. Y. Koh, R. Salakhutdinov, and D. Fried, “Grounding language models to images for multimodal generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.13823, 2023.
[146] J. Merullo, L. Castricato, C. Eickhoff, and E. Pavlick, “Linearly mapping from image to text space,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.15162, 2022.
[147] R. Zhou, C. Jiang, and Q. Xu, “A survey on generative adversarial network-based text-to-image synthesis,” Neurocom-
puting, vol. 451, pp. 316–336, 2021.
[148] H. Zhang, T. Xu, H. Li, S. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Huang, and D. N. Metaxas, “Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image
synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision, pp. 5907–5915, 2017.
[149] T. Xu, P. Zhang, Q. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Gan, X. Huang, and X. He, “Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation
with attentional generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 1316–1324, 2018.
[150] O. Patashnik, Z. Wu, E. Shechtman, D. Cohen-Or, and D. Lischinski, “Styleclip: Text-driven manipulation of stylegan
imagery,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2085–2094, 2021.
[151] A. Nichol, P. Dhariwal, A. Ramesh, P. Shyam, P. Mishkin, B. McGrew, I. Sutskever, and M. Chen, “Glide: Towards
photorealistic image generation and editing with text-guided diffusion models,” 2021.
[152] C. Saharia, W. Chan, S. Saxena, L. Li, J. Whang, E. Denton, S. K. S. Ghasemipour, B. K. Ayan, S. S. Mahdavi, R. G.
Lopes, et al., “Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
[153] M. Chen, X. Tan, B. Li, Y. Liu, T. Qin, S. Zhao, and T.-Y. Liu, “Adaspeech: Adaptive text to speech for custom voice,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00993, 2021.
[154] D. Paul, M. P. Shifas, Y. Pantazis, and Y. Stylianou, “Enhancing speech intelligibility in text-to-speech synthesis using
speaking style conversion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.05809, 2020.
[155] T.-C. Zorila, V. Kandia, and Y. Stylianou, “Speech-in-noise intelligibility improvement based on spectral shaping and
dynamic range compression,” in Thirteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
2012.
[156] Y. Zhang, R. J. Weiss, H. Zen, Y. Wu, Z. Chen, R. Skerry-Ryan, Y. Jia, A. Rosenberg, and B. Ramabhadran, “Learning to
speak fluently in a foreign language: Multilingual speech synthesis and cross-language voice cloning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.04448, 2019.
[157] Y. Yu, S. Tang, F. Raposo, and L. Chen, “Deep cross-modal correlation learning for audio and lyrics in music retrieval,”
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM), vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2019.
[158] H. Liang, H. Wang, J. Wang, S. You, Z. Sun, J.-M. Wei, and Z. Yang, “Jtav: Jointly learning social media content
representation by fusing textual, acoustic, and visual features,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01483, 2018.
[159] A. Ferraro, X. Favory, K. Drossos, Y. Kim, and D. Bogdanov, “Enriched music representations with multiple cross-modal
contrastive learning,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 28, pp. 733–737, 2021.
[160] K. Choi, G. Fazekas, B. McFee, K. Cho, and M. Sandler, “Towards music captioning: Generating music playlist
descriptions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04868, 2016.
[161] I. Manco, E. Benetos, E. Quinton, and G. Fazekas, “Muscaps: Generating captions for music audio,” in 2021 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2021.
[162] I. Manco, E. Benetos, E. Quinton, and G. Fazekas, “Learning music audio representations via weak language supervision,”
in ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 456–460,
IEEE, 2022.
[163] B. Elizalde, S. Deshmukh, M. A. Ismail, and H. Wang, “Clap: Learning audio concepts from natural language supervision,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04769, 2022.
[164] L. Banarescu, C. Bonial, S. Cai, M. Georgescu, K. Griffitt, U. Hermjakob, K. Knight, P. Koehn, M. Palmer, and
N. Schneider, “Abstract meaning representation for sembanking,” in Proceedings of the 7th linguistic annotation
workshop and interoperability with discourse, pp. 178–186, 2013.
[165] X. Li, A. Taheri, L. Tu, and K. Gimpel, “Commonsense knowledge base completion,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1445–1455, 2016.
[166] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Kg-bert: Bert for knowledge graph completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03193, 2019.
[167] C. Malaviya, C. Bhagavatula, A. Bosselut, and Y. Choi, “Commonsense knowledge base completion with structural
and semantic context,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 2925–2933, 2020.
[168] F. Petroni, T. Rocktäschel, P. Lewis, A. Bakhtin, Y. Wu, A. H. Miller, and S. Riedel, “Language models as knowledge
bases?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066, 2019.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:37
[169] T. Shin, Y. Razeghi, R. L. Logan IV, E. Wallace, and S. Singh, “Autoprompt: Eliciting knowledge from language models
with automatically generated prompts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15980, 2020.
[170] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00190,
2021.
[171] Q. Guo, Z. Jin, X. Qiu, W. Zhang, D. Wipf, and Z. Zhang, “Cyclegt: Unsupervised graph-to-text and text-to-graph
generation via cycle training,” 2020.
[172] P. L. Dognin, I. Melnyk, I. Padhi, C. N. dos Santos, and P. Das, “Dualtkb: A dual learning bridge between text and
knowledge base,” 2020.
[173] Y. Lu, Q. Liu, D. Dai, X. Xiao, H. Lin, X. Han, L. Sun, and H. Wu, “Unified structure generation for universal information
extraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12277, 2022.
[174] I. Melnyk, P. Dognin, and P. Das, “Knowledge graph generation from text,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10511, 2022.
[175] C. Zhao, M. Walker, and S. Chaturvedi, “Bridging the structural gap between encoding and decoding for data-to-text
generation,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, (Online),
pp. 2481–2491, Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
[176] B. Distiawan, J. Qi, R. Zhang, and W. Wang, “Gtr-lstm: A triple encoder for sentence generation from rdf data,”
in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pp. 1627–1637, 2018.
[177] L. Song, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, and D. Gildea, “A graph-to-sequence model for amr-to-text generation,” 2018.
[178] R. Koncel-Kedziorski, D. Bekal, Y. Luan, M. Lapata, and H. Hajishirzi, “Text generation from knowledge graphs with
graph transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02342, 2019.
[179] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
[180] L. F. Ribeiro, Y. Zhang, C. Gardent, and I. Gurevych, “Modeling global and local node contexts for text generation
from knowledge graphs,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 8, pp. 589–604, 2020.
[181] S. Yao, T. Wang, and X. Wan, “Heterogeneous graph transformer for graph-to-sequence learning,” in Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7145–7154, 2020.
[182] L. Dong and M. Lapata, “Language to logical form with neural attention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.01280, 2016.
[183] R. Jia and P. Liang, “Data recombination for neural semantic parsing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03622, 2016.
[184] C. Lyu and I. Titov, “Amr parsing as graph prediction with latent alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.05286, 2018.
[185] B. Chen, L. Sun, and X. Han, “Sequence-to-action: End-to-end semantic graph generation for semantic parsing,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.00773, 2018.
[186] S. Zhang, X. Ma, K. Duh, and B. V. Durme, “Amr parsing as sequence-to-graph transduction,” 2019.
[187] F. Fancellu, S. Gilroy, A. Lopez, and M. Lapata, “Semantic graph parsing with recurrent neural network dag grammars,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00051, 2019.
[188] B. Su, D. Du, Z. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. Li, A. Rao, H. Sun, Z. Lu, and J.-R. Wen, “A molecular multimodal foundation model
associating molecule graphs with natural language,” 2022.
[189] C. Edwards, C. Zhai, and H. Ji, “Text2mol: Cross-modal molecule retrieval with natural language queries,” pp. 595–607,
01 2021.
[190] C. Edwards, T. Lai, K. Ros, G. Honke, K. Cho, and H. Ji, “Translation between molecules and natural language,” 2022.
[191] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou, B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang, et al., “Codebert: A pre-trained
model for programming and natural languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155, 2020.
[192] A. Kanade, P. Maniatis, G. Balakrishnan, and K. Shi, “Learning and evaluating contextual embedding of source code,”
in International conference on machine learning, pp. 5110–5121, PMLR, 2020.
[193] Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for
code understanding and generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00859, 2021.
[194] W. U. Ahmad, S. Chakraborty, B. Ray, and K.-W. Chang, “Unified pre-training for program understanding and
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06333, 2021.
[195] P. Yin and G. Neubig, “A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01696,
2017.
[196] H. Dai, Y. Tian, B. Dai, S. Skiena, and L. Song, “Syntax-directed variational autoencoder for structured data,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.08786, 2018.
[197] M. Allamanis, M. Brockschmidt, and M. Khademi, “Learning to represent programs with graphs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00740, 2017.
[198] E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Savarese, and C. Xiong, “Codegen: An open large
language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis,” 2022.
[199] S. K. Lahiri, A. Naik, G. Sakkas, P. Choudhury, C. von Veh, M. Musuvathi, J. P. Inala, C. Wang, and J. Gao, “Interactive
code generation via test-driven user-intent formalization,” 2022.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:38
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
[200] L. Zhou, J. Gao, D. Li, and H.-Y. Shum, “The design and implementation of xiaoice, an empathetic social chatbot,”
Computational Linguistics, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 53–93, 2020.
[201] D. Adiwardana, M.-T. Luong, D. R. So, J. Hall, N. Fiedel, R. Thoppilan, Z. Yang, A. Kulshreshtha, G. Nemade, Y. Lu,
et al., “Towards a human-like open-domain chatbot,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977, 2020.
[202] K. Shuster, J. Xu, M. Komeili, D. Ju, E. M. Smith, S. Roller, M. Ung, M. Chen, K. Arora, J. Lane, et al., “Blenderbot 3: a
deployed conversational agent that continually learns to responsibly engage,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03188, 2022.
[203] P. Dhariwal, H. Jun, C. Payne, J. W. Kim, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Jukebox: A generative model for music,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.00341, 2020.
[204] S. Lu, D. Guo, S. Ren, J. Huang, A. Svyatkovskiy, A. Blanco, C. Clement, D. Drain, D. Jiang, D. Tang, et al., “Codexglue:
A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04664, 2021.
[205] L. Tunstall, L. Von Werra, and T. Wolf, Natural language processing with transformers. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2022.
[206] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman, A. Ray,
R. Puri, G. Krueger, M. Petrov, H. Khlaaf, G. Sastry, P. Mishkin, B. Chan, S. Gray, N. Ryder, M. Pavlov, A. Power, L. Kaiser,
M. Bavarian, C. Winter, P. Tillet, F. P. Such, D. Cummings, M. Plappert, F. Chantzis, E. Barnes, A. Herbert-Voss, W. H.
Guss, A. Nichol, A. Paino, N. Tezak, J. Tang, I. Babuschkin, S. Balaji, S. Jain, W. Saunders, C. Hesse, A. N. Carr, J. Leike,
J. Achiam, V. Misra, E. Morikawa, A. Radford, M. Knight, M. Brundage, M. Murati, K. Mayer, P. Welinder, B. McGrew,
D. Amodei, S. McCandlish, I. Sutskever, and W. Zaremba, “Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code,” July
2021. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs].
[207] A. Lewkowycz, A. Andreassen, D. Dohan, E. Dyer, H. Michalewski, V. Ramasesh, A. Slone, C. Anil, I. Schlag, T. Gutman-
Solo, et al., “Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858, 2022.
[208] A. Fawzi, M. Balog, A. Huang, T. Hubert, B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, F. J. R Ruiz, J. Schrittwieser,
G. Swirszcz, et al., “Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 610,
no. 7930, pp. 47–53, 2022.
[209] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann,
et al., “Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
[210] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in
2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 248–255, Ieee, 2009.
[211] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of
prompting methods in natural language processing,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–35, 2023.
[212] C. Zhou, Q. Li, C. Li, J. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Wang, K. Zhang, C. Ji, Q. Yan, L. He, et al., “A comprehensive survey on pretrained
foundation models: A history from bert to chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09419, 2023.
[213] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, and C. D. Manning, “Electra: Pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather than
generators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
[214] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
[215] A. Borji, “A categorical archive of chatgpt failures,” 2023.
[216] “Could chatgpt become a monster misinformation superspreader?,” Jan 2023.
[217] A. Mahadevan, “This newspaper doesn’t exist: How chatgpt can launch fake news sites in minutes,” Feb 2023.
[218] “Why can’t ai draw realistic human hands?,” Jan 2023.
[219] S. Wang, D. Lo, and L. Jiang, “An empirical study on developer interactions in stackoverflow,” in Proceedings of the
28th annual ACM symposium on applied computing, pp. 1019–1024, 2013.
[220] H. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Ma, J. Gao, and L. Su, “Texttruth: an unsupervised approach to discover trustworthy information
from multi-sourced text data,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
& Data Mining, pp. 2729–2737, 2018.
[221] B. Goodrich, V. Rao, P. J. Liu, and M. Saleh, “Assessing the factual accuracy of generated text,” in Proceedings of the
25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 166–175, 2019.
[222] C.-Y. Lin, “Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries,” in Text summarization branches out, pp. 74–81,
2004.
[223] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in
Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
[224] O. Evans, O. Cotton-Barratt, L. Finnveden, A. Bales, A. Balwit, P. Wills, L. Righetti, and W. Saunders, “Truthful ai:
Developing and governing ai that does not lie,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06674, 2021.
[225] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saunders, et al., “Webgpt:
Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[226] A. Fan, Y. Jernite, E. Perez, D. Grangier, J. Weston, and M. Auli, “Eli5: Long form question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.09190, 2019.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:39
[227] S. Lin, J. Hilton, and O. Evans, “Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
[228] N. Lee, W. Ping, P. Xu, M. Patwary, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Factuality enhanced language models for open-
ended text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04624, 2022.
[229] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell, “On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language
models be too big?,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 610–623,
2021.
[230] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill,
et al., “On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[231] Z. Kenton, T. Everitt, L. Weidinger, I. Gabriel, V. Mikulik, and G. Irving, “Alignment of language agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.14659, 2021.
[232] J. Dhamala, T. Sun, V. Kumar, S. Krishna, Y. Pruksachatkun, K.-W. Chang, and R. Gupta, “Bold: Dataset and metrics
for measuring biases in open-ended language generation,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency, pp. 862–872, 2021.
[233] P. P. Liang, C. Wu, L.-P. Morency, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Towards understanding and mitigating social biases in
language models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6565–6576, PMLR, 2021.
[234] M. Nadeem, A. Bethke, and S. Reddy, “Stereoset: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.09456, 2020.
[235] I. Solaiman, M. Brundage, J. Clark, A. Askell, A. Herbert-Voss, J. Wu, A. Radford, G. Krueger, J. W. Kim, S. Kreps, et al.,
“Release strategies and the social impacts of language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09203, 2019.
[236] R. Thoppilan, D. De Freitas, J. Hall, N. Shazeer, A. Kulshreshtha, H.-T. Cheng, A. Jin, T. Bos, L. Baker, Y. Du, et al.,
“Lamda: Language models for dialog applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
[237] D. Ganguli, L. Lovitt, J. Kernion, A. Askell, Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, B. Mann, E. Perez, N. Schiefer, K. Ndousse, et al.,
“Red teaming language models to reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.07858, 2022.
[238] Y. Wu, N. Yu, Z. Li, M. Backes, and Y. Zhang, “Membership inference attacks against text-to-image generation models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00968, 2022.
[239] H. Hu, Z. Salcic, L. Sun, G. Dobbie, P. S. Yu, and X. Zhang, “Membership inference attacks on machine learning: A
survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 11s, pp. 1–37, 2022.
[240] J. Duan, F. Kong, S. Wang, X. Shi, and K. Xu, “Are diffusion models vulnerable to membership inference attacks?,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01316, 2023.
[241] H. Hu and J. Pang, “Membership inference of diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09956, 2023.
[242] T. Matsumoto, T. Miura, and N. Yanai, “Membership inference attacks against diffusion models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.03262, 2023.
[243] N. Carlini, D. Ippolito, M. Jagielski, K. Lee, F. Tramèr, and C. Zhang, “Quantifying memorization across neural language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07646, 2022.
[244] N. Carlini, Y. Liu, H. Daume III, U. Erlingsson, T. Kohno, and D. Song, “Extracting training data from large language
models,” in 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), 2021.
[245] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners,” OpenAI Blog, vol. 1, no. 8, 2019.
[246] G. Somepalli, V. Singla, M. Goldblum, J. Geiping, and T. Goldstein, “Diffusion art or digital forgery? investigating data
replication in diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03860, 2021.
[247] N. Carlini, J. Hayes, M. Nasr, M. Jagielski, V. Sehwag, F. Tramèr, B. Balle, D. Ippolito, and E. Wallace, “Extracting
training data from diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13188, 2023.
[248] S. Reddy, S. Allan, S. Coghlan, and P. Cooper, “A governance model for the application of ai in health care,” Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 491–497, 2020.
[249] Y. Qi and J. Xiao, “Fintech: Ai powers financial services to improve people’s lives,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 61,
no. 11, pp. 65–69, 2018.
[250] S. Grigorescu, B. Trasnea, T. Cocias, and G. Macesanu, “A survey of deep learning techniques for autonomous driving,”
Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 362–386, 2020.
[251] Y. Gil, M. Greaves, J. Hendler, and H. Hirsh, “Amplify scientific discovery with artificial intelligence,” Science, vol. 346,
no. 6206, pp. 171–172, 2014.
[252] R. Taylor, M. Kardas, G. Cucurull, T. Scialom, A. Hartshorn, E. Saravia, A. Poulton, V. Kerkez, and R. Stojnic, “Galactica:
A large language model for science,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.
[253] O. Ostapenko, T. Lesort, P. Rodríguez, M. R. Arefin, A. Douillard, I. Rish, and L. Charlin, “Continual learning with
foundation models: An empirical study of latent replay,” in Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 60–91, PMLR,
2022.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:40
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
[254] S. Gururangan, A. Marasović, S. Swayamdipta, K. Lo, I. Beltagy, D. Downey, and N. A. Smith, “Don’t stop pretraining:
Adapt language models to domains and tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10964, 2020.
[255] I. Chalkidis, M. Fergadiotis, P. Malakasiotis, N. Aletras, and I. Androutsopoulos, “Legal-bert: The muppets straight
out of law school,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02559, 2020.
[256] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, E. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning
in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
[257] Z. Zhang, A. Zhang, M. Li, H. Zhao, G. Karypis, and A. Smola, “Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning in language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00923, 2023.
[258] A. Madaan, S. Zhou, U. Alon, Y. Yang, and G. Neubig, “Language models of code are few-shot commonsense learners,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07128, 2022.
[259] J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. d. L. Casas, L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl,
A. Clark, et al., “Training compute-optimal large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
[260] A. Aghajanyan, L. Yu, A. Conneau, W.-N. Hsu, K. Hambardzumyan, S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, O. Levy, and
L. Zettlemoyer, “Scaling laws for generative mixed-modal language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03728, 2023.
[261] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed representations of words and phrases and
their compositionality,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 26, 2013.
[262] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors for word representation,” in Proceedings of the
2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.
[263] A. M. Dai and Q. V. Le, “Semi-supervised sequence learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 28, 2015.
[264] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word vectors with subword information,” Transactions
of the association for computational linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017.
[265] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word
representations,” arXiv, 2018.
[266] Y. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Li, S. Feng, X. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Tian, D. Zhu, H. Tian, and H. Wu, “Ernie: Enhanced representation
through knowledge integration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09223, 2019.
[267] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, Q. V. Le, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Transformer-xl: Attentive language models
beyond a fixed-length context,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
[268] L. Dong, N. Yang, W. Wang, F. Wei, X. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Gao, M. Zhou, and H.-W. Hon, “Unified language model
pre-training for natural language understanding and generation,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 32, 2019.
[269] K. Song, X. Tan, T. Qin, J. Lu, and T.-Y. Liu, “Mass: Masked sequence to sequence pre-training for language generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02450, 2019.
[270] W. Wang, B. Bi, M. Yan, C. Wu, Z. Bao, J. Xia, L. Peng, and L. Si, “Structbert: Incorporating language structures into
pre-training for deep language understanding,” arXiv, 2019.
[271] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, R. L. Logan IV, R. Schwartz, V. Joshi, S. Singh, and N. A. Smith, “Knowledge enhanced
contextual word representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04164, 2019.
[272] W. Liu, P. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Deng, and Q. Ju, “Fastbert: a self-distilling bert with adaptive inference time,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02178, 2020.
[273] M. Joshi, D. Chen, Y. Liu, D. S. Weld, L. Zettlemoyer, and O. Levy, “Spanbert: Improving pre-training by representing
and predicting spans,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 8, pp. 64–77, 2020.
[274] N. Kitaev, Ł. Kaiser, and A. Levskaya, “Reformer: The efficient transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04451, 2020.
[275] X. Jiao, Y. Yin, L. Shang, X. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Li, F. Wang, and Q. Liu, “Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10351, 2019.
[276] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut, “Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of
language representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
[277] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar,
et al., “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[278] J. T. Rolfe, “Discrete variational autoencoders,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02200, 2016.
[279] W. Kim, B. Son, and I. Kim, “Vilt: Vision-and-language transformer without convolution or region supervision,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5583–5594, PMLR, 2021.
[280] J. Cho, J. Lu, D. Schwenk, H. Hajishirzi, and A. Kembhavi, “X-lxmert: Paint, caption and answer questions with
multi-modal transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11278, 2020.
[281] Z. Huang, Z. Zeng, B. Liu, D. Fu, and J. Fu, “Pixel-bert: Aligning image pixels with text by deep multi-modal
transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00849, 2020.
[282] Y. Huo, M. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Lu, Y. Gao, G. Yang, J. Wen, H. Zhang, B. Xu, W. Zheng, et al., “Wenlan: Bridging vision
and language by large-scale multi-modal pre-training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06561, 2021.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:41
[283] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders
and large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.
A
CURATED ADVANCES IN GENERATIVE AI
In this section, we present a comprehensive review of the recent significant advancements in the
field of generative AI. Consistent with the aforementioned discussion, we classify the general
framework into unimodal and multimodal generative models. In each subsection, we further
categorize the models based on specific modalities, and we provide a table summary of relative
paper details.
A.1
Language
In this section, we give a summary of the main milestone models in NLP. Generally, the architec-
ture includes probabilistic objectives, encoder, decoder, and encoder-decoder structure. We also
summarize the backbones of these methods.
Year
Conference
Method
Architecture
Backbone
Code
2013
NeurIPS
Skip-Gram [261]
Probabilistic
Word2Vec
https://github.com/.../models
2014
EMNLP
GloVe [262]
Probabilistic
Word2Vec
https://github.com/.../GloVe
2015
NeurIPS
LM-LSTM [263]
Probabilistic
LSTM
-
2017
TACL
FastText [264]
Probabilistic
Word2Vec
https://github.com/.../fastText
2018
NAACL
ELMO [265]
Encoder
LSTM
https://allennlp.org/elmo
2018
-
GPT [61]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
2019
ACL
ERNIE [266]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../ERNIE
2019
ACL
Transformer-XL [267]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../transformer-xl
2019
NeurIPS
UNILM [268]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../unilm
2019
NAACL
BERT [42]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/google-research/bert
2019
CoRR
RoBERTa [43]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
2019
NeurIPS
XLNet [44]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/zihangdai/xlnet
2019
NeurIPS
DistilBERT [214]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
2019
ICML
MASS [269]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/microsoft/MASS
2019
ICLR
StructBERT [270]
Encoder
Transformer
-
2019
EMNLP
KnowBERT [271]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../kb
2019
-
GPT-2 [245]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/openai/gpt-2
2019
JMLR
T5 [56]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/google-research/text-to-text-transfer-transformer
2019
-
Megatron [65]
General
Transformer
https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM
2020
ACL
fastBERT [272]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../FastBERT
2020
ACL
spanBERT [273]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../SpanBERT
2020
ICLR
Reformer [274]
Encoder
Reformer
https://github.com/.../reformer
2020
EMNLP
TinyBERT [275]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../TinyBERT
2020
ICLR
ALBERT [276]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/google-research/ALBERT
2020
ICLR
ELECTRA [213]
Encoder
Transformer
https://github.com/google-research/electra
2020
NeurIPS
GPT-3 [245]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/openai/gpt-3
2020
ACL
BART [34]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
2020
-
PaLM [209]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/lucidrains/PaLM-pytorch
2021
-
Gopher [39]
Decoder
Transformer
-
2021
JMLR
Switch [67]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/tensorflow/mesh
2022
-
LaMDA [236]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/.../LaMDA
2022
-
OPT [45]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/facebookresearch/metaseq
2022
-
InstructGPT [10]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/openai/following-instructions-human-feedback
2022
-
Sparrow [46]
Decoder
Transformer
-
2022
-
BLOOM [64]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/bigscience
2022
-
MT-NLG [66]
Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed
2022
ICLR
HTLM [69]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
-
2022
ACL
DQ-BART [70]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/amazon-research/dq-bart
2022
ICLR
ExT5 [68]
Encoder-Decoder
Transformer
https://github.com/google-research/text-to-text-transfer-transformer
2023
-
LLaMA [277]
Decoder
Transformer
-
Table 2. Major natural language models.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:42
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
A.2
Vision
Year
Method
Architecture
Category
Code
2014
GAN [29]
GAN
Traditional
https://github.com/goodfeli/adversarial
2015
LAPGAN [71]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/facebook/eyescream
2015
DCGANs [73]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/carpedm20/DCGAN
2017
Progressive GAN [74]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/tkarras/progre...
2019
SAGAN [75]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/brain-research/self
2018
BigGAN [76]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/ajbrock/BigGAN
2019
StyleGAN [77]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan
2016
BiGAN [78]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/eriklindernoren/GAN
2018
AGE [79]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/DmitryUlyanov/AGE
2017
D2GAN [80]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/tund/D2GAN
2016
GMAN [81]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/zhengchuanpan/GMAN
2017
MGAN [82]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/qhoangdl/MGAN
2018
MAD-GAN [83]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/LiDan456/MAD-GANs
2016
CoGAN [84]
GAN
Traditioal
https://github.com/mingyuliutw/CoGAN
2016
InfoGAN [85]
GAN
Representative variants
https://github.com/eriklindernoren/...GAN
2014
CGANs [86]
GAN
Representative variants
https://github.com/pfnet-research/sngan...
2018
C-CycleGAN [87]
GAN
Representative variants
-
2019
MSGAN [88]
GAN
Representative variants
https://github.com/HelenMao/MSGAN
2016
f-GAN [89]
GAN
Representative variants
https://github.com/mboudiaf/Mut...
2017
WGAN [90]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/daheyinyin/wgan
2020
GLS-GAN [91]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/guojunq/lsgan
2017
LS-GAN [92]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/xudonmao/LSGAN
2018
SNGAN [93]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/pfnet-research/sngan
2016
Che et al. [94]
GAN
Objective
-
2016
UnrolledGAN [95]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/poolio/unrolledgan
2018
RelativisticGAN [96]
GAN
Objective
https://github.com/AlexiaJM/RelativisticGAN
2013
VAE [30]
VAE
Traditional
https://github.com/AntixK/PyTorch-VAE
2018
VampPrior [99]
VAE
Complex priors
https://github.com/jmtomczak/vaevampprior
2019
BIVA[100]
VAE
Complex priors
https://github.com/vlievin/biva-pytorch
2020
NVAE[101]
VAE
Complex priors
https://github.com/NVlabs/NVAE
2021
GHVAE [102]
VAE
Complex priors
-
2019
RAE [103]
VAE
Regularized Autoencoders
https://github.com/ParthaEth/Regul...
2021
dGAN [278]
VAE
Regularized Autoencoders
https://github.com/topics/discrete...
2017
VQ-VAE [104]
VAE
Regularized Autoencoders
https://github.com/deepmind/...vqvae
2019
VQ-VAE2 [105]
VAE
Regularized Autoencoders
https://github.com/deepmind/sonnet
2014
NICE [57]
Flow
Coupling and autoregressive
https://github.com/EugenHotaj/...nice
2016
Real NVP [106]
Flow
Coupling and autoregressive
https://github.com/tensorflow/models
2017
MAF [107]
Flow
Coupling and autoregressive
https://github.com/gpapamak/maf
2018
NAF [108]
Flow
Coupling and autoregressive
https://github.com/CW-Huang/NAF
2020
BNAF [109]
Flow
Coupling and autoregressive
https://github.com/nicola-decao/BNAF
2017
ConvFlow [110]
Flow
Convolutional and Residual
-
2019
E-ConvFlow [111]
Flow
Convolutional and Residual
https://github.com/ehoogeboom/emerging
2017
RevNets [112]
Flow
Convolutional and Residual
https://github.com/renmengye/revnet-public
2018
i-RevNets [113]
Flow
Convolutional and Residual
https://github.com/jhjacobsen/pytorch-i-revnet
2020
DDPM [115]
Diffusion
Traditional
https://github.com/hojonathanho/diffusion
2019
NCSN [31]
Diffusion
Traditional
https://github.com/ermongroup/ncsn
2020
Score SDE [116]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
https://github.com/yang-song/scoresde
2022
Salimans et al. [117]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
https://github.com/Hramchenko/diffusion..distiller
2022
TDPM [118]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
https://github.com/jegzheng/truncat..
2022
ES-DDPM [119]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
https://github.com/zhaoyanglyu/early...
2022
Franzese et al. [120]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
-
2021
Improved DDPM [121]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
https://github.com/openai/improved-diffusion
2021
San Roman et al. [122]
Diffusion
Training Enhance
-
2020
DDIM [123]
Diffusion
Training-free Sampling
https://github.com/ermongroup/ddim
2022
Analytic-DPM [124]
Diffusion
Training-free Sampling
https://github.com/baofff/Analytic-DPM
2021
Watson et al. [125]
Diffusion
Training-free Sampling
-
2022
Watson et al. [126]
Diffusion
Training-free Sampling
-
2021
Nachmani et al. [127]
Diffusion
Noise Distribution
-
2022
Cold Diffusion [128]
Diffusion
Noise Distribution
https://github.com/arpitbansal297/cold-...
2021
CCDF [129]
Diffusion
Noise Distribution
-
2022
DiffuseVAE [130]
Diffusion
Mixed Modeling
https://github.com/kpandey008/DiffuseVAE
2021
LSGM [131]
Diffusion
Mixed Modeling
https://github.com/NVlabs/LSGM
2021
Denoising diffusion GANs [132]
Diffusion
Mixed Modeling
https://github.com/NVlabs/denoising
2021
DiffFlow [133]
Diffusion
Mixed Modeling
https://github.com/qsh-zh/DiffFlow
Table 3. Major vision generative models.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC):
A History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT
111:43
A.3
Vision Language
Year
Method
Task
Architecture
Code
2019
VisualBERT [134]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
https://github.com/uclanlp/visualbert
2020
VL-BERT [136]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
https://github.com/jackroos/VL-BERT
2020
UNITER [138]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
https://github.com/ChenRocks/UNITER
2021
ViLT [279]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
https://github.com/dandelin/vilt
2022
SimVLM [135]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
-
2019
LXMERT [139]
VL Encoders
Cross-aligned Encoders
https://github.com/airsplay/lxmert
2019
X-LXMERT [280]
VL Encoders
Cross-aligned Encoders
https://github.com/allenai/x-lxmert
2020
PixelBERT [281]
VL Encoders
Concatenated Encoders
https://github.com/microsoft/xpretrain
2019
ViLBERT [140]
VL Encoders
Cross-aligned Encoders
-
2021
WenLan [282]
VL Encoders
Cross-aligned Encoders
https://github.com/BAAI-WuDao/BriVl
2021
CLIP [245]
VL Encoders
Cross-aligned Encoders
https://github.com/openai/CLIP
2019
VLP [138]
To-text Decoders
Encoder-Decoders
https://github.com/LuoweiZhou/VLP
2021
ALBEF [141]
To-text Decoders
Encoder-Decoders
https://github.com/salesforce/ALBEF
2022
BLIP [142]
To-text Decoders
Encoder-Decoders
https://github.com/salesforce/lavis
2023
BLIP-2 [283]
To-text Decoders
Frozen Decoders
https://github.com/salesforce/lavis
2021
Frozen [143]
To-text Decoders
Frozen Decoders
-
2022
Flamingo [144]
To-text Decoders
Frozen Decoders
https://github.com/lucidrains/flamingo-pytorch
2023
Grounding [145]
To-text Decoders
Frozen Decoders
https://github.com/kohjingyu/fromage
2017
StackGAN [148]
To-image Decoders
GAN Decoders
https://github.com/hanzhanggit/StackGAN
2018
AttnGAN [149]
To-image Decoders
GAN Decoders
https://github.com/taoxugit/AttnGAN
2021
StyleCLIP [150]
To-image Decoders
GAN Decoders
https://github.com/orpatashnik/StyleCLIP
2021
GLIDE [151]
To-image Decoders
Diffusion Decoders
https://github.com/openai/glide-text2im
2022
Stable-diffusion [13]
To-image Decoders
Diffusion Decoders
https://github.com/compvis/stable-diffusion
2022
Imagen [152]
To-image Decoders
Diffusion Decoders
https://github.com/lucidrains/imagen-pytorch
2022
DALL-E-2 [5]
To-image Decoders
Diffusion Decoders
https://github.com/lucidrains/DALLE2-pytorch
2021
DALL-E [1]
To-image Decoders
VAE Decoders
https://github.com/openai/DALL-E
Table 4. Major vision language models.
A.4
Text Audio
Year
Method
Task
Code
2021
AdaSpeech [153]
Text-Audio Generation
https://github.com/rishikksh20/AdaSpeech
2021
AdaSpeech2
Text-Audio Generation
https://github.com/rishikksh20/AdaSpeech2
2020
Lombard [154]
Text-Audio Generation
https://github.com/dipjyoti92/TTS-Style-Transfer
2019
Zhang et al.[156]
Text-Audio Generation
https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleSpeech
2019
Yu et al.[157]
Text-Music Generation
-
2018
JTAV [158]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/mengshor/JTAV
2021
Ferraro et al.[159]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/andrebola/contrastive-mir-learning
2016
Choi et al.[160]
Text-Music Generation
-
2021
MusCaps [161]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/ilaria-manco/muscaps
2022
Manco et al.[162]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/ilaria-manco/mulap
2022
CLAP [163]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/YuanGongND/vocalsound
2020
Jukebox [203]
Text-Music Generation
https://github.com/openai/jukebox
Table 5. Major text audio models.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:44
Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun
A.5
Text Graph
Year
Method
Task
Code
2016
Li et al. [165]
Text-to-KG Generation
-
2019
KG-BERT [166]
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/yao8839836/kg-bert
2020
Malaviya et al. [167]
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/allenai/commonsense-kg-completion
2019
Petroni et al. citepetroni2019language
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/facebookresearch/LAMA
2020
Shin et al. citeshin2020autoprompt
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/ucinlp/autoprompt
2021
Li et al. citeli2021prefix
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/XiangLi1999/PrefixTuning
2022
Lu et al. [173]
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/universal-ie/UIE
2022
Grapher [174]
Text-to-KG Generation
https://github.com/ibm/grapher
2020
CycleGT [171]
Text-KG Generation
https://github.com/QipengGuo/CycleGT
2020
DualTKB [172]
Text-KG Generation
-
2018
GTR-LSTM [176]
KG-to-Text Generation
-
2018
Song et al. [177]
KG-to-Text Generation
https://github.com/freesunshine0316/neural-graph-to-seq-mp
2020
DUALENC [175]
KG-to-Text Generation
https://github.com/zhaochaocs/DualEnc
2019
Koncel-Kedziorski et al. [178]
KG-to-Text Generation
https://github.com/rikdz/GraphWriter
2020
Ribeiro et al. [180]
KG-to-Text Generation
https://github.com/UKPLab/kg2text
2020
HetGT [181]
KG-to-Text Generation
https://github.com/QAQ-v/HetGT
2016
Dong et al. [182]
Semantic Parsing
https://github.com/donglixp/lang2logic
2016
Jia et al. [183]
Semantic Parsing
https://worksheets.codalab.org/...
2018
Lyu et al. [184]
Semantic Parsing
https://github.com/...PREDICTION
2018
Chen et al. [185]
Semantic Parsing
https://github.com/dongpobeyond/Seq2Act
2019
Zhang et al. [186]
Semantic Parsing
https://github.com/sheng-z/stog
2019
Fancellu et al. [187]
Semantic Parsing
-
2021
Text2Mol [189]
Text-Molecule Generation
https://github.com/cnedwards/text2mol
2022
MolT5 [190]
Text-Molecule Generation
https://github.com/blender-nlp/MolT5
2022
MoMu [188]
Text-Molecule Generation
https://github.com/bingsu12/momu
Table 6. Major text graph models.
A.6
Text Code
Year
Method
Task
Code
2020
CodeBERT [191]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT
2020
CodeBERT [191]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT
2020
CuBERT [192]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/cubert
2021
CodeT5 [193]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/salesforce/codet5
2021
PLBART [194]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/wasiahmad/PLBART
2017
Yin et al. [195]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/pcyin/NL2code
2018
Dai et al. [196]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/Hanjun-Dai/sdvae
2022
CODEGEN [198]
Text-Code Generation
https://github.com/salesforce/CodeGen
2022
TDUIF [199]
Text-Code Generation
-
Table 7. Major text code models.
Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

