Thought Cloning: Learning to Think while Acting
by Imitating Human Thinking
Shengran Hu1,2
srhu@cs.ubc.ca
Jeff Clune1,2,3
jclune@gmail.com
1Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2Vector Institute
3Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Abstract
Language is often considered a key aspect of human thinking, providing us with
exceptional abilities to generalize, explore, plan, replan, and adapt to new situa-
tions. However, Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents are far from human-level
performance in any of these abilities. We hypothesize one reason for such cognitive
deficiencies is that they lack the benefits of thinking in language and that we can
improve AI agents by training them to think like humans do. We introduce a
novel Imitation Learning framework, Thought Cloning, where the idea is to not
just clone the behaviors of human demonstrators, but also the thoughts humans
have as they perform these behaviors. While we expect Thought Cloning to truly
shine at scale on internet-sized datasets of humans thinking out loud while acting
(e.g. online videos with transcripts), here we conduct experiments in a domain
where the thinking and action data are synthetically generated. Results reveal that
Thought Cloning learns much faster than Behavioral Cloning and its performance
advantage grows the further out of distribution test tasks are, highlighting its ability
to better handle novel situations. Thought Cloning also provides important benefits
for AI Safety and Interpretability, and makes it easier to debug and improve AI.
Because we can observe the agent’s thoughts, we can (1) more easily diagnose
why things are going wrong, making it easier to fix the problem, (2) steer the agent
by correcting its thinking, or (3) prevent it from doing unsafe things it plans to
do. Overall, by training agents how to think as well as behave, Thought Cloning
creates safer, more powerful agents.1
1
Introduction
Language may be the key to what separates humans from all other animals, endowing us with an
amazing level of general intelligence [1–4]. Crucially, the benefits of language are not confined to
improving our ability to communicate with others: language also helps us think better [2–4]. We first
describe the benefits of agents that can understand language (a common topic in AI) before moving
to the benefits of agents that think in language (a topic that has received far less attention).
There are many benefits that arise if our agents can understand language. Doing so is crucial for
agents to generalize to new tasks we want them to perform. This is because it is drastically more
sample efficient if one can tell an agent what the task is, rather than requiring the agent to figure out
the task through trial and error [5, 6]. Moreover, agents that can understand language allow us to
define new tasks at test time without having to anticipate every wish we might eventually have for
1The code and dataset are available in https://github.com/ShengranHu/Thought-Cloning.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2306.00323v1  [cs.AI]  1 Jun 2023

our trained agents [7]. That is in contrast to conventional hand-designed task descriptions, which can
be vast, but still place constraints on what we can ask an agent to perform [8].
While the benefits of agents that can understand language are commonly discussed, there has been
relatively little discussion in AI, especially in Reinforcement Learning (RL), regarding the many
benefits of agents that think in language. Thinking in language helps humans generalize, extrapolate,
adapt to new situations, combine old knowledge in new ways, explore, plan, replan when necessary
or beneficial, and the list goes on [2–4]. Despite these benefits, AI agents rarely, if ever, think, at least
not in human language. While neural networks have internal vector activations that can be considered
thinking, many hypothesize that there are specific benefits to thinking in the discrete, symbolic form
of language (e.g. combining ideas in an exponential number of ways) [6, 9, 10], meaning that agents
that think in language might learn faster, perform better, and generalize better than non-lingual agents.
In addition to agents being more capable, there are major benefits regarding AI Safety and Inter-
pretability that arise when agents think in our language. If one can watch an agent think during
training, one can recognize deficiencies in skills or values that can be improved, or one could decide
the agent is not ready to be deployed. During testing, one can constantly scan the thoughts of the
agent and intervene when the agent plans to do something undesirable. For example, if an agent
thinks “My goal is to take my passenger to the store as fast as possible so I will run through this
red light without stopping” one could intervene to stop that behavior ahead of time. Furthermore,
watching agents think enhances the steerability of agents. If an agent is confused when solving
challenging tasks, one can inject their thoughts into the agent to help it solve the task in a desired
way. A final major benefit of agents that think in human language is it makes it easier to train more
capable, safer AI agents. One can spot why things are not working, instead of just seeing that they are
not working, and that provides ideas for how to debug and or improve AI training.
For all these reasons, adding the ability of AI agents to think in language could produce many
significant advantages, and we suggest that the most effective way to achieve this goal is by imitating
human thinking. Humans do not acquire thinking skills in isolation; instead, they are learned in
part through demonstrations and feedback provided by teachers [2, 11–13]. As such, a promising
method is to have agents learn from demonstrations where humans think out loud while acting. This
approach is distinct from existing works that leverage pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs)
for planning [14, 15], because such LLMs are not trained on data where humans think out loud while
acting. Thought data, such as YouTube videos and transcripts [16, 17], contains millions of hours of
people talking out loud while performing tasks, revealing the thinking behind their actions, planning,
decisions, and replanning, such as when they play video games [17]. This thought data is greatly
valuable and widely available (Section 2), but has not yet been extensively explored, and this work
hopes to encourage further research into the utilization of thought data to teach thinking skills to
agents.
Provided we can solve the real, significant challenges of AI Safety and existential risk [18–22], there
are tremendous gains to be had by creating more powerful AI or even AGI. In this paper, we propose
a novel Imitation Learning framework, Thought Cloning, where agents not only learn to act from
human demonstrations, as in Behavioral Cloning [23], but also learn to think from demonstrations
where human think out loud while acting. Although we expect Thought Cloning to truly shine when
trained on vast online datasets of synchronized human thoughts and actions, this paper validates the
concept with synthetic thought data in a challenging domain, BabyAI [24]. Our experimental results
illustrate that Thought Cloning outperforms Behavioral Cloning, even when Behavioral Cloning
agents have the ability to think (in latent vectors), but have to learn that skill without the supervision
of thinking provided by Thought Cloning. We also demonstrate that Thought Cloning generalizes
better than Behavioral Cloning in out-of-distribution tasks in both zero-shot and fine-tuning settings.
Finally, we provide empirical evidence for the previously discussed advantages of Thought Cloning
in terms of Safety and Interpretability, where unsafe behavior can be near perfectly stopped before
execution. All told, the results are promising and offer a glimpse of the enormous potential of Thought
Cloning to not only make AI smarter, but also safer and more interpretable.
2
Proposed Method
Conventional Imitation Learning methods [25, 26], such as Behavioral Cloning [23], strive to
construct a policy that accurately replicates the distribution of behavior in a given dataset of demon-
2

Observation
Mission
Put blue ball next to 
purple key
Thought History
Explore the unseen area
Pickup blue ball to 
complete PutNext mission
Next Thought
Drop blue ball to 
complete PutNext mission
Action
DROP
𝜋"
Thought
Cloning
Loss
Action 
Loss
𝜋!
Thought Cloning Agent
Figure 1: Overall framework for Thought Cloning (TC). The TC agent has two components: the
Upper-Level and Lower-level Components. At each timestep, the TC agent receives an observation, a
mission, and a history of thoughts as inputs. The Upper-Level Component generates thoughts, and
the Lower-Level Component generates actions conditioned on these thoughts. Generated thoughts
and actions are compared to the ground truth from the demonstration dataset to calculate the loss.
strations. However, our proposed framework, Thought Cloning, diverges from this approach by
aiming to teach agents how to also think while acting, utilizing a synchronized dataset of hu-
man thinking. The thought dataset, denoted as D = {Di}N
i=1, comprises a series of trajectories,
Di = (m, {(ot, tht, at)}T
t=1). Each trajectory encompasses a mission, m, defined in natural language,
along with an observation ot, an action at, and a corresponding thought tht at each timestep, t. Such
datasets are widely available online. For example, by inferring action labels from Youtube videos
with VPT [17] and then retrieving the corresponding transcripts, we can obtain a thought dataset that
contains both human thinking and action [17, 16]. In such a dataset for Minecraft, a thought like
"I need to gather wood to build a shelter before nightfall" might correspond to the player moving
towards a tree and collecting wood. To validate Thought Cloning, we construct a synthetic thought
dataset to simulate having internet-scale datasets (see Section 3.1).
In the Thought Cloning training framework, agents learn to produce natural language thoughts at
each timestep and subsequently condition their actions based on these generated thoughts. This
learning process gives rise to a bi-level architecture (Fig. 1). The architecture comprises an
Upper-level Component responsible for thought generation, and a Lower-level Component tasked
with executing actions based on the thoughts generated by the Upper-level Component. While differ-
ent choices of what to condition the Upper-level and Lower-level Components are possible, in this
work, for a particular trajectory of length T in the thought dataset we minimize:
min
θu,θl
T
X
t=1
−α log πθu(tht|m, {oτ}t
τ=1, {thτ}t−1
τ=1) −log πθl(at|m, {oτ}t
τ=1, tht)
(1)
Here, θu and θl represent the weights for the Upper-Level and Lower-level Components; α represents
the coefficient for Thought Cloning loss; th, o, a, and m denote thought, observation, action, and
mission, as previously described.
For more complex or large-scale scenarios, the Upper-level Component can be implemented
with pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLM) either zero-shot or fine-tuned [27], while the
Lower-level Component can be trained from scratch or adapted from existing language-conditioned
controllers in the target domain [6, 14]. In this paper, we base both components on the BabyAI
1.1 model architecture [28], which utilizes a memory-augmented architecture–an LSTM [29]–to
address the partial observability challenge. The model also employs FiLM [30] for modality fusion,
effectively combining visual and text input. The detailed architecture adopted in this paper can be
found in Supplementary Material A. While all models in this paper are trained from scratch, we
anticipate that the utilization of pre-trained models in complex domains will be beneficial.
3

(…after 43 steps)
Thought: open blue door to explore
Actions: [forward, ..., open]
Thought: go to purple box to complete goto mission
Actions: [forward]
Thought: remove blocking object purple ball
Actions: [pickup, ..., drop]
Thought: go to purple box to complete goto mission
Actions: [left, ..., left]
: Agent         : Ball      : Key          : Box                  : Locked and Unlocked Door         : Open door
Mission: go to a purple box and go to the green door on your right
Step 43
BabyAI 27 x 27 grid maze room
Agent’s Thoughts and Actions
Step 0
Observable Region
Figure 2: Left: A BabyAI [24] environment example. The environment contains various colored
items (ball, key, box, door). The agent can pick up, drop, and move objects or open and close doors,
while locked doors can only be unlocked with color-matched keys. The agent can observe the 7 × 7
grid cells in front of it, which can be blocked by walls and closed doors. Right: An example from a
trained Thought Cloning agent planning and replanning. The mission requires reaching the purple
box (highlighted), but a purple ball blocks the way. The agent’s thoughts and actions show replanning
when encountering the obstacle, removing it, and resuming the previous goal.
3
Experimental Results
3.1
Domain and Synthetic Thought Data
This paper employs BabyAI [24], a simulated partially observable 2D gridworld domain. We focus
on the most challenging environment, BossLevel, in BabyAI. An overview of the domain is shown
in Fig. 2 (left). Each BabyAI environment consists of a randomly generated room layout, item
configuration, and a mission described in natural language, sampled on an environment distribution.
Colored items (balls, keys, boxs, doors) and the initial position of the agent are randomly distributed
across a 27 × 27 grid world containing nine 3 × 3 rooms. Missions comprise four possible tasks
(GoTo, PickUp, OpenDoor, PutNextTo), connected by then/after and and (with or without ordering
constraints). GoTo and PickUp require agents to go to or pick up an object; OpenDoor requires agents
to open or unlock a door; PutNextTo requires the agent to pick up object A, find object B, and drop A
next to B. The mission may implicitly require the agent to open or unlock doors to find the target
objects. Relative directional instruction in the mission, e.g., on your right, is based on the agent’s
initial position. An environment is solved when all tasks in the mission are completed. The agent’s
observation consists of the 7 × 7 grid cells in front of the agent, except the agent cannot see through
walls (Fig. 2 yellow square). This work features the state-based observations provided by BabyAI
[24]. Each grid cell in the 7 × 7 observation is represented by three integers: [the item ID, the color
ID, and a status code], resulting in a 7 × 7 × 3 observation matrix. The status code is 1 for closed
doors and 2 for locked doors, with 0 for open doors and other items. Occluded grid cells are assigned
an item ID of 0. The agent’s action space includes [left, right, forward, pickup, drop, toggle door
(unlock, open, close)].
The key challenges in BabyAI revolve around partial observability, hard-to-explore mazes, complex
missions in natural language, and long-horizon planning. The 7 × 7 observation field is limited
compared to the 27 × 27 maze, and the agent cannot see through walls and closed doors. The maze
containing multiple closed rooms is difficult to navigate and explore as the agent needs to find target
items across multiple closed (even locked) rooms. The missions are challenging because (1) they are
described in natural language and (2) they can consist of multiple tasks, each requiring complicated
navigation and actions. Combining all these factors results in a long horizon, with hundreds or even
thousands of steps needed to solve a single environment.
One significant advantage of BabyAI is that it provides an Oracle Solver (named BOT in [24]) capable
of generating step-by-step solutions for any given environment. This is achieved through hand-coded
rules and an internal stack machine to generate plans for solving environments. In our work, we
translate the Oracle Solver’s internal states into natural language thoughts with pre-defined rules. For
example, if the inner logic is to open a red door to explore the room, the translated thought will read,
4

“open red door to explore”. This translation process is combined with the generated demonstrations
to synthesize the thought dataset with 1 million trajectories. To make the dataset more realistic, noise
is added, with a 1% chance of adding a random noisy segment at each timestep, consisting of a
random thought and several random actions, with a random length sampled from 1-6. A trajectory
with example noise is shown in Supplementary Material B.
3.2
Experiment Setup
To verify the effectiveness of learning to think, we compare our Thought Cloning (TC) approach
to the conventional Imitation Learning algorithm, Behavioral Cloning (BC). BC shares most of its
architecture with the Lower-level Component of TC (Fig. 1), and because it is trained only on action
loss, it does not encode thought like the lower-level component of TC. Additionally, since BC has
fewer parameters than TC, we introduce an ablation variant called TC w/o Imitating Thought that
is trained without the Thought Cloning loss to demonstrate that TC’s superiority is not solely due
to its larger number of parameters. The architecture of the variant is mostly identical to the TC
architecture, except for a minor architectural difference where the latent vector from the upper level is
directly input to the lower level as thought. This adjustment is required when training occurs without
thought supervision because the discrete sampling to produce a sequence of thoughts (words) is not
differentiable.
Our training setup is based on BabyAI [24, 28], with BC agents identical to the Imitation Learning
baseline from it. The training iterates for 8 epochs on the 1 million episode dataset, corresponding
to a total of 160 training steps and 7 × 108 training frames. The Thought Cloning loss parameter α
(Eq. 1) is set to 2. During training, we employ teacher-forcing [31], which is adopted when decoding
thoughts. It conditions the Lower-level Component on the ground truth thoughts from the dataset.
The teacher-forcing ratio linearly decreases from 100% to 0% from the 10th training step to the end.
Producing all the main results in the paper took about ten A40 GPUs for one week. More details on
training can be found in Supplementary Material A.
In our experiments, The performance of agents is evaluated based on their success rate in held-out
test environments. Success for an environment is defined as the completion of all specified tasks
in the mission. By controlling random seeds, all test environments are unseen during the training
process. All experiment results from Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 are calculated from five independent
runs. The success rate results presented in Section 3.3 are obtained by testing agents on a set of 512
sampled environments. In Section 3.4, agents are tested in a larger set of 1,024 test environments.
During the testing phase, the TC agent has identical observations as the BC agent, i.e. it has no extra
information.
3.3
Imitation Learning
In this section, we show the main performance results of training TC, BC, and TC w/o Imitating
Thought. The results illustrate that TC learns faster than BC, where BC requires orders of magnitude
more time to achieve a performance similar to TC’s early-stage results, and TC ultimately outperforms
BC at the end of training (Fig. 3). The outperformance of TC compared to BC at 25%, 50%, 75%, and
100% of the way through training is statistically significant, as confirmed by the Mann-Whitney U
test, with p = [0.012, 0.008, 0.021, 0.008] < 0.05. These results support our hypothesis that natural
language can help the agent learn to explore and plan.
Another comparison is between TC and an ablation variant TC w/o Imitating Thought that shares
the same architecture with TC, but without the Thought Cloning loss in training. The results show
that TC also substantially outperforms TC w/o Imitating Thought (Fig. 3). Similar to the previous,
the results are statistically significant (p = [0.008, 0.012, 0.008, 0.008] < 0.05). The results reveal
that TC’s superior performance is not solely due to a larger number of parameters than BC, and also
supports our argument that learning from human thought boosts an agent’s ability to think.
An example of a TC agent planning and replanning is shown in Fig 1 (right). After opening the blue
door, the agent discovers the target (a purple box) within its observation and thinks about going to
it to complete the task. However, the agent realizes that a purple ball is blocking its path. A smart
replan emerges here, with the agent inserting a new plan to remove the ball. The agent achieves
this subgoal by picking up the ball in its way, finding an empty space, and then dropping it. After
completing this new, necessary, intermediate task, the agent resumes its original mission to go to the
5

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Training Frames
1e8
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Success Rate
Thought Cloning
Behavioral Cloning
TC w/o Imitating Thought
Figure 3: Training progress comparison of Thought Cloning (TC), Behavioral Cloning (BC), and
a TC ablation variant without the Thought Cloning loss. The BC architecture is identical to the
Lower-level Component of TC and the TC w/o Imitating Thought has the same architecture as TC,
without the TC loss. BC and the ablation variant are trained solely with the action loss (which leads
to some minor architectural differences, see Section 3.2.) The results indicate that TC learns faster
than BC and also outperforms it. Furthermore, the comparison between TC and TC w/o Imitating
Thought demonstrates that the superiority of TC is not simply due to having more parameters.
purple box and successfully solves the environment. From this example, we can see that by thinking
like humans in natural language, the agent demonstrates successful planning and replanning abilities.
We also see the interpretability benefits, as it is easy to follow along and understand why the agent
executes certain actions.
3.4
Generalization to Out-of-Distribution Environments
This section compares the generalization abilities between the TC and BC agents by testing them
on environments that are increasingly out of distribution. We define the distribution of environ-
ments with two difficulty dimensions: Behavioral Difficulty and Cognitive Difficulty. Behavioral
Difficulty is based on the length of the action sequence required to solve the environment (pro-
vided by Oracle Solver, see Section 3.1). The simplest environments require approximately 20
steps, while the most challenging environments require more than 500 steps. Cognitive Diffi-
culty reflects the complexity of the mission, with more difficult environments requiring stronger
planning abilities to complete complex tasks. The calculation formula for Cognitive Difficulty is
adapted from the maxStep parameter calculation in BabyAI environments [24] and is given by
(# of {GoTo, PickUp, OpenDoor} + 2 × # of {PutNextTo} + # of ordering constraints). The Put-
NextTo task is assigned a higher weight because it involves a combination of picking up, navigating,
and dropping, making it the most challenging task among the four. The range of cognitive difficulty
spans from 1 (simplest) to 9 (most difficult). In the training distribution, the environments exhibit
means and standard deviations of Behavioral and Cognitive Difficulties of 84.2 ± 68.8 and 2.7 ± 1.6,
respectively. In this paper, we define out-of-distribution (OOD) environments as those with a Behav-
ioral Difficulty > 175 or a Cognitive Difficulty ≥4, each being approximately more than one standard
deviation away from the mean. The furthest OOD environments, with a Behavioral Difficulty greater
than 425 or a Cognitive Difficulty of 9, had less than 5.7 × 10−5 and 1.6 × 10−4 probability of being
sampled during training (calculated with rejection sampling). For testing both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution environments, we sample various sets of environments that extend away from the
distribution in terms of both Behavioral and Cognitive Difficulty, and then evaluate agents on these
sets. For Cognitive Difficulty, we sample sets of environments across the full range of Cognitive
Difficulty levels 1-9. For Behavioral Difficulty, we sample sets of environments within intervals of
50 (e.g., 125-175, 175-225, etc.), starting from 25. Environments with a Behavioral Difficulty > 425
are grouped into one set.
First, we test the zero-shot performance of TC and BC agents in OOD environments. The results
show that the TC agent substantially outperforms the BC agent with environments being increasingly
out of distribution (Fig. 4a), and the results are statistically significant across all testing difficulties
(Mann-Whitney U test p < 0.05), thereby supporting our hypothesis that language utilization can
enhance agents’ generalization capabilities. Moreover, we observe that the Oracle Thoughts + TC
Learned Control achieves near-optimal performance even on the most challenging environments.
6

0
25
75
125
175
225
275
325
375
425+
Behavioral Difficulty
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Success Rate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Cognitive Difficulty
Thought Cloning
Behavioral Cloning
Oracle Thoughts + TC Learned Control
Training Distribution
(a) Zero-shot success rates of agents on environments that are increasingly out of distribution.
175
225
275
325
375
425+
Behavioral Difficulty
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Success Rate
4
5
6
7
8
9
Cognitive Difficulty
TC zero-shot
BC zero-shot
TC fine-tune improvement
BC fine-tune improvement
(b) Success rates after fine-tuning agents on out-of-distribution environments
Figure 4: The zero-shot and fine-tuning success rate of Thought Cloning (TC) and Behavioral Cloning
(BC) agents on environments that are increasingly out of distribution. Behavioral and Cognitive
Difficulties are defined by the length of the solutions to environments and the mission complexity
of environments respectively (Section 3.4). (a): The gray region indicates the training distribution.
The Oracle Thought + TC Learned Control refers to the TC agent with oracle high-level thoughts.
The results demonstrate TC generalizes much better than BC. They also illustrate that with a more
powerful Upper-level Component trained from vast human thought data, the agent should become
drastically more capable. (b): TC is much better at adapting to novel situations than BC.
This indicates that the current limitation of TC performance lies in high-level thinking. As we scale
our approach to leverage internet-sized datasets of human thinking, the high-level thinking capability
is expected to improve substantially, thereby enhancing the power of the TC agent.
Next, we investigate how well the agents adapt to new situations by fine-tuning them on OOD
environments. We fine-tune the TC and BC agents on the corresponding environments for 15 epochs,
with the same settings described in Section 3.2. The results demonstrate that the TC agent is better at
adapting to OOD environments (Fig. 4b). The superiority of TC over BC is statistically significant
across all testing difficulties, as supported by the Mann-Whitney U test p < 0.05, with the exception
of Cognitive Difficulty 4, where both methods already achieve near-perfect performance. The results
support our argument that language can better assist agents in adapting to novel situations.
3.5
AI Safety and Interpretability
The ability to observe the agent’s thought process gives our model a high degree of interpretability.
To empirically assess the interpretability of TC, we introduce a metric named the Future Action
Declaration Score. This metric quantifies the fraction of times when an agent, preparing to execute
an action other than navigation, declares this impending action in its thoughts beforehand. In the
training distribution, TC agents performed exceptionally well (green square in Fig. 5a). Interestingly,
TC agents also scored near-perfectly across all out-of-distribution environments (rest of Fig. 5a),
demonstrating the robust and consistent interpretability of our model even under novel, out-of-
distribution situations, which is an important property for AI safety and interpretability.
7

Training Distribution
(a) Interpretability of Thought Cloning agents
Touching red items
Picking up balls
Picking up requested item
Unsafe Behaviors
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Episodes with Unsafe Behavior
57.21%
37.07%
41.52%
0.16%
0.53%
0.08%
No Intervention
Precrime Intervention
(b) Effectiveness of the Precrime Intervention
Figure 5: (a): A heatmap illustrating the Future Action Declaration Score, a metric designed to
evaluate the interpretability of Thought Cloning agents (Section 3.5). The x and y axes denote
various levels of difficulty. Each cell represents a region of sampled environments, with the color
intensity reflecting the mean score. Brighter cells indicate a higher degree of match between the
agent’s declared thoughts and subsequent actions. The green square denotes the training distribution,
while the rest of the regions are out of distribution (Section 3.4). The results illustrate the robust and
consistent interpretability of Thought Cloning agents. (b): A bar chart demonstrating the effectiveness
of the Precrime Intervention mechanism, which is to halt the Thought Cloning agents upon detecting
dangerous plans in their thoughts and thus prevent unsafe behaviors. We show three tests (x axis)
where (1) touching red items, (2) picking up balls, and (3) picking up requested items were declared
unsafe. We report the fraction of episodes where unsafe behaviors occurred (y axis). The results
show that Precrime Intervention effectively eliminates almost all unsafe behaviors.
Due to its high degree of interpretability, Thought Cloning allows a simple method that can consider-
ably enhance AI safety. We call it Precrime Intervention. In practical settings, an agent might employ
dangerous or undesirable strategies to accomplish challenging tasks. However, because Thought
Cloning features such strong interpretability, we can simply halt the agent upon detecting dangerous
thoughts and thereby prevent the unsafe behavior it was planning to conduct. Additionally and impor-
tantly, Precrime Intervention does not require any changes to the weights of the model. If we learn or
decide after training that a certain behavior is unsafe or undesirable, Precrime Intervention can still
prevent it. The same flexibility allows different definitions of what is allowable and unsafe behavior
in different settings (e.g. in the presence of adults vs. children or customized to the preferences of
different countries with different regulations). To demonstrate this flexibility and test to what extent
Precrime Intervention works, we conducted three separate tests, where we declared three different
behaviors as unsafe (1) touching any red item, (2) picking up any ball, and (3) picking up the object
the agent is being asked to pick up in its mission. The last one is particularly interesting because the
agent has a strong prior to want to perform that action, which Precrime Intervention has to combat.
We report the fraction of episodes where such unsafe behaviors occurred with and without Precrime
Intervention (Fig. 5b). Remarkably, Precrime Intervention almost entirely eliminates all unsafe
behaviors, thereby demonstrating the promising potential of TC agents in advancing AI safety.
Moreover, the interpretability of the model also greatly aids in diagnosing problems, thus simplifying
the development of more capable and safer AI. This feature actually proved beneficial during the
development phase of this paper. Initially in our development, the TC agent showed promising
performance in training, but frequently failed during testing, repetitively oscillating between incorrect
thoughts (plans) without actively exploring new ideas. This observation helped us to recognize that,
because we had trained with teacher forcing throughout with oracle (i.e. perfect) thoughts, the agent
had never practiced having incorrect thoughts, and thus had never practiced recovering from them by
trying alternate ideas. Thus, at inference time when it has to generate its own thoughts, which are
sometimes incorrect, it did not know how to recover. We then instead tested an immediate transition
from teacher-forcing to 100% auto-regressive sampling and training (i.e. from 100% teacher-forcing
on one training step to 0% on the next), but the agent generated too many nonsensical thoughts, which
prevented stable training and harmed performance. Thanks to the model’s interpretability, we were
able to recognize the situation and try an alternative strategy that worked well, and is the one we
report results for in this paper: we gradually decay the teacher-forcing rate (fraction) during training,
which dramatically improved performance (Section. 3.3). Supplementary Material C contains more
details about this example.
8

Lastly, TC enables steerability. That is because the actions of TC agents are conditioned on their
thoughts, and we can manually inject alternate thoughts to have the agents do what we wish. We
can also take advantage of this capability to help agents in challenging tasks. The TC agent, when
provided with oracle high-level thoughts, is capable of near-perfect performance across almost all
environments (Fig. 4a). Additional empirical evidence of this is the high fraction of tasks successfully
performed by following these oracle thoughts. This oracle task success rate starts at a median of 96.0
(95% confident interval: -8.4,+4.0)% for tasks furthest out of distribution (Behavioral Difficulty >
450 and Cognitive difficulty = 9), and rises to a near-perfect median of 99.2 (95% confident interval:
-5.5,+0.8)% when within the training distribution. These findings highlight the promising potential of
TC agents in effectively collaborating with humans to accomplish challenging missions.
4
Related Works
4.1
Planning in RL with Language
Recent work leverages the reasoning capability, the ability to flexibly combine abstractions, and the
interpretability offered by natural language to address high-level planning challenges in real-world
domains. We augment this approach by enabling agents to think in language, facilitating the capability
of agents, AI Safety, and Interpretability. There are two major categories of works in the literature
that enable language planning. The first involves Hierarchical RL methods, where the language
represents the hierarchy [32–36]. However, the planning space in these works is constrained to a
pre-defined subgoal set, limiting their generalization to novel scenarios and preventing them from
utilizing the reasoning and powerful commonsense found in pre-trained LLMs [37–39]. The second
category of work involves pre-trained LLMs that generate plans in language for RL systems. Earlier
works [14, 15] allow the LLM to predict step-by-step plans for a specific task. However, these works
are open-loop methods, as the LLM cannot perceive the environment while acting, and thus cannot
adapt and change once things do not go according to plan, which is a crucial capability in complex
environments. Some recent approaches have developed closed-loop methods to provide LLMs with
dynamic information for planning [15, 40, 41]. While these works show exciting performance in
different environments, their closed-loop feedback mechanisms for the LLMs either rely on an oracle
from the environment or complicated captioning models. The work most relevant to our vision is
PALM-E [27], in which a pre-trained Vision-Language Model is adopted as the planner, allowing it
to recognize patterns from observations directly. However, PALM-E was not trained on synchronized
videos of humans thinking out loud and acting, meaning it does not benefit from learning from human
thought demonstrations how to do things like plan, replan, create high-level goals and the subgoals
required to achieve them, and the many other benefits of thinking intelligently during acting.
4.2
Learning from Dataset Aligning Action and Language
Several studies have recognized the value of datasets that align action with language. DIAL [42]
employs such a dataset to train language-conditioned agents with Behavioral Cloning, achieving
impressive results in real-world robotic tasks. However, it is limited by a pre-defined instruction set.
Another work, (SL)3 [43], generates a hierarchical dataset for agents to learn from, demonstrating
superiority in a challenging 3D simulation domain, but has the drawback discussed in the previous
section of being open-loop. Finally, in the study most similar to our own, Hu et al. [44] collected
a dataset from two human players collaborating on an RTS game. However, the agent in [44] is
not language conditioned, which limits its potential to learn to do any task (e.g. arbitrary tasks
requested of it in natural language). Similarly, a work concurrent to ours constructed a dataset with
BabyAI oracle plans [45]. However, their architecture, unlike ours, is not compatible with most
pre-trained models, making ours more able to harness new, powerful foundation models to tackle
increasingly complex challenges. Additionally, although previously mentioned two methods [44, 45]
employ learning frameworks similar to ours, they do not explore the full potential of learning from
datasets that align action with language, particularly in terms of the resulting benefits in terms of
generalization, AI Safety, and Interpretability.
9

5
Discussion and Conclusion
Our research findings are focused on two main areas. First, our Thought Cloning (TC) agent
demonstrated superior performance compared to Behavioral Cloning (BC), effectively showcasing its
capabilities in generalization, exploration, planning, replanning, and adaptation to various situations.
Second, we presented empirical evidence underscoring the benefits Thought Cloning provides in
AI Safety and Interpretability. The robust interpretability of the TC agent not only help developers
in diagnosing AI systems, but also contributes to AI safety, as evidenced by mechanisms such as
Precrime Intervention. Our empirical results on steerability further spotlight the potential of TC
agents in effectively collaborating with humans to tackle complex tasks.
We utilized a synthetic dataset and trained a model from scratch as a proof of concept. However,
the full vision for the TC framework, and where we expect it to truly shine, will be when Thought
Cloning agents are trained on internet-scale datasets of humans thinking out loud while acting, such
as YouTube videos and their narration [17, 16] (whether in closed caption transcripts or directly from
audio). Consider the prospect of an agent that has both learned to think and act like humans in a
huge variety of settings. Much like the thoughts of human children are guided by teachers, our agents
could become skilled at planning, replanning, reasoning, and explaining their thinking to us (either
via their outputs or because we have the unique ability to observe the thoughts in their minds). The
vision for utilizing internet-scale datasets is also supported by the experimental results presented in
Section 3.4, which suggest that the current bottleneck in agent capability is its high-level thinking, a
skill that could be substantially enhanced by scaling to vast online data.
Of course, there are also risks associated with such agents, from the same ones that occur with
language models trained on our written thoughts, such as bias [46–48] and otherwise emulating
undesirable human thoughts, but also in terms of AI Safety and Existential Risk [18, 19, 21].
In conclusion, this paper has introduced Thought Cloning, where agents not only simply learn to act
from human demonstrations, as in Behavioral Cloning, but also learn to think from demonstrations
where humans think out loud while acting. Through Thought Cloning, we have illustrated how an
agent can become more capable, interpretable, and safe by imitating human thinking. This work
facilitates the training of increasingly powerful agents and opens up numerous avenues for future
scientific investigation in Artificial General Intelligence, AI Safety, and Interpretability.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was supported by the Vector Institute, a grant from Schmidt Futures, an NSERC Discovery
Grant, and a generous donation from Rafael Cosman. We also thank Aaron Dharna, Ben Norman,
and Jenny Zhang (sorted alphabetically) in our lab at the University of British Columbia for insightful
discussions.
References
[1] Robert C Berwick and Noam Chomsky. Why Only Us: Language and Evolution. MIT press,
2016.
[2] David Premack. Is language the key to human intelligence? Science, 303(5656):318–320, 2004.
[3] Noam Chomsky et al. Language and Mind. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[4] Steven Pinker. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. Penguin UK, 2003.
[5] Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
[6] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng,
Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas
Jackson, Linda Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner Monologue: Em-
bodied reasoning through planning with language models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608,
2022.
10

[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[8] Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck,
Jakob Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, et al. Open-
ended learning leads to generally capable agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12808, 2021.
[9] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le,
Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-Thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[10] Gary Marcus. The algebraic mind, 2001.
[11] Lev Vygotsky et al. Interaction Between Learning and Development. Linköpings universitet,
2011.
[12] John D Bransford, Ann L Brown, Rodney R Cocking, et al. How People Learn, volume 11.
Washington, DC: National academy press, 2000.
[13] Steve Olusegun Bada and Steve Olusegun. Constructivism Learning Theory: A paradigm for
teaching and learning. Journal of Research & Method in Education, 5(6):66–70, 2015.
[14] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David,
Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel
Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano,
Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang,
Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell
Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers,
Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu,
Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do As I Can and Not As I Say: Grounding language in robotic
affordances. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[15] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.
[16] Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu,
Andrew Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. MineDojo: Building
open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge.
In Thirty-sixth Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rc8o_j8I8PX.
[17] Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (VPT): Learning to act by
watching unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
24639–24654, 2022.
[18] Adrien Ecoffet, Jeff Clune, and Joel Lehman. Open questions in creating safe open-ended AI:
Tensions between control and creativity. In Conference on Artificial Life, pages 27–35. MIT
Press, 2020.
[19] N Bostrom. Existential Risks: analyzing human extinction scenarios and related hazards.
Journal of Evolution and Technology, 9, 2002.
[20] Kaj Sotala and Roman V Yampolskiy. Responses to catastrophic AGI risk: a survey. Physica
Scripta, 90(1):018001, 2014.
[21] Eliezer Yudkowsky et al. Artificial Intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk.
Global catastrophic risks, 1(303):184, 2008.
[22] Thomas G Dietterich and Eric J Horvitz. Rise of concerns about AI: reflections and directions.
Communications of the ACM, 58(10):38–40, 2015.
11

[23] Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelli-
gence 15, pages 103–129, 1995.
[24] Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Sa-
haria, Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. BabyAI: First steps towards grounded language
learning with a human in the loop. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJeXCo0cYX.
[25] Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning:
A survey of learning methods. ACM Computation Survey, 50(2), apr 2017. ISSN 0360-0300.
doi: 10.1145/3054912. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3054912.
[26] Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 1, 1988.
[27] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. PaLM-E: An embodied
multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
[28] David Yu-Tung Hui, Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio.
Babyai 1.1. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12770, 2020.
[29] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9
(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[30] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. FiLM:
Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), 2018. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11671. URL https://ojs.aaai.
org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11671.
[31] Ronald J Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully
recurrent neural networks. Neural computation, 1(2):270–280, 1989.
[32] Tianmin Shu, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Hierarchical and interpretable skill acquisi-
tion in multi-task reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2018.
[33] Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn.
Language as an
abstraction for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[34] Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial
semantic representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In Conference on
Robot Learning, pages 706–717. PMLR, 2022.
[35] Yichi Zhang and Joyce Chai. Hierarchical task learning from language instructions with unified
transformers and self-monitoring. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 4202–4213, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.368. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2021.findings-acl.368.
[36] Michał Zawalski, Michał Tyrolski, Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygó´zd´z, Damian Stachura,
Piotr Pi˛ekos, Yuhuai Wu, Łukasz Kuci´nski, and Piotr Miło´s. Fast and Precise: Adjusting
planning horizon with adaptive subgoal search. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7JsGYvjE88d.
[37] OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[38] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
2022.
12

[39] Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Jordan Hoffmann, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Phil
Blunsom, and Aida Nematzadeh. A systematic investigation of commonsense knowledge
in large language models. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
11838–11855, 2022.
[40] Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, Explain, Plan and
Select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023.
[41] Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2Motion:
From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
[42] Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Pierre Sermanet, Ayzaan Wahid, Anthony Brohan, Karol Hausman,
Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tompson. Robotic skill acquistion via instruction augmentation
with vision-language models. In Workshop on Language and Robotics at CoRL 2022, 2022.
[43] Pratyusha Sharma, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob Andreas. Skill induction and planning with
latent language. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1713–1726, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.120. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.120.
[44] Hengyuan Hu, Denis Yarats, Qucheng Gong, Yuandong Tian, and Mike Lewis. Hierarchical
decision making by generating and following natural language instructions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[45] Lina Mezghani, Piotr Bojanowski, Karteek Alahari, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Think Before
You Act: Unified policy for interleaving language reasoning with actions. In Workshop on
Reincarnating Reinforcement Learning at ICLR, 2023.
[46] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A
survey on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35,
2021.
[47] Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. Real-
ToxicityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3356–3369, Online, November
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.301.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.301.
[48] Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On
the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big. In Proceedings of the 2021
ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 610–623, 2021.
[49] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[50] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Gregory S. Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2013.
[51] Gi-Cheon Kang, Jaeseo Lim, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Dual attention networks for visual
reference resolution in visual dialog. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2024–2033, 2019.
[52] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[53] Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola,
Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training
imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
[54] Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory Diamos, Erich Elsen, David Garcia,
Boris Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, et al. Mixed precision
training. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
13

Supplementary Material
A
Architecture and Training Details
𝜋!
𝑡ℎ!"#
…
𝑡ℎ$
𝑡ℎ#
𝑜!
Scaled
Dot Product
Attention
Memory!
"
LSTM
Scaled
Dot Product
Attention
Memory!
"
Multi-head
Attention
Multi-head
Attention
Transformer 
Encoder 
Layer
Modality 
Fusion
LSTM
Memory!
"
Memory!#$
"
Decoder
Thought History RNN
Thought Generator
m 
𝑡ℎ!
⊕
𝜋!
Scaled
Dot Product
Attention
Modality
Fusion
LSTM
Head
Memory!"#
$
Memory!$
Memory!$
Scaled
Dot Product
Attention
Memory!$
⊕
𝑚
𝑜!
𝑠𝑔!
𝑎!
Figure 6: Detailed architecture for Thought Cloning (TC) agent. At each timestep t, the inputs to
the TC agent include a natural language-defined mission m, and an observation ot. All preceding
thoughts {thτ}t−1
τ=1 is embedded with an LSTM in the Upper-level Component. The generated
thought tht from the Upper-level Component will be the input to the Lower-level Component and
an action at is predicted by the Lower-level Component. (Left): The Upper-level Component. We
employ an LSTM [29] to embed the thought history and a transformer encoder to process both the
mission and thought history. The text input is then fused with the visual observation input using
FiLM [30]. (Right): The Lower-level Component is largely similar to the BabyAI agent [24], with
the primary difference being the additional embedding of the thought generated by the Upper-Level
Component.
Algorithm 1 Thought Cloning
1: Input: thought dataset D = {Di}N
i=1, where each Di = (m, {(ot, tht, at)}T
t=1), upper level
component πθu(th|o, m, {history_th}), lower level component πθl(a|o, m, th)
2: while training do
3:
for each Di = (m, {(ot, tht, at)}T
t=1) in D do
4:
for each (ot, tht, at) in Di do
5:
Generate upper level thought sentence ˆtht = πθu(·|m, {oτ}t
τ=1, {thτ}t−1
τ=1)
6:
Predict lower level action probability distribution ˆat = πθl(·|m, {oτ}t
τ=1, ˆ
tht)
7:
Compute the loss: L(θu, θl) = LCE(at, ˆat) + αLCE(tht, ˆtht) −βH(ˆat)
8:
Update the policy network parameters θu, θl by minimizing L(θu, θl)
9:
end for
10:
end for
11: end while
For full transparency, replicability, and to facilitate future research building on our work, we are
releasing both the source code and model weights. Additionally, we provide key details necessary
for the evaluation and replication of our work in this supplementary information. The architectural
details of Thought Cloning models are shown in Fig. 6. As in [28], all missions and thoughts
are encoded with Gated Linear Units (GLUs), with separate encoders employed for the missions
and thoughts respectively. After the encoding process, we apply an attention mechanism [49] to
dynamically weight the importance of different parts of the text encoding, based on the state history.
The observation is encoded with a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and a Bag-of-Words [50]
encoding approach. In the Upper-level Component, a Transformer encoder [49, 51] is adopted to
embed the thought history and mission, with the thought history as the query and the mission as
the key and value. This Transformer encoder consists of two layers, each with two heads. The
Lower-level Component is identical to the Behavior Cloning Baseline, except with the additional
encoding of thoughts. Key architectural parameters, such as memory size and embedding size, are
consistent with the baseline in [28], as shown in Table 1.
The pseudocode for Thought Cloning (TC) training framework is shown in Algorithm 1. In the
loss function, we follow [28] by including an entropy term for actions. The Adam optimizer [52] is
14

mission: put a key next to the blue ball and pick up the green key
t=1-5: Thought "pickup a key to complete PutNext mission", Action [forward, right, ... , forward]
t=6: Thought "pickup blue key to complete PutNext mission", Action [pickup]
t=7-12: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [right, right, ... , right]
t=13-14: Thought "open green door to explore", Action [left, left, ... , toggle]
t=15-22: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=23-28: Thought "open red door to explore", Action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=29: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward]
t=30-38: Thought "drop blue key to complete PutNext mission", Action [forward, forward, ... , drop]
t=39-44: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [right, right, ... , left]
t=45-48: Thought "open green door to explore", Action [left, left, ... , toggle]
t=49-56: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=57-69: Thought "open green door to explore", Action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=70-77: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=78-88: Thought "open grey door to explore", Action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=89-95: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=96-101: Thought "open purple door to explore", Action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=102-110: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=111-122: Thought "open red door to explore", Action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=123-130: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=131-134: Thought "open grey door to explore", Action [right, right, ... , forward]
t=135-137: Thought "pickup green box to complete PutNext mission", Action [left, left, left]
t=138-204: Thought "open grey door to explore", Action [right, right, ... , toggle]
t=205: Thought "explore unseen area", Action [forward]
t=206-213: Thought "pickup green key to complete pickup mission", Action [forward,...,pickup]
Figure 7: Example trajectories of the synthetic human thought dataset. The inserted noisy segments
are highlighted in red.
adopted to train TC and TC variant, with a batch size of 180 and a learning rate of 5e−4. Similar
to the setting in baseline [28, 24], we train BC with a batch size of 296 and a learning rate 5e−5.
The learning rate schedule begins with a warm-up phase of 5 training steps, linearly increasing from
1e−4 to 5e−4, and then decaying by 50% at 120th training steps, similar to the practices in [24, 53].
In line 5 of Algorithm 1, the input thought could be the ground truth from the dataset (tht) or the
generated thought from the Upper-level Component ( ˆtht), depending on with or without teacher
forcing. For training efficiency, Backpropagation Through Time was truncated at 20 steps in TC. The
mix precision in PyTorch is also adopted during training, which speeds up training without sacrificing
much performance [54]. In fine-tuning experiments, due to the increased difficulty of the levels and
longer steps requiring more memory, we reduced the batch size from 180 to 40 and trained with an
auto-regressive strategy. Detailed hyperparameter settings are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Hyperparameter Settings
Hyperparameter
Value
Adam β1
0.9
Adam β2
0.99
Adam ϵ
10−5
Entropy Coefficient
0.01
Image Embedding Dimension
128
Text Embedding Dimension
256
Memory Dimension
2048
B
Synthetic Human Thought Dataset
Fig. 7 presents an example trajectory. We translate the inner state of the BabyAI Oracle Solver
(called “Bot” in [24]) into natural language thoughts. These thoughts outline the current plan for task
completion and also describe the underlying intentions behind these plans, as the same low-level plan
can serve different stated high-level purposes. For instance, the plan could be to “open the red door”
with the intention of “completing the open mission” or “exploring”. The segments with inserted
noise are marked in red in Fig. 7.
15

mission: put the green box next to the purple door after you go to the purple door and put a blue box next to the purple door
t=1-6: explore unseen area, action [right, right, ... , left]
t=7-14: open red door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=15-21: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=22-23: open blue door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , left] 
t=24: open blue, action [forward] 
t=25: open blue door to complete, action [right]
t=26-28: open blue door to explore, action [right, right, ... , toggle]
t=29-37: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=38-45: open yellow door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=46-47: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , forward]
t=48-53: go to purple door to complete goto mission, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=54: pickup door box to complete putnext mission, action [right]
t=55: go to purple door to complete mission, action [left]
t=56: pickup to purple door to complete mission, action [forward]
t=57-62: go to purple door to complete goto mission, action [right, right, ... , right]
t=63: pickup blue box to complete putnext mission, action [toggle]
t=64-71: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=72-74: open yellow door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=75: pickup door door to complete, action [left]
t=76: open yellow door to complete, action [right]
t=77-78: open yellow door to explore, action [right, right, ... , toggle]
t=79-87: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=88-108: open grey door to explore, action [right, right, ... , left]
t=109-116: open red door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=117-124: open grey door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=125-132: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
(2748 steps are skipped and the max step is reached)
t=1-6: explore unseen area, action [right, right, ... , left]
t=7-14: open red door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=15-21: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=22-24: open blue door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=25-33: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=34-41: open yellow door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=42-43: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , forward]
t=44-52: go to purple door to complete goto mission, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=53-2880: pickup blue box to complete putnext mission, action [right,...,forward]
t=1-6: explore unseen area, action [right, right, ... , left]
t=7-14: open red door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=15-21: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , left]
t=22-24: open blue door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=25-33: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=34-41: open yellow door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=42-43: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , forward]
t=44-52: go to purple door to complete goto mission, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=53-130: pickup blue box to complete putnext mission, action [right, right, ... , right]
t=131-133: open grey door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=134-141: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right]
t=142-149: open blue door to explore, action [forward, forward, ... , toggle]
t=150-158: explore unseen area, action [forward, forward, ... , right] 
(442 steps are skipped)
t=600-615: pickup green box to complete putnext mission, action [left, left, ... , pickup]
t=616-624: drop green box to complete putnext mission, action [left,...,drop]
(environment solved)
Constant auto-regressive training after teacher-forcing training
Constant teacher-forcing training
Teacher-forcing rate gradually decay
Nonsensical 
thoughts
Stuck with 
incorrect 
thoughts
The agent 
has incorrect 
thoughts but 
fixes them.
Figure 8: Example trajectories of agents trained with different strategies. Constant teacher-forcing
training refers to exclusively training with the teacher-forcing strategy. In this scenario, the agent
does not learn to recover from incorrect thoughts. Once it adopts an incorrect thought, it continues to
follow this thought for thousands of time-steps until it reaches the maximum step count (top right
from t=53 to t=2880). Constant auto-regressive training after teacher-forcing training implies
directly transitioning to auto-regressive training following an initial phase of teacher-forcing training.
In this case, agents begin to generate nonsensical thoughts, as shown on the left, such as open blue at
t=24 (left) and pickup door door at t=75 (left). Gradual decay of teacher-forcing rate involves
gradually reducing the ratio of teacher-forcing during training. This strategy is adopted in the final
version of Thought Cloning. In this setting, the agent might generate some incorrect thoughts as
shown at t=53 (bottom right), but it can recover from these errors to explore new ideas, as evidenced
at t=131 (bottom right).
C
Example on Diagnosing Agents by Observing Thoughts
In this section, we provide an example of one time when we were able to diagnose Thought Cloning
(TC) agents by observing their thoughts during the development phase of this paper. In the early
stages of development, we trained the TC agent with a constant teacher-forcing strategy. We observed
that during testing, the agents often got stuck persisting with incorrect thoughts and did not actively
explore new ideas. For instance, in the top right example in Fig. 8, after t=53, the agent persistently
attempted to implement the incorrect thought “pickup blue box to complete putnext mission” until
it reached the maximum step limit, without seeking new ideas. This observation led us to realize
that, as we exclusively trained the agent with oracle thoughts via a teacher-forcing strategy, the agent
had never practiced dealing with incorrect thoughts and consequently had not learned to recover
from them by trying alternative ideas. Subsequently before this realization, we had attempted to
transition directly to auto-regressive training after the teacher-forcing training stage. However, the
agent then started to generate nonsensical thoughts. The trajectory in Fig. 8 (left) shows nonsensical
thoughts such as open blue (t=24) and pickup door door (t=75) being generated when a constant
auto-regressive strategy is applied. Because of the realization from being able to observe the agent’s
thoughts, we adopted a gradual decay schedule for teacher-forcing rates during training. As shown
in Fig. 8 (bottom right), the agent in this setting was able to explore new ideas after failing on an
incorrect thought, and it rarely generate nonsensical thoughts. For example, the agent generates an
incorrect thought at t=53, but it can recover from these errors to explore new ideas, e.g. open grey
door to explore. Because we can observe the TC agents thinking out loud, we are able to identify the
issue and improve the agent’s performance. Without this visibility into the agent’s thoughts, simply
observing their actions would have made it much harder to pinpoint the underlying problems.
16

