Cosmology from random entanglement
Stefano Antonini:, Martin Sasieta§, Brian Swingle;
:University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA
§;Martin Fisher School of Physics, Brandeis University,
Waltham, Massachusetts 02453, USA
Abstract
We construct entangled microstates of a pair of holographic CFTs whose dual semiclassical de-
scription includes big bang-big crunch AdS cosmologies in spaces without boundaries. The cosmology
is supported by inhomogeneous heavy matter and it partially purifies the bulk entanglement of two
disconnected auxiliary AdS spacetimes. We show that the island formula for the fine grained entropy
of one of the CFTs follows from a standard gravitational replica trick calculation. In generic settings,
the cosmology is contained in the entanglement wedge of one of the two CFTs. We then investigate
properties of the cosmology-to-boundary encoding map, and in particular, its non-isometric charac-
ter. Restricting our attention to a specific class of states on the cosmology, we provide an explicit,
and state-dependent, boundary representation of operators acting on the cosmology. Finally, under
genericity assumptions, we argue for a non-isometric to approximately-isometric transition of the
cosmology-to-boundary map for “simple” states on the cosmology as a function of the bulk entan-
glement, with tensor network toy models of our setup as a guide.
: santonin@terpmail.umd.edu
§ martinsasieta@brandeis.edu
; bswingle@brandeis.edu
arXiv:2307.14416v2  [hep-th]  1 Aug 2023

Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Overview and summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Cosmological states
14
2.1
Semiclassical state
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Excited bulk states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Cosmology as an island
26
3.1
Purity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Entanglement spectrum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Cosmology-to-boundary map
34
4.1
Non-isometricity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Cosmological bag of gold? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Reconstruction of operators in the cosmology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Tensor network toy model
49
5.1
Model of the cosmology-to-boundary map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Non-isometric to approximately-isometric transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Discussion
60
A Subdominant saddles and a Hawking-Page transition
62
A.1 Other possible contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B Estimate of thermal entropy in type IIB supergravity
67
C Low energy coherent states in the harmonic oscillator
68
1

D Cosmology as a random purification
69
E Tensor network resolvent
71
1
Introduction
Any theory of quantum gravity aiming at capturing physics in our universe must be able to describe cos-
mology. Holography [1, 2], and its realization in the Anti-de Sitter/Conformal Field Theory (AdS/CFT)
correspondence [3], offers a promising framework for the formulation of theories of quantum gravity, one
which has advanced our understanding of several fundamental aspects of quantum gravity in recent
years, see e.g. [4–19]. However, describing realistic cosmologies within the holographic paradigm re-
mains a central open problem.
An intuitive way to visualize the difficulties arising when trying to attain a holographic model of
cosmology is to recall that in AdS/CFT the bulk theory lives on an asymptotically AdS spacetime and
the holographic CFT lives on the conformal boundary of this manifold. In contrast, most cosmological
spacetimes, and in particular the homogeneous and isotropic Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker
(FLRW) spacetimes relevant for the description of our universe, do not possess timelike asymptotic
boundaries or weakly gravitating regions where a holographic description could be located. It is there-
fore reasonable to expect that some new ingredient is needed in order to describe cosmology within
holography, or at least that a holographic cosmology would need to be encoded in the dual theory in a
non-standard fashion.
Moreover, seeking realistic models of cosmology which can be described using holography introduces
additional difficulties. For example, cosmological observations show that the expansion of our universe is
currently accelerating. This feature is explained in the standard model of cosmology by the presence of
a positive cosmological constant. In contrast, the familiar version of holography realized by AdS/CFT
describes quantum gravity in the presence of a negative cosmological constant, Λ ă 0, seemingly in
tension with observation.
While new ingredients seem to thus be a priori needed, there do exist
alternative explanations of the observed accelerated expansion which include a negative cosmological
constant, see e.g. [20–26].
In the last two decades, progress has been made in several different approaches to holographic
cosmology [24–54]. These include proposals for a holographic description of de Sitter space [27–35],
phenomenologically-oriented descriptions of Λ ą 0 cosmological spacetimes [36–39], and, more recently,
holographic descriptions of Λ ă 0 big bang-big crunch cosmologies [24–26, 45–53]. The first two ap-
proaches are based on novel—and not yet fully developed—ingredients, i.e. a new de Sitter holography
framework and a dual microscopic theory with complex parameters, respectively. The last approach
2

makes use of more standard AdS/CFT tools, but nonetheless the cosmology is expected to be encoded
in the state of the dual microscopic theory in a highly non-trivial way.
The cosmological spacetimes described in refs. [24–26, 45–53] have a well-defined analytic continu-
ation to asymptotically AdS Euclidean spaces. These are saddle point geometries of the gravitational
path integral dual to the Euclidean path integral preparing a specific state of the microscopic boundary
theory. In the constructions of refs. [24, 25, 48–50], the cosmology is an “entanglement island” for the
dual microscopic system, similar to the setups studied in refs. [55–59]. In the braneworld cosmology
approach studied in refs. [45, 46], which can be understood as a a doubly-holographic description of the
setup of refs. [24, 25, 48–50], the cosmology lives instead behind the horizon of a higher-dimensional
AdS black hole. In both cases, the dictionary relating cosmological observables to microscopic CFT
observables is expected to be highly non-trivial, as is the case for the black hole interior [60–65].
In this paper, we build a new class of cosmological microstates in AdS/CFT and study how cosmo-
logical physics is encoded in the dual CFT description. The Lorentzian bulk description of the state
includes a Λ ă 0, big bang-big crunch, inhomogeneous closed cosmology, along with two additional dis-
connected AdS spacetimes. The cosmology is supported by heavy matter and contains thermal radiation
which partially purifies the bulk entanglement of thermal radiation present in the two AdS spacetimes.
The global bulk state is time reversal-symmetric, and it is prepared on the time reflection-symmetric
slice by a Euclidean gravitational path integral, evaluated in the saddle point approximation. In the
boundary description, the dual Euclidean path integral prepares a low-temperature partially entangled
thermal state (PETS) of two copies of a holographic CFT.
The present setup is similar in spirit to the constructions of refs.
[24, 25, 48–50], in the sense
that it describes Λ ă 0 cosmologies with an associated bulk Euclidean saddle point geometry, and the
microscopic state encoding the cosmology is prepared via a well-defined dual boundary Euclidean path
integral. However, the simplicity of our construction, which we will briefly review below, will allow us
to have more microscopic control over the system and study the holographic encoding of the cosmology
in more detail. The price to pay is a cosmology which is not phenomenologically realistic: in its present
realization, its evolution is not driven by a perfect fluid, it is inhomogeneous, and it does not undergo
any phase of accelerated expansion.
Although the final goal of any holographic cosmology program is certainly to describe our own uni-
verse using the holographic framework, understanding the properties of the holographic encoding of any
cosmological spacetime—even one which is not phenomenologically relevant—is already a complicated
and worthwhile endeavor. Hopefully, this will teach us general lessons that could guide us towards a
holographic description of more realistic cosmologies.
We will now provide a summary of the main constructions and results of the present paper, which
will be explored in detail in Secs. 2-5.
3

1.1
Overview and summary of results
Cosmological states
The bulk Euclidean saddle point geometry X preparing the cosmological state of interest is built by
gluing two patches of thermal AdS spaces (generically at different temperatures) along the worldvolume
of a thin shell of pressureless matter, as illustrated in Fig.
1.
In this regard, our construction is
reminiscent of the construction in ref. [66] of two-sided black hole microstates with long Einstein-Rosen
bridges. In order for X to be dominant over the competing black hole solution, we require the inverse
temperatures ˜βL, ˜βR1 to be large in units of the AdS radius ℓ. In other words, we are interested in
studying the gravitational system below its characteristic Hawking-Page temperature.
In this regime, the time reflection-symmetric slice Σ of X, on which the the bulk semiclassical state
is prepared, contains three connected components, Σ “ Σl Y Σc Y Σr. Each of the two components Σl
and Σr corresponds to a hyperbolic disk, providing the initial data of two independent AdS spacetimes
(AdSl and AdSr). The last component, Σc, is a closed universe of spherical topology. It is formed by
two hyperbolic disks Σcl, Σcr with a radial cut off at r “ R˚ (which is equal for the two components),
glued together along the position of the thin shell. The causal development of the initial data on Σc,
denoted by c “ cl Y cr, consists of two patches of global AdS, glued along the spherical worldvolume
of the thin shell. The shell collapses towards the past and the future, generating the big bang and big
crunch singularities of the cosmological spacetime c.
More concretely, the metric on each one of the two AdS patches forming the cosmology can be locally
characterized by the open FLRW metric
ds2 “ ´dt2
c ` ℓ2 cos2ptc{ℓq dH2
d ,
(1.1)
where dH2
d “ dρ2 ` sinh2 ρ dΩ2
d´1 is the hyperbolic metric of a FLRW slice. In this form, the metric is
homogeneous and isotropic, with the scale factor given by aptcq “ ℓcosptc{ℓq. The singularities arising
at tc “ ˘πℓ{2 are only coordinate singularities. In fact, this metric covers a hyperbolic slicing of a
Wheeler-DeWitt (WDW) patch of a pure AdS spacetime.
However, cl and cr are strictly contained within the WDW patch covered by the metric (1.1) and
they become truly singular due to the presence of the collapsing shell. We will show in Sec. 2 that each
FLRW time slice of cl and cr is cut off at the location of the shell, implicitly given by ρ “ ρmaxptcq, where
ρmaxptcq parametrizes the radial trajectory of the shell in these coordinates (see Fig. 7). In particular,
the size of the spatial slices shrinks to zero at tc “ ˘tf, with tf ă πℓ{2, corresponding to the endpoints
1 The inverse temperatures ˜βL, ˜βR represent the Euclidean preparation time of the CFT microstate. The corresponding
physical inverse temperatures βL, βR of the left and right Euclidean AdS spaces are given by the sum of the preparation
temperatures and the Euclidean time elapsed by the shell’s trajectory, see eq. (2.14).
4

Figure 1: Semiclassical state prepared by the gravitational path integral at low preparation temperatures. The geometry
of the Euclidean section X consists of two thermal AdS spaces. Each space has topology Dd ˆ S1, where Dd is a d-
dimensional ball, and S1 is the additional non-contractible thermal circle. The two solutions are glued together along
the trajectory of the thin shell (red line). The Euclidean manifold X is homotopic to a pair of pants. The semiclassical
state is prepared on the time reflection-symmetric slice Σ (blue slice), which contains the initial data of two global AdS
timeslices Σl and Σr, and a third closed universe Σc supported by the thin shell. In the Loretzian section, obtained from
analytic continuation along Σ, the universe crunches towards the future.
of the shell’s collapse. The spacetime curvature is singular at these points, which we identify with the
big bang and the big crunch singularities of our cosmological spacetime.2
cl and cr can then be understood to be two patches of a closed,3 Λ ă 0, big bang-big crunch
cosmology. Although this cosmology looks homogeneous and isotropic locally (i.e. within the cl and cr
patches), it is actually inhomogeneous due to the presence of the shell. In particular, the cosmological
singularities are inhomogeneous: they do not arises from the scale factor vanishing in each patch, but
rather from the size of the spatial slices shrinking to zero due to the collapse of the shell of matter.
The classical solutions built this way provide sensible (macroscopic) cosmologies if the shell is heavy,
of rest mass mℓ" 1. As we will explain, this regime can be approached microscopically, by taking the
large-N limit of the holographic CFT, and considering that the dual operator to the thin shell is heavy,
with a conformal dimension scaling with N2. Additionally, we will be alluding to the case of a very
heavy shell throughout this paper, treated formally in the mℓÑ 8 limit. In this parametric regime,
2 The geometry of cl and cr is similar to the one arising inside a collapsing shell of matter during black hole formation.
The future singularity of our cosmological spacetime can then be identified with the black hole singularity. Unlike usual
black hole formation setups, our construction is time reversal-symmetric and there is a past singularity as well.
3 Although the spatial FLRW slices of each patch cl and cr are hyperbolic, each spatial slice is cut off at the location of
the shell and glued to another identical portion of a spatial slice, giving rise to a closed cosmology.
5

many of the calculations that we will encounter simplify considerably. Of course, we expect that this
limit provides a good approximation to very large but finite mℓas well.
A clear example where such simplification occurs is at the level of the entanglement structure of the
state of the quantum fields on Σ, in the bulk effective field theory (EFT). Specifically, the path integral
of the bulk fields on X prepares a specific bulk EFT state, via a bulk time-dependent Hamiltonian
coupling all of the three components of Σ. At intermediate values of mℓ, the bulk state prepared this
way generally shares entanglement between the three connected components of Σ. In the limit of large
mass for the shell, however, the shell’s worldvolume W effectively pinches off in Fig. 1. This drastically
reduces the coupling between the two sides of the cosmology Σcl, Σcr Ă Σc, in the Euclidean preparation.
As a result, the bulk state prepared by X will contain mostly bipartite entanglement between each side
of the cosmology (Σcl, Σcr), and the respective AdS region (Σl, Σr). Moreover, in this case, the bulk
state prepared by X roughly correspond to two bulk thermofield doubles, at temperatures βL (for AdSl
and cl) and βR (for AdSr and cr), with fields in the cosmology purifying fields in the AdS regions.
Given the construction of the Euclidean geometry X preparing the bulk state, it is natural (and
convenient for the reasons described in Sec. 2) to consider more general bulk states on Σ, with additional
entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology. Such states can be easily prepared with the
addition of local operator insertions along the Euclidean preparation manifold X (see Sec. 2.2). For
similar reasons, in the large mass limit for the thin shell, all of the bulk states prepared in this way
contain mostly bipartite entanglement.
Partially entangled thermal states
The gravitational path integral preparing the cosmological state holographically corresponds to the Eu-
clidean CFT path integral on flat cylinders of lengths ˜βL{2 and ˜βR{2, with the insertion of a heavy
operator O dual to the shell in between these Euclidean evolutions (see Fig. 4). This path integral pre-
pares a so-called partially entangled thermal state (PETS) of two independent copies of the holographic
CFT,
|ΨOy “
ρ˜βL{2Oρ˜βR{2
E
“
1
?Z1
ÿ
n,m
e´ 1
2 p˜βLEn`˜βREmqOnm |Eny˚
L b |EmyR ,
(1.2)
where each CFT lives on a spatial Sd´1 of radius ℓ. The two-point function of the operator Z1 “
Trpe´˜βLHO:e´˜βRHOq normalizes the state.
The insertion of the heavy CFT operator O in the path integral provides the boundary condition
for the worldvolume of the thin shell at the asymptotic boundary of the Euclidean geometry X. The
specific operator corresponding to the thin shell is O „ ś
i O∆pΩiq, formed by a large number of single
trace operator insertions O∆pΩiq, of low conformal dimension ∆! N2, distributed in an approximately
homogeneous way along the sphere, Ωi P Sd´1.
In what follows, we consider that the number of
6

operator insertions is OpN2q, which implies that the associated bulk backreaction cannot be treated
perturbatively in the 1{N expansion. Still, the matrix elements of the shell operator O admit an effective
gaussian description in the energy basis, at least at the level of the two-point function, given that the
shell effectively behaves as a spherical heavy particle (see [67]).
In the absence of any operator insertion (i.e. when O “ 1), the PETS becomes a low-temperature
TFD state of two independent CFTs in the confined phase, dual to a pair of AdS spacetimes with bulk
quantum fields entangled between the two components to form a bulk thermofield-double state. The
insertion of the heavy thin shell operator causes the non-perturbative modification of the semiclassical
state, leading to the presence of the closed cosmology in the way described above. Similarly, in the high
temperature regime, i.e. above the associated confinement/deconfinement phase transition temperature
for the state, the semiclassical description of the PETS becomes that one of the two-sided black hole
microstates constructed in ref. [66], where the black hole contains a large interior geometry, supported
by the presence of the shell.
The construction of these cosmological states admitting a holographic dual description should be
regarded as the first main result of the present paper.
Cosmology as an entanglement island
Given the construction of the cosmological microstates described above, in Sec. 3 we derive, through
a standard gravitational replica trick calculation, that the entanglement entropy of the reduced state
ρL to the CFTL follows a version of the quantum-corrected RT formula. We denote by ρi, i “ l, r, c,
the density matrices for the bulk quantum fields restricted on the time symmetric slices of the two
AdS regions Σl, Σr and of the cosmology Σc, respectively. The global state on the bulk Cauchy slice
Σ “ Σl Y Σc Y Σr is pure, i.e. Spρlcrq “ 0.
In the present setup, the entropy of the bulk fields is OpG0q and therefore subleading with respect
to any OpG´1q area term. This implies that all possible genometrically non-empty extremal surfaces
are disfavored and that the RT surface is indeed empty, γL “ H, for the CFTL.4 However, due to the
presence of the closed cosmology, it is still neccesary to specify the homology hypersurface ΣL, with
BΣL “ L. The two possibilities are:
• The homology hypersurface is ΣL “ Σl, and it does not include the cosmology. The bulk entan-
glement entropy of ρΣL given by this candidate is Spρlq.
4 An interesting classical extremal surface is given by the initial sphere associated to the position of the shell, at r “ R˚,
in the time reflection-symmetric slice Σ. This surface has index 1 at least, which means that the surface is maximal in
at least one direction of deformation space, as opposed to the candidate RT surfaces, which are always minimal surfaces.
In the regime where the quantum-corrected RT prescription is valid, the whole cosmology resembles a python’s lunch,
encoded in either CFTL or CFTR.
7

• The homology hypersurface is ΣL “ Σl Y Σc, which includes the full closed cosmology. The bulk
entanglement entropy of ρΣL given by this candidate is Spρlcq “ Spρrq.
From these considerations, the naive application of the quantum-corrected RT prescription leads to
the island formula
SpρLq “ min tSpρlq, Spρlcqu .
(1.3)
This results suggests that whenever Spρlcq ă Spρlq—i.e. whenever the entanglement between AdSl and
cl is larger than the entanglement between AdSr and cr, given that Spρlcq “ Spρrq—the entanglement
wedge of CFTL will contain the cosmology c. If, on the contrary, Spρrq ą Spρlq, the cosmology will be
contained in the entanglement wedge of CFTR. See Fig. 2 for a visual representation of the former case.
We would like to remark that the situation is more subtle. The derivation of the minimization
prescription of eq. (1.3) requires that one of the two terms dominates over the other, with corrections
which are negligible when expp|Spρlq ´ Spρrq|q " 1. This condition is generally satisfied by the excited
cosmological states we will be interested in even if the bulk entropies Spρrq and Spρlq are in general
OpN0q in the large-N expansion, as we will explain in Sec. 2.2. If, however, the two terms become
comparable or if both terms are small, then we cannot consider the cosmology to be encoded in any
one of the two CFTs, but only in the union of both CFTs. For example, this is the case for the simple
PETS state below the Hawking-Page temperature (1.2), for which Spρlq and Spρrq are generically small
in string theory constructions of AdS/CFT (see Appendix B), as well as in any bottom-up model, unless
a parametrically large number of bulk species is added by hand.
Figure 2: Schematic representation of the semiclassical state. The lines connecting the cosmology to the left and right
AdS spacetimes represent entanglement between bulk fields. The green line cutting the entanglement lines represents
the dominant RT surface for the whole CFTL, which is geometrically empty. The cosmology c is contained within the
entanglement wedge of CFTL.
In Sec. 3, we derive the island formula (1.3) from Euclidean gravity, adopting the FLM replica
trick prescription of refs. [7, 9] for these particular cosmological microstates. In this case, different
saddle point geometries arise from different thin shell contractions between replicated CFT contours.
These provide different contributions to the Rényi entropies of ρL, which in the end leads to (1.3) upon
analytic continuation. In particular, the island term, Spρlcq, originates from a “replica wormhole” saddle
point geometry with thin shell contractions between different boundary replicas. This phenomenon
8

was first noticed in a different context in the “west coast model” of black hole evaporation [18]. An
important aspect of the present replica trick calculation is that the classical contribution of every saddle
point geometry contributing to the Rényi entropies factors out, and cancels with the semiclassical
normalization of the state ρL.
The remaining non-trivial contributions arise from suitable one-loop
partition functions of the bulk fields on top of each geometry, leading to eq. (1.3).
Cosmology-to-boundary map
The construction of the cosmological microstates sets the stage for an interesting question: how is the
cosmological EFT encoded holographically in the CFTs? We address this question in Sec. 4 by studying
the bulk-to-boundary map between the bulk EFT and the microscopic dual CFTs. The encoding of the
bulk EFT on the AdSl and AdSr spacetimes into the CFTL and CFTR, respectively, presents no difficulty
and is given in terms of the standard AdS/CFT dictionary. Therefore, we are particularly interested in
understanding the trickier question of how different bulk states in the cosmology c are mapped to CFT
states, and how to reconstruct the action of bulk operators on c from the dual boundary theory.
For this reason, we focus our attention on the bulk Hilbert space Hψ Ă HΣ obtained by acting on a
reference state |ψy P HΣ with local unitary operators supported only on the time-symmetric slice of the
cosmology Σc, where HΣ is the full bulk EFT Hilbert space defined on the time reflection-symmetric slice
Σ “ Σl Y Σc Y Σr. In other words, we fix the state ρlr and thus the bulk entanglement entropy between
the AdS regions and the cosmology, and consider different bulk states by acting on the cosmological
degrees of freedom (DOF). In this paper we will refer to the bulk theory restricted to this class of states
as the “cosmological EFT”. We call the resulting bulk-to-boundary map Vψ : Hψ Ñ HL bHR (with HL,R
Hilbert spaces of the left and right CFTs) the cosmology-to-boundary map.5
In order to simplify our analysis, we restrict our attention to operator insertions ϕi at the time
reflection-symmetric slice in the cosmology that create localized particles on top of some reference bulk
state |ψy. These particles are heavy (i.e. miℓ" 1), but light enough that their backreaction on the
geometry can be neglected. The resulting bulk states have the form
|ψIy “
1
?zI
ź
i
ϕipyiq |ψy ,
(1.4)
where zI is a normalization factor and yi P Σc. The condition miℓ" 1 guarantees that we can use the
geodesic approximation in the Euclidean geometry to relate the operator insertions in the cosmology
to corresponding local CFT operator insertions—which we will collectively represent by OIpxIq—in the
5 Note that we will discuss the global cosmology-to-boundary map.
Some of our results apply to the single-sided
cosmology-to-boundary map given by entanglement wedge reconstruction, when the cosmology is encoded in only one
of the two CFTs, i.e. when the island formula (1.3) holds.
9

Euclidean path integral preparing the reference state |Ψy “ Vψ |ψy (see Fig. 14):
|ΨIy “ Vψ |ψIy “

1
?ZI
T tOp˜βR{2qOΨpxΨqOIpxIqu
F
,
(1.5)
where T denotes Euclidean time ordering, the operator Op˜βR{2q inserts the shell, and we collectively
represented by OΨpxΨq the operator insertions in the Euclidean path integral preparing the reference
state |Ψy.
Given this simple class of bulk states and their dual boundary states, we can investigate the properties
of the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ relating the two. The first result that we derive in Sec. 4.1 is
that Vψ is non-isometric. To show this, we consider two orthogonal bulk states |ψIiy,
ψIj
D
with different
configurations of particles in the cosmology. In the bulk EFT,
@
ψIi
ˇˇψIj
D
“ 0 by assumption.6 The CFT
overlap of the dual states, Gij “
@
ΨIi
ˇˇΨIj
D
“ xψIi| V :
ψVψ
ψIj
D
, is however non-vanishing. Computing
it semiclassically requires to use the bulk Euclidean gravitational path integral. The connected CFT
overlap vanishes, Gij “ 0, where the overline indicates that we evaluated the quantity within the
semiclassical gravity approximation. The square of the overlap, |Gij|2, is however non-vanishing in this
approximation, due to the contribution coming from an Euclidean wormhole saddle point geometry (see
Fig. 16). In the large mass limit, the contribution of this overlap becomes universal, independent of the
details of |ψIiy and
ψIj
D
. It is given by
|Gij|2 “ e´pS2pρlq`S2pρrqq
(1.6)
where S2pρl,rq is the second Rényi entropy of the bulk state ρl,r of the AdSl,r region, respectively. Note
that, as we have discussed above, S2pρl,rq „ OpN0q and therefore the square of the overlap is not
parametrically suppressed in the large-N limit. However, for general excited reference states |ψy of
the bulk EFT, with a large amount of entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS regions, the
overlap is small.
This calculation signals that in general the CFT overlap Gij is non-vanishing. The bulk EFT only
reproduces the average value of the CFT overlap, whose structure is pseudo-random and depends on
microscopic details of the states. It however cannot capture deviations from it, even if these contributions
are not parametrically suppressed in exp
`
´N2˘
, see Sec. 4.1 for additional details. Remarkably, the
bulk Euclidean path integral is nonetheless able to reproduce some structure of these deviations, once
Euclidean wormhole saddles are allowed when computing the moments. From this perspective, we can
conclude that the map Vψ is non-isometric (i.e. V :
ψVψ ‰ 1) since it does not preserve the inner product
structure of the cosmological EFT.
We want to emphasize that the non-isometricity of the cosmology-to-boundary map does not imply
6 We consider states with particles in the cosmology carrying different internal DOF, so that the bulk overlap vanishes
up to 1{N-suppressed corrections due to gravitational interactions between the particles.
10

that such a map is non-invertible. This would only be the case in finite-dimensional toy models of Vψ,
where a clear “bag of gold paradox” arises [18, 68, 69]. In AdS/CFT, however, the boundary description
has an infinite dimensional Hilbert space, and we generally expect that orthogonal states in the bulk
EFT are mapped to non-orthogonal but still linearly-independent states in the dual boundary theory, so
that V ´1
ψ
exists.7 The information distinguishing all of the bulk states is in principle stored on thermal
tails of the CFT wavefunction of these states (see Sec. 4.2 for additional details on this point). In
this way, all of the bulk EFT states can at least in principle be distinguished by a boundary observer,
provided that this observer can probe the CFT states to an arbitrary accuracy.
On the other hand, for CFT observers with finite resolution, such as those only sensitive to a specific
microcanonical band, a bag of gold paradox does arise. Under this restriction, we show in Sec. 4.2 that
the universal overlap (1.6) and its higher moments are consistent with the fact that the cosmology-
to-boundary map, restricted to a microcanonical window, has a non-trivial kernel and is therefore
non-invertible. Intuitively, ignoring the information contained in thermal tails of the microscopic states,
and restricting to a CFT microcanonical window, null states appear and many of the cosmological states
look linearly dependent as an artifact of this truncation. We further show that the overlap (1.6) and
its higher moments are consistent with the low-energy microcanonical density of states of the CFTs.
By choosing a number of bulk EFT orthogonal states K ą eS (where S “ Sl ` Sr with Sl,r bulk
microcanonical entropies in AdSl,r) the dual CFT microstates span the microcanonical window.
Finally, in Sec. 4.3, we turn our attention to the reconstruction of bulk operators acting on the
cosmology. Consider a bulk operator ϕpyq acting on a bulk state |ψIy and creating a particle at a point
y P Σc in the cosmology, and the corresponding boundary operator Φ “ VψϕV ´1
ψ
acting on the CFT
state |Ψy. In standard AdS/CFT, the bulk operator ϕ is dual to a given CFT generalized free field Oϕ
which is identified by means of the extrapolate dictionary. One then writes down a smeared version
of the generalized free field, with an appropriate kernel, which provides the HKLL representation of
the local bulk operator in the CFT [70, 71]. In the case of the cosmology, any causal reconstruction
is doomed to fail, since the cosmology c is geometrically disconnected from the asymptotic boundaries
where the dual theory is defined.
In order to obtain an explicit reconstruction of the bulk operator, we can use the fact that the state
Φ |ΨIy “ Vψϕpyq |ψIy can be prepared by a Euclidean path integral of the form (1.5) with the addition
of an extra operator insertion Oϕ at a specific Euclidean time τϕ.8 The matrix elements of the CFT
7 We thank Mark Van Raamsdonk for discussions on this point.
8 For a generic bulk operator ϕ with small mass, the corresponding CFT operator insertion in the Euclidean path integral
is non-local. We will again restrict for simplicity to the case of operators that can be treated under the geodesic worldline
approximation, for which a local insertion of ϕ in the bulk corresponds to a local insertion of Oϕ in the Euclidean boundary.
11

operator Φ then take the form
ΦIJ “ xΨI| VψϕpyqV ´1
ψ
|ΨJy “
1
?ZIZJ
TrpT tOp˜βR{2qOΨpxΨqOJpxJqOϕpxϕqO:p´˜βR{2qO:
Ψpx1
ΨqO:
Ipx1
Iquq .
(1.7)
In this expression, the Euclidean time ordering T of the CFT operator insertions is crucial for the
correct definition of the matrix elements. Since different bulk states correspond to insertions of different
operators OΨ, OI at different Euclidean times τΨ, τI, the right-hand-side of eq. (1.7) depends on the
states |ΨIy and |ΨJy, and the matrix elements of the CFT operator Φ need to be defined one by one.
In this sense, the explicit Euclidean reconstruction (1.7) of the bulk operators acting on the cosmology
is manifestly state-dependent.
The properties of the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ outlined above and the state-dependent re-
construction of the cosmological EFT operators described above should be regarded as the second main
result of the present paper.
Tensor network toy model
In order to study the properties of the cosmology-to-boundary map more explicitly, we introduce a tensor
network (TN) toy model for the cosmological states that qualitatively captures all of the properties of
the AdS/CFT setup described above, see Fig. 3.
Figure 3: TN model of our setup defining the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ.
In this TN, described in detail in Sec. 5, the triangles on the left and right represent MERA TNs
modeling the initial slices of the AdSl,r spacetimes; the triangles with a curved edge are MERAs cut off
at r “ R˚ which represent the cl,r initial slices; the projection labeled by O glues the two cosmological
MERAs together and has the interpreation of the shell operator O; the lines labeled by |l| “ 2Sl, |r| “ 2Sr
represent the EPR pairs between the AdSl,r regions and the cosmology; the lines labeled by |cl,r| represent
bulk DOF on the cosmology, including those entangled with AdSl,r and additional, DOF which are not
entangled; finally, the box labeled by ψi represents a bulk state |ψiy on Σ “ Σl Y Σc Y Σr. We can
tune the entanglement between the AdSl,r spaces and the cosmological components cl,r, by increasing
the number of EPR pairs by hand, given by the parameters Sl,r of the TN. Note that the state |ψy is a
state defined on all of the bulk DOF, and in particular also on the AdSl,r DOF which are not entangled
with the cosmology (which we did not represent here for simplicity, given that they are irrelevant for
12

our discussion).
Moreover, we choose the tensor O to be Gaussian random, with zero mean and unit variance.9 With
this choice, a TN replica trick calculation shows that this random TN approximately saturates the RT
formula on the TN, which is the analog of the island formula (1.3) described above for the AdS/CFT
setup. Interestingly, the island term in the TN replica trick arises from a replica-connected contribution
present when taking averages over the O tensor, in analogy with the gravitational replica wormhole
contribution in AdS/CFT.
Given the TN of Fig. 3, we consider general states |ψiy of the cosmological EFT, that is, those
states generated by acting on a reference state |ψy with local unitaries Upiq
c
supported on the DOF of
the cosmology. The TN in Fig. 3 defines a cosmology-to-boundary map
Vψ |ψiy “ IlIrpΠl
MAXΠr
MAX xΠO|cq |ψiy ,
(1.8)
where xΠO|c “ xO| IclIcr is the “cosmological projector” associated with the random shell tensor and the
Icl,r cutoff MERA isometries, Il,r are the AdS MERA isometries, and Πi
MAX “ |MAXiy xMAXi| is the
orthogonal projector to the maximally entangled state of Sl,r pairs between AdSl,r and cl,r, respectively.
In general, the dimension of the Hilbert space of cosmological DOF can be larger than the entan-
glement between the cosmology and the AdS regions, i.e. |cl||cr| ą |l||r|. Since the TN defines a linear
map between finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, this implies that, in this regime, there are null states
in the cosmological EFT, i.e. dimtKerpVψqu “ |cl||cr| ´ |l||r| ą 0, and the map Vψ is non-isometric.
Thus, unlike the previous discussion in AdS/CFT, the TN model of the cosmology-to-boundary map
in this case has a non-trivial kernel. This is a consequence of the finite dimensional nature of the TN,
in which high energy states have been projected out and thus the information contained on thermal
tails (which in principle enables to distinguish different cosmological states in the CFT) is lost. The
TN should be regarded as a model of what a CFT observer with finite resolution can distinguish, in
analogy with the situation described above in which we truncate the CFT Hilbert space by projecting
onto a microcanonical band of the CFT.
By exploiting the gaussian isoperimetric inequalities for the random O tensor, we can estimate under
which condition the map Vψ is approximately isometric for all states that a computationally limited
bulk observer can prepare (both the notion of approximate isometry and the definition of these “simple”
states are made precise in Sec. 5.2) with extremely high probability. We find that this is the case if
|l||r| Á plog |c|qq
(1.9)
where |c| “ |cl||cr| and q is a constant given in eq. (5.28). This result shows that in order to have an
9 This assumption is motivated by the coarse-grained semiclassical description of the thin shell operator O in terms of a
Gaussian random matrix in the energy basis [67].
13

approximately isometric encoding of all “simple” cosmological states, it is enough that the number of
entangled pairs Sl ` Sr between cosmology and AdS regions scales logarithmically with the number of
DOF in the cosmology.
We expect that these considerations to also hold under genericity assumptions for the full-fledged
cosmology-to-boundary map in AdS/CFT. A simple estimate of the cosmological dimension in this case
is log2 |c| „ 2Np, for p ă 2, associated to the microcanonical entropy of two gases of particles in AdS,
one on each of the patches cl and cr. The regime (1.9) is still within the microcanonical stability of the
gas of particles in AdS, and it can therefore be attained in our construction.
The non-isometric to approximately isometric transition for the cosmology-to-boundary map, when
the entanglement to the cosmology exceeds the bound (1.9), should be regarded as the third main result
of the present paper.
Organization of the paper
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
In Sec.
2 we present a detailed construction of the
cosmological states in the bulk and boundary theories and describe the properties of the cosmological
spacetime. In Sec. 3 we derive the island formula from the FLM replica trick calculation for these
states. In Sec. 4 we analyze the properties of the cosmology-to-boundary map restricted to specific
states prepared via the insertion of localized matter operators in the CFT Euclidean path integral, and
provide an explicit state-dependent reconstruction of operators acting on the cosmology. In Sec. 5 we
present a TN toy model of our setup and analyze generic properties of the cosmology-to-boundary map
using this model. We end with a discussion of our results in Sec. 6. Technical details related to our
results can be found in Appendices A-E.
2
Cosmological states
To construct CFT states with closed cosmological duals, we will be guided by the construction of
semiclassical states of a two-sided black hole with long Einstein-Rosen bridges. It is well-known that
such states can be created by adding heavy matter with substantial backreaction in the black hole
interior. In JT gravity coupled to matter particles, this class of states were dubbed partially entangled
thermal states (PETS) in [72]. More recently, analogous microstates have been considered in a variety
of different contexts, including extremal supersymmetric black holes [73, 74] and higher dimensional
neutral black holes [66, 67, 75] (see also [76–78] for one-sided analogs and B-states).
A PETS is a state on the Hilbert space of two independent copies of the CFT, |ΨOy P HL b HR,
where each CFT lives on a spatial Sd´1 of radius ℓ.
The state is prepared by an Euclidean CFT
14

path integral on a flat cylinder of finite length (see Fig. 4). The preparation includes two portions of
Euclidean time-evolutions of lengths ˜βL{2 and ˜βR{2, driven by the CFT Hamiltonian H “ HL “ HR,
and the additional insertion of, at least, a matter operator O in between. The wavefunction of the state
in the energy basis reads
|ΨOy “
ρ˜βL{2Oρ˜βR{2
E
“
1
?Z1
ÿ
n,m
e´ 1
2 p˜βLEn`˜βREmqOnm |Eny˚
L b |EmyR ,
(2.1)
where the state has been normalized by a suitable thermal two-point function, Z1 “ Trpe´˜βLHO:e´˜βRHOq.
Figure 4: Euclidean path integral on the flat cylinder preparing |ΨOy.
In this paper, we consider an operator O „ ś
i O∆pΩiq comprised of a large number of single-trace
operator insertions O∆along the sphere Ωi P Sd´1, distributed in an approximately homogeneous way.10
In the limit of a large number of insertions, these operators create classical spherically symmetric domain
walls of dust particles in the bulk (see [79]). We will work with an effective hydrodynamic description
of these shells of dust, characterizing them as localized pressureless perfect fluids with mass density σ.
The bulk EFT that we will consider to describe this system is
IrXs “ ´
1
16πG
ˆ
X
p R ´ 2Λq `
1
8πG
ˆ
BX
K ` ImatterrXs `
ˆ
W
σ ` IctrBXs ,
(2.2)
where ImatterrXs is the action of the bulk quantum fields, W is the codimension-one worldvolume of
the thin shell and IctrBXs are local counterterms at asymptotic infinity that implement holographic
renormalization and render the value of the action finite [80, 81].
The semiclassical state dual to |ΨOy is prepared, according to the rules of the holographic dictionary,
by the dominant bulk Euclidean saddle point geometry X satisfying the boundary conditions imposed
by the CFT path integral which computes the two-point function Z1. The time reflection-symmetric
slice Σ of the Euclidean solution X, provides the initial data of the semiclassical state and singles out
a particular state of the bulk fields.
At high preparation temperatures, ˜βL, ˜βR À ℓ, the dominant Euclidean geometry X is constructed
10 We can also include different conformal primaries, see Appendix A.
15

out of the Euclidean Schwarzschild AdS black hole solution, of topology D2 ˆ Sd´1, where D2 is a two
dimensional disk, transverse to the spatial spheres. X is formed out of two black hole solutions, with
different masses ML, MR. They are glued together along the worldvolume of the thin shell W, which
backreacts in this localized way (see Fig. 5).11. The semiclassical state on Σ corresponds to the initial
data of two AdS-Schwarzschild black holes with a shared Einstein-Rosen bridge, which is supported
by the presence of the spherical heavy shell of matter. The CFT wavefunction (2.1) in this regime is
dominated by high-energy microcanonical bands, with energies associated to the ADM masses ML, MR
of the two large AdS black holes.
Figure 5: Semiclassical state prepared by the gravitational path integral at high preparation temperatures. The Euclidean
section X consists of two Euclidean black holes of masses ML and MR. Each solution is topologically D2 ˆSd´1, where D2
is a two dimensional disk (each point in the figure corresponds to a transverse Sd´1). The two solutions are glued together
along the worldvolume of the thin shell W, in red. The semiclassical bulk state is prepared at the time reflection-symmetric
slice Σ (blue slice), which contains a long Einstein-Rosen bridge supported by the shell. In the Lorentzian section, the
shell hides behind the horizon of the two-sided black hole.
Our initial motivation is the observation in [67] that AdS solutions with the heavy shell operator
O inserted also exist and dominate below the analog of the Hawking-Page preparation temperature. A
detailed analysis of the dominance of the different phases in our setup can be found in Appendix A to-
gether with the discussion of other possible competing configurations. At low preparation temperatures,
˜βL, ˜βR Á ℓ, the support of the wavefunction (2.1) is dominated by AdS microcanonical bands, dual to
low-energy states in the confined phase of the holographic CFT. The dominant X now consists of two
Euclidean thermal AdS spaces, each of topology Dd ˆ S1 (where Dd is a d-dimensional ball), which are
11 As shown in [66], the preparation moduli of the cylinder ˜βL, ˜βR can always be chosen such that the thin shell is prepared
in the black hole interior, irrespective of its rest mass m, for given fixed physical temperatures βL, βR of the two black holes.
To be more precise, there is a lower bound for the mass of the shell set by the difference in ADM masses, |ML ´ MR| ď m.
There is no upper bound for m in these solutions, which allows to explore the Hilbert space of the black hole by varying
the value of m for fixed ML, MR (cf. [66]).
16

again glued along W (see Fig. 1). The time reflection-symmetric slice Σ of this saddle is geometrically
disconnected. It contains three connected components: two initial slices of global AdS (Σl, Σr), and a
third closed initial slice, Σc, supported by the presence of the heavy shell. Under Lorentzian evolution,
Σc develops a big-crunch singularity towards the future, and arises from a big-bang singularity in the
past. In this way, the geometrically disconnected space corresponds to the configuration of a semi-
classical closed AdS cosmology, microscopically described by the low-temperature PETS (2.1) of two
holographic CFTs. We now move onto the detailed construction of these states.
2.1
Semiclassical state
In the EFT (2.2), the shell propagates freely at tree level, following a codimension-one worldvolume W
which bisects the Euclidean geometry X into two components X˘. To leading order, we shall neglect
the backreaction exerted by the state of the quantum fields on X. At this level, the metric on X˘ will
be that of thermal AdS
ds2
˘ “ fprqdτ 2
˘ ` dr2
fprq ` r2dΩ2
d´1 ,
(2.3)
where
fprq “ r2
ℓ2 ` 1 .
(2.4)
Each Euclidean time coordinate is periodic with periodicity given by the physical inverse temperature
of the corresponding AdS space, τ´ „ τ´ ` βL and τ` „ τ` ` βR. The radial coordinate must remain
continuous across the gluing of these two solutions across W, given that it measures the proper areas
of transverse spheres. It therefore has the same label for both components in (2.3).
From spherical symmetry of W, the embedding functions of W in X˘ reduce to τ˘ “ τ˘pTq and
r “ RpTq, where T is the thin shell’s proper Euclidean time, and RpTq is its radial trajectory. The rest
of the angular coordinates over Sd´1 are inherited from the metrics (2.3). The induced metric on W is
simply
ds2
W “ dT 2 ` RpTq2dΩ2
d´1 .
(2.5)
The gluing of X˘ is performed solving Einstein’s field equations locally in a neighbourhood of W.
This leads to the so-called Israel-Darmois junction conditions [82, 83]. The first condition states that
the metric should remain continuous along W, which, from (2.3) and (2.5), translates to
1 “ fpRq 9τ 2
˘ `
9R2
fpRq ,
(2.6)
where the dot represents
d
dT . The second junction condition quantifies how the normal derivative of
the induced metric jumps across W. The total jump is given by the energy-momentum tensor of the
thin shell, which from (A.4) has dust form, Tµν|W “ σuµuν, for uµ “ pdTqµ the proper velocity of each
17

particle forming the shell. Combined with (2.6) this condition yields (see e.g. [84])
psignp 9τ`q ´ signp 9τ´qq
b
´ 9R2 ` fpRq “
8πGm
pd ´ 1qVΩRd´2 .
(2.7)
In this expression we have introduced the total rest mass of the shell
m “ VΩRd´1σ ,
(2.8)
where VΩ“ VolpSd´1q. The total rest mass m is conserved by virtue of the angular components of the
second junction condition. It correspond to an intrinsic property which characterizes the shell operator
used in the construction of the state.12
Squaring (2.7) produces the equation of motion of a non-relativistic particle with zero total energy,
moving in one dimension,
9R2 ` VeffpRq “ 0 ,
(2.9)
which describes the radial motion of the thin shell. The effective potential is
VeffpRq “ ´fpRq `
ˆ
4πGm
pd ´ 1qVΩRd´2
˙2
.
(2.10)
The second term of the effective potential corresponds to the gravitational self-energy of the shell, which
creates a repulsive force in the Euclidean section. This makes the shell bounce at a given radius R˚ ą 0,
satisfying VeffpR˚q “ 0.13 The shell’s trajectory then starts from the Euclidean asymptotic boundary at
R “ 8, dives into the bulk until it turns around at R “ R˚, and then goes back to R “ 8 again (see
Fig. 1).14
The turning radius R˚ is a function of the shell’s mass, R˚ “ R˚pmq. For large mass in AdS units,
mℓ" 1, the turning radius scales as
R˚
ℓP
„ pmℓq
1
d´1 ,
(2.11)
measured in units of the pd ` 1q-dimensional Planck length ℓP “ G
1
d´1 . The classical solution can thus
be trusted if the shell is parametrically heavy in AdS units. In this case, its mass density σ remains
parametrically smaller than the Planck density along W.
12 In the microscopic description of the shell, given by the CFT operator O, the parameter m is related to the total
conformal dimension m „ ∆O „ n∆, where n „ N 2 is the number of local operator insertions that form O, each of
conformal dimension ∆.
13 Setups similar to those described in this paper cannot be achieved using holographic BCFT constructions dual to
spacetimes containing end-of-the-world (ETW) branes like in [45, 46, 51, 52, 85, 86]. In fact, at least in these minimal
models, the brane’s equation of state is that of constant proper energy density (its stress-energy tensor is proportional to
the induced metric), leading to a brane’s trajectory without turning points when the background is pure AdS: the brane
simply shrinks from r “ 8 to r “ 0 in Euclidean signature. Therefore, the insertion of two branes at symmetric Euclidean
times leads to two disconnected ETW branes (see [45] for an explicit construction), and the corresponding Lorentzian
manifold does not contain a disconnected component (the cosmology) like in the present setup.
14 For d “ 2, these solutions only exist for R˚ ą 0 if 2Gm ą 1. In higher dimensions, they always exist.
18

The total Euclidean time elapsed by the shell from the point of view of each component X˘ can be
obtained by plugging (2.9) into (2.6). It is given by
∆τ˘ “ 2
ˆ 8
R˚
dR
fpRq
d
fpRq ` VeffpRq
´VeffpRq
.
(2.12)
Note that the value of (2.12) only depends on m.
Moreover, we squared (2.7) to reduce it to the form (2.9). Plugging (2.9) back into (2.7) imposes
the additional requirement that the trajectory of the shell satisfies
signp 9τ`q “ `1 ,
signp 9τ´q “ ´1 .
(2.13)
These gluing conditions can only be satisfied if the gluing is done as indicated in Fig. 1. Namely,
the Euclidean time has to be running in the opposite directions in both components, with the correct
overall sign imposed by (2.13). This enforces ´1
4βL ă τ´pTq ă 1
4βL and 1
4βR ă τ`pTq ă 3
4βR, where the
Euclidean time runs clockwise in both components.
The Euclidean asymptotic boundary BX of the solution constructed this way includes two portions
of a thermal circle, of lengths ˜βL and ˜βR, corresponding to (twice) the inverse preparation temperatures
of the dual microscopic state. These two portions are glued along the two spheres where W meets the
boundary, which correspond to the heavy operator insertions in the Euclidean CFT path integral. In the
bulk, the physical temperatures of each component is fully determined by the preparation temperatures,
and by the additional Euclidean time elapsed by the shell on each component,
βR “ ˜βR ` ∆τ` ,
βL “ ˜βL ` ∆τ´ .
(2.14)
The saddle point geometry X prepares a bulk semiclassical state at the Euclidean time reflection-
symmetric slice
Σ “ Σl Y Σc Y Σr .
(2.15)
The slice Σ is now disconnected and contains Σl “ tτ´ “ 0u and Σr “ tτ` “ 0u, which consist of two
hyperbolic disks Hd, providing the initial data of two disconnected AdS spaces. The third connected
component is
Σc “ tτ´ “ ´βL{2u Y tτ` “ βR{2u ,
(2.16)
and corresponds to the initial slice of a closed universe, of topology Sd, comprised of two hyperbolic
disks, Σcl “ tτ´ “ ´βL{2u and Σcr “ tτ` “ βR{2u. The disks are regulated and glued together at a
finite radial distance r “ R˚—which is the same for both disks—precisely associated to the position of
the thin shell.
19

The total proper volume of Σc is controlled by the mass of the thin shell
VolpΣcq
Gℓ
“ 2VΩ
Gℓ
ˆ R˚
0
rd´1dr
a
fprq
„
8π
pd ´ 1q2 mℓ.
(2.17)
Again, we see that the symmetric slice Σc of the closed universe is macroscopic and the Euclidean
manifold X is under semiclassical control if the shell is parametrically heavy in AdS units.
Limit of large mass
A regime which allows us to simplify technical details considerably, and that we shall adopt at different
points throughout this paper, is the case of a very heavy shell, treated in the limit mℓÑ 8. In this
limit, the Euclidean time traveled by the shell vanishes, ∆τ˘ Ñ 0 by virtue of (2.12), given that the
turning radius R˚ in (2.11) becomes infinite. The physical temperatures solving (2.14) are βL “ ˜βL and
βR “ ˜βR in this regime. The worldvolume W then effectively “pinches off” and the Euclidean solution
X in Fig. 1 becomes effectively disconnected, consisting of two complete Euclidean thermal AdS spaces
glued at a point of the diagram (see Fig. 6).15 The volume (2.17) of the reflection-symmetric slice of
the closed universe Σc Ă Σ becomes also infinite in this limit.
Figure 6: Half of the Euclidean manifold X in the limit of large mass for the thin shell operator. In this illustration,
the trajectory of the shell pinches off to the asymptotic region, ∆τ˘ Ñ 0, and the physical preparation time becomes
βL,R “ ˜βL,R. The slice Σc Ă Σ corresponds to the initial data of a very large closed universe.
State of the bulk fields
The Euclidean gravitational path integral, in the saddle point approximation provided by X, prepares
a specific state for bulk quantum fields on Σ, which we shall denote by |ψ0y. Since X is connected, the
bulk preparation is driven by a (time-dependent) Hamiltonian which couples the quantum fields on Σc
15 The large mass limit is not a pinching limit for X in the physical sense, since the proper distance travelled by W remains
infinite.
20

and on Σl and Σr. The outcome of this coupling is to generally produce an entangled state |ψ0y between
the three components.
In the large mass limit, the pinching of X makes the two components X˘ approximately decouple,
since the time-dependent Hamiltonian coupling them acts for a very small Euclidean time ∆τ˘ Ñ 0.
Therefore, generically, we can assume that the state of the bulk fields |ψ0y manifestly factorizes into the
product
|ψ0y « |Φ´ylcl |Φ`ycrr ,
(2.18)
where |Φ˘y correspond to two entangled states between the respective side of the closed universe and
the AdS region. The approximate factorization of the bulk state (2.18) implicitly assumes that the
entanglement entropy of any such states |Φ˘y is much greater than the very small residual entanglement
entropy between both sides of the closed universe Σc. As we will see in Sec. 2.2, depending on the
bulk theory, this might not be the case for the semiclassical bulk state prepared by X, given that the
preparation temperature is below the gap of the system. In these cases, the bulk state |ψ0y could retain
a more complicated entanglement structure, even in the large mass limit. However, in this paper, we
will generally consider excited states of the bulk fields |ψy on Σ, prepared by the addition of bulk local
operator insertions in the same Euclidean preparation manifold X (see Fig. 9). Generally such states
contain additional entanglement and will satisfy (2.18) in the large mass limit.
Lorentzian geometry and inhomogeneous cosmology
The Lorentzian manifold XL corresponding to the initial data prepared on Σ is obtained from analytic
continuation τ˘ Ñ it˘ of the Euclidean manifold X.
This leads to a real time reversal-symmetric
geometry XL. XL contains two disconnected global AdS components AdSl, AdSr Ă XL, with metric
ds2
l,r “ ´fprqdt2
˘ ` dr2
fprq ` r2dΩ2
d´1 ,
(2.19)
corresponding to the evolution of the initial data on Σl and Σr, respectively.
Additionally, there is a third connected component c Ă XL given by the causal development of the
initial data on Σc. This development is comprised of two patches of pure AdS space, cl and cr, which are
glued together along the worldvolume WL of the thin shell in the Lorentzian section, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. The metric of each one of these patches is locally given by a pure AdS metric of the form (2.19),
with a time-dependent IR cutoff at the trajectory of the shell r “ Rptiq, for ti the corresponding global
time variable defined on each patch i “ cl, cr. The two patches cl and cr are geometrically identical, but
the state of the bulk fields living on them is different (in particular, the temperatures βL and βR of the
thermal gas in the two patches is different).
The shell’s equation of motion is obtained from the analytic continuation T Ñ iT of its proper
21

Euclidean time in (2.9). The corresponding equation for the trajectory of the shell
9R2 ` V L
effpRq “ 0
(2.20)
is indeed equivalent to the Lorentzian junction condition, given the effective potential
V L
effpRq “ fpRq ´
ˆ
4πGm
pd ´ 1qVΩRd´2
˙2
.
(2.21)
Note that this potential has a minus sign with respect to the Euclidean potential (2.10). In particular,
the gravitational self-energy is attractive in the Lorentzian section, as expected. Together with the
AdS potential, this makes the shell collapse towards the future and towards the past. Namely, in the
Lorentzian section the shell starts with zero velocity at r “ R˚ at T “ 0 on Σc, and collapses to r “ 0
in a finite proper time T “ ˘Tf both towards the future and the past. The value of this time is given
by
Tf “
ˆ R˚
0
dR
b
´V L
effpRq
.
(2.22)
The classical solution stops being sensible and develops curvature singularities slightly before this time,
when the shell’s mass density σ becomes Planckian. For d “ 2, Tf “ π
2 ℓ, independently of the rest mass
of the shell. For d ą 2, the proper time is Tf «
ℓ
?
2d for mℓparametrically large. These moments in
time thus define the big bang and big crunch of the closed universe c as illustrated in Fig. 1.
It is interesting to note that cl and cr are contained within the Wheeler-DeWitt patches associated
with boundary times t˘ “ 0 in the corresponding pure AdS spacetimes without IR cutoff (see Fig. 7).
This can be readily understood by computing the total coordinate global time t˘ “ tf needed for the
shell to collapse from its maximum radius r “ R˚ to r “ 0. This time is
tf “
ˆ R˚
0
dR
fpRq
d
fpRq ´ V L
effpRq
´V L
effpRq
.
(2.23)
For d “ 2 we again obtain tf “ πℓ
2 independently of m. For d ą 2, a numerical evaluation shows that
tf ă πℓ{2 for any m, with tf Ñ πℓ{2 in the large mass limit, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
The (null) boundary of the t “ 0 Wheeler-DeWitt patch of a pure AdS spacetime has infinite radius
at t “ 0 and shrinks to zero radius at t “ ˘πℓ{2, independently of the dimension d. The full (timelike)
trajectory of the shell, which starts at r “ R˚ ă 8 for t “ 0 and ends at r “ 0 for t “ tf ă πℓ{2 is
contained within such Wheeler-DeWitt patch.
As a consequence of this result, the entirety of each one of the two (identical) patches cl and cr of
the cosmology is separately covered by the FLRW coordinates describing a hyperbolic slicing of the
Wheeler-DeWitt patch (see Fig. 7). The change of coordinates from global AdS to FLRW coordinates
is given by tanpt{ℓq “ tanptc{ℓq{ cosh ρ, r “ ℓcosptc{ℓq sinh ρ, in which case the AdS metric takes the
22

Figure 7: Each one of the locally AdS patches cl and cr (shaded in red) is bounded by the collapsing shell (red solid
line) and contained within the t “ 0 Wheeler-DeWitt patch (bounded by the solid blue line) in the corresponding pure
AdS spacetime without cutoff. The gray lines represent constant tc slices in the hyperbolic foliation described by the
metric (2.24). In our setup, each slice is cut off when it intersects the shell and glued to an analogous slice of the other
cosmological component. A curvature singularity arises at the tips of the shell’s trajectory. In this figure we represent the
full Lorentzian geometry obtained by evolving the initial state for cl or cr at t “ 0 backwards and forward in time.
form
ds2
˘ “ ´dt2
c ` ℓ2 cos2ptc{ℓq dH2
d ,
(2.24)
where dH2
d “ dρ2 ` sinh2 ρ dΩ2
d´1 is the hyperbolic metric of a FLRW time slice.
In the case of empty AdS, this metric describes an open universe and is a solution of the Friedmann
equation with negative spatial curvature and a negative cosmological constant, with no additional
matter. Since this metric describes a Wheeler-DeWitt patch of pure AdS, it is clearly non-singular. The
“big bang” and “big crunch” at tc “ ˘πℓ{2 are simply coordinate singularities corresponding to the tips
of the Wheeler-DeWitt patch.
On the other hand, in the case of c, each FLRW time slice t “ tc in each one of the two patches cl
and cr is cut off at the location of the shell, implicitly given by ρmaxptcq “ sinh´1 rRptcq{ pℓcosptc{ℓqqs,
where Rptcq ” Rptptcqq, and glued to another identical cutoff FLRW slice. Therefore, the cosmology
c “ cl Y WL Y cr is actually closed (i.e. each time slice is compact). Although c is locally homogeneous
and isotropic inside each one of the two patches cl and cr, the presence of the shell introduces an
inhomogeneity.
In particular, there are two contributions to the expansion and contraction of the
23

Figure 8: Global AdS time elapsed during the shell’s trajectory from r “ R˚ to r “ 0 as a function of the shell’s mass
m for d “ 3. We set here ℓ“ 1, so the x axis is measured in units of the AdS radius. tf ă πℓ{2 for all values of m, and
tf Ñ πℓ{2 in the large m limit: the shell is always contained within the t “ 0 Wheeler-DeWitt patch.
universe:16 the first one is homogeneous and driven by the evolution of the scale factor aptcq “ ℓcosptc{ℓq,
and the second one is inhomogeneous and determined by the contraction of the shell.
Unlike the
hyperbolic slicing of pure AdS, our cosmology is singular, with the big bang and big crunch singularities
approximately corresponding to the initial and final loci of the shell’s worldvolume WL at r “ 0 and
t “ ¯tf, respectively. Note that these are not the usual homogeneous singularities arising in FLRW
universes, but rather inhomogeneous singularities associated with the collapse of the shell, similar to
what happens in the geometry enclosed by a collapsing shell during black hole formation. By inverting
the coordinate transformation between global and FLRW coordinates:
tanh ρ “
r
ℓ
b
1 ` r2
ℓ2 cos
` t
ℓ
˘;
tan
ˆtc
ℓ
˙
“
tan
` t
ℓ
˘
b
1 ´
r2
ℓ2p1`r2{ℓ2q cos2pt{ℓq
,
(2.25)
we obtain that the big bang and big crunch singularities sit at FLRW coordinates ρ “ 0 and tc “ ¯tf
in each one of the two cosmological patches cl and cr.
2.2
Excited bulk states
Given the construction of the Euclidean section X supported by the heavy shell, which prepares the state
|ψ0y of the quantum fields on the EFT Hilbert space HΣ defined on the initial slice Σ “ ΣlYΣcYΣr, it is
natural to consider more general bulk states, |ψy P HΣ, prepared by additional light operator insertions
16 Here we are considering the full Lorentzian geometry c obtained by evolving backwards and forward the initial state
prepared by the Euclidean path integral at global time t` “ t´ ” t “ 0. If we want to restrict to the contracting phase,
it is sufficient to restrict our analysis to t ą 0, corresponding to tc ą 0.
24

ϕpxq at different points x P X, as illustrated in Fig. 9.17 Each bulk state prepared this way defines a
corresponding CFT state |Ψy P HLbHR prepared by inserting an appropriate (and in general non-local)
CFT operator in the CFT Euclidean path integral. The associated bulk-to-boundary map will be the
object of study in Secs. 4 and 5 of this paper.
Figure 9: Preparation of the excited state |ψy from local operator insertions along X. The radial slices correspond to
constant Euclidean time slices, evolved with the action of the time-independent Hamiltonians Hl,r
b . Note that here and in
all the following figures, we add probe operator insertions in the bulk manifold X that do not backreact on the geometry.
These local operators are inserted at different points on the Sd´1 (which is suppressed in the figures).
In the limit of large mass mℓÑ 8 for the shell, the bulk Euclidean preparation via X effectively
decouples both sides of the cosmology (see Fig. 6) and, as a consequence, the bulk state approximately
factorizes, |ψy « |Φ´ylcl |Φ`ycrr. In this regime, the reduced density matrices prepared by the bulk
Euclidean path integral become simply
ρl « exp
`
´βLHl
b
˘
ZlpβLq
T tϕl
IpxIqu ,
(2.26)
ρr « expp´βRHr
bq
ZrpβRq
T tϕr
IpxIqu ,
(2.27)
where Hl,r
b is the time-independent bulk Hamiltonian, associated with the Up1q Euclidean time transla-
tion symmetry of each component of X. Each Up1q is weakly broken in this limit by the presence of the
thin shell in the near-boundary region. The corresponding Hamiltonians are given by local integral on
constant Euclidean time slices illustrated in Fig. 9. Additionally, the light fields ϕl,r
I pxIq represent the
corresponding operator insertions at the points xI P X, where T denotes the Euclidean time-ordering
in the bulk preparation.18 The factors Zl,rpβq “ TrpT te´βHl,r
b ϕl,r
I uq serve as normalization factors for
17 Such a naive notion of EFT of “free gravitons and matter” HΣ, at G “ 0, should be a reasonable approximation to the
true EFT, when G ‰ 0. At a first glance, this seems problematic, given that the cosmology Σc Ă Σ is a closed space, and
that it carries all of the well-know problems of implementing the gravitational Gauss’ law non-trivially in closed spaces.
The way in which this setup avoids this issue is to note that all of the modes of the quantum fields in the state |ψ0y
contain some entanglement with the corresponding modes in the AdS region, given that the preparation of the state is
thermal-like. Entanglement allows to dress all of the modes on the cosmology, in a state-dependent way, to the physical
asymptotic boundaries of the AdS regions. In Sec. 5 we comment on this issue, which affects all of the discussions of
entanglement islands, in a simplified toy model.
18 Note that with this time-ordering prescription the Euclidean time runs clockwise on the right component X`, and
counter-clockwise in the left component X´.
25

the states, and correspond to suitable bulk partition functions on thermal AdS spaces.
The bulk state |ψy constructed this way contains mostly bipartite entanglement between each of
the AdS regions and the corresponding side of the cosmology. The reduced bulk density matrices ρl, ρr
and ρc will have entanglement entropies given by Spρlq, Spρrq and Spρcq « Spρcl b ρcrq « Spρlq ` Spρrq,
respectively. Therefore, the cosmology effectively purifies the bulk entanglement of the quantum fields
in the AdS regions.
For most of our analysis, we will be interested in excited states |ψy in which the entanglement Spρl,rq
and the difference |Spρlq ´ Spρrq| can be taken to be large. This can be achieved with the addition
of suitable operator insertions along X, since these can create light entangled particles between the
cosmology and the AdS regions. The effect of adding such insertions is to change the ADM energy of
the state. Microcanonically, a gas of particles in AdS is stable, up to energies of order EℓÀ G´1 „ N2,
before it collapses into a small black hole.
Therefore, by adding light entangled pairs between the
cosmology and the AdS regions, it is possible to attain a large value of Spρl,rq and |Spρlq ´ Spρrq|. As
long as the number of entangled pairs, and thus the total energy, is parametrically smaller than OpN2q,
the semiclassical wavefunction of the state will remain within the cosmological branch.
The reason why we are interested in considering more general excited states rather than the original
state |ψ0y described above, dual to the PETS, is that, in string theory realizations of AdS/CFT, the bulk
(thermal) entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS regions is very small in the original state
|ψ0y. This is the case because the preparation temperature is of the order of the gap of the system, and
the number of species in these theories is not extremely large. For instance, in type IIB supergravity in
AdS5ˆS5, which contains 256 local DOF, we provide a simple estimate of this entanglement in Appendix
B, showing that indeed SpβqIIB À 0.29. As we will discuss in detail in Secs. 4 and 5, this small amount
of entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology implies that the cosmology-to-boundary
map encoding the cosmology in the dual theory is highly non-isometric, and that the reconstruction of
the cosmological physics by a CFT observer requires exceptionally precise control over the CFT. In the
presence of a large amount of entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS regions, the situation
greatly simplifies. For this reason, we will consider more general excited states |ψy with larger amounts
of bulk entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology.19
3
Cosmology as an island
In this section we derive a version of the island formula for the fine-grained entanglement entropy
between the CFTL and the CFTR in the cosmological microstates built in the previous section. To do
this, we will use a standard CFT replica trick, complemented by the rules of the semiclassical path
19 An alternative avenue would be to work with the original PETS in bottom-up models of AdS/CFT, in which the number
of bulk species can be chosen to be much larger.
26

integral of gravity, following FLM [7, 9] closely.
Recall that the von Neumann entropy of ρL can be computed via the replica trick
SpρLq “ lim
nÑ1`
1
1 ´ n log Trρn
L “ ´Bn log Trpρn
Lq|n“1 .
(3.1)
To do this, one starts from Trpρn
Lq for integer n ą 1, which is related to the n-th Rényi entropy,20 to
then analytically continue in n, and evaluate it close to n “ 1`, in order to take the derivative in (3.1).
In our case we can prepare the unnormalized state ˆρL using the Euclidean CFT path integral. The
n-th Rényi entropy of the unnormalized state Trpˆρn
Lq is given by a CFT path integral on a manifold
consisting of n replicas of the original manifold. The contour of this path integral is shown in Fig. 10
for the case n “ 2, which analogously extends to higher Rényi entropies.
Figure 10: Euclidean CFT path integral computing the unnormalized purity Trpˆρ2
Lq. Each point represents a spatial
sphere Sd´1. The two replicas are glued together across the dashed axis of Z2 symmetry, which cuts the Hilbert space of
the L subsystems.
For the unnormalized n-th Rényi entropy, there will be n creation operator insertions Oi and n
annihilation insertions O:
i along the CFT contour, where i “ 1, ..., n is the replica label. Within the
EFT (2.2) with n shells, the shells can only propagate freely at tree level.21 There will thus be n! saddle
point geometries, Xg, each of which corresponds to a symmetric group element g P Sympnq representing
that O:
i is connected to Ogpiq in this saddle.
To compute the normalized n-th Rényi entropy, the normalization of the state by the norm Z1 “
20 In the following we will refer for brevity to Trpρn
L q as the n-th Rényi entropy, although the latter is related to the former
by SnpρLq “ log Trpρn
L q{p1 ´ nq.
21 A putative tadpole or three-point interaction between shells is expected to be exponentially suppressed in mℓif the
mass of the shell is large, like in the case of classical matter. Moreover the operator O has to be thought of as an s-wave
channel, and thus each shell is an irreducible object.
27

TrpˆρLq also needs to be taken into account.22
3.1
Purity
Consider for concreteness the case n “ 2. There will be two saddle point geometries Xe, Xη, where e is
the symmetric group identity element and η “ p12q. These solutions are illustrated in Fig. 11 and Fig.
12, respectively. The unnormalized purity is simply the sum of both contributions
Trpˆρ2
Lq „ ZrXe, ϕIs ` ZrXη, ϕIs ,
(3.2)
where ZrXi, ϕIs “ e´IrXisZbulkrXi, ϕp1q
I , ϕp2q
I s is the semiclassical contribution of Xi, with IrXis “
OpG´1q the classical gravitational action. The replicated bulk operators ϕp1q
I , ϕp2q
I
are inserted at the
corresponding Euclidean times, and the term ZbulkrXi, ϕp1q
I , ϕp2q
I s corresponds to the correlation function
of these fields on each manifold.
The overline is to denote that this quantity is computed by the
gravitational path integral, in the semiclassical G Ñ 0 asymptotic expansion.
Figure 11: The saddle point geometry Xe consist of thin shell contractions between each replica. The center of replica
symmetry corresponds to an AdS space of physical inverse temperature βL,2 “ 2˜βL ` 2∆τ`. Here and in all the following
figures we consider generic saddles in which additional operator insertions ϕI are present (represented by the crosses), see
Sec. 2.2.
To compute the purity, the normalization of the state by the norm Z1 “ TrpˆρLq needs to be taken into
account.23 In particular, we need to consider the square of this norm, which enters in the normalization
of (3.2). As it was shown in [66, 67] for the high-temperature PETS, moments of the overlap between
22 As customary in the gravitational Euclidean path integral computations of Rényi entropies (see for instance [7, 9]),
we assume that computing the trace of the unnormalized state Trpˆρn
L q and the normalization factor separately using the
gravitational Euclidean path integral and then taking the ratio is a good approximation to computing the trace of the
normalized state.
23 As customary in the gravitational Euclidean path integral computations of Rényi entropies (see for instance [7, 9]), we
assume that computing the unnormalized purity and the normalization factor separately using the gravitational Euclidean
path integral and then taking the ratio is a good approximation to computing the normalized purity directly.
28

Figure 12: The replica wormhole Xη consist of thin shell contractions between replicas. The center of replica symmetry
corresponds to an AdS space of temperature βR,2 “ 2˜βR ` 2∆τ`. On the right, the large mass limit of the shell, where
the geometry becomes effectively composed of disconnected Euclidean AdS spaces, with βR,2 “ 2βR. Each of these spaces
contributes with a factor of ZlpkβLq or ZrpkβRq.
PETS states, in this case the norm of one of them, admit connected contributions coming from Euclidean
wormholes in the semiclassical path integral computing these quantities. These wormholes also exist at
low temperatures,
pZ1q2 “ ZrX, ϕIs2 ` ZrX2, ϕIs .
(3.3)
The corresponding Euclidean wormhole X2 was constructed in [67] (see Fig. 13). It consists of a pair
of AdS spaces, glued along the trajectories of the thin shells in such a way that BX2 contains two
disconnected components, each of which prepares a single copy of Z1.
The normalized purity is then given by
Trpρ2
Lq „ ZrXe, ϕIs ` ZrXη, ϕIs
ZrX, ϕIs2 ` ZrX2, ϕIs .
(3.4)
Since, at this level, the classical on-shell gravitational action of Euclidean AdS is linear in the boundary
Euclidean time, the classical gravitational contributions to (3.4) cancel between numerator and denom-
inator, given that the boundary is always of length 2˜βL ` 2˜βR for all of these saddles, and that the
contribution from the shell does not depend on the physical temperature of the solutions.
All that is left to do to evaluate the purity (3.4) is to compute the corresponding correlation function
29

Figure 13: The Euclidean wormhole X2 contributing to the square of the norm of the state. In the space transverse to
the spheres, X2 is homotopic to a sphere with four punctures. The asymptotic boundary BX2 contains two disconnected
components, corresponding to Euclidean CFT path integrals computing the normalization Z1. The wormhole is decon-
structed in a pair of thermal AdS spaces at inverse temperatures βR,2 “ 2βR ` 2∆τ` and βL,2 “ 2βL ` 2∆τ`, glued along
the trajectories of two thin shells.
of the bulk fields on each manifold, ZbulkrXi, ϕIs. The computation of these quantities is involved, given
the irregular spectrum of the second order differential operator ∇2 in the space of normalizable functions
L2
gpXiq (for any of the above manifolds). A remarkable simplification occurs again in the limit of large
mass of the thin shell, mℓÑ 8. As explained in Sec. 2, in this limit the manifolds effectively factorize
and become a collection of Euclidean AdS spaces at different temperatures. The bulk partition functions
factorize accordingly24
ZbulkrXe, ϕIs « Zlp2βLqZrpβRq2 ,
(3.5)
ZbulkrXη, ϕIs « ZlpβLq2Zrp2βRq ,
(3.6)
ZbulkrX, ϕIs « ZlpβLqZrpβRq ,
(3.7)
ZbulkrX2, ϕIs « Zlp2βLqZrp2βRq ,
(3.8)
where
Zl,rpnβL,Rq “ Tr
´
T te´nβL,RHl,r
b pϕl,r
I qp1q...pϕl,r
I qpnqu
¯
(3.9)
is the correlation function of the bulk operator insertions in the replicated Euclidean AdS spaces. These
factors precisely correspond to traces of the replicated unnormalized bulk states ˆρn
l and ˆρn
r , prepared
by the bulk replicated manifolds at τ “ 0, as in (2.26) and (2.27) for n “ 1.
24 A more detailed argument to show the factorization of the one-loop partition function will appear in [87].
30

Plugging these expressions back into (3.4), we get that the purity can be written as
Trpρ2
Lq „ dr ` dl
1 ` dldr
,
(3.10)
where log dl,r “ S2pρl,rq is the second Rényi entropy of the respective bulk states (2.26) and (2.27).
Assuming dl,r " 1,25 the first term in the numerator, which comes from the replica disconnected saddle
Xe, provides a contribution of approximately d´1
l
“ Trpρ2
l q, which corresponds to the naive purity of
the state ρl in the AdSl space of Fig. 1. The second term, on the other hand, comes from the replica-
connected (also known as ‘replica wormhole’) saddle Xη, and provides a contribution of approximately
d´1
r
“ Trpρ2
r q, which corresponds to the purity of the state ρr in the AdSr region. Since the global bulk
state is pure, d´1
r
also corresponds to the purity of the state ρlc of the AdSl region and the cosmology
c in Fig. 1.
Interestingly, when dl " dr, i.e. if the bulk entanglement of fields in the AdSl space is sufficiently
larger than the bulk entanglement of fields in the AdSr space, the purity of the CFTL is controlled by
the purity of the bulk state ρr in the AdSr region (or, equivalently, by the purity of the state ρlc on
the AdSr region and the cosmology c). This result is already suggestive of an island formula: if the
entanglement of bulk fields in AdSl is large, in order to compute the purity of the CFTL using a bulk
calculation we must include the contribution of an entanglement island given by the cosmology c. In
Sec. 3.3 we will make this statement precise by computing the von Neumann entropy of the CFTL.
The expression (3.10) has suggestive similarities with the purity of a random state (cf. [88]). As we
explain in Appendix D, this is no coincidence, and one can identify the cosmological state in the large
mass limit with a random purification of the bulk states ρl,r, at least at the level of the Rényi entropies.
3.2
Entanglement spectrum
The generalization to higher Rényi entropies is a matter of combinatorics. In the regime of large mass
mℓÑ 8, evaluating all of the contributions becomes straightforward. First of all, the trajectories of
the shells pinch off and the preparation temperatures become equal to the physical temperatures. All
that is left to do is to evaluate the number of closed βL and βR loops on each diagram, and assign a
factor of the bulk partition function (3.9) for each loop. For a permutation g “ σ1σ2...σsg P Sympnq,
with cycles of lengths ki “ |σi|, such that řsg
i“1 ki “ n, the number of βR-loops in Xg is simply sg,
and each of them has length kiβR. Moreover let us define the left conjugate permutation g1 “ ηg, with
η “ p123...nq, where g1 “ σ1
1σ1
2...σ1
sg1 are cycles of lengths k1
i “ |σ1
i|. The number of βL loops in Xg is
25 This condition is satisfied as long as the AdS regions and the cosmology share enough entanglement, see Sec. 2.2 for a
discussion of the size of such entanglement.
31

simply sg1, and each of them has length k1
iβL. The formula for the unnormalized n-th Rényi is then
Trpˆρn
Lq „
ÿ
gPSympnq
Zrpk1βRq...ZrpksgβRqZlpk1
1βLq...Zlpk1
sg1βLq ,
(3.11)
were, again, each factor of Zl,rpnβL,Rq corresponds to the trace of the unnormalized state of the bulk
fields, prepared by the bulk EFT path integral, on n copies of thermal AdS.
For the normalization of the state, Zn
1 , there will be n creation operator insertions Oi and n annihi-
lation insertions O:
i along the disconnected CFT contours, where i “ 1, ..., n labels each connected copy
of Z1. Thus, there will be n! saddle points X1
g also labeled by a symmetric group element g P Sympnq.
For g ‰ e, X1
g will contain at least an Euclidean wormhole solution, connecting different components
of the boundary together. In the limit of large mass mℓÑ 8, evaluating all the actions becomes also
straightforward. Again, one needs to evaluate the number of closed βL and βR loops on each diagram.
It turns out that, in this case, both of them are given by sg, and each of the loops has length kiβR and
kiβL respectively. With this in mind, the normalization becomes
TrpˆρLqn „
ÿ
gPSympnq
Zlpk1βLq...ZlpksgβLqZrpk1βRq...ZrpksgβRq .
(3.12)
Finally, we arrive to the n-th Rényi entropy computed by semiclassical gravity26
Trpρn
Lq „
ř
gPSympnq Zrpk1βRq...ZrpksgβRqZlpk1
1βLq...Zlpk1
sg1βLq
ř
gPSympnq Zlpk1βLq...ZlpksgβLqZrpk1βRq...ZrpksgβRq .
(3.13)
Again, this expression has similarities with the average Rényi entropies of a random purification of
the bulk density matrices ρl,r, as we explain in Appendix D.
3.3
Entanglement entropy
In order to compute the von Neumann entropy (3.1), we need to analytically continue eq.
(3.13).
This analytic continuation is subtle already from the CFT perspective, given that random states with
thermal tails do not have self-averaging entanglement entropy in systems with infinite Hilbert space
dimension. The reason is that it is possible to store an arbitrary amount of entanglement entropy by
slightly modifying the high-energy tail of the wavefunction of such states.
In the gravity computation, the problem comes from replica symmetry breaking saddle points, such
26 A consistency check of this expression is that when βR Ñ 8, the state ρL becomes exactly pure.
32

as the two-cycles
TrpˆρLqn Ą
ˆn
2
˙
Zrp2βRqZrpβRqn´2ZlpβLqZlppn ´ 1qβLq ,
(3.14)
which give rise to terms proportional to Zlp0q “ 8, when the derivative is taken in (3.1).
A way to evade this problem is to analytically continue the gravitational saddles off-shell, which
gives a more refined characterization of the cosmological microstate. In our setup the problematic saddle
points cannot be physically continued near n Ñ 1`. Some of them, like (3.14), become perturbatively
unstable due to the Jeans instability of the gas of particles in AdS at high temperatures [89]. Others
directly fail to satisfy the Witten-Kontsevich-Segal criterium for allowable saddle point geometries [90,
91], since the local temperature of the solution is negative as n Ñ 1`. This motivates to only consider
replica-symmetric saddle points, and in particular those which remain stable close to n Ñ 1`. Strictly,
we continue the quotient manifold Mg “ Xg{Zn off-shell in n, for any replica-symmetric Xg (i.e. for g
satisfying g “ ηgη´1), in the opening angle 2π{n, with the corresponding conical defect at the center
of replica symmetry. The two contributions which satisfy these criteria are
TrpρLqn “ ZrpnβRqZlpβLqn ` ZlpnβLqZrpβRqn
ZrpβRqnZlpβLqn ` ZrpnβRqZlpnβLq
0 ă n ´ 1 ! 1 ,
(3.15)
corresponding to g “ e, η saddle points in the numerator and the denominator. The quotient manifold
Xη{Zn corresponding to the second term in the numerator of (3.15) is the vacuum AdS analog of the
‘pinwheel’ geometry (cf. [18]).
We can now analytically continue eq. (3.15) and compute the von Neumann entropy using eq. (3.1),
which leads to the quantum corrected RT formula for the entanglement entropy
SpρLq « mintSpρlq, Spρrqu .
(3.16)
In the derivation of eq. (3.16) we have assumed that the state is such that the exponential in the entropy
difference expp|Spρlq ´ Spρrq|q is large enough, so that one of the two terms in eq. (3.15) dominates.
The bulk entropies are computed using the bulk replica trick
Spρl,rq “ ´BnpZl,rpnβL,Rq ´ nZl,rpβL,Rqq|n“1 “ ´Trpρl,r log ρl,rq ,
(3.17)
where the reduced states are given by eqs. (2.26) and (2.27), respectively.
Given the fact that the global bulk state is pure, eq. (3.16) can be rewritten as the island formula
SpρLq « mintSpρlq, Spρlcqu .
(3.18)
The area term in both cases vanishes, since the RT is empty γRT “ H, but one needs to still minimize
over choices of entanglement entropy of the bulk fields on different homology hypersurfaces ΣL with
BΣL “ L as the single boundary. Because of the presence of the closed cosmology, one needs to decide
33

whether ΣL contains the cosmology c, or not. Thus, the candidates are ΣL “ Σl and Σ1
L “ Σl Y Σc.
In the case where the latter dominates, the CFTL contains the closed cosmology in its entanglement
wedge, see Fig. 2 for a schematic representation.27
The derivation of eq.
(3.16) presented in this section supports the lesson drawn from the west
coast model of black hole evaporation, namely that the island formula follows from the replica trick by
considering Euclidean saddle points with connectivity between different replicas (i.e. replica wormholes)
[18]. The rules of our calculation have simply been those in the standard FLM replica trick for this
particular entangled microstate of two holographic CFTs, and the island formula is simply the quantum-
corrected RT formula in this context. An important feature of these cosmological microstates is that
the cosmology c is always in an entanglement island, for either the L or the R holographic systems. In
fact, the full CFT state is pure, implying SpρLq “ SpρRq. Therefore, when the bulk entropies satisfy
Spρlq ă Spρrq, eq. (3.18) gives SpρRq “ SpρLq « Spρlq “ Spρrcq and the cosmology is now an island for
the CFTR.
It is important to remark that the microscopic description of the cosmology is non-perturbatively
well defined: it corresponds to a state in the Hilbert space of two holographic CFTs. On the one hand,
this setup explicitly shows that potential issues with islands and the mass of the graviton can be avoided
(cf. [93, 94]), since in this construction the CFTs do not interact, and the bulk AdS graviton propagates
pd ´ 1qpd ´ 2q{2 ´ 1 polarizations.28 On the other hand, it is worth emphasizing the generality of the
results in this section, which are expected to apply to any higher dimensional holographic system with
Einstein gravity coupled to matter and negative cosmological constant in their low energy bulk effective
description.
4
Cosmology-to-boundary map
A central question given our construction is how the EFT on the cosmology is encoded in the boundary
description. Let us denote by HΣ the Hilbert space of the bulk EFT living on the two AdS components
and the cosmology, by Hψ Ă HΣ the Hilbert space obtained by acting on a reference state |ψy P HΣ with
an arbitrary number of unitary operators supported only on c, and by HLbHR the CFT Hilbert space. A
complete answer to the question above would require to elucidate the nature of a cosmology-to-boundary
map29 of the form
Vψ : Hψ Ñ HL b HR .
(4.1)
27 Note that the necessary conditions for the formation of cosmological islands in e.g. [55, 92] are trivially satisfied by the
empty extremal surfaces of this paper, similar to the closed cosmological islands studied in [59].
28 In Sec. 5, we address the issue of dressing operators in the cosmology.
29 As we have discussed in Sec. 1, this is more precisely a bulk-to-boundary map from the bulk Hilbert space of the
cosmology and the two AdS components to the CFT Hilbert space, with the bulk Hilbert space restricted to states for
which the reduced density matrix on Σl Y Σr is fixed, whereas the state of bulk fields in the cosmology can vary. In
particular, for all these states the entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology is fixed.
34

As we will show in this section, constructing concrete realizations of the cosmology-to-boundary map
Vψ, valid for certain classes of cosmological states |ψy, is straightforward because the Euclidean CFT
preparation of the PETS is known. Our goal in this section is to study aspects of this restricted version
of Vψ. In particular we will show that Vψ does not preserve the inner product structure (i.e. it is
non-isometric) in a way which is consistent with the finite microcanonical entropy of the holographic
CFTs. Moreover, we will propose a way to explicitly reconstruct operators acting on the cosmology, in
a state-dependent way.
Recall that the low-temperature PETS |ΨOy is prepared with the Euclidean CFT path integral on
the cylinder illustrated in Fig. 4. Given this preparation, we can consider additional insertions of local
primaries, Oipxiq, where xi “ pτi, Ωiq labels a point on the Euclidean cylinder. We will choose these
new insertions to be light, ∆i ! N2. The microscopic CFT state prepared this way is
|ΨIy “

1
?ZI
T tOp˜βR{2qOIpxIqu
F
,
(4.2)
where T corresponds to the Euclidean time ordering, where in this prescription the Euclidean time lies
in the range 0 ď τ ď p˜βL ` ˜βRq{2. The symbol OIpxIq denotes the product of local operators
OIpxIq ”
ź
i
Oipxiq ,
(4.3)
where the index i includes all of the light operator insertions in the preparation of the state. The state
(4.2) has been appropriately normalized by the correlation function
ZI “ TrpT tOp˜βR{2qOIpxIqO:p´˜βR{2qO:
Ipx1
Iquq ,
(4.4)
where x1
I represents the time reflection-symmetric point τi Ñ ´τi of xI on the Euclidean S1 ˆ Sd´1,
formed by gluing the corresponding cylinders preparing the unnormalized bra and ket.
Following [95], we now choose all of the operator insertions to be heavy enough to admit worldline
saddle point approximations in the bulk, while still remaining within the probe approximation (cf. [95]
for the black hole interior-to-boundary map). The corresponding primaries have conformal dimensions
in the range 1 ! ∆i ! N2. The restriction to this subset of operator insertions is sufficient for the
purposes of the present paper and will greatly simplify our analysis because, with this choice, insertions
of local operators in the CFT Euclidean path integral will correspond to insertions of approximately
local bulk operators on the time reflection-symmetric slice Σ.
In the Euclidean manifold X, the massive bulk fields ϕi dual to these primaries will follow geodesic
worldlines with endpoints xi, x1
i P BX at the conformal boundary, corresponding to the points where
the dual operators are inserted in the path integral preparation, as illustrated in Fig. 14. For simplicity,
we assume that all of the primary insertions are different so that all of these worldlines will intersect Σ
35

once. We classify the insertions in three families30, depending on the Euclidean time τi at which the
CFT operator Oipxiq is inserted:
Figure 14: The operator insertions with propagate into X in the probe worldline approximation. There are three types
of insertions, depending on the Euclidean time τi of the corresponding operator insertion: type I creates a particle on c,
type II creates a linear superposition of a particle on c and a particle on l or r, and type III creates a particle on l or r.
I : The operator is inserted at an Euclidean time τi P r
˜βL
4 ` ϵi, 2˜βL`˜βR
4
´ ϵis, where ϵi „ Op1{∆iq.
The dominant worldline intersects Σc and the bulk state contains an additional particle in the
cosmology.
II : The operator is inserted at an Euclidean time τi P p
˜βL
4 ´ ϵi,
˜βL
4 ` ϵiq Y p2˜βL`˜βR
4
´ ϵi, 2˜βL`˜βR
4
` ϵiq.
There are two degenerate worldlines, one intersecting Σc, and the other one intersection either Σl
or Σr. The bulk state contains a linear superposition of a particle in the cosmology and a particle
in one of the AdS regions.
III : The operator is inserted at an Euclidean time τi P p0,
˜βL
4 ´ϵisYr 2˜βL`˜βR
4
`ϵi,
˜βL`˜βR
2
q. The dominant
geodesic intersects Σl or Σr and the bulk state contains an additional particle on the corresponding
AdS region.
Case II creates an approximate entangled pair of the form
1
?
2p|0miyc |1miyl,r`|1miyc |0miyl,rq between
the modes in the cosmology and in the AdS regions, where mi is the mass of the particle. Therefore,
30 Finding the full-fledged cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ, valid for light bulk modes of the quantum fields and light
operator insertions in the CFT, is beyond the scope of the present paper. The general expectation from intuition built
upon the heat kernel is that, for local insertions of light CFT operators for which the geodesic approximation does not
hold (i.e. with ∆i „ 1), the three families are continuously related and the bulk wavefunctional always contains some
support on both the cosmology and the AdS regions.
Therefore, generic local operator insertions in the CFT would
lead to a modification of the state both in the cosmology and in the AdS regions, and to a change in the entanglement
between the two. In order to study the cosmology-to-boundary map for very light operators, one must thus consider
local insertions of the bulk operators in the cosmology, which correspond to more complicated non-local insertions in the
boundary CFT. Since restricting to operators for which the geodesic approximation applies is enough for our purposes,
we will not investigate this more general case here.
36

adding type II insertions allows one to increase the bulk entanglement with the cosmology by an Op1q
amount, within this overly restricted set of CFT states, as advocated more generally in Sec. 2.2.
Microscopically, the initial increase of the holographic entanglement between the CFTL and CFTR
generated by the type II insertions is more subtle. Originally, for the PETS, the entanglement between
CFTL and CFTR is small and the island formula is not sharp, as we have discussed. As we will see in
the next subsection, the cosmological states are also expected to have Op1q overlaps microscopically. In
particular, this drastically reduces the amount of microscopic entanglement that type II insertions can
generate between the two holographic systems. In simple qubit models, it is possible to see that, under
genericity assumptions, the regime of a sharp island formula is attained after the addition of Op10q type
II insertions, even if the initial states overlap. After this, additional type II insertions will increase the
microscopic entanglement in accordance with the sharp island formula (3.18), taking into account the
Op1q additional bulk entanglement generated by these insertions.
Restricted cosmology-to-boundary map
By fixing a given number of type II operator insertions, we can prepare a bulk reference state |ψy with
a fixed number of entangled pairs between the cosmology and the AdS regions.31 On top of this state,
we add type I operator insertions which create additional particles in the cosmology. Note that these
insertions only change the state of bulk fields in the cosmology, leaving the state in the two AdS regions
and the entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS regions unchanged. The resulting bulk states
will have the form
|ψIy “
1
?zI
ź
i
ϕipyiq |ψy ,
(4.5)
where zI is a normalization constant and yi P Σc is the intersection point of the particle’s geodesic with
the time reflection-symmetric slice Σc (see Fig. 14). The operator ϕipyiq is smeared over the Compton
wavelength of the particle λi „ 1{mi, and thus the state is normalizable.
In this way, our explicit construction defines the linear map
Vψ |ψIy “ |ΨIy ,
(4.6)
restricted to states of the form (4.5), where
|ΨIy “

1
?ZI
T tOp˜βR{2qOΨpxΨqOIpxIqu
F
,
(4.7)
with Op˜βR{2q shell operator, OΨpxΨq the operator insertions necessary to prepare the reference state
31 In general, we can also fix a given number of type III insertions, corresponding to having additional particles in the
AdS regions in the reference state |ψy.
37

|Ψy, and OIpxIq the type I operator insertions associated with the bulk insertion of ś
i ϕipyiq. The
restricted cosmology-to-boundary map (4.6) is rich enough to contain many interesting features which
are expected more generally for the full map (4.1). In the remainder of this section, we will study some
of the properties of the restricted map Vψ.
4.1
Non-isometricity
Figure 15: The overlap Gij “ gij, computed gravitationally by the overlap between two bulk states with two different
particles, vanishes from the orthogonality of the bulk overlaps between the state of the particle iI and the particle jI.
At this point, we consider a collection of K orthogonal cosmological states S “ t|ψI1y , ..., |ψIKyu in
the bulk EFT, with each state consisting of one different particle in the cosmology added on top of the
bulk reference state |ψy. This reference state is constructed from type II insertions with the prescription
described above, and it contains Sl and Sr entangled pairs between the cosmology and the AdSl and
AdSr regions, respectively.32 The cosmology-to-boundary map generates a collection of CFT states,
|ΨIiy “ Vψ |ψIiy for i “ 1, ..., K. In this setup, we define the respective Gram matrices of overlaps,
gij ”
@
ψIi
ˇˇψIj
D
“ δij ,
(4.8)
Gij ”
@
ΨIi
ˇˇΨIj
D
“ xψIi| V :
ψVψ
ψIj
D
.
(4.9)
The vanishing overlap between different bulk EFT states is represented in Fig. 15. The non-vanishing
32 For the sake of simplifying the notation, we are omitting proportionality constants, and identifying the entanglement
entropy of the reduced states ρl,r directly with the number of entangled pairs Sl,r. The reason is that, since the thermal
entropy in the original PETS is very small as we discussed in Sec. 2, the quantities Sl,r approximately reflect the total
bulk entanglement entropy of the states on AdSl,r. These quantities arise from the number of type II insertions, which
create approximate EPR pairs between the AdS regions and the cosmology.
38

of the off-diagonal elements of the CFT Gram matrix Gij provides a measure of the non-isometricity of
the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ, i.e., it signals the amount by which V :
ψVψ ‰ 1.
The CFT gram matrix Gij is expected to be highly complex to determine microscopically, due to
the presence of the operator which creates the thin shell, which is heavy and has very erratic matrix
elements in the energy basis, even in the low-lying part of the spectrum of the CFT. We can assume
that Gij inherits the pseudo-random structure from this operator,
Gij “ gij ` Rij ,
(4.10)
where Rij is some K ˆ K random matrix.
From the construction of the states, the semiclassical connected computation of the CFT Gram
matrix produces the EFT Gram matrix
Gij “ gij “ δij .
(4.11)
where the overline indicates that the quantity is evaluated using the bulk semiclassical description. In
terms of (4.10), this means that the EFT only produces the smooth part of the CFT overlaps, i.e.
Rij “ 0 semiclassically.
Universal moments of the CFT overlaps from wormholes
The semiclassical moments of the CFT overlaps, however, receive connected contributions (cf. [66])
|Gij|2 „
zij
2
zIizIj
pi ‰ jq ,
(4.12)
coming from the Euclidean wormhole saddle point geometry X2 constructed in Fig. 16. The zIi, zIj
factors appearing in the denominator correspond to the semiclassical normalizations of the CFT states
|ΨIiy and
ΨIj
D
, i.e. ZIi “ zIi. By construction, these quantities also correspond to the normalizations
of the bulk states |ψIiy and
ψIj
D
, as represented in Fig.
17.
As shown in [67], the non-vanishing
semiclassical variance given by eq. (4.12) corresponds to the microscopic variance |Rij|2 over an ensemble
of Gram matrices. This ensemble is induced from a coarse-grained version of the thin shell operator,
which is characterized in terms of an ensemble of microscopic operators with identical semiclassical
features, such as a their thermal two-point functions. Therefore, eq. (4.12) must be interpreted as a
typical value of the erratic off-diagonal elements of the CFT Gram matrix, and therefore quantifies the
non-isometricity of the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ.
To evaluate the connected overlap (4.12), one needs to include the additional operator insertions
39

Figure 16: Euclidean wormhole geometry X2 contributing semiclassically to the second moment of the overlap |Gij|2
in eq. (4.12). It consists of two Euclidean AdS spaces, glued by the trajectories of two thin shells, where the shells on
the left and right are identified. Each of the two states |ΨIiy,
ΨIj
D
contains a different type I and a type III insertion
(additional type II insertions that prepare the reference state have been omitted). The type I and type III operator
insertions correspond to different primaries, even if they are labeled by the same i and j, which corresponds to the label
of the bra and the ket in the overlap.
propagating geodesically in this geometry and evaluate the quantity
zij
2 “ ZrX2, ϕs expp´miLirX2s ´ mjLjrX2sq ,
(4.13)
where ZrX2, ϕs is the gravitational action of X2, with the addition of bulk operator insertions that
prepare the bulk reference state |ψy (in this case the type II insertions). The last two factors correspond
to the additional type I worldline action of the particle that defines each cosmological state, where mi
is the mass of this particle, and LirX2s is the length of the geodesic that it follows in the Euclidean
wormhole X2 (see Fig. 13).
As explained in Sec. 3, in the large mass limit for the thin shell, the manifold X2 effectively factorizes,
and the contributions become
ZrX2, ϕs « Zlp2βLqZrp2βRqpZ0q2
(4.14)
zIi « ZlpβLqZrpβRqZ0 expp´miLirXsq .
(4.15)
where Z0 “ expp´2mℓlogpR˚{2ℓqq is the intrinsic contribution from the shell and LirXs is the length
of the geodesic that the particle follows in the Euclidean geometry X used to compute the norm of each
state |ψIiy semiclassically.
40

Figure 17: Saddle point geometry X contributing to the semiclassical normalization of the CFT state |ΨIiy, ZIi “ zIi.
The state contains a type I insertion on the left, and a type III insertion on the right (additional type II insertions
that prepare the reference state have been omitted). The Euclidean time elapsed by type I geodesics is identical to that
one elapsed in the wormhole geometry X2 in Fig. 16. Contrarily, the Euclidean time elapsed by type III geodesics is
smaller than that one elapsed in the wormhole geometry X2 in Fig. 16. In this case, both Euclidean times are related by
2τ i,X2
˚
“ 2
´
βR
2 ´ τ i,X
˚
¯
in the large shell’s mass limit. This discrepancy causes the type III overlaps to be suppressed.
Plugging these expressions back in (4.13), the classical contributions from the shell cancels between
numerator and denominator. For general insertions, the connected contribution to the squared of the
overlap (4.12) is suppressed by a factor
α “ e´mipLirX2s´LirXsq´mjpLjrX2s´LjrXsq.
(4.16)
Since both X and X2 are locally AdS spaces, the geodesic lengths LirXs and LirX2s only depend
on the difference in Euclidean time between the endpoints of the trajectories on each manifold. In
particular, the length of a generic radial geodesic connecting two points on the asymptotic boundary
separated by an amount of global Euclidean time 2τ˚ is given by
L “ 2ℓlog
”
2 tanh
´τ˚
2
¯ı
,
(4.17)
where we neglected a universal divergent contribution coming from the near-boundary region, which
cancels out in the combination between the different lengths in the suppression factor (4.16). In our
time reflection-symmetric setup, τ˚ represents the Euclidean time difference between the insertion point
and the time reflection-symmetric slice τ “ 0, β{2 for a thermal circle of length β. Therefore, for a given
insertion point τi P p0, β
2 q, we have τ˚ “ mintτi, β
2 ´ τiu.
For type I insertions which create particles in the cosmology, the value of τ˚ is the same in the
41

geometries X and X2.
In fact, restricting for simplicity to insertions in the left and to the large
shell’s mass limit for which ˜βL « βL, type I insertions in X have τi P rβL
4 ` ϵi, βL
2 ´ ϵis, yielding
τ i,X
˚
“ βL
2 ´ τi P p0, βL
4 q. In the wormhole geometry X2, the inverse temperature of the left Euclidean
AdS is βL,2 “ 2βL, with the time reflection-symmetric slice given by τ “ 0, βL. In this case, type I
insertions have τi P p0, βL
4 ´ϵisYr 3βL
4 `ϵi, βLq. The value of τ i,X2
˚
P p0, βL
4 q for a given insertion is therefore
the same as that one for the X geometry (see Figs. 16 and 17). As a consequence, the geodesic lengths
(4.17) for a given insertion satisfy LirXs “ LirX2s, and the suppression factor (4.16) is identically one.
This leads to the universal answer for the second moment of the overlap, independent of the nature
of the type I insertions,
|Gij|2 “ Zlp2βLqZrp2βRq
ZlpβLq2ZrpβRq2 “
1
dldr
.
(4.18)
The suppression factors are given by log dl,r “ S2pρl,rq, which correspond to the second Rényi entropy
of the bulk reduced states (2.26) and (2.27) to the AdS regions.
If the second Rényi entropies are sufficiently large, the square of the overlap is small, and states that
are orthogonal in the bulk EFT due to the presence of different particles in the cosmology are mapped
to nearly orthogonal states in the CFT. In this case, the cosmology-to-boundary map is approximately-
isometric for general states (see Sec. 5.2 for a quantitatve analysis of the size of the entropies needed for
the map to be approximately-isometric for all simple states). On the other hand, if dl, dr “ Op1q, states
that are orthogonal in the bulk EFT are mapped to nearly parallel (but still linearly independent, and
therefore in principle distinguishable) states in the CFT. In this case, the map is highly non-isometric.
We want to remark that such non-isometricity does not obviously imply that the map is non-invertible,
but simply that it does not preserve inner products. We will comment more on this point in Sec. 4.2.
It is interesting to evaluate |Gij|2 also in the case in which the operator insertions are of type III,
resulting in two orthogonal bulk EFT states |ψIiy and
ψIj
D
with two different particles in the right (or
left) AdS region.33 In this case, most of the analysis carried out above still holds, with the difference
that the suppression factor (4.16) is non-vanishing. In fact, by a similar reasoning to the one used for
type I insertions, we can conclude that τ i,X
˚
P p0, βR
4 q, and τ i,X2
˚
“ βR
2 ´ τ i,X
˚
‰ τ i,X
˚
, see Figs. 16 and
17. It is then straightforward to show that the suppression factor takes the form
α “
»
——–
tanh
ˆ
βR
4 ´ τ i,X
˚
2
˙
tanh
ˆ
τ i,X
˚
2
˙
fi
ffiffifl
´2miℓ»
——–
tanh
ˆ
βR
4 ´ τ j,X
˚
2
˙
tanh
ˆ
τ j,X
˚
2
˙
fi
ffiffifl
´2mjℓ
.
(4.19)
For τ i,X
˚
, τ j,X
˚
Ñ βR
4 we obtain α Ñ 1, whereas for 0 ă τ i,X
˚
, τ j,X
˚
ă βR
4 the suppression factor decreases
rapidly (we recall that miℓ, mjℓ" 1 in order for the geodesic approximation to hold), see Fig. 18.
33 Note that these insertions modify the reference state |ψy and therefore take us out of the Hilbert space Hψ on which
the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ is defined.
42

0
βR
16
βR
8
3 βR
16
βR
4
τ*
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
α
2.×10-6
4.×10-6
6.×10-6
8.×10-6
0.00001
Figure 18: Suppression factor α given by eq. (4.16) as a function of the Euclidean time difference between the insertion
point of the operators and the time reflection-symmetric slice, where we set for simplicity τ i,X
˚
“ τ j,X
˚
” τ˚. We chose
ℓ“ 1, βR “ 1, mi “ 50, mj “ 40 in eq. (4.16). Insertions to the right of the dashed red line at τ˚ “
β
4 ´ ϵ with
ϵ “ 1{mj « 1{∆j are type II and therefore are not relevant for our analysis. For all relevant values of the insertion point
τ˚ P p0, βR
4 ´ ϵq, the suppression factor is very small and drops rapidly as we decrease τ˚ (see the inset). This implies
that the overlap computed by the gravitational Euclidean path integral for CFT states corresponding to (orthogonal) bulk
EFT states with different particles in the AdS regions is very small. In this case, the bulk-to-boundary map is expected
to be isometric.
We can therefore conclude that the CFT overlap computed by our replica calculation for states that
are orthogonal in the bulk EFT due to the presence of different particles in AdSl,r is extremely small.
This result holds independently of the amount of entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS
regions. We recall that the bulk replica calculation we carried out gives only an approximation to the
true overlap between the CFT states. In fact, it relies on a saddle point approximation for the bulk
geometry and on the geodesic approximation for the description of operator insertions. The fact that
such an approximate overlap is very small and that the ordinary holographic dictionary applies to the
two AdS components of our bulk spacetime suggests that the bulk-to-boundary map restricted to the
Hilbert space of states generated by type III insertions on top of some reference state is isometric, and
the true CFT overlap vanishes.
The generalization to higher moments is also possible (with the AdS version of the Euclidean worm-
holes constructed in [66, 67] for the black hole case)
Gi1i2Gi2i3...Gini1|conn. „ ZlpnβLqZrpnβRq
ZlpβLqnZrpβRqn ,
(4.20)
where the label conn. stands for the completely connected contribution between n asymptotic bound-
aries. The particles travel through the Euclidean wormhole solution Xn between the different compo-
nents of the asymptotic boundary. The universal form of (4.20) arises in the large mass limit for the thin
shell, for the same reason as for the second moment. Namely, the geodesic lengths for type I insertions
cancel out with the normalization factors, and the overlap becomes independent of the details of the
43

states. 34
4.2
Cosmological bag of gold?
The rank of the K ˆ K Gram matrices of overlaps (4.8) and (4.9) provides information about the
number of linearly independent states on S and on VψS “ t|ΨI1y , ..., |ΨIKyu. For the former, there are
K independent states by assumption,
rankpgijq “ dimpspantSuq “ K .
(4.21)
The question is to see how many independent states there are on VψS,
rankpGijq “ dimpspantVψSuq ď K .
(4.22)
An important point to notice is that the question about rankpGijq, formulated this way, has no
relation with the non-isometricity of the map Vψ, but rather with the existence of an inverse V ´1
ψ , such
that V ´1
ψ VψS “ S. Any invertible map Vψ, albeit non-isometric, will produce rankpGijq “ K. Since
the CFT Hilbert space is infinite dimensional, and all of the cosmological states contain thermal tails
(i.e. when written as a superposition of energy eigenstates, they have exponentially suppressed but
non-vanishing coefficients for all energy eigenstates), it is difficult to think how any finite collection of
states built this way can conspire to be linearly dependent in the CFT. Therefore we expect all these
states to be linearly independent, although not orthogonal to each other. An analogy of this situation
is the set of coherent states of fixed average energy for the harmonic oscillator, which generate a basis
of the Hilbert space precisely due to the tails in energy (see Appendix. C).35
On the other hand, bag of gold paradoxes arise microcanonically in the CFT, where the number
of states really remains finite. They have to do with the fact that different states of the cosmological
EFT, with different features on the cosmology, have approximately the same energy, and thus must
look linearly dependent when truncating the CFT Hilbert space by projecting onto the dominant mi-
crocanonical band. In this case, not all bulk EFT states are distinguishable from the CFT point of
view, which means that the map Vψ has a non-trivial kernel when restricted to some microcanonical
band in the CFT. We will now show that the universal overlaps (4.20) found in the previous subsection
34 In fact, the situation is a little bit more subtle than in [66]. In this case, since there is a single heavy shell O for all states,
there are in fact n Euclidean wormholes, labelled by a cyclic permutation g P Sympnq, associated to the corresponding
completely connected thin shell operator contractions through the bulk. It is easy to see that the dominant configuration
consist of g “ η “ p12...nq, since in this configurations the additional light particles travel the smallest possible distance
across the wormhole.
35 The CFT states |ΨIiy also have exponentially suppressed branches in their semiclassical wavefunction which corresponds
to two-sided black hole microstates analogous to those constructed in [66]. For this reason, it is reasonable that their tails
can generate the high-energy density of states of the CFT as well.
44

are consistent with the microcanonical density of states of the holographic CFT. In order do that, we
consider the microcanonical version of the Gram matrix
GE
ij “ xψIi| V :
ψΠEVψ
ψIj
D
,
(4.23)
where ΠE with E “ pEl, Erq is an orthogonal projection onto the corresponding microcanonical windows
of energies rEl,r, El,r ` ∆El,rs, with ∆El,r ! El,r.
We can expand the bulk partition functions as a sum over energies
ZlpnβLq “
ˆ dE
E eSpEqpˆρn
l qE,E
(4.24)
ZrpnβRq “
ˆ dE
E eSpEqpˆρn
r qE,E ,
(4.25)
where SpEq is the microcanonical entropy of the gas of particles in AdS. From standard AdS/CFT
considerations, this same entropy corresponds to the microcanonical entropy of the CFT, in the micro-
canonical confined phase.
Given this, and assuming that the reduced bulk state is full rank and approximately constant on the
microcanonical window of interest, the microcanonical contribution of the window at energy E “ pEl, Erq
to the semiclassical overlaps (4.20) is given by
GE
i1i2GE
i2i3...GE
ini1|conn. « e´pn´1qS ,
(4.26)
where S “ pSpElq ` SpErqq is the full microcanonical entropy of both CFTs.
Eigenvalue density of the microcanonical Gram matrix
In linear algebra, a way to compute the rank of a matrix, in this case the microcanonical Gram matrix
GE
ij, is to consider its resolvent
Rijpλq ”
ˆ
1
λ1 ´ GE
˙
ij
“ 1
λ δij `
8
ÿ
n“1
1
λn`1 rpGEqnsij .
(4.27)
The density of eigenvalues λ of the Gram matrix GE
ij, denoted by Dpλq, will follow from the discontinuity
of the trace of its resolvent, Rpλq “
Kř
i“1
Riipλq, along the imaginary axis:
Dpλq “
1
2 π i p Rpλ ´ iϵq ´ Rpλ ` iϵq q .
(4.28)
The advantage of using this trick is that for our present purposes is that, in semiclassical gravity, each
45

term in the series expansion of the trace of the resolvent can be computed directly from the semiclassical
moments of the overlaps
λRpλq “ K `
8
ÿ
n“1
1
λn TrppGEqnq .
(4.29)
Evaluating each term of the right hand side semiclassically produces a simple diagrammatic expansion,
where (4.29) acquires the form of a Schwinger-Dyson equation (see [16, 66] for details). The latter can
be explicitly resumed
λRpλq “ K ` eS
8
ÿ
n“1
˜
Rpλq
eS
¸n
“ K `
eS Rpλq
eS ´ Rpλq
.
(4.30)
Thus, the trace of the semiclassical resolvent satisfies the following quadratic equation
Rpλq
2 `
ˆ eS ´ K
λ
´ eS
˙
Rpλq ` K
λ eS “ 0 .
(4.31)
The density of states follows from the discontinuity across the real axis of the trace of the resolvent of
the Gram matrix (eq. 4.28), which gives
Dpλq “ eS
2πλ
c ”
λ ´
`
1 ´ K1{2 e´S{2˘2 ı ” `
1 ` K1{2 e´S{2˘2 ´ λ
ı
` δpλq
`
K ´ eS˘
θpK ´ eSq ,
(4.32)
Such a density of states has a continuous part (first term) and a discontinuous part (second term).
The continuous part accounts for the non-zero eigenvalues of the Gram matrix, which belong to the
domain
´
1 ´ K1{2 e´S{2¯2
ă λ ă
´
1 ` K1{2 e´S{2¯2
.
(4.33)
The singular part counts the number of zero eigenvalues. The latter only contributes when K ą eS due
to the Heaviside factor, and gives a total of K ´ eS zero eigenvalues. Therefore, this shows that
rankpGE
ijq “ mintK, eSu .
(4.34)
Eq. (4.34) is the main result of this subsection. It shows that, when restricting to a CFT micro-
canonical band, the rank of the Gram matrix of overlaps, and therefore, the dimension of the Hilbert
space generated by the cosmological microstates, is upper bounded by the microcanonical density of
states of the CFTs, which is agreement with microscopic considerations. Therefore, by choosing K ą eS
orthogonal states in the cosmological EFT, not all of them will be mapped by Vψ to linearly indepen-
dent states in the microcanonical window, and some of them will be linear combination of others. In
46

particular, eS of such cosmological states will suffice to span the microcanonical window of the CFTs.36
4.3
Reconstruction of operators in the cosmology
Given the explicit map Vψ in (4.6), we can ask how the operators that create particles in the cosmology
look like in the CFT. In particular, consider the bulk EFT operator ϕpyq defined in eq. (4.5), which
creates a particle of mass mi at y P Σc. The reconstruction of this operator is formally given by
Φ “ VψϕpyqV ´1
ψ
.
(4.35)
By definition Φ |ΨIy “ ϕ |ψIy, where |ΨIy “ Vψ |ψIy. In other words, the CFT operator Φ acts at the
time reflection-symmetric slice on the state |ΨIy dual to a semiclassical state with no particle in the
cosmology, and maps it to the state |Ψ1
Iy “ Φ |ΨIy dual to a semiclassical state with a particle in the
cosmology.
The bulk weakly coupled field ϕ is dual to a CFT generalized free field Oϕ, which can be identified
in general using the extrapolate dictionary. In simple bulk setups such as a pure AdS spacetime, the
insertion of the operator ϕ in the bulk corresponds to the insertion of the dual operator Oϕ smeared by
a non-local kernel. This is the so-called HKLL dictionary [70, 71], which enables the reconstruction of
operators within the causal wedge of a boundary subregion and is manifestly state-independent. This
reconstruction can be applied in our case to insertions of the operator ϕ in one of the AdS regions, i.e.
on Σl,r, leading to a state-independent reconstruction of bulk operators in AdSl,r.
On the other hand, the cosmology is causally disconnected from the dual boundary CFTs, implying
that a bulk operator insertions on Σc cannot be reconstructed using HKLL. However, as we have
explained in Sec. 2 and 4, we can associate the insertion of the bulk operator ϕ at some given point
y P Σc to an insertion of the CFT operator Oϕ at a specific Euclidean time τϕ in the past of the
Euclidean path integral preparing the state with a particle in the cosmology. The CFT operator Φ can
thus be defined in terms of such an insertion in the Euclidean past.
In this “Euclidean reconstruction”, the Euclidean time-ordering of the operator insertions is clearly
very important. A given state |ΨIy in the class of CFT states of our interest is built using insertions
in the Euclidean past of several operators, see eq. (4.7): the shell operator O, type II and type III
insertions (which we denoted by OΨ in (4.7)) necessary to prepare the reference state |Ψy, and type
I insertions (which we collectively indicate with OIpxIq) to prepare the final state. The operator Oϕ
must be inserted at the specific Euclidean time τϕ in order for the resulting state prepared by the path
integral to be given by Φ |ΨIy.
36 This statement is true with high probability, within the effective random matrix description that semiclassical gravity
provides for the Gram matrix of overlaps. We always assume that the microscopic Gram matrix, which depends on details
of the heavy operator, is typical in this ensemble of Gram matrices.
47

It is then clear that the Euclidean reconstruction we are considering is manifestly state-dependent
and the correct boundary representation VψϕpxqV ´1
ψ
has to be reconstructed matrix element by matrix
element, within the space of states representing the cosmological EFT in the CFT. Namely the matrix
elements of the dual CFT operator need to be defined as
ΦIJ “ xΨI| VψϕpxqV ´1
ψ
|ΨJy “
1
?ZIZJ
TrpT tOp˜βR{2qOΨpxΨqOJpxJqOϕpxϕqO:p´˜βR{2qO:
Ψpx1
ΨqO:
Ipx1
Iquq ,
(4.36)
where x1
I, x1
Ψ again indicate the time reflection-symmetric points associated with operator insertions at
the point xI, xΨ. The left hand side of (4.36) is a Euclidean CFT path integral on S1 ˆ Sd´1, with the
corresponding operator insertions, which defines the matrix element ΦIJ.
By construction, this operator has the same matrix elements as the operator on the cosmology, when
acting on cosmological microstates
xΨI| Φ |ΨJy “ xψI| ϕpyq |ψJy .
(4.37)
It is worth noticing that, although this reconstruction is state-dependent and we are not aware
of a way to build a state-independent one, we did not prove explicitly that such a state-independent
reconstruction does not exist. We leave this interesting endeavour to future work. Nonetheless, given
the specific features of our setup (in particular, the fact that the cosmology is an island), it is reasonable
to expect bulk reconstruction in the cosmology to be in general state-dependent.
Before moving to the study of a TN model of our setup, which will allow us to study explicitly a
number of features of the cosmology-to-boundary map, we would like to make two final remarks. First,
if we are in the regime in which the island formula applies (see Sec. 3) and the cosmology is therefore
encoded either in the left or the right CFT, all the results we obtained in the present section (which
apply in general to the two-sided cosmology-to-boundary map) are expected to also be valid for the
single-sided quantum channel encoding the cosmology in one of the two CFTs. Second, in the highly
non-isometric regime of the cosmology-to-boundary map, states that can be distinguished by a one-shot
bulk EFT experiment in the cosmology (i.e. orthogonal states in the bulk) cannot be distinguished by
a one-shot CFT experiment, because they are not mapped to orthogonal, nor even nearly orthogonal,
CFT states. This in turn implies that well-defined experiments that can be performed by a bulk observer
do not necessarily correspond to well-defined experiments for the CFT observer. In other words, the
result of bulk experiments can only be predicted if one has control over the CFT, but such predictions
require knowledge (to very good accuracy, as we have discussed) of the CFT state and of the cosmology-
to-boundary map, which cannot simply be obtained by a one-shot boundary experiment. The detailed
investigation of the consequences of this result is an interesting direction to be pursued in future work.
48

5
Tensor network toy model
In this section, we present a simple TN toy model of the cosmological states, which qualitatively captures
all of the gravitational features obtained in the previous sections, but which drastically simplifies the
study of the system. Because we will be working with finite dimensional qubit models, we will need
some care to interpret additional features of the model, such as the appearance of null states. We will
use this tractable model to study the properties of the cosmology-to-boundary map.
Mimicking the Euclidean CFT preparation of the PETS, we consider a pair of thermofield-double
states |TFDyLA and |TFDyA1R at physical inverse temperatures βL and βR, respectively, defined on
HL b HA and HA1 b HR, for two auxiliary copies of the CFT, A, A1. Consider the maps NA and NA1
acting on HA and on HA1 whose effect is to coarse-grain each auxiliary part of the TFD states, in the
sense of the holographic RG flow, up to an energy scale set by the radius of the shell, Es „ R˚{ℓ2 " β´1
L,R.
The unnormalized PETS (2.1) will then arise from the projection
ΨO
D
“ xO|AA1 pNA |TFDyLA b NA1 |TFDyA1Rq ,
(5.1)
where projecting onto |OyAA1 “ O:
A |MAXyAA1 “ ř
n,m O˚
nm |Eny˚
A b |EmyA1 has the effect of gluing the
two AdS spaces, forming the cosmology. We indicated with |MAXyAA1 the maximally entangled state
between A and A1. To match (2.1) one needs to impose that37
NA “ e
∆τ´
2
HA ,
(5.2)
NA1 “ e
∆τ`
2
HA1 .
(5.3)
The construction of the TN with (5.1) in mind is represented in Fig.
19.
Each TFD state at
low temperatures is described by two spherical MERA TNs, represented by gray isometries Ii, for
i “ l, cl, cr, r respectively. These are pairwise connected along the bulk dangling legs which represent
the bulk entanglement, in the form of microcanonical EPR pairs.
Figure 19: TN for the unnormalized cosmological state
ΨO
D
.
In total, there are two such TFDs, with bulk entanglement Sl and Sr. The action of NA, NA1 is to
introduce a radial cutoff in the two auxiliary MERAs at a bulk radial distance R˚, which is depicted
37 The positive exponent in (5.2) and (5.3) is a manifestation of the fact that the natural time at the auxiliary systems,
given by the Killing Hamiltonian, runs oppositely to the time at the CFT boundaries.
49

by curving the corresponding edge of the gray triangles. The effect of the projection onto xO|AA1 is to
glue these two cutoff MERAs at R˚, adding the heavy matter operator O in between them.
The construction can naturally incorporate more general states with larger amounts of entanglement
with the addition of EPR pairs between the AdS regions and the cosmology. This allows us to consider
general values of Sl and Sr in the TN, at least within the microcanonical entropy bound Sl, Sr À N2.
For convenience, we shall define |l| “ 2Sl and |r| “ 2Sr as the bond dimensions of the corresponding cuts
in the network.
The unnormalized state represented by the TN has the norm
Z1 “
@
ΨO
ˇˇΨO
D
“ TrpO Πl
cO:Πr
cq
(5.4)
for the orthogonal projectors Πl
c “ IclI:
cl and Πr
c “ IcrI:
cr.
In the AdS/CFT construction of the cosmological microstates, the norm of the PETS given after
eq. (2.1) was positive-definite. This is in contrast with (5.4), which can vanish for certain choices of
the O tensor, for which Πl
cO:Πr
c “ 0.38 This simply showcases the difference between finite dimensional
qubit models and thermal states in an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space of a quantum field theory.
Null states of this TN must be interpreted with some care: as we have discussed in Sec. 4.2, they seem
to arise from an operational point of view, namely due to the inability of the boundary observer to
distinguish thermal tails of the wavefunction to arbitrary accuracy. This finite resolution is realized in
the TN model by the restriction to a finite-dimensional Hilbert space.39 Since the tensors O that make
Z1 vanish in this toy model are a measure-zero subset of all complex matrices, we shall ignore them for
most of this paper, although their presence plays a role in the discussion of Sec. 5.2.
Thus, in analogy with the gravitational preparation, given the TN state
ΨO
D
we will rescale it to
get a normalized state
|ΨOy “
1
?Z1
ΨO
D
P HL b HR .
(5.5)
Already at this level, any such TN state |ΨOy captures by construction a weak version of the island
formula
SpρLq, SpρRq ď mintSl, Sru ,
(5.6)
whereas the strong version, corresponding to the approximate saturation of the inequality, will depend
on the particular choice of tensors in the network.
38 Intuitively, the number of legs contracted with the tensor O can be larger than the number of legs connecting c with L
and R. Therefore, not all possible choices of O can be mapped to different states on the external legs of the TN.
39 A more faithful model, which we will not develop in this paper, would be to include the thermal tails of the bulk
entanglement in an enlarged bulk Hilbert space, Hl b Hr Ñ ‘i,jpHi
l b Hj
r q, including different microcanonical bands. The
contribution of each band would need to be weighted by associated Boltzmann suppression factors.
50

Coarse-grained shell tensor
In semiclassical gravity, the heavy operator O is treated in a coarse-grained sense, as a gaussian random
matrix in the energy basis, at the level of the two-point function (cf. [67]). This suggests to follow the
same logic here, and consider Oij as a random matrix in the computational basis of the TN, at least for
simple enough observables. In this vein, we pick xO|AA1 randomly from a complex gaussian probability
distribution, with zero mean and unit variance, corresponding to the measure
ˆ
dµrOs “
ˆ ź
ij
d RetOijud ImtOiju
2π
exp
ˆ
´1
2TrpOO:q
˙
.
(5.7)
Island formula
For a typical choice of xO|AA1 from the gaussian ensemble, the TN state |ΨOy will approximately saturate
the island formula (5.6), which is generally expected in random TNs (cf. [15]). For the purity of the
unnormalized state ˆρL “ TrR
ΨO
D @
ΨO
, the gaussian average yields
ˆ
dµrOs Trpˆρ2
Lq “ |l||r|2 ` |l|2|r| .
(5.8)
The trivial Wick contraction of the O tensors produces the first term, while the second term comes from
the non-trivial Wick contraction connecting different replicas. The latter has the same structure as the
gravitational replica wormhole of Fig. 10 (see Fig. 20).
Likewise, the average normalization squared is
ˆ
dµrOs TrpˆρLq2 “ |l|2|r|2 ` |l||r| ,
(5.9)
where, again, the first term arises from the trivial Wick contraction between copies of the norm, while
the second arises from a connected contraction between the two copies, which has the interpretation of
the Euclidean wormhole in Fig. 13.
Altogether, the average purity is approximately given by
Trpρ2
Lq « |l| ` |r|
1 ` |l||r| ,
(5.10)
in complete analogy with (3.10), which in this case is simply the average purity of a random state living
in the cut Hl b Hr of the TN. Note that the approximation in (5.10) consists in taking the gaussian
average separately in the numerator (5.8) and in the denominator (5.9), for the unnormalized TN state
ˆρL “ TrR
ΨO
D @
ΨO
. This was also the case in the gravity calculation in Sec. 3, where the semiclassical
path integral computation gave the unnormalized Rényi entropies and the average value Zn
1 separately,
51

and then we took their ratio.40
Figure 20:
Left: unnormalized purity Trpˆρ2
Lq for the TN state before gaussian average.
Note that the contracted
isometries on the left and right sides of the figure yield identities. Right: “replica wormhole” contribution to the average
unnormalized purity, where the non-trivial Wick contraction of the random operator (depicted here by dashed red lines)
amounts for the shell’s propagation between different replicas. The outer isometries Il and Ir do not play a role in this
computation.
For the higher Rényis, the formulas can be obtained from simple combinatorics (see e.g. [96])
Trpρn
Lq «
řn
s“1 Npn, sq|l|n`1´s|r|s
řn
s“1 Npn, sq|l|s|r|s
,
(5.11)
where Npn, sq “ 1
n
`n
s
˘` n
s´1
˘
are the Narayana numbers. The analytic continuation of (5.11) is given by
hypergeometric functions
Trpρn
Lq «
1
|r|n´1
2F1p1 ´ n, ´n; 2; zq
w 2F1p1 ´ n, ´n; 2; wq “
1
|l|n´1
2F1p1 ´ n, ´n; 2; z´1q
w 2F1p1 ´ n, ´n; 2; wq ,
(5.12)
for z “ |r|{|l| and w “ 1{|l||r|.
The n Ñ 1` expansion of the hypergeometric functions can now be taken in either of the two
expressions in (5.12), corresponding to the |z| ă 1 and |z| ą 1 branches. Inserting these in the expression
(3.1) for the von Neumann entropy leads to Page’s result for a random state [88]
SpρLq «
$
’
’
&
’
’
%
Sl ´ |l|
2|r|
if |l| ă |r| ,
Sr ´ |r|
2|l|
if |r| ă |l| ,
(5.13)
40 Dividing by Zn
1 instead of pZ1qn accounts for the fact that (5.10) gives an exactly pure state when |l| “ 1 or |r| “ 1, i.e.
at the endpoints of the Page curve for the purity.
52

which is the island formula (3.18) in this toy model,
SpρLq « mintSl, Sru ,
(5.14)
with exponentially small corrections in |Sl ´ Sr|. Since the global state of the bulk fields is pure (it
consists of a collection of EPR pairs in the toy model of the state), Sr precisely corresponds to the
entropy of the bulk state reduced to the AdSl region and to the cosmology c, Sr “ Slc. Similarly,
Sl “ Scr, and naturally SpρLq “ SpρRq. Therefore, when |Sl ´ Sr| " 1, the cosmology is an island for
the left boundary system if Sl ą Sr and it is an island for the right boundary system if Sl ă Sr.
5.1
Model of the cosmology-to-boundary map
Our goal now is to upgrade the TN of the state |ΨOy to a map which can simultaneously account for
many different bulk states of the cosmological EFT. In particular, as we have discussed in the previous
sections, we are interested in studying a cosmology-to-boundary map, which is the bulk-to-boundary
map restricted to a subset of bulk states with fixed entanglement between AdS regions and cosmology
and a fixed state for bulk DOF on AdSl,r, whereas the state of bulk DOF in the cosmology can vary.
In order to model this setup, we consider the bulk Hilbert space Hψ formed by the collection of states
obtained by acting with unitaries Uc supported on the DOF of the cosmology on a given reference state
|ψy of the quantum fields on the cosmology and the two AdS spaces:
Hψ “ tUc |ψy : U:
c Uc “ 1c , supppUcq “ cu.
(5.15)
All of the bulk states in Hψ have fixed entanglement Sl and Sr between the cosmology and the AdS
regions and a fixed reduced density matrix ρlr on the AdS components, because, by only acting with
unitaries on the cosmology, we cannot change the entanglement between AdS regions and cosmology
nor alter the bulk state in the AdS regions.
In a general setup, we can consider the presence of extra bulk dangling legs on the cosmological
MERAs Icl and Icr, corresponding to cosmological DOF which are not entangled with the AdS regions
in the reference state of the bulk fields |ψy. Together with the entangled DOF, these legs form Hilbert
spaces of dimension |cl| and |cr|, respectively.
In the full-fledged AdS/CFT construction of the PETS, the entanglement of the quantum fields on
the cosmology is thermal and thus all of the modes of the quantum field contain some entanglement
with the AdS regions. We would call the extra bulk legs that we added weakly entangled DOF with
respect to |ψy, and identify them with high energy modes whose entanglement with modes in the AdS
regions is suppressed due to Boltzmann factors controlling their weight in the wavefunction. In contrast,
strongly entangled modes would be those for which the contribution to the entanglement is large, such
as the EPR pairs between the cosmology and the AdS region added by means of type II insertions (see
53

Sec. 4 for more details).
We can now define a cosmology-to-boundary map
˜Vψ : ˜Hψ Ñ HL b HR
(5.16)
between the bulk EFT restricted to the states of our interest and the holographic CFTs, at fixed
entanglement between the cosmology and the bulk AdS spaces. Here we have defined ˜Hψ “ HψzKerpVψq
excluding the collection of null states.41
The linear map Vψ defined by the TN and yielding unnormalized states in HL b HR is given by (see
Fig. 21)
Vψ |ψiy “ IlIrpΠl
MAXΠr
MAX xΠO|cq |ψiylcr ,
(5.17)
where |ψiy P Hψ is a state on the cosmological EFT and the two AdS regions in the class of our interest,
xΠO|c “ xO| IclIcr is the projector exerted by the cosmology, and Πi
MAX “ |MAXiy xMAXi| is the
orthogonal projector to the maximally entangled state of Sl and Sr pairs, respectively. Note that the
state |ψy is a state on all bulk DOF, including those in the AdS regions which are unentangled with the
cosmology. Because they are irrelevant in our discussion, we did not represent these DOF in Fig. 21.
Figure 21:
TN for the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ.
|ψiy P Hψ is a state on all bulk DOF in the class of our
interest. Here we only represented the DOF |l|, |r| of the AdS regions which are entangled with the cosmology, omitting
the unentangled ones.
The map (5.17) produces unnormalized states in HL b HR. The normalization can then be added a
posteriori, ˜Vψp|ψiyq “ Vψp|ψiyq{
a
||Vψ |ψiy ||, to produce unit vectors in HL b HR. This normalization
makes sense only if we exclude null states from the bulk Hilbert space, hence the introduction of ˜Hψ.
Normalizing states this way is reminiscent of the Euclidean CFT preparation of cosmological states,
where the resulting CFT state is generally unnormalized, and the normalization is added separately.42
In this form, the linear cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ defined by the TN in Fig. 21 can be directly
41 As mentioned in the discussion after (5.4), null states of the toy model need to be interpreted with some care in
AdS/CFT, where the number of entangled modes due to thermal tails is really infinite and, a priori, states only look
null from an operational point of view when the CFT observer has a finite resolution.
Without such limitation, the
cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ in AdS/CFT is a priori invertible. In any case, null states form a measure zero subset of
Hψ, so we will just ignore them in the present context, and comment on their role in Sec. 5.2.
42 In fact, ways to assign a TN directly to the Euclidean preparation to model V more precisely have been proposed in
[95]. We will not pursue this direction in this paper.
54

regarded as a static version of the toy model of [64] for the interior-to-boundary map of an evaporating
black hole, with the appropriate identifications. The main difference between the two is that for the
cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ the entanglement to the AdS regions is non-geometrical and appears
through the state of the bulk fields. In our case the dimension of the cosmological EFT |c| is fixed, and
it is independent of what |l| and |r| are. Moreover, the map Vψ is gaussian random due to the presence
of the operator O on the cosmology rather than Haar random, which affects the precise way in which
the measure concentrates at large dimension (see also [97] for a gaussian random model in JT gravity).
Although we will not focus on entanglement wedge reconstruction in what follows, we remark that
the same TN can be also used to model the single-sided quantum channel encoding the cosmology on
one of the two boundary systems, as well as the Petz map that allows to recover this information [98, 99].
Such a construction should only be reliable in a regime in which the sharp island formula holds (see
Sec. 3).
Entanglement dressing
Given that we are dealing with closed spaces and gravity, one might find disturbing that we are allowing
to generate new states by acting with local unitaries on the cosmology, Uc, in order to build the EFT
Hilbert space Hψ. Perturbatively, when G ‰ 0, the gravitational Gauss’ law needs to be implemented
to get physically sensible states, and no local operator on c should be gauge invariant. The same issue
could be raised in the full AdS/CFT setup of the previous subsections, where we generated new states
in the bulk EFT by acting with local unitary operators in the cosmology.
The subterfuge in this case is that these unitaries are not gauge invariant in a conventional (state-
independent) sense. There is nevertheless a natural sense in which entanglement serves to dress them to
an asymptotic boundary, thus making them physical. Consider the simplest case consisting of an EPR
pair for some mode ω in the cosmology with the respective mode in the AdSl region
|MAXy “
1
?
2p|0ωyl |0ωyc ` |1ωyl |1ωycq .
(5.18)
The action of any unitary Uω
c on the mode in the cosmology can likewise be implemented by a
unitary Uω
l
acting on the entangled mode ω on the AdSl region,
Uω
c |MAXy “ Uω
l |MAXy .
(5.19)
The unitary Uω
l
is a state-specific reconstruction of Uω
c from l for this particular state, in the sense of
[100]. Now, Uω
l
acts on the AdSl space, and can therefore be conventionally dressed to the asymptotic
55

boundary by a suitable gravitational Wilson line, making it gauge invariant.43 It is always possible
in this way to create any state of the mode in the cosmology by acting with a proper gauge invariant
operator on its EPR partner.
In the general case where the entanglement structure between all of the modes of the cosmology and
the AdS regions is more involved, one needs other less physical but still mathematically valid ways to
implement a general unitary Uc, for example by means of associated non-unitary operators acting on the
AdS regions.44 Particular choices of Uc might still be approximately reconstructible in a state-specific
way using other unitaries (see [64, 100]), while others might not.
In any case, given that the bulk state |ψy in AdS/CFT contains thermal entanglement between all
of the modes of the EFT, i.e. the reduced states ρl,r are full rank, we will assume that there is always a
mathematical way to dress the unitaries Uc (or the local operators inserted in the full AdS/CFT setup)
in this way, and define Hψ in a gauge invariant way when G ‰ 0. This way islands—and cosmological
islands in this particular case—can exist in Einstein gravity, evading conventional dressing arguments.
5.2
Non-isometric to approximately-isometric transition
At large spatial volume, the dimension of the cosmological EFT Hψ, given by |c| in this model, can be
taken to be fixed. Mainly, it corresponds to the microcanonical dimension of two gases of particles in
AdS, with a Planck scale cutoff for the modes, ω À MP , and total energy EmaxℓÀ N2 so that the states
can be considered “thermal gas”-like (as opposed to black hole microstates).45 A rough estimate of this
dimension is,
|c| “ |cl||cr| „ 4N
2d
d`1 ,
(5.20)
which arises from the microcanonical density of states of a local QFT in d ` 1 dimensions, in a box of
size ℓ, with total energy Emaxℓ„ N2. The factor of 4 accounts for the two sides of the cosmology.
Clearly, the map Vψ defined by the TN in Fig. 21 can at most have |l||r| independent states as an
outcome,
dimtImpVψqu ď |l||r| ,
(5.21)
43 We assume that there is always a (perhaps state-specific) Wilson line which does not affect the strongly entangled
modes so that the action of the dressed operator on the state is still that of U ω
c , at least within some approximate error.
44 Heuristically, this is the mechanism behind the Reeh-Schlieder theorem in local quantum field theory, where the vacuum
contains an infinite number of “EPR pairs” at all scales. In our full AdS/CFT case, the spectrum is discrete, the associated
bulk von Neumann algebras are of type I, and the entanglement is finite. However, the reduced states ρl,r are themselves
of full rank in the bulk EFT Hilbert space, since the number of weakly entangled pairs involved in the bulk state is really
infinite. These are the conditions which need to be met for the corresponding version of the “Reeh-Schlieder theorem” to
apply for type I algebras.
45 N here regulates as usual the (logarithm of the) bond dimension of the geometric part of the TN as well as the number
of external boundary legs.
56

where ImpVψq is the image of Vψ on HL bHR. To see that the inequality is approximately saturated, we
run the resolvent calculation for TN states in Appendix E, by computing the average eigenvalue density
of the Gram matrix in the gaussian ensemble (5.7) of O tensors. This qualitatively reproduces the
gravitational features of Sec. 4 on each microcanonical band of the CFT, and provides the saturation
of (5.21) for general choices of the O tensor.
When |l||r| ă |c|, there are null states46 in the cosmological EFT, which span a non-trivial kernel for
the map Vψ, dimtKerpVψqu “ |c| ´ |l||r| ą 0. For the linear map Vψ this implies that this map cannot
preserve the inner product structure, i.e.
the cosmology-to-boundary map must be non-isometric,
V :
ψVψ ‰ 1c.47 A way to quantify the non-isometricity of the map is to take two states |ψ1y , |ψ2y P Hψ
and compute how the overlap xψ1| V :
ψVψ |ψ2y differs from the EFT overlap xψ1|ψ2y on average,
ˆ
dµrOs
´
xψ1| V :
ψVψ |ψ2y ´ xψ1|ψ2y
¯
“ 0 ,
(5.22)
ˆ
dµrOs
ˇˇˇxψ1| V :
ψVψ |ψ2y ´ xψ1|ψ2y
ˇˇˇ
2
“ Trpρψ1
lr ρψ2
lr q “
1
|l||r| ,
(5.23)
where ρψ1
lr , ρψ2
lr
are the bulk reduced states to lr, which are equal by the definition of the cosmological
EFT (5.15), ρψ1
lr “ ρψ2
lr “ ρlr, where ρlr is the reduced state in the global reference state |ψy. Given our
construction, the reference state |ψy is chosen to be maximally entangled between the lr DOF and the
cosmology.
The non-vanishing variance (5.23) shows that the map Vψ is indeed non-isometric. The normal-
ized map ˜Vψ will likewise be non-isometric, and on average it will be the same as the map Vψ, since
||Vψ |ψiy || “ 1. The average overlap (5.23) is consistent with the microcanonical version of the gravita-
tional overlap (4.18) computed in Sec. 4.1.
The goal of the discussion in the rest of the present subsection will be to determine, under the
assumed genericity of the map Vψ, for what values of |l||r| we can consider that all operationally “simple”
states that a cosmological observer can prepare are approximately isometrically encoded in HL b HR,
with high probability.
In particular, the expression (5.23) only holds on average, and does not contain information of what
the dimension of the cosmological EFT |c| is. Following [64], we note that it is also possible to make
stronger statements than those obtained on average by taking into account the way the gaussian measure
for the O tensor (5.7) concentrates around the perimeter of the half-space in the limit of large bond
dimension for this tensor (in analogy with how the Haar measure concentrates around the equator of the
46 These are null states associated with the bulk dangling legs, in addition to the “geometrical” null states arising for
specific choices of the shell operator O.
47 Note that the existence of a non-trivial kernel implies non-isometricity of the map, but the converse is not true. A
non-isometric map can in general have a trivial kernel and therefore be invertible. This is expected to be the case for the
full AdS/CFT map discussed in Sec. 4.
57

higher dimensional sphere). In fact, the gaussian random version of the black hole model was already
worked out in [97]. We will translate their central results in what follows.
Consider a set of K states in the cosmological EFT S “ t|ψiy P Hψu, for i “ 1, ..., K. Then [97]
Pr
„
max
|ψ1y,|ψ2yPS
ˇˇˇxψ1| V :
ψVψ |ψ2y ´ xψ1|ψ2y
ˇˇˇ ě
?
18p|l||r|q´γ
ȷ
ď 12
ˆK
2
˙
exp
ˆ
´p|l||r|q1´2γ
2
˙
.
(5.24)
for any fixed 0 ă γ ă 1
2 and |l||r| ą 4.48
In order to understand for what values of |l||r| all “simple” cosmological states are isometrically
encoded in HL b HR with high probability, we need to quantify how many “simple” cosmological states
we have. A rough estimate of the number of cosmological states with complexity C, restricted to the
preparation with k-local gates, is given by49
KC „
ˆlog2 |c|
k
˙C
„ exppk C log2 log2 |c|q .
(5.25)
Since KC scales exponentially with the complexity and, for our purposes, C is parametrically large, KC
gives a good approximation also to the number of states with complexity smaller than or equal to C.
Now we shall apply eq. (5.24) to the collection of states SC in the cosmological EFT with complexity
upper bounded by C, i.e.
Pr
„
max
|ψ1y,|ψ2yPSC
ˇˇˇxψ1| V :
ψVψ |ψ2y ´ xψ1|ψ2y
ˇˇˇ ě
?
18p|l||r|q´γ
ȷ
À 6 exp
ˆ
2k C log2 log2 |c| ´ p|l||r|q1´2γ
2
˙
.
(5.26)
Therefore, we can conclude that the encoding of these states will be nearly-isometric with high proba-
bility if
|l||r| Á p4k C log2 log2 |c|q
1
1´2γ .
(5.27)
What should a good estimate of C be for “simple” cosmological states? First of all, the proper time
tmax that any cosmological observer can live is bounded by the presence of the big bang singularity in
the past and the big crunch singularity in the future, and it is given by tmax „ ℓ„ N
2
d´1 ℓP . Assume
that the observer is powerful enough to have access to all of the microcanonical entropy in the cosmology
during that time, with the restriction of only implementing k-local gates, where k is some Op1q number.
The maximum complexity of any such state is naturally
C „ tmax
τc
log2 |c| À plog2 |c|q
d2`1
dpd´1q ,
(5.28)
48 Note that the gaussian measure concentrates exponentially stronger than the Haar measure, since the coefficient in the
exponent in (5.24) is 1{2 instead of 1{24 for the Haar measure (cf. [64]).
49 For simplicity, we are omitting the logarithmic dependence on the size of the regulator ε in Hψ, given a tessellation of
Hψ in ε-balls.
58

where the circuit time τc has been taken to be Planckian to get the upper bound, and we used (5.20)
for |c|. That is, the complexity of any such state is polynomial in log |c|, with the particular exponent
given by (5.28).
Given this assumption, then the encoding of all “simple” states that the cosmological observer can
prepare is approximately-isometric with extremely high probability if
|l||r| Á plog2 |c|q
d2`1
dpd´1q
1
1´2γ „ N
2pd2`1q
d2´1
1
1´2γ ,
(5.29)
where we have used (5.20) and neglected multiplicative constants and the subleading logarithmic de-
pendence. We note that this occurs at
Sl ` Sr Á 2pd2 ` 1q
d2 ´ 1
1
1 ´ 2γ log2 N ,
(5.30)
which is well below the microcanonical entropy bound Sl, Sr À N2 for the AdS gases to collapse into a
small black hole. We remark that a similar conclusion would hold if we replaced the complexity (5.28) by
any polinomial in log |c| so that more complex states arising from the past singularity can be included,
as well as the internal states of the particles that form the shell.
12
13
14
15
16 Sl+Sr
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
sup(P)
Figure 22:
Upper bound for the probability of non-isometric encoding—given by the minimum between 1 and the
right-hand side of eq. (5.26) with C given by eq. (5.28)—as a function of the entanglement Sl ` Sr between cosmology
and AdS regions. We chose here d “ 3, k “ 5, γ “ 0.25, |c| “ 1000. For Sl ` Sr “ Oplog Nq a sharp non-isometric to
approximately-isometric transition takes place. In particular, with the parameters of our choice the right hand side of eq.
(5.30) is Op10q.
The conclusion is that, by entangling more and more modes between the cosmology and the AdS
regions microcanonically and therefore increasing the value of Sl`Sr to the point where condition (5.30)
is satisfied, the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ (and consequently ˜Vψ) will undergo a non-isometric to
approximately-isometric transition for basically all of the states that a cosmological low-energy observer
can prepare (see Fig. 22). The transition occurs at a relatively low value for the microcanonical entropy,
59

given by (5.30). Although this result was derived using a TN toy model in which an explicit calculation
is possible, we expect the non-isometric to approximately-isometric transition to also occur in our full
AdS/CFT setup.
6
Discussion
The construction presented in this paper provides a specific example of a holographic model of closed
cosmology within the standard framework of AdS/CFT. The inhomogeneous big bang-big crunch cos-
mology is supported by a shell of heavy matter and is described microscopically as a low-temperature
partially entangled thermal state of two holographic CFTs. In the bulk EFT, the bulk quantum fields
in the cosmology pruify the state of the quantum fields in two additional disconnected AdS spacetimes.
If the entanglement between the cosmology and the AdS spacetimes is sufficiently large, the cosmol-
ogy arises as an entanglement island of either the right or the left CFT. We have seen that the cosmology-
to-boundary map, encoding the cosmological physics into the boundary theory, is non-isometric, and
provided a state-dependent reconstruction of bulk operators acting on the cosmology. Using a TN toy
model of our setup, we have argued that the cosmology-to-boundary map generically undergoes a non-
isometric to approximately-isometric transition for all operationally “simple” states of the cosmology, as
a function of the entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology.
A number of open questions related to our results indicate the direction for future research on these
topics.
A central conceptual challenge raised by our construction is whether lowering the bulk entanglement
between the AdS regions and the cosmology, and in particular reaching a regime in which the inequality
(5.30) is violated, implies any physical breakdown of the EFT on the cosmology. From the bulk point
of view, there is a priori no reason to expect such an intrinsic quantum gravitational regime, given
that the cosmology is macroscopic and under semiclassical control. Another piece of evidence favoring
the same conclusion is that the gravitational replica trick used to derive the island formula (3.18) in
this paper heavily relies on the validity of the bulk EFT. The island formula (3.18) should still hold at
parametrically smaller entanglement than that given by the bound (5.30).
Given these considerations, the most conservative possibility is simply that a version of “cosmological
complementarity” holds for this system [101]. The cosmology is always mathematically encoded in the
CFT through the invertible cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ, but the decoding of cosmological physics,
given by the inverse of this map, V ´1
ψ , becomes highly non-trivial to obtain for any CFT observer with
finite resolution and limited access to the states. This is particularly true when the inequality (5.30) is
not satisfied, and therefore when V ´1
ψ
and V :
ψ start to differ even for simple states. Thus, any physically
reasonable CFT observer might not be able to resolve the cosmology if the entanglement is too low.
60

A closely related issue that would be interesting to investigate in more detail is the one-shot distin-
guishability of cosmological states. Since the cosmology-to-boundary map Vψ is non-isometric, states
that are orthogonal in the bulk EFT are mapped to non-orthogonal states in the CFT (and even to
almost-parallel states if the entanglement between the AdS regions and the cosmology is very small).
This suggests that, while a bulk EFT observer can naturally distinguish two states by performing a one-
shot experiment, a CFT observer might not be able to predict the outcome of the experiment easily,
given that this would require precise knowledge of the CFT states and of the cosmology-to-boundary
map. A deeper understanding of the relationship between experiments in the bulk EFT and experi-
ments in the microscopic boundary theory could shed new light on the features of holographic duality
at the operational level, as well as determine the viability of the implementation of different classes of
semiclassical bulk experiments on quantum devices.
Another open problem which we leave to future work is the exact mechanism by which observables
in the closed cosmological spacetime can be made gauge-invariant when G ‰ 0. In our TN model we
explained how this dressing works in extremely simple cases, and suggested that the presence of an
infinite number of entangled modes in the full AdS/CFT setup can be used to dress all bulk observables
to the boundaries of the two AdS spaces. However, a precise quantitative analysis of this issue would
be useful to understand in more detail the relationship between bulk EFT observables in the cosmology
and associated dual observables in the microscopic boundary theory.
A different topic that also requires further investigation is that one regarding the state-dependence
of the reconstruction of local operators of the cosmological EFT. In Sec. 4.2 we were able to give an
explicit state-dependent prescription to reconstruct bulk operators on the cosmology from the boundary
theory. However, we did not prove that a state-independent reconstruction does not exist. This problem
is related to a more general question regarding the exact relationship between state-dependence and
non-isometric encoding in AdS/CFT. Understanding whether and under which conditions these two
features are equivalent is an interesting direction that we plan to explore in the near future.
Finally, the exact zero temperature limit of our construction, with ˜βL, ˜βR Ñ 8, requires a separate
treatment. In fact, in this case the (infinite) Euclidean evolution acts as a sharp projector onto the unique
supersymmetric ground state of the CFTs, |0yL b |0yR, regardless of the operator insertions performed
in the Euclidean path integral. This in turn implies that there is a single bulk state and somehow all
different cosmological states that we discussed in the present paper are equivalent at the fundamental
level. In this case, the inverse map V ´1
ψ
clearly does not exist. This presents some similarities with the
puzzle raised in [73, 74] for the degeneracy of states of supersymmetric extremal black holes. In our
setup, however, the lack of spatial connectivity and, in the zero temperature limit, of bulk entanglement
between the cosmology and the AdS regions might come to the rescue. In fact, under these conditions it
would be impossible to dress operators in the cosmology to make them gauge-invariant. Consequently,
it is reasonable to expect that, upon a careful definition of the bulk EFT which takes dressing into
account, there is only one state of the closed universe, even from a bulk semiclassical gravity point of
61

view. This is in accordance with the claim, common in the literature, that the intrinsic Hilbert space
of closed universes is one-dimensional (see e.g. [102] and references therein).
Acknowledgments
We thank Vijay Balasubramanian, Ning Bao, José Barbón, Charles Cao, Wissam Chemissany, Roberto
Emparan, Albion Lawrence, Javier Magán, Geoff Penington, Simon Ross, Petar Simidzija, Mark Van
Raamsdonk, and Chris Waddell for stimulating conversations. We acknowledge support from the U.S.
Department of Energy through DE-SC0009986 (M.S. and B.S.) and QuantISED DE-SC0020360 (M.S.),
and from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing
Research, Accelerated Research for Quantum Computing program “FAR-QC” (S.A.). This preprint is
assigned the code BRX-TH-6714.
A
Subdominant saddles and a Hawking-Page transition
In this appendix we show that the Euclidean saddle point geometry X described in Sec. 2 provides the
dominant contribution to the semiclassical wavefunction of the bulk state dual to the PETS |ΨOy (2.1),
at low preparation temperatures ˜βL, ˜βR " ℓ.
For this matter, we consider the normalization of the PETS |ΨOy, defined in (2.1) as an Euclidean
two-point correlation function of the shell operator
Z1 “ Trpe´˜βLHO:e
˜βRHOq .
(A.1)
The preparation of the PETS amounts to cutting the Euclidean CFT path integral computing (A.1)
open in half (see Fig. 4). For this reason, the dominant semiclassical saddle point of (A.1) will also
correspond to the dominant semiclassical state in the bulk wavefunction.
Including X, there are in total four obvious saddle points contributing to Z1.
The other three
consist of either Euclidean black hole solutions glued to Euclidean AdS spaces, or of a pair of Euclidean
black holes glued together. We shall denote them collectively by Xi|j “ Xi Y W Y Xj, where XAdS
represents an Euclidean AdS component and XBH represents an Euclidean Schwarzschild-AdS black
hole component. In this notation, X ” XAdS|AdS, and XBH|BH corresponds to the Euclidean solution
represented in Fig. 5. The last two, XBH|AdS and XAdS|BH, contain mixed components, and provide
initial data of one-sided black hole microstates entangled to AdS regions, similar to those described
in [77]. Note that the black hole component XBH only exists above the critical temperature for AdS
black hole solutions. Moreover, we only consider the thermally stable branch of large AdS black holes
solutions.
62

With this in mind, the semiclassical contribution to (A.1) becomes
Z1 „
ÿ
i,j
e´IrXi|jsZbulkrXi|js ,
(A.2)
interpreted in the asymptotic G Ñ 0 expansion, where IrXi|js “ OpG´1q is the classical gravitational
action (A.4) and ZbulkrXi|js “ OpG0q is the one-loop determinant of the quantum fields, for each
corresponding saddle point Xi|j.
In the saddle point Xi|j, the shell will again propagate according to 9R2`VeffpRq “ 0, for the effective
potential
V i,j
eff pRq “ ´fjpRq `
ˆMj ´ Mi
m
´
4πGm
pd ´ 1qVΩRd´2
˙2
,
(A.3)
where Mi is the ADM mass associated with the component Xi.
The solutions will have physical
temperatures βi,j
L
“ ˜βL ` ∆τ i,j
´ and βi,j
R “ ˜βR ` ∆τ i,j
` , where the Euclidean time elapsed by the shell
∆τ i,j
˘ is determined by the analog of (2.12) in the corresponding background (we refer to the reader to
[66] for details in the case of XBH|BH).
The classical action IrXi|js can be evaluated to be
IrXi|js “ ˜βLFipβLq ` ˜βRFjpβRq ` IsrXi|js ,
(A.4)
where Fipβq is the Gibbons-Hawking free energy associated to the saddle Xi, and IsrXi|js is the intrinsic
contribution from the shell. After the addition of suitable counterterms the free energy becomes (cf.
[103])
Fipβq “ VΩ
8πG
´
´rd
i ` rd´2
i
` cd
¯
(A.5)
where ri represents the radius of the horizon associated to Xi, at inverse temperature β (with rAdS “ 0).
The constant cd gives the Casimir energy of the CFT in even dimensions [104] (cd “ ´1
2, 3
8, ´ 5
16, . . . in
d “ 2, 4, 6, . . .).
The intrinsic contribution coming from the shell in (A.4) can be expressed as (cf. [66])
IsrXi|js “
d
8πG
`
VolpXi
sq ` VolpXj
sq
˘
` md ´ 2
d ´ 1LrγWs ,
(A.6)
for
LrγWs “ 2
ˆ r8
R˚
dR
b
´V i,j
eff pRq
,
(A.7)
VolpXi
sq “ 2VΩ
d
ˆ r8
R˚
dR
fipRq
g
f
f
efipRq ` V i,j
eff pRq
´V i,j
eff pRq
pRd ´ rd
i q .
(A.8)
63

The phase diagram of (A.2) will thus depend on the presence of the shell operator O, since the
operator is heavy and modifies the microcanonical saddle point of (A.1) in the form of bulk backreaction
in the classical limit, namely through (A.6). However, the effects of the shell will be small in the phase
transition of (A.2).
To illustrate this point, we shall take the large mass limit of the shell, mℓÑ 8. In this limit, the
manifolds Xi|j become effectively disconnected, and the intrinsic contribution from the shell IsrXi|js
no longer depends on the solution that it propagates in (cf. [66]). The Euclidean time elapsed by the
shell vanishes ∆τ i,j
˘ Ñ 0, and the preparation temperatures become the physical temperatures of all of
the solutions, βi,j
L
“ ˜βL and βi,j
R “ ˜βR. The classical contribution from each of the components of Xi|j
factorizes in this limit,
Z1 „ Z0
ÿ
i,j
ZipβLqZjpβRq ,
(A.9)
where Z0 “ expp´2mℓlog R˚{2ℓq, with R˚ given by (2.11), is the constant part coming from the intrinsic
contribution of the shell (cf. [66]). Each factor of Zipβq “ expp´βFipβqqZbulkrXis corresponds to the
Gibbons-Hawking partition function of Xi at inverse temperature β, including the contribution of the
quantum fields on each background geometry at one-loop.
Each partition function Zipβq undergoes a well-known first order phase transition at G Ñ 0, dual to
the confinement/deconfinement phase transition of the holographic CFT, at the Hawking-Page temper-
ature β´1
HP [89]. Thus, in this case, the different semiclassical branches of the wavefunction of the PETS
will exchange dominance at the preparation temperatures
˜βL, ˜βR “ βHP .
(A.10)
At low temperatures ˜βL, ˜βR ě βHP, the Euclidean AdS saddle point XAdS|AdS will provide the dominant
contribution to (A.9). This shows that in this regime, the semiclassical bulk dual to the PETS (2.1)
prepares the closed cosmology described in the previous subsection.
At finite mℓ, the effects of the operator O can be incorporated numerically (see Fig. 23). These
effects do not have a substantial effect in the exchange in dominance between the different semiclassical
saddles in the wavefunction of the PETS. In the opposite limit, taking the shell to be a probe particle,
mℓÑ 0, the operator O becomes light, and the PETS (2.1) becomes the TFD state with the insertion
of a light operator, provided that ˜βL “ ˜βR. In the bulk, the semiclassical state at high temperatures is
that of an eternal black hole of physical temperature ˜βL “ ˜βR “ β{2, with a probe particle sitting at
the horizon.50 Since the operator does not backreact, the phase transition in this case occurs when the
physical temperature of the black hole equals the Hawking-Page temperature, that is, at a preparation
temperature ˜βL, ˜βR “ βHP{2. In the intermediate regime, i.e. at finite mℓ, the overall effect of the
50 The mixed solutions XBH|AdS and XAdS|BH do not exist in this limit, since they need a heavy enough shell to support
them.
64

1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 23: In the symmetric case ˜βL “ ˜βR “ ˜β in AdS5 (d “ 4), the exchange in dominance between the Euclidean
black hole saddle XBH|BH and the Euclidean AdS saddle XAdS|AdS occurs at the inverse preparation temperature ˜β «
0.70 βHP « 1.47ℓfor a shell of mass m “ ℓ2{G, where βHP « 2πℓ{3.
operator is to decrease the critical temperature to some value in the range βHP{2 ď ˜βL, ˜βR ď βHP.
A.1
Other possible contributions
All the Euclidean saddle point geometries discussed above are constructed assuming the existence of
a single, coherent spherical shell of matter whose trajectory in the Euclidean geometry connects the
operator insertions in the Euclidean past (O) and future (O:). In other words, each one of the massive
particles forming the shell follows an Euclidean trajectory which connects the operator insertion creating
that particle in the bra to the respective operator insertion creating the same particle in the ket. Clearly,
this is not the only possibility in general settings.51
In fact, if all the particles composing the shell are identical, i.e. they are created by the insertion
of the same conformal primary O∆, there are alternative Euclidean configurations where the particles’
trajectories connect operator insertions within the O and the O: insertions. In this disconnected case,
there are two separate “shells”, one in the Euclidean past and one in the Euclidean future, and no
51 We thank Mark Van Raamsdonk for pointing this out to us.
65

trajectory intersecting the time reflection-symmetric slice. Thus these configurations are expected to
represent branches of the semiclassical wavefunction of the PETS corresponding to two AdS spaces and
no cosmology.
Since, as we have assumed throughout the paper, the number of local operator insertions in O scales
with N2, we expect that the Euclidean geometry associated to these contributions is non-perturbatively
modified by the presence of the two disconnected shells we just described. Unlike for the single shell
case, there is no obvious way to build the backreacted geometries in this case, because the matter
contractions explicitly break spherical symmetry. As a consequence, we are not able to evaluate the
on-shell gravitational action for such solutions, assuming that they exist, and compare it to the on-shell
action for the saddle of our interest to determine which saddle is dominant in the gravitational Euclidean
path integral.
From the CFT side, the assumption that the connected spherical shell solution dominates the corre-
lation function Z1 translates into the technical assumption of ref. [79]. Namely, the correlation functions
of the thin shell operator O are assumed to be dominated by intermediate identity conformal blocks,
in the global OPE channel in which each one of the local operator insertions in O contracts with the
corresponding operator insertion in O: at the same point on the sphere.52 This assumption is motivated
by the behavior of heavy Virasoro conformal blocks in the large-c expansion of two-dimensional CFTs.
Alternatively, a way to suppress the additional configurations further is to consider that each particle
that forms the shell carries some definite internal global charge, for a global symmetry which can be
broken in the bulk by the 1{N-suppressed interactions.
In this case, we choose O as the operator
which creates a large number of classical particles with definite global charge, which together form a
macroscopic classical object. The operator O: annihilates the classical shell, while other annihilation
channels are highly suppressed, in the same manner as for any classical object comprised of a large
number of particles. Under this assumption, the operator O creates global charge, and therefore its one-
point function vanishes to leading order. For this reason any disconnected contribution to Z1 vanishes
in this approximation, and the connected saddle is clearly dominant. Another way to achieve a similar
effect is to consider that different local insertions that form the shell consist of different primaries, with
different conformal dimensions ∆i, in such a way that the mass density is approximately homogeneous
along the sphere.
For these reasons, we will restrict our attention to the cases described above in which the connected
shell saddle point contributions of interest are dominant. Studying disconnected shell configurations in
more detail is an interesting and non-trivial endeavour that we leave for future work.
52 Actually, this does not determine the OPE channel completely. One needs to maximize over paths in the complex plane
for fixed contractions (see [79]).
66

B
Estimate of thermal entropy in type IIB supergravity
In this appendix, we estimate the thermal partition function of type IIB supergravity in AdS5ˆS5 below
the Hawking-Page temperature. The full computation would require to compute the heat kernell of the
field content in AdS, in zeta function regularization [105]. To simplify things, we shall approximate
the space by a 9-dimensional box of size ℓ. Recall that the thermal partition function of a massless
scalar/fermion in a D-dimensional spatial box of size ℓis
log Zspβq “
ÿ
n
´βωn
2
´ log
´
1 ´ e´βωn¯
(B.1)
log Zfpβq “
ÿ
n
βωn
2
` log
´
1 ` e´βωn¯
,
(B.2)
where n P ND´1 and ωn “ |n|{ℓ.
The ground state free energy will vanish due to the N “ p2, 0q supersymmetry in D ` 1 “ 10
dimensions. The free energy of each kind of particle is then
log Zspβq « ´VolpSD´1q
ˆ
d|n|
p2πqD |n|D´1 log
´
1 ´ e´β|n|{ℓ¯
“ cD
ℓD
βD ,
(B.3)
log Zfpβq « VolpSD´1q
ˆ
d|n|
p2πqD |n|D´1 log
´
1 ` e´β|n|{ℓ¯
“ c1
D
ℓD
βD ,
(B.4)
where
cD “ ΓpDqLiD`1p1q
Γ
` D
2
˘
2D´1π
D
2
,
(B.5)
c1
D “ p1 ´ 2´DqΓpDqζpD ` 1qLiD`1p1q
Γ
` D
2
˘
2D´1π
D
2
,
(B.6)
with Lispzq the polylogarithm function.
The free energy of the theory is just
Fpβq « ´ log Zpβq “ ´pNNS-NS ` NR-Rq
`
cD ` c1
D
˘ ℓD
βD
(B.7)
where NNS-NS “ NR-R “ pD ´ 1q2 “ 56 corresponds to the DOF of each bosonic sector. In total, there
are 128 bosonic and 128 fermionic local DOF. The thermal entropy is then
Sgaspβq « p1 ´ βBβq log Zpβq « 221 ℓ9
β9 .
(B.8)
67

At the Hawking-Page temperature in AdS5, βHP « 2π
3 ℓ, the entropy of the supergravity gas,
SpβHPqIIB « 0.29 ,
(B.9)
is very small. The reason is that the temperature is of the scale of the gap of the system, and that the
number of species is not extremelly large. For the considerations in Secs. 3, 4 and 5 to apply sharply to
this system, we will need to include more entanglement between c and l, r,by adding entangled modes
microcanonically on top of the low-temperature thermal state.
C
Low energy coherent states in the harmonic oscillator
The bulk DOF in each asymptotically AdS region are weakly coupled fields which can be treated as
collections of bosonic or fermionic oscillators in the first approximation. In this appendix, we review a
simplified version of this setting to illustrate some points in the main text. In particular, we will show
that the Hilbert space of a harmonic oscillator can be spanned by coherent states with a fixed average
number of quanta thanks to the presence of energy tails. This should be regarded as a simple explicit
realization of the discussion of Sec. 4.2.
Consider a single harmonic oscillator with annihilation and creation operators a and a:, respectively.
Coherent states |αy obey
a|αy “ α|αy.
(C.1)
It is well known that the set of all coherent states form an overcomplete basis for the oscillator Hilbert
space. It is also possible to obtain an overcomplete basis just from coherent states with a fixed average
number of quanta.
The average number of quanta in a coherent state is
xα|a:a|αy “ |α|2,
(C.2)
so we need only consider states with a fixed magnitude |α| “ r. The uniform mixture over such coherent
states is
ˆ dθ
2π|reiθyxreiθ| “
ˆ dθ
2π
ÿ
n,m
rn`meipn´mqθ
?
n!m!
|nyxm| “
ÿ
n
r2n
n! |nyxn|.
(C.3)
Because this uniform mixture is full rank, the fixed magnitude coherent states also form an overcomplete
basis. For example, a given Fock basis state can be obtained as
|ny “
?
n!
rn
ˆ dθ
2πe´inθ|reiθy.
(C.4)
68

A resolution of the identity can be formally obtained via
I “
ˆ dθ
2π
dθ1
2π |reiθyxreiθ1|gpθ ´ θ1q
(C.5)
where
gpθ ´ θ1q “
8
ÿ
ℓ“0
ℓ!
r2ℓe´iℓpθ´θ1q.
(C.6)
This is formal because the series for g does not converge. However, defining
gΛpθ ´ θ1q “
Λ
ÿ
ℓ“0
ℓ!
r2ℓe´iℓpθ´θ1q,
(C.7)
we see that
IΛ “
ˆ dθ
2π
dθ1
2π |reiθyxreiθ1|gΛpθ ´ θ1q
(C.8)
where
IΛ “
Λ
ÿ
n“0
|nyxn|
(C.9)
is a partial resolution in the Fock basis up to level Λ.
D
Cosmology as a random purification
The entanglement spectrum (3.13) of the microscopic CFT state is characteristic of a random purification
of the bulk reduced density matrices
|ΨOy Ñ |?ρl R ?ρry “ 1
Z1
ÿ
n,p,q,m
p?ρlqnpRpqp?ρrqqm |Eny˚
L b |EmyR ,
(D.1)
where R is a complex gaussian random matrix of zero mean and unit variance. The density matrices
correspond to (2.26) and (2.27) in the low-lying spectrum of the CFT.
Such a random state originates from the microscopic description of the heavy operator O, assuming
that it satisfies a generalized version of the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis [106, 107],53
Onm “ e´fpEn,Emq{2 Rnm ,
(D.2)
for a smooth envelope function fpEn, Emq which determines the semiclassical two-point function of the
53 The ansatz (D.2) for the heavy operator O is justified since it can still be considered “simple” in the large-N internal
space of the holographic CFT. In fact, it consists of roughly the product of „ N 2 local conformal primaries of low conformal
dimension at different points of the sphere, as opposed to complex operators consisting of random polynomials of these
primaries. Moreover, even if the low-lying spectrum of the CFT becomes integrable in the large-N limit, the operator O
does not become sparse in the energy basis, becuase it is composed of „ N 2 light operator insertions and thus its structure
is still expected to resemble the one for a chaotic system even at low energies.
69

operator (cf. [67]). In the relevant low-energy spectrum, the envelope function reads
fpEn, Emq « ∆τ pEn ` Emq ` 2mℓlog R˚{2ℓ.
(D.3)
Under these considerations, the Euclidean saddle point geometries Xg for g P Sympnq in the gravita-
tional replica trick of Sec. 3 can be equivalently derived directly from the microscopic CFT description
in the large-N asymptotic expansion of the corresponding quantities, by assuming an effective gaussian
random matrix description for the Rnm coefficients of the shell operator in (D.2).
The replica saddles from the CFT
To see this, consider the unnormalized density matrix ˆρL “ ?ρlRρrR:?ρl obtained from (2.1) under
the partial trace of the R subsystem. The unnormalized purity corresponds to
Trˆρ2
L “ TrpρlRρrR:ρlRρrR:q .
(D.4)
Assuming gaussian statistics for the Rnm coefficients,
RnmR˚pqRn1m1R˚
p1q1 “ δnpδmqδn1p1δm1q1 ` δnp1δmq1δn1pδm1q ,
(D.5)
the unnormalized purity gives
Trˆρ2
L “ Zlp2βLqZrpβRq2 ` ZlpβLq2Zrp2βRq ,
(D.6)
where ZlpnβLq “ Trpρn
l q and ZrpnβRq “ Trpρn
r q. The first term is associated to the replica-disconnected
contractions of the Rnm coefficients, while the second term is associated to the replica-connected con-
tractions, in analogy with eqs. (3.5) and (3.6) in the Euclidean gravity calculation.
Similarly, the Euclidean saddle point geometries computing the normalization can also be derived
in this way. One gets that
pTrˆρLq2 “ ZlpβLq2ZrpβRq2 ` Zlp2βLqZrp2βRq ,
(D.7)
where the first term comes from the disconnected contraction of the Rnm coefficients, while the second
term comes from the connected contraction, in complete analogy with eqs.
(3.7) and (3.8) in the
Euclidean gravity calculation.
70

The ratio between (D.6) and (D.7) gives the desired result
Trρ2
L « dr ` dl
1 ` dldr
(D.8)
for d´1
l,r “ Trpρ2
l,rq. This formula yields the same result as the semiclassical purity (3.10).
In a completely analogous way, it is possible to derive the higher semiclassical Rényi entropies (3.13)
from the gaussian statistics of the Rnm coefficients (D.5). The universality of the entanglement spectrum
(3.13) arises naturally in the large mass limit from the CFT perspective, by thinking of mℓas a label
which parametrizes a trajectory of the cosmological states at fixed entanglement in the Hilbert space of
the CFTs. As mℓincreases, the state vector |ΨOy ergodically explores the Hilbert space generated by
the cosmological states. At large values of mℓ, the entanglement spectrum equilibrates to the value for
a random purification.54
E
Tensor network resolvent
In this appendix, we carry out a resolvent calculation similar to the one reported in Sec.
4.2, but
in the random TN toy model introduced in Sec.
5.
Let us consider a collection of K orthogonal
bulk states S “ t|ψI1y , ..., |ψIKyu Ă Hψ of the cosmological EFT, and the corresponding TN states
VψS “ t|ΨI1y , ..., |ΨIKyu Ă HL b HR. We can then build the TN K ˆ K Gram matrix of overlaps
Gij ”
@
ΨIi
ˇˇΨIj
D
“ xψIi| V :
ψVψ
ψIj
D
.
(E.1)
The moments of the TN Gram matrix can be easily computed from the TN diagramatics upon the
gaussian average over the O tensor. For i ‰ j, the second moment is given by eq. (5.23), which we
import here
|Gij|2 “
1
|l||r| .
(E.2)
Similarly, it is straightforward to see that the completely connected contribution to the n-th moment
reads
Gi1i2Gi2i3...Gini1|conn. «
1
|l|n´1|r|n´1 .
(E.3)
In this case there are n ´ 1 different contractions of the O tensor, which lead to completely connected
contributions. The dominant one comes from the η “ p12...nq permutation, in analogy with eq. (4.20)
for the dominant Euclidean wormhole configuration to the gravitational moments of the Gram matrix.
54 For the PETS, this reproduces the entanglement spectrum of a thermal random state (cf. [96]). An analogous spectrum
is generated by the equilibration in time under a chaotic Hamiltonian, which is relevant for the study of the evaporating
black hole (cf. [84]).
71

In order to find the dimension of the Hilbert space that the cosmological TN states span, we want
to compute the average eigenvalue density of the Gram matrix (E.1). To do that, we again invoke the
resolvent
Rijpλq ”
ˆ
1
λ1 ´ G
˙
ij
“ 1
λ δij `
8
ÿ
n“1
1
λn`1 pGqn
ij ,
(E.4)
and write down the trace of the TN resolvent in Schwinger-Dyson form, which allows for the resummation
λRpλq “ K ` 2S
8
ÿ
n“1
˜
Rpλq
2S
¸n
“ K `
2S Rpλq
2S ´ Rpλq
(E.5)
with S “ log2 |l||r| “ Sl ` Sr.
This leads to the quadratic equation for the trace of the resolvent
Rpλq
2 `
ˆ 2S ´ K
λ
´ 2S
˙
Rpλq ` K
λ 2S “ 0 .
(E.6)
The density of eigenvalues of the Gram matrix follows from the discontinuity of the trace of the
resolvent along the imaginary axis (4.28),
Dpλq “ 2S
2πλ
c ”
λ ´
`
1 ´ K1{2 2´S{2˘2 ı ” `
1 ` K1{2 2´S{2˘2 ´ λ
ı
` δpλq
`
K ´ 2S˘
θpK ´ 2Sq .
(E.7)
Therefore, when K ą 2S, the rank of the Gram matrix, which is equal to the dimension of the image
of the map Vψ, saturates at a value |l||r|, according to the sharp curve
dimtImpVψqu “ rankpGijq “ mintK, |l||r|u .
(E.8)
References
[1] G. ’t Hooft, “Dimensional reduction in quantum gravity”, Conf. Proc. C 930308 (1993) 284–296,
arXiv:gr-qc/9310026.
[2] L. Susskind, “The World as a hologram”, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6377–6396,
arXiv:hep-th/9409089.
[3] J. M. Maldacena, “The Large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity”, Adv.
Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231–252, arXiv:hep-th/9711200.
[4] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, “Aspects of Holographic Entanglement Entropy”, JHEP 08 (2006)
045, arXiv:hep-th/0605073 [hep-th].
72

[5] B. Swingle, “Entanglement Renormalization and Holography”, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 065007,
arXiv:0905.1317 [cond-mat.str-el].
[6] M. Van Raamsdonk, “Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement”, Gen. Rel. Grav. 42
(2010) 2323–2329, arXiv:1005.3035 [hep-th].
[7] A. Lewkowycz and J. Maldacena, “Generalized gravitational entropy”, JHEP 08 (2013) 090,
arXiv:1304.4926 [hep-th].
[8] J. Maldacena and L. Susskind, “Cool horizons for entangled black holes”, Fortsch. Phys. 61
(2013) 781–811, arXiv:1306.0533 [hep-th].
[9] T. Faulkner, A. Lewkowycz, and J. Maldacena, “Quantum corrections to holographic
entanglement entropy”, JHEP 11 (2013) 074, arXiv:1307.2892 [hep-th].
[10] D. Stanford and L. Susskind, “Complexity and Shock Wave Geometries”, Phys. Rev. D 90
no. 12, (2014) 126007, arXiv:1406.2678 [hep-th].
[11] A. Almheiri, X. Dong, and D. Harlow, “Bulk Locality and Quantum Error Correction in
AdS/CFT”, JHEP 04 (2015) 163, arXiv:1411.7041 [hep-th].
[12] J. Maldacena, S. H. Shenker, and D. Stanford, “A bound on chaos”, JHEP 08 (2016) 106,
arXiv:1503.01409 [hep-th].
[13] F. Pastawski, B. Yoshida, D. Harlow, and J. Preskill, “Holographic quantum error-correcting
codes: Toy models for the bulk/boundary correspondence”, JHEP 06 (2015) 149,
arXiv:1503.06237 [hep-th].
[14] A. R. Brown, D. A. Roberts, L. Susskind, B. Swingle, and Y. Zhao, “Holographic Complexity
Equals Bulk Action?”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 no. 19, (2016) 191301, arXiv:1509.07876 [hep-th].
[15] P. Hayden, S. Nezami, X.-L. Qi, N. Thomas, M. Walter, and Z. Yang, “Holographic duality from
random tensor networks”, JHEP 11 (2016) 009, arXiv:1601.01694 [hep-th].
[16] G. Penington, “Entanglement Wedge Reconstruction and the Information Paradox”, JHEP 09
(2020) 002, arXiv:1905.08255 [hep-th].
[17] A. Almheiri, N. Engelhardt, D. Marolf, and H. Maxfield, “The entropy of bulk quantum fields
and the entanglement wedge of an evaporating black hole”, JHEP 12 (2019) 063,
arXiv:1905.08762 [hep-th].
[18] G. Penington, S. H. Shenker, D. Stanford, and Z. Yang, “Replica wormholes and the black hole
interior”, JHEP 03 (2022) 205, arXiv:1911.11977 [hep-th].
[19] A. Almheiri, T. Hartman, J. Maldacena, E. Shaghoulian, and A. Tajdini, “Replica Wormholes
and the Entropy of Hawking Radiation”, JHEP 05 (2020) 013, arXiv:1911.12333 [hep-th].
73

[20] J. B. Hartle, S. W. Hawking, and T. Hertog, “Accelerated Expansion from Negative Λ”,
arXiv:1205.3807 [hep-th].
[21] P. J. E. Peebles and B. Ratra, “Cosmology with a Time Variable Cosmological Constant”,
Astrophys. J. Lett. 325 (1988) L17.
[22] B. Ratra and P. J. E. Peebles, “Cosmological Consequences of a Rolling Homogeneous Scalar
Field”, Phys. Rev. D 37 (1988) 3406.
[23] S. Tsujikawa, “Quintessence: A Review”, Class. Quant. Grav. 30 (2013) 214003,
arXiv:1304.1961 [gr-qc].
[24] S. Antonini, P. Simidzija, B. Swingle, and M. Van Raamsdonk, “Accelerating Cosmology from a
Holographic Wormhole”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130 no. 22, (2023) 221601, arXiv:2206.14821
[hep-th].
[25] S. Antonini, P. Simidzija, B. Swingle, M. Van Raamsdonk, and C. Waddell, “Accelerating
cosmology from Λ ă 0 gravitational effective field theory”, JHEP 05 (2023) 203,
arXiv:2212.00050 [hep-th].
[26] M. Van Raamsdonk and C. Waddell, “Possible hints of decreasing dark energy from supernova
data”, arXiv:2305.04946 [astro-ph.CO].
[27] A. Strominger, “The dS / CFT correspondence”, JHEP 10 (2001) 034, arXiv:hep-th/0106113.
[28] M. Alishahiha, A. Karch, E. Silverstein, and D. Tong, “The dS/dS correspondence”, AIP Conf.
Proc. 743 no. 1, (2004) 393–409, arXiv:hep-th/0407125.
[29] X. Dong, E. Silverstein, and G. Torroba, “De Sitter Holography and Entanglement Entropy”,
JHEP 07 (2018) 050, arXiv:1804.08623 [hep-th].
[30] V. Gorbenko, E. Silverstein, and G. Torroba, “dS/dS and TT”, JHEP 03 (2019) 085,
arXiv:1811.07965 [hep-th].
[31] E. Coleman, E. A. Mazenc, V. Shyam, E. Silverstein, R. M. Soni, G. Torroba, and S. Yang, “De
Sitter microstates from TT + Λ2 and the Hawking-Page transition”, JHEP 07 (2022) 140,
arXiv:2110.14670 [hep-th].
[32] L. Susskind, “Black Holes Hint Towards De Sitter-Matrix Theory”, arXiv:2109.01322
[hep-th].
[33] L. Susskind, “De Sitter Holography: Fluctuations, Anomalous Symmetry, and Wormholes”,
Universe 7 no. 12, (2021) 464, arXiv:2106.03964 [hep-th].
[34] L. Susskind, “Entanglement and Chaos in De Sitter Space Holography: An SYK Example”,
JHAP 1 no. 1, (2021) 1–22, arXiv:2109.14104 [hep-th].
74

[35] E. Shaghoulian and L. Susskind, “Entanglement in De Sitter space”, JHEP 08 (2022) 198,
arXiv:2201.03603 [hep-th].
[36] P. McFadden and K. Skenderis, “Holography for Cosmology”, Phys. Rev. D 81 (2010) 021301,
arXiv:0907.5542 [hep-th].
[37] N. Afshordi, E. Gould, and K. Skenderis, “Constraining holographic cosmology using Planck
data”, Phys. Rev. D 95 no. 12, (2017) 123505, arXiv:1703.05385 [astro-ph.CO].
[38] H. Nastase, “Solution of the cosmological constant problem within holographic cosmology”,
Phys. Lett. B 801 (2020) 135168, arXiv:1812.07597 [hep-th].
[39] H. Nastase and K. Skenderis, “Holography for the very early Universe and the classic puzzles of
Hot Big Bang cosmology”, Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 2, (2020) 021901, arXiv:1904.05821 [hep-th].
[40] J. M. Maldacena and L. Maoz, “Wormholes in AdS”, JHEP 02 (2004) 053,
arXiv:hep-th/0401024.
[41] B. McInnes, “Answering a basic objection to bang / crunch holography”, JHEP 10 (2004) 018,
arXiv:hep-th/0407189.
[42] B. McInnes, “Pre-inflationary spacetime in string cosmology”, Nucl. Phys. B 748 (2006)
309–332, arXiv:hep-th/0511227.
[43] B. Freivogel, V. E. Hubeny, A. Maloney, R. C. Myers, M. Rangamani, and S. Shenker, “Inflation
in AdS/CFT”, JHEP 03 (2006) 007, arXiv:hep-th/0510046.
[44] N. Engelhardt, T. Hertog, and G. T. Horowitz, “Holographic Signatures of Cosmological
Singularities”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 121602, arXiv:1404.2309 [hep-th].
[45] S. Cooper, M. Rozali, B. Swingle, M. Van Raamsdonk, C. Waddell, and D. Wakeham, “Black
hole microstate cosmology”, JHEP 07 (2019) 065, arXiv:1810.10601 [hep-th].
[46] S. Antonini and B. Swingle, “Cosmology at the end of the world”, Nature Phys. 16 no. 8, (2020)
881–886, arXiv:1907.06667 [hep-th].
[47] Y. Chen, V. Gorbenko, and J. Maldacena, “Bra-ket wormholes in gravitationally prepared
states”, JHEP 02 (2021) 009, arXiv:2007.16091 [hep-th].
[48] M. Van Raamsdonk, “Comments on wormholes, ensembles, and cosmology”, JHEP 12 (2021)
156, arXiv:2008.02259 [hep-th].
[49] M. Van Raamsdonk, “Cosmology from confinement?”, JHEP 03 (2022) 039, arXiv:2102.05057
[hep-th].
[50] S. Antonini, P. Simidzija, B. Swingle, and M. Van Raamsdonk, “Cosmology from the vacuum”,
arXiv:2203.11220 [hep-th].
75

[51] S. Fallows and S. F. Ross, “Constraints on cosmologies inside black holes”, JHEP 05 (2022) 094,
arXiv:2203.02523 [hep-th].
[52] S. F. Ross, “Cosmologies inside hyperbolic black holes”, JHEP 11 (2022) 168,
arXiv:2209.11620 [hep-th].
[53] A. Sahu, P. Simidzija, and M. Van Raamsdonk, “Bubbles of cosmology in AdS/CFT”,
arXiv:2306.13143 [hep-th].
[54] C. Akers, T. Faulkner, S. Lin, and P. Rath, “The Page curve for reflected entropy”, JHEP 06
(2022) 089, arXiv:2201.11730 [hep-th].
[55] T. Hartman, Y. Jiang, and E. Shaghoulian, “Islands in cosmology”, JHEP 11 (2020) 111,
arXiv:2008.01022 [hep-th].
[56] V. Balasubramanian, A. Kar, and T. Ugajin, “Islands in de Sitter space”, JHEP 02 (2021) 072,
arXiv:2008.05275 [hep-th].
[57] V. Balasubramanian, A. Kar, and T. Ugajin, “Entanglement between two disjoint universes”,
JHEP 02 (2021) 136, arXiv:2008.05274 [hep-th].
[58] V. Balasubramanian, A. Kar, and T. Ugajin, “Entanglement between two gravitating universes”,
Class. Quant. Grav. 39 no. 17, (2022) 174001, arXiv:2104.13383 [hep-th].
[59] R. Bousso and E. Wildenhain, “Islands in closed and open universes”, Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 8,
(2022) 086012, arXiv:2202.05278 [hep-th].
[60] K. Papadodimas and S. Raju, “An Infalling Observer in AdS/CFT”, JHEP 10 (2013) 212,
arXiv:1211.6767 [hep-th].
[61] A. R. Brown, H. Gharibyan, G. Penington, and L. Susskind, “The Python’s Lunch: geometric
obstructions to decoding Hawking radiation”, JHEP 08 (2020) 121, arXiv:1912.00228
[hep-th].
[62] N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, “A world without pythons would be
so simple”, Class. Quant. Grav. 38 no. 23, (2021) 234001, arXiv:2102.07774 [hep-th].
[63] N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, “Finding pythons in unexpected
places”, Class. Quant. Grav. 39 no. 9, (2022) 094002, arXiv:2105.09316 [hep-th].
[64] C. Akers, N. Engelhardt, D. Harlow, G. Penington, and S. Vardhan, “The black hole interior
from non-isometric codes and complexity”, arXiv:2207.06536 [hep-th].
[65] C. Cao, W. Chemissany, A. Jahn, and Z. Zimborás, “Approximate observables from
non-isometric maps: de Sitter tensor networks with overlapping qubits”, arXiv:2304.02673
[hep-th].
76

[66] V. Balasubramanian, A. Lawrence, J. M. Magan, and M. Sasieta, “Microscopic origin of the
entropy of black holes in general relativity”, arXiv:2212.02447 [hep-th].
[67] M. Sasieta, “Wormholes from heavy operator statistics in AdS/CFT”, JHEP 03 (2023) 158,
arXiv:2211.11794 [hep-th].
[68] J. A. Wheeler, “Geometrodynamics and the issue of final state”, in Les Houches Summer Shcool
of Theoretical Physics: Relativity, Groups and Topology, pp. 317–522. 1964.
[69] Z. Fu and D. Marolf, “Bag-of-gold spacetimes, Euclidean wormholes, and inflation from domain
walls in AdS/CFT”, JHEP 11 (2019) 040, arXiv:1909.02505 [hep-th].
[70] A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz, and D. A. Lowe, “Local bulk operators in AdS/CFT: A
Boundary view of horizons and locality”, Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 086003,
arXiv:hep-th/0506118.
[71] A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz, and D. A. Lowe, “Holographic representation of local
bulk operators”, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 066009, arXiv:hep-th/0606141.
[72] A. Goel, H. T. Lam, G. J. Turiaci, and H. Verlinde, “Expanding the Black Hole Interior:
Partially Entangled Thermal States in SYK”, JHEP 02 (2019) 156, arXiv:1807.03916
[hep-th].
[73] H. W. Lin, J. Maldacena, L. Rozenberg, and J. Shan, “Holography for people with no time”,
arXiv:2207.00407 [hep-th].
[74] H. W. Lin, J. Maldacena, L. Rozenberg, and J. Shan, “Looking at supersymmetric black holes
for a very long time”, SciPost Phys. 14 (2023) 128, arXiv:2207.00408 [hep-th].
[75] J. Chandra, “Euclidean wormholes for individual 2d CFTs”, arXiv:2305.07183 [hep-th].
[76] I. Kourkoulou and J. Maldacena, “Pure states in the SYK model and nearly-AdS2 gravity”,
arXiv:1707.02325 [hep-th].
[77] J. Chandra and T. Hartman, “Coarse graining pure states in AdS/CFT”, arXiv:2206.03414
[hep-th].
[78] V. Balasubramanian, A. Lawrence, J. M. Magan, and M. Sasieta, “Microscopic origin of the
entropy of astrophysical black holes”, arXiv:2212.08623 [hep-th].
[79] T. Anous, T. Hartman, A. Rovai, and J. Sonner, “Black Hole Collapse in the 1/c Expansion”,
JHEP 07 (2016) 123, arXiv:1603.04856 [hep-th].
[80] S. de Haro, S. N. Solodukhin, and K. Skenderis, “Holographic reconstruction of space-time and
renormalization in the AdS / CFT correspondence”, Commun. Math. Phys. 217 (2001) 595–622,
arXiv:hep-th/0002230.
77

[81] K. Skenderis, “Lecture notes on holographic renormalization”, Class. Quant. Grav. 19 (2002)
5849–5876, arXiv:hep-th/0209067.
[82] G. Darmois, Les équations de la gravitation einsteinienne. No. 25 in Mémorial des sciences
mathématiques. Gauthier-Villars, 1927. http://www.numdam.org/item/MSM_1927__25__1_0/.
[83] W. Israel, “Singular hypersurfaces and thin shells in general relativity”, Il Nuovo Cimento B
(1965-1970) 44 no. 1, (1966) 1–14.
[84] M. Sasieta, “Ergodic equilibration of Rényi entropies and replica wormholes”, JHEP 08 (2021)
014, arXiv:2103.09880 [hep-th].
[85] T. Takayanagi, “Holographic Dual of BCFT”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 101602,
arXiv:1105.5165 [hep-th].
[86] M. Fujita, T. Takayanagi, and E. Tonni, “Aspects of AdS/BCFT”, JHEP 11 (2011) 043,
arXiv:1108.5152 [hep-th].
[87] A. Climent, R. Emparan, J. Magán, M. Sasieta, and A. Vilar-López, “to appear”,.
[88] D. N. Page, “Average entropy of a subsystem”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 1291–1294,
arXiv:gr-qc/9305007.
[89] S. W. Hawking and D. N. Page, “Thermodynamics of black holes in anti-de Sitter space”,
Communications in Mathematical Physics 87 no. 4, (1982) 577 – 588.
[90] E. Witten, “A Note On Complex Spacetime Metrics”, arXiv:2111.06514 [hep-th].
[91] M. Kontsevich and G. Segal, “Wick Rotation and the Positivity of Energy in Quantum Field
Theory”, Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. 72 no. 1-2, (2021) 673–699, arXiv:2105.10161 [hep-th].
[92] R. Bousso and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, “Island Finder and Entropy Bound”, Phys. Rev. D 103
no. 10, (2021) 106005, arXiv:2101.11648 [hep-th].
[93] H. Geng, A. Karch, C. Perez-Pardavila, S. Raju, L. Randall, M. Riojas, and S. Shashi,
“Inconsistency of islands in theories with long-range gravity”, JHEP 01 (2022) 182,
arXiv:2107.03390 [hep-th].
[94] H. Geng and A. Karch, “Massive islands”, JHEP 09 (2020) 121, arXiv:2006.02438 [hep-th].
[95] J. Chandra and T. Hartman, “Toward random tensor networks and holographic codes in CFT”,
JHEP 05 (2023) 109, arXiv:2302.02446 [hep-th].
[96] H. Liu and S. Vardhan, “Entanglement entropies of equilibrated pure states in quantum
many-body systems and gravity”, PRX Quantum 2 (2021) 010344, arXiv:2008.01089 [hep-th].
[97] A. Kar, “Non-isometric quantum error correction in gravity”, JHEP 02 (2023) 195,
arXiv:2210.13476 [hep-th].
78

[98] J. Cotler, P. Hayden, G. Penington, G. Salton, B. Swingle, and M. Walter, “Entanglement
Wedge Reconstruction via Universal Recovery Channels”, Phys. Rev. X 9 no. 3, (2019) 031011,
arXiv:1704.05839 [hep-th].
[99] C.-F. Chen, G. Penington, and G. Salton, “Entanglement Wedge Reconstruction using the Petz
Map”, JHEP 01 (2020) 168, arXiv:1902.02844 [hep-th].
[100] C. Akers and G. Penington, “Quantum minimal surfaces from quantum error correction”,
SciPost Phys. 12 no. 5, (2022) 157, arXiv:2109.14618 [hep-th].
[101] L. Susskind, L. Thorlacius, and J. Uglum, “The Stretched horizon and black hole
complementarity”, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 3743–3761, arXiv:hep-th/9306069.
[102] J. McNamara and C. Vafa, “Baby Universes, Holography, and the Swampland”,
arXiv:2004.06738 [hep-th].
[103] R. Emparan, C. V. Johnson, and R. C. Myers, “Surface terms as counterterms in the AdS /
CFT correspondence”, Phys. Rev. D 60 (1999) 104001, arXiv:hep-th/9903238.
[104] V. Balasubramanian and P. Kraus, “A Stress tensor for Anti-de Sitter gravity”, Commun. Math.
Phys. 208 (1999) 413–428, arXiv:hep-th/9902121.
[105] S. W. Hawking, “Zeta function regularization of path integrals in curved spacetime”,
Communications in Mathematical Physics 55 no. 2, (1977) 133 – 148.
[106] J. M. Deutsch, “Quantum statistical mechanics in a closed system”, Phys. Rev. A 43 (Feb, 1991)
2046–2049. https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.43.2046.
[107] M. Srednicki, “Chaos and quantum thermalization”, Phys. Rev. E 50 (Aug, 1994) 888–901.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.50.888.
79

