Two-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
Hans Christian ¨Ottinger∗
ETH Z¨urich, Quantum Center and Department of Materials, HCP F 43.1, CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland
(Dated: September 7, 2023)
The stochastic nature of quantum mechanics is more naturally reflected in a bilinear two-process
representation of density matrices rather than in squared wave functions. This proposition comes
with a remarkable change of the entanglement mechanism: entanglement does not originate from su-
perpositions of wave functions, but results from the bilinear structure of density matrices. Quantum
interference is not an additive superposition mechanism, but rather a multiplicative phenomenon.
The proposed bilinear representation of density matrices is given in terms of two stochastic jump
processes. These ideas are illustrated for the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen and double-slit experiments.
The expression of the stochastic nature of quantum mechanics in terms of random variables rather
than their probability distributions facilitates an ontological viewpoint and leads us to a two-worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The stochastic nature of quantum mechanics calls for
an appropriate setting for describing randomness. The
most natural description of quantum states is given by
a density matrix ρ on a Hilbert space for a system of
interest, by which the average of any observable A, which
is a self-adjoint operator on the Hilbert space, can be
obtained as a trace, ⟨A⟩= tr(ρA). In the Schr¨odinger
picture, the evolution of the density matrix ρt describing
the time-dependent state of a quantum system is given
by the von Neumann equation
iℏdρt
dt = [H, ρt],
(1)
where ℏis the reduced Planck constant, H is the Hamil-
tonian of the system, and the square brackets denote the
commutator. Except for its greater flexibility in choos-
ing initial conditions, which are not restricted to pure
states, the von Neumann equation is equivalent to the
Schr¨odinger equation.
As an alternative probabilistic tool, Schr¨odinger’s com-
plex wave function ψt is less directly associated with the
stochastic nature of quantum mechanics than the den-
sity matrix ρt. One needs the additional rule that the
squared modulus of the wave function, |ψt|2, should be in-
terpreted as a probability density, whereas (1) is a linear
evolution equation for the primary probabilistic quantity
of interest, ρt.
Quantum master equations for density matrices have
the further advantage that they are perfectly suited not
only for describing reversible dynamics, but also for dis-
sipative quantum systems [1, 2]. A class of robust quan-
tum master equations for dissipative systems has been
obtained by quantizing the geometric structures behind
classical nonequilibrium thermodynamics [3, 4].
The
same type of thermodynamic master equations has also
∗hco@mat.ethz.ch; www.polyphys.mat.ethz.ch
been found by means of projection-operator methods for
coarse-graining reversible systems [5].
The most fundamental equations of nature are gener-
ally believed to be reversible, whereas irreversibility is
considered to be an emergent phenomenon. However, as
we presently do not know the most fundamental equa-
tions of nature and, even if we happened to know them
at some point, we could never be sure because new obser-
vations could always be made, it might be more appropri-
ate to build all physical theories by default on irreversible
equations. One should actually consider reversible equa-
tions as an idealization that needs to be justified when-
ever it might be appropriate. Therefore, density matrices
governed by quantum master equations appear to provide
the most natural setting for describing the evolution of
quantum systems.
Meaningful deterministic equations for the evolution
of probabilistic tools should characterize stochastic pro-
cesses. We here propose to consider stochastic processes,
which provide the most common indeterministic models
[6], as the more fundamental level of description. This is
particularly appealing because quantum physics involves
ontic randomness, contrary to the epistemic randomness
associated with coarse graining, say in classical statistical
mechanics.
When one solves the linear Schr¨odinger equation for
the wave function of an interacting system, superposi-
tion of states occurs inevitably. In the subsequent sec-
tion, we introduce a bilinear representation of quantum
master equations in terms of two independently evolv-
ing stochastic jump processes, for which superposition
no longer is an essential feature (Section II). This rep-
resentation is further motivated by discussing serious
limitations of quantum mechanics, which can be over-
come in the quantum field theoretic setting of particle
physics (Section III). We then discuss two experiments,
the standard interpretation of which relies heavily on
superposition states, in the proposed two-process repre-
sentation of quantum mechanics: the Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen Gedankenexperiment (Section IV) and the double-
slit experiment (Section V). The final conclusions (Sec-
tion VI) focus on the interpretation of quantum me-
arXiv:2309.03151v1  [quant-ph]  6 Sep 2023

2
chanics, ontological considerations, and the elimination
of paradoxes by natural limitations for the applicability
of quantum mechanics.
II.
TWO-PROCESS UNRAVELINGS
The general strategy of so-called unravelings is to in-
troduce stochastic processes in Hilbert space such that a
density matrix evolving according to the von Neumann
equation (1) can be extracted in terms of suitable aver-
ages. This idea of passing from probabilistic tools like
density matrices to equivalent stochastic processes was
originally motivated by computer simulations for dissi-
pative quantum systems [1], but it is useful also for re-
versible systems and conceptual clarifications. The pas-
sage from probabilities to stochastic objects is particu-
larly relevant to ontology [7].
For dissipative systems, unravelings typically employ
continuous evolution to represent reversible dynamics
and a combination of stochastic jump processes with con-
tinuous correction terms to reproduce dissipative dynam-
ics [1]. In the context of dissipative quantum field theory
[8], it has been proposed to treat also reversible inter-
actions by jumps. The usefulness of this idea has been
elaborated in detail for simulating purely reversible quan-
tum dynamics in [9].
The treatment of interactions as jumps requires a split-
ting of the full Hamiltonian into free and interacting con-
tributions, H = Hfree + Hint. We further assume that
there exists a distinguished basis B of orthonormal eigen-
states of the free Hamiltonian Hfree. The basis vectors
are denoted by bn and the corresponding eigenvalues of
Hfree are given by En. For unravelings in terms of two
stochastic processes |ϕ⟩t and |ψ⟩t in Hilbert space, one
wishes to reproduce the density matrix ρt by the follow-
ing expectation,
ρt = E

|ϕ⟩t ⟨ψ|t

,
(2)
where we have used Dirac’s bra-ket notation.
In this
setting we can impose the strict superselection rule that
the states |ϕ⟩t and |ψ⟩t can only be multiples of basis
vectors from B. Reasons for believing in the existence
of such a distinguished basis and a strict superselection
rule emerge from the origins of quantum mechanics in
elementary particle physics, or quantum field theory, and
will be discussed in Section III.
The strict superselection rule has the useful side-effect
of reducing the enormous number of possibilities for con-
structing unravelings. It naturally guides us to the fol-
lowing construction of piecewise continuous trajectories
with interspersed jumps.
The stochastic processes for the bra-vector |ψ⟩t and the
ket-vector |ϕ⟩t in (2) evolve independently, but according
to the same rules. Therefore, it is sufficient to describe
the construction of |ϕ⟩t. At any time t, the stochastic
state vector |ϕ⟩t is a multiple of some basis vector bn ∈
B. Between jumps, the process is governed by the free
Schr¨odinger equation,
iℏd
dt |ϕ⟩t = Hfree |ϕ⟩t ,
(3)
which simply introduces a phase factor e−iEn∆t/ℏif |ϕ⟩t
is a multiple of bn and ∆t is the time between jumps.
Quantum jumps reproduce the effect of the interaction
Hamiltonian Hint. They are characterized by a rate pa-
rameter r for the occurrence of jumps and by the transi-
tion probabilities pln for jumping from a given state bn to
any particular state bl (with P
l pln = 1). If the process
before a jump at time t is in the state |ϕ⟩t = ctbn, then
the state |ϕ′⟩t after the jump is given by the stochastic
jump rule
|ϕ⟩t = ctbn →|ϕ′⟩t =
1
pln
 1
iℏr ⟨bl| Hint |bn⟩+ δln

ctbl
with probability pln.
(4)
The rate parameter r should be chosen such that ℏr is
a characteristic interaction energy of the system and the
transition probabilities pln are given by the proportion-
ality
pln ∝
 ⟨bl| Hint |bn⟩+ iℏr δln
J.
(5)
For J = 1 the changes of the prefactors in (4) are as
uniform as possible, whereas the choice J = 2 can be
motivated by Fermi’s golden rule.
We still need to specify the initial conditions for the
stochastic processes |ϕ⟩t and |ψ⟩t. The proper initial con-
ditions for the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen and double-slit
experiments are discussed in Sections IV and V. In both
cases, also the initial conditions for the two processes of
the unraveling are independent random variables. Meth-
ods for constructing stochastic unravelings of equilibrium
initial states at given temperatures, with special empha-
sis on the ground state at zero temperature, can be found
in [10].
The continuous free evolution shows the importance
of allowing for scalar multiplication. The jumps elimi-
nate the need for any addition of states. Superpositions
of base vectors do not occur in the two-process unrav-
eling.
The discussion of concrete experiments clarifies
how entanglement nevertheless arises in the two-process
unraveling.
In summary, we have constructed two stochastic pro-
cesses |ϕ⟩t and |ψ⟩t, each satisfying a strict superselec-
tion rule. The density matrix obtained as a correlation
function of these processes according to (2) satisfies the
von Neumann equation (1), that is, the very same equa-
tion as obtained from the Schr¨odinger equation for den-
sity matrices associated with pure states. The stochastic
representation of the density matrix is not restricted to
pure states and, as it is based on two stochastic processes
instead of one deterministic wave function, it offers an al-
ternative interpretation of quantum mechanics based on
a new implementation of entanglement.

3
III.
EXISTENCE OF DISTINGUISHED BASES
In conventional quantum mechanics one is free to do
basis changes, which typically involve superpositions.
Therefore, we need to justify our assumption of the exis-
tence of a distinguished basis B in the superposition-free
formulation of quantum mechanics based on two-process
unravelings. To this end one needs to recognize the limi-
tations and the approximate nature of quantum mechan-
ics for systems consisting of a fixed number of particles
and to look at its deeper origin in quantum field theory.1
Dirac’s marvelous quantization recipe formally sug-
gests that we can quantize any classical Hamiltonian
system, preferably in canonical coordinates, by replac-
ing classical Poisson brackets by quantum commutators.
However, the quantization of say planetary motion can
hardly be particularly meaningful. A rigid restriction of
quantum theory to elementary particles, which would be
the other extreme, is unpractical because we can never
be sure that we know the truly elementary particles. For
example, nobody hesitates to apply quantum mechanics
to protons although they are not elementary particles.
A revealing textbook example for the application of
quantum mechanics is the hydrogen atom, which leads to
the famous prediction for the line spectrum of atomic hy-
drogen. Note that the Hamiltonian for this problem con-
tains the Coulomb potential of classical electrostatics. In
that sense, quantum mechanics possesses a semi-classical
character, which is usually not pointed out. Particularly
questionable is the occurrence of electron-proton interac-
tions at a distance.
In a more rigorous treatment of the hydrogen atom,
the Coulomb interaction should result from an exchange
of soft photons with momenta of the order of the electron
momentum and wave lengths of the order of the atomic
size between the electron and the proton, or between the
electron and the quarks in a proton.
We then are in
the domain of quantum field theory, allowing for the cre-
ation and annihilation of photons. Quantum mechanics
for systems with a fixed number of particles can only
be an approximate theory that arises in the low-energy
limit of quantum field theory, when particle creation and
annihilation are suppressed (which is hardly possible for
massless particles). Quantum mechanics should emerge
from the quantum field theory of elementary particles
and their interactions after making suitable approxima-
tions.
This remark implies that special relativity can
be properly taken into account at the starting point for
justifying quantum mechanics. Of course, it may turn
out that there are more fundamental theories of elemen-
tary particles from which one could obtain both quantum
1 We here use the term quantum mechanics for systems with a
fixed, finite number of degrees of freedom, whereas quantum field
theory deals with a variable number of degrees of freedom, in-
cluding the limit of infinitely many degrees of freedom. Quantum
theory includes both mechanics and field theory.
mechanics and quantum field theory by suitable approx-
imations.
In quantum field theory, Fock space comes with a nat-
ural basis F [8, 11, 12]. The Fock basis vectors describe
states with well-defined free particle content, where free
particles are in momentum eigenstates (we assume regu-
larization by a momentum lattice to avoid the problems
associated with a continuous basis; physically this means
that space is finite). In quantum field theory, the strict
superselection rule implies that a system can never be in
a superposition state of different particle contents, where
quantum particles can be distinguished by a number of
intrinsic properties. In making approximations for pass-
ing from quantum field theory to quantum mechanics one
should make sure that a distinguished basis B emerges
from the natural Fock basis F of quantum field theory.
For example, the treatment of a proton as an elementary
particle on the atomic length scale (or low energies) in
quantum mechanics relies on color confinement. Having
an eye on what makes sense from the perspective of par-
ticle physics restricts the situations in which quantum
mechanics can be applied in a deep and meaningful way.
Different options for choosing a distinguished basis
may arise even in quantum field theory. For example,
in the Schwinger model for electrodynamics in 1 + 1 di-
mensions [13–15], one can switch from the standard Fock
space to an alternative Fock space based on photons and
bound electron-positron pairs (see Section 3.3.7 of [8]),
which is similar to regarding protons as elementary par-
ticles and actually illustrates the emergence of a new dis-
tinguished basis via confinement.
When quantum field theory is developed on the Fock
space of momentum eigenstates, one cannot know the po-
sition of a free quantum particle at a given time. How-
ever, whenever collisions between typically three or four
particles occur, we know that all the colliding particles
are at the same position. This remark explains the char-
acteristic particle tracks observed in collider experiments
when a high-energy collision is followed by many low-
energy collisions in a detector ruled by a certain correla-
tion structure of collision events [7].
In the next two sections, we discuss the Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen and double-slit experiments in terms of
two-process unravelings in order to illustrate the basic
ideas. For these discussions we use basis vectors inspired
by the Fock space of particle physics with the correspond-
ing superselection rule. In the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
experiment, the allowed states consist of pairs of pho-
tons with well-defined wave lengths and helicities; in the
double-slit experiment, the allowed states consist of elec-
trons with well-defined momenta.
IV.
EINSTEIN-PODOLSKY-ROSEN
GEDANKENEXPERIMENT
The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) Gedankenexper-
iment [16] was designed to reveal the occurrence of

4
actions-at-a-distance as a sign of the incompleteness of
quantum mechanics. We consider the EPR experiment
in the version for photons, which is appealing for both
theoretical arguments and experimental realization [17–
22]. We here prefer photons over electrons because their
circular polarization states are characterized with respect
to the unambiguous direction of their motion, whereas
the electron spin states are usually characterized with
respect to a preferred direction in space (because their
direction of motion is not Lorentz invariant and is actu-
ally undefined in the rest frame). The arbitrariness of
the chosen direction of space would have to be addressed
with undesirable changes of bases.
Pairs of photons with different wave lengths (λ1 =
551.3 nm and λ2 = 422.7 nm) moving with the same cir-
cular polarization in opposite directions can be created
in the decay of properly excited calcium atoms [17, 18].
Whereas the actual decay occurs through an intermedi-
ate state within some 5 ns, we here use the idealization
of a single collision event in which a calcium excitation
is annihilated and two photons are created.
In the discussion of the EPR experiment, one usually
focuses entirely on polarizations states and neglects spa-
tial information. Spatial information is associated with
the annihilation of a calcium excitation into two photons
and with the detection of the photons by collisions in a
photomultiplier. In between, we do not have any spatial
information. However, one may assume a certain correla-
tion structure for collision events, for example, implying
that the two photons from a single excitation hit two
equally distant detectors at equal times (in the labora-
tory). Filters can be introduced such that photons with
wave length λ1 arrive only in one detector, say the left
one, whereas photons with wave length λ2 arrive only in
the other detector, say the right one.
The following orthonormal basis vectors for the two-
photon states are natural: b1 = |5513, 1⟩|4227, 1⟩and
b2 = |5513, −1⟩|4227, −1⟩, where each photon is charac-
terized by its wave length in ˚Angstr¨om and by its helicity.
The eigenvalues for these eigenstates of the free Hamilto-
nian are independent of helicity, E1 = E2. When a cal-
cium excitation decays, the two processes of the stochas-
tic unraveling are independently initialized with proba-
bility 1/2 in the states
√
2 b1 or −
√
2 b2. According to
the basic idea of unravelings in (2), this implies the ini-
tial density matrix
ρEPR = 1
2

1
−1
−1
1

,
(6)
resulting from the independence of the bra- and ket-
states. Note that this density matrix is of rank 1, that
is, it corresponds to a pure state in standard quantum
mechanics. The pure state associated with the density
matrix (6) is the maximally entangled Bell singlet state
(b1−b2)/
√
2, which is the usual starting point for the dis-
cussion of the EPR experiment. In the unraveling, this
initial condition is produced without any superposition of
the natural basis states. In the language of Schr¨odinger’s
free evolution
bra-world
ket-world
free evolution
with p = 1/2
1
–
+1
+1
1
–
annihilation
collision
1
–
+1
+1
1
–
1
–
+1
+1
1
–
1
–
+1
+1
1
–
with p = 1/2
of
Ca excitation
in
detector
collision
in
detector
FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of the EPR experiment in the
two-world interpretation (see text for details).
famous dramatization, both the bra-cat and the ket-cat
of the two-worlds interpretation are either dead or alive,
but they may be in different states.
The representation of the density matrix (6) in the two-
process unraveling appears at the center of the schematic
illustration of the EPR experiment in Figure 1. The pho-
tons moving in opposite directions with wave lengths λ1
and λ2 are indicated by left and right arrows, respec-
tively. The free motion leads to complex phase factors
that do not depend on the helicity states, so that the bra-
ket average for the density matrix of the helicity states
remains unchanged during the free evolution. When the
photons hit the detectors at equal distances from the site
of their creation, they still have their original, equal helic-
ities: +1 and −1 with equal probabilities, independently
in the two worlds.
Each of the detectors consists of a beam-splitting linear
polarizer and two photomultipliers counting the photons
in the two linear polarization states. These polarizers are
cubes made of two glass prisms with suitable dielectric
thin films on the sides stuck together. The polarizers can
be rotated by the angles θ1, θ2 around the optical axis
with respect to a reference direction. As the photons are
moving in opposite directions, also the rotations are per-
formed in opposite directions, so that θ1 + θ2 actually is
the angle between the two polarizers. We are interested
in the probabilities for finding the photons in the two
optical units in parallel (∥) and perpendicular (⊥) polar-
ization states. In the natural, intrinsic basis of circular
polarization states, these probabilities are the averages of
the following observables, which are obtained by trans-
formation from linear to circular polarization states,
A∥∥(θ1, θ2) = A⊥⊥(θ1, θ2) = 1
4

1
e2i(θ1+θ2)
e−2i(θ1+θ2)
1

(7)
and
A∥⊥(θ1, θ2) = A⊥∥(θ1, θ2)
= 1
4

1
−e2i(θ1+θ2)
−e−2i(θ1+θ2)
1

.
(8)
These averages performed with the density matrix (6) are
used to detect a violation of Bell’s inequalities [23, 24],

5
electron
gun
wall with
two slits
probability
densities
II
PI, II
I
PI
PII
absorbing
wall
FIG. 2. Double-slit experiment with electrons explained in
terms of wave functions (symbolically illustrated by the in-
terference of waves).
which are nowadays no longer interpreted as actions-at-
a-distance but rather as nonlocal correlations in quan-
tum systems [18, 19]. Such correlations arise from the
multiplicative interplay of the two independent stochas-
tic processes of the two-world interpretation. As the den-
sity matrices obtained from the maximally entangled Bell
singlet state of standard quantum mechanics and from
the two-process unraveling coincide, so do the respective
predictions for the correlations.
It is important to note that the definition of the observ-
ables (7) and (8) implies the following strong postulate:
When photons pass through macroscopic polarizers, all
polarization and phase shift effects coincide with those
for classical electromagnetic waves. Also filters must act
on individual photons in the same way as on electromag-
netic waves.
V.
DOUBLE-SLIT EXPERIMENT
The double-slit experiment provides most convincing
evidence in favor of wave-like properties of quantum par-
ticles. As for waves of water or electromagnetic waves,
one likes to add amplitudes and to square the result to
obtain intensities exhibiting interference effects. We dis-
cuss some details in the spirit of Sections 1-3 to 1-5 in
Volume III of the Feynman Lectures on Physics [25]. A
similar discussion, but from a more philosophical per-
spective, can be found in Section 7.1 of [22].
An ide-
alized experimental setup for the double-slit experiment
with electrons is sketched in Figure 2.
The electron gun in Figure 2 could simply be a tung-
sten wire emitting electrons when heated by an electric
current, surrounded by a metal box with a hole in it.
A voltage between the wire and the box accelerates the
electrons, where all electrons leaving the box through the
hole possess nearly the same kinetic energy E. The wall
with two parallel slits of equal width typically is a thin
metal plate. Attached to the absorbing wall, there is a
movable electron detector, say a Geiger counter, to mea-
sure the distribution of electron hits as a function of po-
sition on the absorbing wall.
The electrons are found to hit the absorbing wall as
individual events occurring at random positions x.
If
only Slit I (or II) is open, one finds the probability den-
sity PI (or PII) for the spatial distribution of events on
the absorber, which may also be regarded as intensities
(see Figure 2). If both slits are open, one observes the
startling interference pattern PI, II for the distribution of
discrete electron hits on the screen, which is taken as
evidence for a “particle-wave duality.” Electrons do not
simply go through either one or the other slit so that a
wave-like pattern with constructive and destructive inter-
ference arises. Note that also the single-slit probability
densities PI and PII are affected by wave-like diffraction.
A.
Standard interpretation
Following [25], the spin of the electron is neglected in
our discussion of the double-slit experiment. The proba-
bility density PI, II obtained with both slits open is clearly
not the sum of the probability densities PI and PII for
each slit alone. As for waves of water or electromagnetic
waves, interference effects can be described by adding
amplitudes rather than adding probability densities or
intensities,
PI, II = |ψI + ψII|2
̸=
|ψI|2 + |ψII|2 = PI + PII, (9)
where the complex amplitudes ψI and ψII are the wave
functions for the single-slit experiments, obtained by
solving the corresponding Schr¨odinger equations.
The
probability densities sketched in Figure 2 actually corre-
spond to the intensity profiles obtained from the Fraun-
hofer diffraction equation of classical wave optics for large
distances from the slits. Such a calculation is based on
Huygens’ idea that every point on a wavefront acts as a
source of a spherical wave and that the sum of all these
spherical waves determines the further propagation of the
wavefront.
Experimental data for cold neutrons can be found in
[26]. Less detailed experimental data for electrons are
available in a much older paper [27] (in German), or in
its partial translation into English [28].
Explanations of the type sketched above are generally
presented and readily accepted as a sound and convinc-
ing story of quantum interference by both physicists and
philosophers. However, such explanations may be con-
sidered as rather symbolic, raising a number of ques-
tions. For example, note that ψI and ψII in (9) are time-
independent wave functions evaluated on the absorbing
wall, that is, on a boundary of the domain. On what
domain should one actually solve the time-independent
Schr¨odinger equation? Between the walls or also around
the electron gun?
What kind of boundary conditions
are required to solve the second-order time-independent

6
Schr¨odinger equation? Is the wave function on the ab-
sorbing wall needed as a boundary condition or is it a
predictive result of the full solution? Is the sum ψI + ψII
consistent with the boundary conditions for the double-
slit experiment? Furthermore note that the phase shifts,
which are at the heart of interference, are in direct cor-
respondence to the flight times for the electrons. How
can then a time-independent solution provide the whole
story? Why shouldn’t small differences in arrival times
reveal through which slit an electron has passed? Does a
discrete electron hit on the absorbing wall occur at one
instant in time or is it smeared in time due to contribu-
tions from the two slits? A detailed theoretical discussion
that goes far beyond the usual textbook arguments can
be found in [29].
Maybe
the
above
questions
could
be
addressed
most convincingly within Bohmian mechanics [30–34].
Whereas all these questions are nonchalantly ignored for
the standard interpretation based on wave functions, this
is no longer possible for the two-process unraveling.
B.
Two-process interpretation
Each of the independent jump processes of the two-
process unraveling consists of the following five steps:
creation of an electron at the exit hole of the electron
gun, free evolution of the electron to one of the two slits,
effective collision of the electron in the corresponding nar-
row slit, free evolution of the electron to the absorbing
wall, and absorption of the electron by the wall. As in
the standard interpretation, we neglect the electron spin,
and we assume that all electrons leave the gun with the
same (nonrelativistic) energy E. The magnitude of the
electron momentum k is then restricted by k2 = 2mE,
where m is the electron mass. We further assume that
there is a large but finite number of possible orientations
of k and that both the set of possible momentum states
and their frequencies of occurrence respect the up-down
symmetry of the experiment illustrated in Figure 3. Fi-
nally, all relevant momenta possess a positive component
to the right.
To elaborate the stochastic jump processes in more de-
tail, we introduce the sets KI, KII which consist of the
momenta pointing from the exit of the electron gun to
slit I or II, respectively, and the set K containing all mo-
menta that can occur in an effective elastic collision in a
slit. Simultaneously but independently for the two pro-
cesses of the unraveling, an electron is initiated with a
momentum k ∈KI ∪KII so that it can pass through
one of the slits. After the time determined by the dis-
tance of the electron gun from the wall with slits and
the component of the momentum k normal to the wall,
the electron passes a slit. As a result of a high interac-
tion rate with macroscopic matter at the narrow slit, the
electron jumps into a state k′ ∈K, where we make the
simplifying assumption of a single effective elastic colli-
sion, that is |k′| = |k|. The flight time to the absorbing
electron
gun
absorbing
wall
wall with
two slits
probability
densities
II
PI
PII
PI, II
I
1
2
3
4
k
k'
FIG. 3. Double-slit experiment with electrons explained by
two-process interpretation.
wall is determined by the distance between the parallel
walls and by the normal component of k′. When the elec-
tron hits the absorbing wall, it is assumed to be stopped
by an inelastic collision and its momentum jumps to 0.
Equipped with the construction of the independent
jump processes of the stochastic unraveling, how can we
find the probability for an electron to hit the detector?
As the jump process involves only momentum states, we
need to consider also the geometry of the experimental
setup. For a given position of the detector, we can con-
struct the set D of all pairs of momenta (k, k′) for which
the electron ends up in the detector. The number of pos-
sible momentum states should be so large that, even for
a detector with diameter small compared to the width of
the slits, the set D contains many pairs. Figure 3 shows
four such (k, k′) pairs and the corresponding piece-wise
linear “trajectories” that end in the detector. We put the
term “trajectories” in quotation marks because the posi-
tion of an electron is known only when collisions occur,
that is, in the electron gun, at a slit, and on the absorbing
wall, thus defining a (k, k′) pair; in between, the free evo-
lution of the electrons comes with a certain correlation
structure between collision events implying flight times
and phase factors expressed by piece-wise linearity, just
as in the EPR experiment. Two “trajectories” per slit
is the minimum number required to account for single-
slit diffraction. Any finite number of “trajectories” per
slit can be treated in the same way and even the limit
to infinitely many “trajectories” may be considered. If,
and only if, the “trajectories” of both jump processes are
contained in D, there can be a nonzero contribution to
the probability for the electron to end up in the detec-
tor. Note that the absorption of the electron for the two
processes does not occur at exactly the same time; a non-
vanishing contribution to the density matrix arises only
after both processes have reached the absorbing wall.
The relevance of (k, k′) pairs shows that the calcula-
tion of probability densities depends on the sequences of
events occurring in the jump processes. Such an analysis

7
goes beyond the evolution of the density matrix accord-
ing to the von Neumann equation (1) and can only be
performed in the context of the more detailed stochastic
unravelings of the density matrix. An appealing frame-
work for analyzing such histories of events is provided in
[35].
We are now in a position to evaluate the probabil-
ity for an electron to hit the detector.
For the pair
j = (k, k′) ∈D, the probability pj is given by the prod-
uct of the probabilities for generating and scattering the
electron in the corresponding momentum states k and
k′, respectively. The complex phase factor ϕj is deter-
mined by the length of the corresponding piece-wise lin-
ear “trajectory” or, equivalently, by the flight time. The
probability for a pair of independent “trajectories” j, l is
given by the product pj pl, and the overall probability for
electron detection suggested by the density matrix (2) is
given by
X
j,l∈D
pjpl ϕjϕ∗
l =

X
j∈D
pjϕj

2
.
(10)
What looks like the square of a sum actually results from
the product of all independent combinations of possibil-
ities. The independent processes of the unraveling im-
ply the same result as the corresponding superposition
of properly weighted states [in (9), equal weights are as-
sumed]. Without loss of generality, the phase factors at
the hole of the electron gun have been taken as unity
[random phase factors would average out in (10)].
It is remarkable that the numerical calculation per-
formed in [26] for comparison to experimental diffraction
data for neutrons is performed in a fully analogous way.
It is also based on the phase factors resulting from the
sum of the lengths of the linear paths from the electron
source to a point in one of the slits and from there to the
detector, and their final result corresponds to the right-
hand side of (10), thus confirming the assumed corre-
lation structure between collision events. The left-hand
side reveals that we here do not obtain this result by
superposition, but from the bilinear representation of
the density matrix in terms of stochastically independent
bra- and ket-vectors.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The proposed two-worlds interpretation of quantum
mechanics leads to the same equation for density ma-
trices as standard quantum mechanics, which is the von
Neumann equation (1). In standard quantum mechan-
ics, this equation for density matrices is inferred from
the Schr¨odinger equation for wave functions. In the two-
worlds interpretation, the von Neumann equation is ob-
tained from two stochastic jump processes in Hilbert
space. Although the same equation arises in both ap-
proaches, they nevertheless are significantly different.
The two-worlds interpretation introduces a new entan-
glement mechanism and heavily restricts the quantum
systems to which the von Neumann equation can be ap-
plied, thus reducing the risk of paradoxes.
We have proposed to use unravelings of density matri-
ces in terms of stochastic jump processes to account for
the stochastic nature of quantum mechanics in the most
direct way. Continuous free Schr¨odinger evolution is in-
terrupted by stochastic quantum jumps that reproduce
the proper interaction effects. The bilinear representa-
tion (2) of density matrices in terms of two independently
evolving stochastic processes is the most general, natu-
ral and versatile option. The enormous freedom in con-
structing two-process unravelings is restricted by a strong
superselection rule, which essentially eliminates super-
position states from quantum mechanics.
This strict
superselection rule, which can be justified by obtaining
quantum mechanics as a limit of quantum field theory,
requires that the content of fundamental particles in a
quantum system is well-defined; superpositions of parti-
cle states with different characteristic properties are for-
bidden.
In the proposed formulation of quantum me-
chanics, entanglements no longer arise from superposi-
tion, but rather from the dyadic pairing and averaging of
the two stochastic state vectors of our unravelings in the
fundamental representation (2) of the density matrix as
a correlation function.
Superposition states are at the origin of many para-
doxes in quantum mechanics. Therefore, a superposition-
free implementation of quantum entanglement offers the
possibility to eliminate paradoxes. This is a consequence
of restricting the applicability of quantum mechanics by
the strong superselection rule that results from the ori-
gin of quantum mechanics in the quantum field theory of
elementary particle physics.
For example, in Schr¨odinger’s cat version of the EPR
experiment, the superposition state involves a complex
macroscopic system.
In the tradition of “Wigner’s
friend” [36], Frauchiger and Renner [37] assume the appli-
cability of quantum mechanics to even more complex su-
perposition states that include agents who are themselves
using quantum theory, and they then reveal inconsisten-
cies in conventional quantum mechanics. However, for
these situations the applicability of quantum mechanics
cannot be justified by making a connection to quantum
field theory and verifying the strong superselection rule.
The stochastic jumps of our unravelings reproduce
the interaction of standard quantum mechanics.
Be-
ing equivalent to the interaction part of the Schr¨odinger
equation, they reflect the intrinsic stochastic nature of
quantum mechanics, not an additional feature. This situ-
ation is fundamentally different from the GRW approach
[38], in which spontaneous collapses of wave functions
are an additional stochastic jump feature on top of the
full Schr¨odinger dynamics [39]. In the GRW approach,
superpositions are suppressed only in the passage from
microscopic to macroscopic systems [40].
Despite the linguistic similarity between the two-

8
worlds and many-worlds [41, 42] interpretations of quan-
tum mechanics, they are very different views. Unlike in
the many-worlds interpretation with a branching struc-
ture into many separate worlds, a combination or overlay
of two worlds, or maybe better of two semi-worlds, de-
termines the behavior of a single full world in the present
interpretation. In the many-worlds view, “world” is often
replaced by “universe” whereas, in the two-worlds inter-
pretation, we deal with two stochastic processes in the
Hilbert space of a quantum “system.” These two pro-
cesses are rigorously ruled by classical probability the-
ory, where probability is an ontic feature of quantum
theory. The Markov property of its stochastic processes
suggests to consider the two-worlds interpretation as a
hidden-variable theory.
Note that the nature of this
hidden-variable theory is very different from determin-
istic Bohmian mechanics [30–34].
Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to de-
velop a general theory of measurement, it should be
pointed out that a theory of measurable multitime cor-
relation functions has been developed in [1].
For the
semilinear quantum master equations of thermodynamic
origin, which are linear for scalar multiplication but, in
general, nonlinear for addition, this theory of measur-
able correlations has been generalized in [8].
One can
further ask the question whether density matrices can be
measured. This question can, for example, be addressed
by quantum-state tomography [43, 44]. Concerning the
measurement problem formulated in a concise way by
Maudlin [45] as the mutual inconsistency of three claims
associated with the standard formulation of quantum me-
chanics in terms of wave functions, none of these three
claims is made in the two-worlds interpretation.
“Density-matrix realism” as an appealing alternative
to “wave-function realism” has been discussed in great
detail in [46]. We here go a step further and consider the
stochastic unraveling of a density matrix as the funda-
mental representation of a quantum system. Unravelings
provide an opportunity of a new interpretation of quan-
tum mechanics, and this new form of realism may be
called “unravelism.” Complete knowledge of a quantum
state requires two stochastic state vectors.
These two
“semi-worlds” are what there ultimately exists, and they
play together to characterize the quantum state of the
”full world,” including entanglements. In the context of
dissipative quantum field theory, this opportunity has al-
ready been explored in [7, 8]. The magic number “two”
in the two-world interpretation corresponds to the num-
ber “2” in the expression |ψ|2, which relates the wave
function to probability. The role of Born’s rule is taken
over by the bilinear expression (2) for the probabilistic
tool density matrix in terms of two more fundamental
stochastic objects.
It might be desirable to couple the semi-worlds of
the two-worlds interpretation (bringing two views of the
world together is a challenging task, not only for drunk-
ards). Such a coupling indeed arises as soon as we pass
from reversible to irreversible quantum systems [1, 8].
As we argued in the introduction, irreversible dynamics
should be considered as the most natural choice, whereas
reversible dynamics can be justified only in exceptional
situations. For thermodynamic equilibrium states, it has
been observed that the two processes of the unraveling
may not be independent [9, 10].
This should not be
surprising because thermodynamic equilibrium states are
reached by some kind of irreversible process, where the
precise form or strength of the process is irrelevant.
A quantum field theory that incorporates dissipative
smearing at very short length scales has been elaborated
in hcoqft. It has been argued that the length scale at
which dissipative smearing sets a limit to physical resolv-
ability could be identified with the Planck length. As the
Planck length involves Newton’s gravitational constant it
may be concluded that irreversibility is associated with
gravity and, therefore, that also the coupling between
the two worlds of an unraveling can be a gravitational
effect. The foundations for including gravity into dissi-
pative quantum field theory have been laid in [47, 48].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Michael Esfeld, Carlo Rovelli,
Andrea Oldofredi, Simon Friederich, Alexei Bazavov, Ro-
main Chessex and Alexander Weyman for helpful com-
ments on a first draft of this paper. I gratefully acknowl-
edge inspiring discussions with J¨urg Fr¨ohlich and Amine
Rusi El Hassani on the operator-algebraic ETH approach
(Events–Trees–Histories) to quantum theory.
[1] H.-P. Breuer and F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open
Quantum Systems (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2002).
[2] U. Weiss, Quantum Dissipative Systems, 3rd ed., Series
in Modern Condensed Matter Physics, Volume 13 (World
Scientific, Singapore, 2008).
[3] H. C. ¨Ottinger, The geometry and thermodynamics of
dissipative quantum systems, Europhys. Lett. 94, 10006
(2011).
[4] D. Taj and H. C. ¨Ottinger, Natural approach to quantum
dissipation, Phys. Rev. A 92, 062128 (2015).
[5] H. Grabert, Nonlinear relaxation and fluctuations of
damped quantum systems, Z. Physik B 49, 161 (1982).
[6] C. Werndl, Determinism and indeterminism, in The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Science, edited by
P. Humphreys (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2015)
pp. 210–232.
[7] A. Oldofredi and H. C. ¨Ottinger, The dissipative ap-
proach to quantum field theory: Conceptual foundations
and ontological implications, Euro. Jnl. Phil. Sci. 11, 18

9
(2021).
[8] H. C. ¨Ottinger, A Philosophical Approach to Quantum
Field Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2017).
[9] R. Chessex, M. Borrelli, and H. C. ¨Ottinger, Dynamical
triplet unraveling: A quantum Monte Carlo algorithm for
reversible dynamics, Phys. Rev. A 106, 022222 (2022).
[10] R. Chessex, M. Borrelli, and H. C. ¨Ottinger, Fixed-
point quantum Monte Carlo method:
A combination
of density-matrix quantum Monte Carlo method and
stochastic unravellings, Phys. Rev. A 105, 062803 (2022).
[11] V. Fock, Konfigurationsraum und zweite Quantelung,
Z. Physik 75, 622 (1932).
[12] P. Teller, An Interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field
Theory (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1995).
[13] J. Schwinger, Gauge invariance and mass. II, Phys. Rev.
128, 2425 (1962).
[14] J. H. Lowenstein and J. A. Swieca, Quantum electrody-
namics in two dimensions, Ann. Phys. 68, 172 (1971).
[15] J. Kogut and L. Susskind, Hamiltonian formulation of
Wilson’s lattice gauge theories, Phys. Rev. D 11, 395
(1975).
[16] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered
complete?, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).
[17] S. J. Freedman and J. F. Clauser, Experimental test of
local hidden-variable theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 938
(1972).
[18] A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, Experimental real-
ization of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm Gedankenex-
periment: A new violation of Bell’s inequalities, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 49, 91 (1982).
[19] A. Aspect, Bell’s theorem: The naive view of an exper-
imentalist, in Quantum (Un)speakables:
From Bell to
Quantum Information, edited by R. A. Bertlmann and
A. Zeilinger (Springer, Berlin, 2002) pp. 119–153.
[20] R. A. Bertlmann, Bell’s theorem and the nature of reality,
Found. Phys. 20, 1191 (1990).
[21] D. Z. Albert, Quantum Mechanics and Experience (Har-
vard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992).
[22] D. Rickles, The Philosophy of Physics (Polity Press,
Cambridge, 2016).
[23] J. S. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox,
Physics 1, 195 (1964).
[24] J. S. Bell, On the problem of hidden variables in quantum
mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447 (1966).
[25] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, Quan-
tum Mechanics, Feynman Lectures On Physics, Vol. III
(Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1965).
[26] A. Zeilinger, R. G¨ahler, C. G. Shull, W. Treimer, and
W. Mampe, Single- and double-slit diffraction of neu-
trons, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 1067 (1988).
[27] C.
J¨onsson,
Elektroneninterferenzen
an
mehreren
k¨unstlich hergestellten Feinspalten, Z. Physik 161, 454
(1961).
[28] C. J¨onsson, Electron diffraction at multiple slits, Amer.
J. Phys. 42, 4 (1974).
[29] Y. Aharonov, E. Cohen, F. Colombo, T. Landsberger,
I. Sabadini, D. C. Struppa, and J. Tollaksen, Finally mak-
ing sense of the double-slit experiment, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 114, 6480 (2017).
[30] D. Bohm, A suggested interpretation of the quantum the-
ory in terms of ‘hidden’ variables, Phys. Rev. 55, 166
(1952).
[31] D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, and N. Zangh´ı, Quantum equi-
librium and the origin of absolute uncertainty, J. Stat.
Phys. 67, 843 (1992).
[32] M. Esfeld, M. Hubert, D. Lazarovici, and D. D¨urr, The
ontology of Bohmian mechanics, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 65,
773 (2014).
[33] D. Deckert, M. Esfeld, and A. Oldofredi, A persistent
particle ontology for quantum field theory in terms of
the Dirac sea, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 70, 747 (2019).
[34] O. Passon, Bohmsche Mechanik, 2nd ed. (Harri Deutsch,
Frankfurt, 2010).
[35] J. Fr¨ohlich, Relativistic quantum theory, in Do Wave
Functions Jump?, Fundamental Theories of Physics No.
198, edited by V. Allori, A. Bassi, D. D¨urr, and N. Zanghi
(Springer, Cham, 2021) pp. 237–257.
[36] E. Wigner, Remarks on the mind-body question, in
The Scientist Speculates: An Anthology of Partly-Baked
Ideas, edited by I. J. Good (Heinemann, London, 1961)
pp. 284–302.
[37] D. Frauchiger and R. Renner, Quantum theory cannot
consistently describe the use of itself, Nature Communi-
cations 9, 3711 (2018).
[38] G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber, Unified dy-
namics for microscopic and macroscopic systems, Phys.
Rev. D 34, 470 (1986).
[39] J. S. Bell, Are there quantum jumps?, in Schr¨odinger,
Centenary Celebration of a Polymath, edited by C. W.
Kilmister
(Cambridge
University
Press,
Cambridge,
1987) pp. 41–52.
[40] R. Tumulka, A relativistic version of the Ghirardi-
Rimini-Weber model, J. Stat. Phys. 125, 825 (2006).
[41] H. Everett III, “Relative State” formulation of quantum
mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454 (1957).
[42] D. Wallace, The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum Theory
According to the Everett Interpretation (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, 2012).
[43] J. Rau, Evidence procedure for efficient quantum-state
tomography, Phys. Rev. A 82, 012104 (2010).
[44] J. Rau, Quantum Theory: An Information Processing
Approach (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2021).
[45] T. Maudlin, Three measurement problems, Topoi 14, 7
(1995).
[46] E. K. Chen, Quantum mechanics in a time-asymmetric
universe: On the nature of the initial quantum state,
Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 72, 1155 (2021).
[47] H. C. ¨Ottinger, Composite higher derivative theory of
gravity, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013190 (2020).
[48] H. C. ¨Ottinger, Conserved currents for the gauge-field
theory with Lorentz symmetry group and a composite
theory of gravity, 141, 39001 (2023).

