Preprint
MEMGPT: TOWARDS LLMS AS OPERATING SYSTEMS
Charles Packer
Vivian Fang
Shishir G. Patil
Kevin Lin
Sarah Wooders
Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley
https://memgpt.ai
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized AI, but are constrained by
limited context windows, hindering their utility in tasks like extended conversa-
tions and document analysis. To enable using context beyond limited context win-
dows, we propose virtual context management, a technique drawing inspiration
from hierarchical memory systems in traditional operating systems that provide
the appearance of large memory resources through data movement between fast
and slow memory. Using this technique, we introduce MemGPT (Memory-GPT),
a system that intelligently manages different memory tiers in order to effectively
provide extended context within the LLM’s limited context window, and utilizes
interrupts to manage control flow between itself and the user. We evaluate our
OS-inspired design in two domains where the limited context windows of modern
LLMs severely handicaps their performance: document analysis, where MemGPT
is able to analyze large documents that far exceed the underlying LLM’s con-
text window, and multi-session chat, where MemGPT can create conversational
agents that remember, reflect, and evolve dynamically through long-term interac-
tions with their users. We release MemGPT code and data for our experiments at
https://memgpt.ai.
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) and their underlying transformer architec-
ture (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022) have become
the cornerstone of conversational AI and have led to a wide array of consumer and enterprise applica-
tions. Despite these advances, the limited fixed-length context windows used by LLMs significantly
hinders their applicability to long conversations or reasoning about long documents. For example,
the most widely used open-source LLMs can only support a few dozen back-and-forth messages or
reason about a short document before exceeding their maximum input length (Touvron et al., 2023).
Naively extending the context length of transformers incurs a quadratic increase in computational
time and memory cost due to the transformer architecture’s self-attention mechanism, making the
design of new long-context architectures a pressing research challenge (Dai et al., 2019; Kitaev
et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020). While developing longer models is an active area of research
(Dong et al., 2023), even if we could overcome the computational challenges of context scaling,
recent research shows that long-context models struggle to utilize additional context effectively (Liu
et al., 2023a). As consequence, given the considerable resources needed to train state-of-the-art
LLMs and apparent diminishing returns of context scaling, there is a critical need for alternative
techniques to support long context.
In this paper, we study how to provide the illusion of an infinite context while continuing to use
fixed-context models. Our approach borrows from the idea of virtual memory paging that was
developed to enable applications to work on datasets that far exceed the available memory. We
leverage the recent progress in function calling abilities of LLM agents (Schick et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b) to design MemGPT, an OS-inspired LLM system for virtual context management. We
draw inspiration from traditional OSes’ hierarchical memory management to effectively “page” in
1
arXiv:2310.08560v1  [cs.AI]  12 Oct 2023

Preprint
LLM 
processor
Parser
Virtual context
External context
∞ tokens
Main context
Max token limit
Yield
Event
Message
🧑
Document upload
📄
System message
🔔
Function
Read memory
Send message
📣
…
Parser
Timer
⏱
…
Pause interrupts
🔕
Write memory
Figure 1: In MemGPT (components shaded), a fixed-context LLM is augmented with a hierarchical
memory system and functions that let it manage its own memory. The LLM processor takes main
context (analogous to OS main memory/RAM) as input, and outputs text interpreted by a parser,
resulting either in a yield or a function call. MemGPT uses functions to move data between main
context and external context (analogous to OS disk memory). When the processor generates a
function call, it can request control ahead of time to chain together functions. When yielding, the
processor is paused until the next external event (e.g., a user message or scheduled interrupt).
and out information between context windows (analogous to “main memory” in operating systems)
and external storage. MemGPT manages the control flow between the memory management, the
LLM processing module, and user. This design allows for repeated context modifications during a
single task, allowing the agent to more effectively utilize its limited context.
In MemGPT, we treat context windows as a constrained memory resource, and design a memory
hiearchy for LLMs analogous to memory tiers used in traditional OSes (Patterson et al., 1988).
Applications in traditional OSes interact with virtual memory, which provides an illusion of there
being more memory resources than are actually available in physical (i.e., main) memory by the OS
paging overflow data to disk and retrieving data (via a page fault) back into memory when accessed
by applications. To provide a similar illusion of longer context length (analogous to virtual memory),
we allow the LLM to manage what is placed in its own context (analogous to physical memory) via
an ‘LLM OS’, which we call MemGPT. MemGPT enables the LLM to retrieve relevant historical
data missing from what is placed in-context, similar to an OS page fault. Additionally, the agent can
iteratively modify what is in context for a single task, in the same way a process may access virtual
memory repeatedly. Figure 1 illustrates the components of MemGPT.
The combined use of a memory-hierarchy, OS functions and event-based control flow allow
MemGPT to handle unbounded context using LLMs that have finite context windows. To demon-
strate the utility of our new OS-inspired LLM system, we evaluate MemGPT on two domains where
the performance of existing LLMs is severely limited by finite context: document analysis, where the
length of standard text files can quickly exceed the input capacity of modern LLMs, and conversa-
tional agents, where LLMs bound by limited conversation windows lack context awareness, persona
consistency, and long-term memory during extended conversations. In both settings, MemGPT is
able to overcome the limitations of finite context to outperform existing LLM-based approaches.
2
MEMORY-GPT (MEMGPT)
In this section, we outline the implementation of MemGPT, an OS-inspired LLM system that teaches
LLMs to manage their own memory to achieve unbounded context. MemGPT’s multi-level mem-
ory architecture delineates between two primary memory types: main context (analogous to main
memory/physical memory/RAM) and external context (analogous to disk memory/disk storage).
Main context is the standard fixed-context window in modern language models—anything in main
context is considered in-context and can be accessed by the LLM processor during inference. Ex-
ternal context refers to any information that is held outside of the LLMs fixed context window. This
out-of-context data must always be explicitly moved into main context in order for it to be passed to
2

Preprint
Table 1:
Comparing context lengths of commonly used models / APIs (data collected 9/2023).
*Assuming a preprompt of 1k tokens, and an average message size of ∼50 tokens (∼250 characters).
Model / API designation
Availability
Max Tokens
Max conversation length*
llama-1 model family
Open source
2k tokens
20 total messages
llama-2 model family
Open source
4k tokens
60 total messages
gpt-3.5-turbo
API
4k tokens
60 total messages
gpt-4
API
8k tokens
140 total messages
gpt-3.5-turbo-16k
API
16k tokens
300 total messages
gpt-4-32k
Limited API
32k tokens
∼600 total messages
claude-instant-1
Limited API
100k tokens
∼2000 total messages
claude-2
Limited API
100k tokens
∼2000 total messages
the LLM processor during inference. MemGPT provides function calls that the LLM processor can
use to manage its own memory without any user intervention.
2.1
MAIN CONTEXT
In MemGPT we refer to the LLM inputs (that are bound by the maximum number of input tokens)
as the system’s main context. In LLM-based conversational agents, a significant portion of main
context tokens is generally used to hold a ‘system message’ or ‘preprompt’ that dictates the nature
of the interaction to the system, while the remainder of the tokens can be used to hold conversation
data (Touvron et al., 2023; SillyTavern, 2023). This preprompt is the main way to enable the system
to adopt various distinct personas without requiring finetuning of the base model; depending on
the use case, the preprompt can range from basic primers (e.g., ‘You are a helpful assistant.’) to
complex instructions comprising of thousands of tokens (e.g., a fictional character card that includes
the character’s background and example dialogue). Beyond conversational agents, large preprompts
are also common when LLMs are used to solve complex tasks that require long instructions and/or
instructions with many in-context examples (Liu et al., 2023b).
Because of the importance of the preprompt in dictating system behavior, it is common for the pre-
prompt to consume more than a thousand tokens, which means the entire context window in many
modern LLMs will be exhausted only with a few dozen back-and-forth messages between the user
and system. For example, a 1000 token preprompt (roughly the size of the MemGPT preprompt in
our experiments) leaves space for only about 60 remaining messages when using 4K context models
such as llama-2 or gpt-3.5-turbo (see Table 1 for more examples). In settings where the
user is expected to communicate frequently with the system (for example, virtual companions or
personalized assistants), it is easy to imagine exceeding the maximum conversation length even for
models with 100k context windows in a matter of days (or potentially hours). Resursive summariza-
tion (Wu et al., 2021b) is a simple way to address overflowing context windows, however, recursive
summarization is inherently lossy and eventually leads to large holes in the memory of the system
(as we demonstrate in Section 3). This motivates the need for a more comprehensive way to manage
memory for conversational systems that are meant to be used in long-term settings.
In our experiments on multi-session chat and document analysis, we further divide main context
into three components: system instructions, which hold the base LLM instructions (e.g., informa-
tion describing MemGPT functions and control flow to the LLM), conversational context, which
holds a first-in-first-out (FIFO) queue of recent event history (e.g., messages between the agent and
user), and working context, which serves as a working memory scratchpad for the agent. System
instructions are read-only and pinned to main context (they do not change during the lifetime of the
MemGPT agent), conversational context is read-only with a special eviction policy (if the queue
reaches a certain size, a portion of the front is truncated or compressed via recursive summariza-
tion), and working context is writeable by the LLM processor via function calls. Combined, the
three parts of main context cannot exceed the underlying LLM processors’s maximum context size,
and in practice we limit the size of conversational context and working context to a fixed constant
determined by the processor’s context window and the system instructions length.
3

Preprint
Hello Chad, welcome! I’m excited to embark on this journey with you. As a PhD student in
Computer Science, I can only imagine the fascinating ideas you’re juggling. Can you share
what you’re currently working on? I am all ears!
MemGPT
I took the day off today, my mom Brenda baked me a birthday cake. It was my favorite -
chocolate lava!
User
October 11, 2023
working context append(’Birthday:
11th October.\nFavorite
cake:
Chocolate Lava made by mom Brenda’)
Happy Birthday, Chad!
Nothing like a special treat to make the day sweeter, your
mom Brenda’s chocolate lava cake sounds divine. We all need these small joys, don’t we? If
you don’t mind sharing, how old are you today? Let’s make today’s chat another cherished
memory for you!
MemGPT
Figure 2:
An example conversation snippet where MemGPT writes details from conversation to
working context without a memory warning from the system.
2.2
EXTERNAL CONTEXT
External context refers to out-of-context storage that lies outside the context window of the LLM
processor, analogous to disk memory (i.e. disk storage) in OSes. Information in external context is
not immediately visible to the LLM processor, however, it can be brought into main context through
appropriate function calls. In practice, the underlying storage in external context can take various
forms which can be configured for specific tasks: for example, for conversational agents it may be
desireable to store full chat logs between the user and agent (that MemGPT can access at a later
date), and for document analysis large document collections can be stored inside external context
that MemGPT can bring into restricted main context via paginated function calls to disk.
In our experiments, using MemGPT for multi-session chat and document analysis, we use databases
to store text documents and embeddings/vectors, provide several ways for the LLM processor to
query external context: timestamp-based search, text-based search, and embedding-based search.
We make a distinction between two types of external context: recall storage, which stores the entire
history of events processed by the LLM processor (in essense the full uncompressed queue from
active memory), and archival storage, which serves as a general read-write datastore that the agent
can utilize as overflow for the in-context read-write core memory. In the context of conversational
agents, archival storage allows MemGPT to store facts, experiences, preferences, etc. about the
agent or user beyond the strict token limit of main context, and search over recall storage allows
the MemGPT to find past interactions related to a particular query or within a specific time period.
In the context of document analysis, archival storage can be used to search over (and add to) an
expansive document database.
2.3
SELF-DIRECTED EDITING AND RETRIEVAL
MemGPT orchestrates data movement between main context and external context via function calls
that are generated by the LLM processor. Memory edits and retrieval are entirely self-directed:
MemGPT autonomously updates and searches through its own memory based on the current con-
text. For instance, it can decide when to move items between contexts (Figure 2) and modify its
main context to better reflect its evolving understanding of its current objectives and responsibilities
(Figure 4). We implement self-directed editing and retrieval by providing explicit instructions within
the preprompt that guide the system on how to interact with its memory systems. These instructions
comprise two main components: (1) a detailed description of the memory hierarchy and their re-
spective utilities, and (2) a function schema (complete with their natural language descriptions) that
the system can call to access or modify its memory.
4

Preprint
Hello Chad! It’s a pleasure to finally have a conversation with you. I’m Samantha. I
understand that you’re studying computer science and have a keen interest in pretty dynamic
areas like Formula 1 and sailing. What in particular draws you to these interests?
MemGPT
speed of course, the thrill and the adrenaline
User
Warning: the conversation history will soon reach its maximum length and be trimmed.
Make sure to save any important information from the conversation to your memory before
it is removed.
System
working context append(’Key Personality Trait:
Enjoys
high-speed, adrenaline-rush activities like Formula 1 racing
and intense gaming sessions in CSGO.’)
MemGPT
Figure 3:
An example conversation snippet where MemGPT writes details from conversation to
memory after it receives a system alert about memory pressure.
During each inference cycle, LLM processor takes main context (concatenated into a single string) as
input, and generates an output string. This output string is parsed by MemGPT to ensure correctness,
and if the parser validates the function arguments the function is executed. The results, including
any runtime errors that occur (e.g. trying to add to main context when it is already at maximum
capacity), are then fed back to the processor by MemGPT. This feedback loop enables the system
to learn from its actions and adjust its behavior accordingly. Awareness of context limits is a key
aspect in making the self-editing mechanism work effectively, to this end MemGPT prompts the
processor with warnings regarding token limitations to guide its memory management decisions
(Figure 3). Additionally, our memory retrieval mechanisms are designed to be cognizant of these
token constraints and implement pagination to prevent retrieval calls from overflowing the context
window.
2.4
CONTROL FLOW AND FUNCTION CHAINING
In MemGPT, events trigger LLM inference: events are generalized inputs to MemGPT and can con-
sist of user messages (in chat applications), system messages (e.g. main context capacity warnings),
user interactions (e.g. an alert that a user just logged in, or an alert that they finished uploading
a document), and timed events that are run on a regular schedule (allowing MemGPT to run ‘un-
prompted’ without user intervention). MemGPT processes events with a parser to convert them into
plain text messages that can be appended to main context and eventually be fed as input into the
LLM processor.
Many practical tasks require calling multiple functions in sequence, for example, navigating through
multiple pages of results from a single query or collating data from different documents in main
context from separate queries. Function chaining allows MemGPT to execute multiple function
calls sequentially before returning control to the user. In MemGPT, functions can be called with
a special flag that requests control be immediately returned to the processor after the requested
function completes execution. If this flag is present, MemGPT will add the function output to
main context and (as opposed to pausing processor execution). If this flag is not present (a yield),
MemGPT will not run the LLM processor until the next external event trigger (e.g. a user message
or scheduled interrupt).
5

Preprint
Welcome back! Fancy a chat about horror movies? Any particular film you’ve watched
recently that stuck with you?
MemGPT
I actually don’t like horror movies. I’m more into romantic comedy.
User
working context.replace(’I watch horror movies.’,’I like
romantic comedies.’)
My apologies for the mix-up earlier.
Romantic comedies are a delightful genre, full
of laughter and heartfelt moments. Do you have a favorite romantic comedy?
MemGPT
Figure 4: An example conversation snippet where MemGPT corrects information about the user by
writing to main context (and replacing a section of text in working context).
3
EXPERIMENTS
We assess MemGPT in two long-context domains: conversational agents and document analysis.
For conversational agents, we expand the existing Multi-Session Chat dataset Xu et al. (2021) and
introduce two new dialogue tasks that evaluate an agent’s ability to retain knowledge across long
conversations. For document analysis, we benchmark MemGPT on existing tasks from Liu et al.
(2023a) for question answering and key-value retrieval over lengthy documents. We also propose
a new nested key-value retrieval task requiring collating information across multiple data sources,
which tests the ability of an agent to collate information from multiple data sources (multi-hop
retrieval). We publicly release our augmented MSC dataset, nested KV retrieval dataset, and a
dataset of embeddings for 20M Wikipedia articles to facilitate future research. Our code for the full
conversational and document analysis benchmarks is available at https://memgpt.ai.
3.1
MEMGPT FOR CONVERSATIONAL AGENTS
Conversational agents like virtual companions and personalized assistants aim to engage users in
natural, long-term interactions, potentially spanning weeks, months, or even years. This creates
challenges for models with fixed-length contexts, which can only reference a limited history of the
conversation. An ‘infinite context’ agent should seamlessly handle continuous exchanges without
boundary or reset. When conversing with a user, such an agent must satisfy two key criteria:
• Consistency - The agent should maintain conversational coherence. New facts, preferences,
and events mentioned should align with prior statements from both the user and agent.
• Engagement - The agent should draw on long-term knowledge about the user to personalize
responses. Referencing prior conversations makes dialogue more natural and engaging.
We therefore assess our proposed model, MemGPT, on these two criteria:
• Does MemGPT leverage its memory to improve conversation consistency? Can it remem-
ber relevant facts, preferences, and events from past interactions to maintain coherence?
• Does MemGPT produce more engaging dialogue by taking advantage of memory? Does it
spontaneously incorporate long-range user information to personalize messages?
By evaluating on consistency and engagement, we can determine how well MemGPT handles the
challenges of long-term conversational interaction compared to fixed-context baselines. Its ability
to satisfy these criteria will demonstrate whether unbounded context provides meaningful benefits
for conversational agents.
6

Preprint
Taylor Swift!
Hey, remember that time we talked about music? What was the artist you mentioned you could get into?
User is asking about past conversation, recalling our discussion on 
music. I will search my recall memory for the artist name.
Showing 5 of 50 results (page 1/10):
“I agree. Working out is a great way to burn off steam. Do you like country music?", 
“A little bit. I can get into taylor swift."
“Yeah between the both of us, could probably get a country song written about our 
distresses...perhaps Taylor Swift could perform it."
“That would be a chart-topper, I'm sure. Something to blast while driving with the top 
down, maybe even in your next restoration project."
“This sounds fun. Do you have any other hobby?”
search_recall_storage('music')
From the conversation history, it seems that the artist I mentioned I 
could get into is Taylor Swift. Let me conﬁrm this with the user.
Recall
Storage
🧑
 
💭
🤖
🔎
🤖
📣
🤖
💭
🤖
Figure 5:
Illustration of the deep memory retrieval task. In the example shown, the user asks
a question that can only be answered using information from a prior session (no longer in-context).
Even though the answer is not immediately answerable using the in-context information, MemGPT
can search through its recall storage containing prior conversations to retrieve the answer.
3.1.1
DATASET
We evaluate MemGPT and our fixed-context baselines on the Multi-Session Chat (MSC) dataset
introduced by Xu et al. (2021), which contains multi-session chat logs generated by human labelers,
each of whom was asked to play a consistent persona for the duration of all sessions. Each multi-
session chat in MSC has five total sessions, and each session consists of a roughly a dozen messages.
As part of our consistency experiments, we created a new session (session 6) that contains a single
question-answer response pair between the same two personas.
3.1.2
DEEP MEMORY RETRIEVAL TASK (CONSISTENCY)
We introduce a new ‘deep memory retrieval’ (DMR) task based on the MSC dataset designed to test
the consistency of a conversational agent. In DMR, the conversational agent is asked a question by
the user that explicitly refers back to a prior conversation and has a very narrow expected answer
range (see Figure 5 for an example). We generated the DMR question-answer (QA) pairs using
a separate LLM that was instructed to write a question from one user to another that could only
be answered correctly using knowledge gained from the past sessions (see Appendix for further
details).
We evaluate the quality of the generated response against the ‘gold response’ using ROUGE-L scores
(Lin, 2004) and an ‘LLM judge’, which is instructed to evaluate whether or not the generated re-
sponse is consistent with the gold response (GPT-4 has been shown to have high agreement with
human evaluators (Zheng et al., 2023)). In practice, we notice that the generated responses (from
both MemGPT and the baselines) were generally more verbose than the gold responses; ROUGE-
L (which measures the longest common subsequence between the generated and reference text) is
robust to this semantic variation in correct responses since it evaluates the presence of words from
the gold answer in the generated answer. We also report the precision and recall scores used in
calclating the ROUGE-L (F1) score.
MemGPT utilizes memory to maintain coherence: Table 2 shows the performance of MemGPT
vs the fixed-memory baselines. We compare against three variations of fixed-context baselines: an
agent that see a recursive summary of the past five conversations (summary1:5), an agent that can
7

Preprint
Table 2:
Deep memory retrieval (DMR) performance. In this task, the agent is asked a spe-
cific question about a topic discussed in a prior conversation (sessions 1–5). The agent’s response
is scored against the gold answer. Methods using the gold persona (oracle) are marked with ‡.
MemGPT significantly outperforms the (non-oracle) fixed-context baselines.
ROUGE-L
Model
Available information
Accuracy ⇑
F1 ⇑
P ⇑
R ⇑
gpt-3.5‡
persona5 + summary1:5
70.0%
0.190
0.134
0.674
gpt-4‡
persona5 + summary1:5
79.8%
0.225
0.151
0.716
MemGPT‡
persona5 (Core) + dialogue1:5 (Recall)
84.0%
0.171
0.105
0.746
gpt-3.5
summary1:5
56.2%
0.157
0.114
0.585
gpt-3.5
summary1:4 + dialogue5
55.6%
0.120
0.080
0.602
gpt-4
summary1:5
63.0%
0.159
0.101
0.607
gpt-4
summary1:4 + dialogue5
79.2%
0.171
0.107
0.713
MemGPT
dialogue1:5 (Recall)
82.4%
0.173
0.106
0.743
see a recursive summary of the first four conversations (summary1:4) and the exact contents of the
prior conversation (dialogue5 is placed in active memory), as well as an oracle agent that can see the
gold persona (for both chat participants) as well as a recursive summary. We experiment with these
context variations using both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4.
All of the gold persona baselines perform near-perfectly: this is because the human-labelled gold
personas in the MSC dataset are detailed and intended to be a concise summary of all stated persona
information in all prior chats - in other words, a well-written gold persona should contain the answer
to the DMR question. Among the non-oracle fixed-context baselines, GPT-4 significantly outper-
forms GPT-3.5, and with both models the variations that had access to the full prior conversation
in active memory perform slightly better. The drop in performance from summary1:4 + dialogue5
to summary1:5 is expected, since the latter should contain strictly less information than the former
(assuming a perfect summarizer with restricted length summarizations). MemGPT significantly
outperforms both GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 in both LLM judge accuracy and ROUGE-L scores: instead
of relying on recursive summaries to extend context, MemGPT is able to query past conversation
history in its Recall Memory to answer the DMR questions.
3.1.3
CONVERSATION OPENER TASK (ENGAGEMENT)
In the ‘conversation opener’ task we evaluate an agent’s ability to craft engaging messages to the user
that draw from knowledge accumulated in prior conversations. To evaluate the ‘engagingness’ of a
conversation opener using the MSC dataset, we compare the generated opener to the gold personas:
an engaging conversation opener should draw from one (or several) of the data points contained
in the persona, which in MSC effectively summarize the knowledge accumulated throughout all
prior sessions (see Figure 6 for an example). We also compare to the human-generated gold opener,
i.e., the first response in the following session. Because the quality of conversation openers is not
necessarily constrained by context length (a recursive summary or even a few snippets from prior
conversations is enough to craft an opener that uses prior knowledge), we use this task to ablate
MemGPT’s different components (rather than compare it to fixed-context baselines).
We report the CSIM scores of MemGPT’s openers in Table 3.
We test several variations of
MemGPT: MemGPT without working context (storing persona information) and recall storage (stor-
ing conversation information), MemGPT without working context or without recall storage, and
MemGPT with both working context and recall storage enabled.
MemGPT utilizes memory to increase engagement: As seen in Table 3 and Figure 6, MemGPT
is able to craft engaging openers that perform similarly to and occasionally exceed the hand-written
human openers. We observe that MemGPT tends to craft openers that are both more verbose and
cover more aspects of the persona information than the human baseline. Additionally, we can see
the storing information in working context is key to generating engaging openers. Without working
context, MemGPT ’s openers significantly degrade in quality; having the dialogue stored in recall
8

Preprint
Table 3:
Conversation opener performance (session 5). The agent’s conversation opener is
evaluated using similarity scores to the gold persona labels. CSIM-1 scores the closest persona
fragment match to the opener and CSIM-3 scores is the average of the top 3 matches.
Method
CSIM-1 ⇑
CSIM-3 ⇑
CSIM-H ⇑
Gold opener (human baseline)
0.823
0.787
1.000
MemGPT (working context + recall storage)
0.817
0.787
0.760
MemGPT (working context only)
0.820
0.790
0.762
MemGPT (recall storage only)
0.749
0.738
0.737
I am studying the LSAT. I want to be an attorney. I used to live in New Mexico in a small
town. I grew up with horses. I love coffee. I love tea. ...
Gold persona (user)
What date is your LSAT test scheduled?
Gold opener (human baseline)
Hello there! Just brewing up a fresh pot of tea on my end. How’s your coffee? Ready to
burn the midnight oil with some LSAT study?
MemGPT (working context + recall storage) ✓
Hello! It’s great to have you back. It’s time for a fresh cup of coffee. As a tour guide at
our local museum, I meet so many people who say a good brew helps keep them focused.
How’s your LSAT study going?
MemGPT (working context only) ✓
Hey there! It’s always a pleasure to see you online. Let’s dive into the world of shared ideas,
shall we?
MemGPT (recall storage only) ✗
Figure 6:
An engaging conversation opener should draw from the provided persona information.
Without working context, MemGPT’s openers significantly degrade in quality. Having the dialogue
stored in recall memory does not affect the opener, since MemGPT will generally not attempt to
search the conversation history before generating an opener.
storage does not affect the opener, since MemGPT will generally not attempt to search the conver-
sation history before generating an opener.
3.2
MEMGPT FOR DOCUMENT ANALYSIS
Document analysis also faces challenges due to the limited context windows of today’s transformer
models. For example, OpenAI’s (closed) GPT models behind their popular ChatGPT consumer
chatbot application have a limit of 32k input tokens, and the state-of-the-art open source Llama 2
models have a limit of only 4k tokens (see Table 1). Anthropic have released (closed) models han-
dling up to 100k tokens, but many documents easily surpass that length; Stephen King’s bestselling
novel The Shining contains around 150k words, which equates to roughly 200k tokens (words-to-
token varies based on the specific tokenizer used), and legal or financial documents such as Annual
Reports (SEC Form 10-K) can easily pass the million token mark. Moreover, many real document
analysis tasks require drawing connections across multiple such lengthy documents. Anticipating
these scenarios, it becomes difficult to envision blindly scaling up context as a solution to the fixed-
context problem. Recent research (Liu et al., 2023a) also raises doubts about the utility of simply
scaling contexts, since they find uneven attention distributions in large context models (the model is
more capable of recalling information at the beginning or end of its context window, vs tokens in the
middle). To enable reasoning across documents, more flexible memory architectures such as those
used in MemGPT are likely needed.
9

Preprint
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 100  200  300  400  500  600  700
Accuracy
Documents retrieved
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
MemGPT
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
Accuracy
Nesting levels
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
MemGPT
Figure 7: Document QA and nested KV retrieval task performance. In both tasks, MemGPT’s
performance is unaffected by increased context length. Methods such as truncation can extend the
effective context lengths (past the dotted red line) of fixed length models such as GPT-4, but such
compression methods will lead to performance degredation as the necessary compression grows
(compression is particularly bad for key-value retrieval tasks, since it corrupts the key-value pairs).
3.2.1
MULTI-DOCUMENT QUESTION-ANSWERING (DOC-QA)
To evaluate MemGPT’s ability to analyze documents, we benchmark MemGPT against fixed-context
baselines on the retriever-reader document QA task from Liu et al. (2023a). In this task, a question
is selected from the NaturalQuestions-Open dataset, and a retriever selects relevant Wikipedia doc-
uments for the question. A reader model (the LLM) is then fed these documents as input, and is
asked to use the provided documents to answer the question. Similar to Liu et al. (2023a), we evalu-
ate reader accuracy as the number of retrieved documents K increases. In our evaluation setup, both
the fixed-context baselines and MemGPT use the same retriever, which selects the top K documents
according using Faiss efficient similarity search (Johnson et al., 2019) (which corresponds to ap-
proximate nearest neighbor search) on OpenAI’s text-embedding-ada-002 embeddings. In
MemGPT, the entire document set is loaded into archival storage, and the retriever naturally emerges
via the archival storage search functionality (which performs embedding-based similarity search).
In the fixed-context baselines, the top-K documents are fetched using the retriever independently
from the LLM inference, similar to the original retriever-reader setup. We use a dump of Wikipedia
from late 2018, following past work on NaturalQuestions-Open (Izacard & Grave, 2020; Izacard
et al., 2021) We randomly sample a subset of 50 questions for each point in the graph.
The fixed-context baselines performance is capped roughly at the performance of the retriever, as
they use the information that is presented in their context window (e.g. if the embedding search
retriever fails to surface the gold article using the provided question, the fixed-context baselines are
guaranteed to never see the gold article). By contrast, MemGPT is effectively able to make multiple
calls to the retriever by querying archival storage, allowing it to scale to larger effective context
lengths. MemGPT actively retrieves documents from its archival storage (and can iteratively page
through results), so the total number of documents available to MemGPT is no longer limited by the
number of documents that fit within the LLM processor’s context window.
The document QA task is challenging for all methods due to the limitations of embedding-based
similarity search.
We observe that the golden document for chosen question (as annotated by
NaturalQuestions-Open) often appears outside of the first dozen retrieved results, if not even fur-
ther. The retriever performance translates directly to the fixed-context baseline results: GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4’s accuracy is relatively low with few retrieved documents, and continues to improve as addi-
tional documents are added to the context window. While MemGPT is theoretically not limited by
sub-optimal retriever performance (even if the embedding-based ranking is noisy, as long as the full
retriever ranking contains the gold document it can still be found with enough retriever calls via pag-
ination), we observe that MemGPT will often stop paging through retriever results before exhausting
the retriever database. For example, after sifting through a few pages of irrelevant results (missing
the gold document), MemGPT will pause the pagination and ask the user to help narrow the query -
10

Preprint
51722…23b89
 Your task is to provide the value for the following key: 94071…ﬀ740.
Showing 1 of 1 results (page 1/1):
“Key-value pair: key = 94071…ff740, value = 88b32…b3349”
search_archival_storage('94071…ff740')
The value of the provided key "94071…ﬀ740" is "88b32…b3349".
I will now verify if this value is also a key in the archival memory.
Archival
Storage
🧑
 
🔎
🤖
📣
🤖
💭
🤖
search_archival_storage('88bb32…b3349')
Archival
Storage
🔎
🤖
This value of “51722…23b89” doesn’t appear as a key.
So, it is the ﬁnal value in the nested sequence.
💭
🤖
…
Figure 8: Illustration of the nested key-value task. In the example shown, MemGPT generates
repeatedly queries archival memory to search for the latest key. Once archival memory reveals that
the current key’s value is not also a key, MemGPT returns a message to the user with the final value.
in our evaluation, these questions are counted as failed answers, since there is no human-in-the-loop
to answer MemGPT.
There is also a tradeoff in retrieved document capacity created by MemGPT more complex oper-
ation: assuming MemGPT has the same token budget as a fixed-context baseline (using the same
LLM), a non-trivial portion of MemGPT’s token budget will be consumed by system intstructions
required for MemGPT’s OS components (e.g. function call schemas for memory management),
meaning that the total number of documents that can be held in-context at any given time is lower
for MemGPT than the baselines. This tradeoff is observed in Figure 7: MemGPT has a lower av-
erage accuracy than GPT-4 (though higher than GPT-3.5), but can trivially scale to larger numbers
of documents. To evaluate the fixed-context baselines against MemGPT past their default context
lengths, we truncate the document segments returned by the retriever to fix the same number of
documents into the available context. As expected, document truncation reduces accuracy as doc-
uments shrink as the chance of the relevant snippet (in the gold document) being omitted grows.
We anticipate that MemGPT performance on document QA can be further improved with additional
task instructions that reduce the chance of MemGPT returning control to the user (e.g. pausing to
ask questions) and increase the chance of MemGPT reading all documents ranked by the retriever.
3.2.2
NESTED KEY-VALUE RETRIEVAL (KV)
We introduce a new task based on the synthetic Key-Value retrieval proposed in prior work (Liu
et al., 2023a). The goal of this task is to demonstrate how MemGPT can collate information from
multiple data sources. In the original KV task, the authors generated a synthetic dataset of key-value
pairs, where each key and value is a 128-bit UUID (universally unique identifier). The agent is then
given a key, and asked to return the associated value for the key. We create a version of the KV
task, nested KV retrieval, where values themselves may be keys, thus requiring the agent to perform
a multi-hop lookup. In our setup, we fix the total number of UUIDs pairs to 140, corresponding to
roughly 8k tokens (the context length of our GPT-4 baseline). We vary the total number of nesting
levels from 0 (the initial key-value pair’s value is not a key) to 4 (ie 4 total KV lookups are required
to find the final value), and sample 30 different ordering configurations including both the initial key
position and nesting key positions.
While GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have good performance on the original KV tasks, both struggle in the
nested KV task. GPT-3.5 is unable to complete the nested variant of the task and has an immediate
11

Preprint
dropoff in performance, hitting 0 percent accuracy at 1 nesting level (we observe that its primary
failure mode is to simply returns the original value). GPT-4 is better than GPT-3.5, but also suffers
from a similar dropoff, and hits 0 percent accuracy by 4 nesting levels. In GPT-4’s case, we observe
that it often fails to recurse beyond a particular nesting level at simply returns the nested value at a
previous nesting level. MemGPT on the other hand is unaffected with the number of nesting levels
and is able to perform the nested lookup by accessing the key-value pairs stored in main memory
repeatedly via function queries. MemGPT performance on the nested KV task demonstrates its
ability to combine multiple queries to perform multi-hop lookups.
4
RELATED WORK
Recent works have looked at improving context length that can be processed in each LLM invoca-
tion, improving search and retrieval for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), and using language
models to power interactive agents.
4.1
LONG-CONTEXT LLMS
The management of long contexts in LLMs is crucial for coherent and engaging dialogues for con-
versational agents, and for corroborating and stitching together facts from diverse sources for LLMs
used in question answering (QA). One approach to tackle the limitations of fixed-length context,
is through recursive summarization (Wu et al., 2021a). In recursive summarization, the LLM often
generates concise representations over a sliding window to fit them within the specified token length.
This summarization process is inherently lossy and can lead to the unintentional loss of relevant de-
tails or subtle nuances. Given the limitations of context length on many LLM-based applications,
there has been growing interest in improving the ability of LLMs to attend to longer sequences such
as Press et al. (2021); Guo et al. (2021); Dong et al. (2023); Beltagy et al. (2020). MemGPT exploits
and benefits from improvements to context length as it can store more information in MemGPT’s
main memory (as an analogy, as GPU cache’s get bigger, the processor can now compute through
quicker as it would benefit from high cache hits).
4.2
SEARCH AND RETRIEVAL
Search and retrieval mechanisms especially for the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) paradigm,
have been incorporated into conversational agents for tasks ranging from document question answer-
ing, customer support, to more general chatbots for entertainment. These mechanisms often utilize
external databases or internal conversation logs to provide contextually relevant responses.
Lin
et al. (2023) for example, demonstrate how to train the retriever and LLM during instruction-tuning
to improve the document recall. Other works have looked at optimizing the retriever or the LLM in-
dependently Ram et al. (2023); Borgeaud et al. (2022); Karpukhin et al. (2020); Lewis et al. (2020);
Guu et al. (2020). Trivedi et al. (2022) interleave retrieval with Chain-of-Thoughts reasoning to
improve multi-step question answering. In this work, we are agnostic for the retriever mechanism
used; various retrieval mechanisms can be easily swapped or even combined as part of disk memory
in MemGPT.
4.3
LLMS AS AGENTS
Recent work has explored augmenting LLMs with additional capabilities to act as agents in inter-
active environments. Park et al. (2023) propose adding memory to LLMs and using the LLM as
a planner, and observe emergent social behaviors in a multi-agent sandbox environment (inspired
by The Sims video game) where agents can perform basic activities such as doing chores/hobbies,
going to work, and conversing with other agents. Nakano et al. (2021) train models to search the
web before answering questions, and use similar pagination concepts to MemGPT to control the un-
derlying context size in their web-browsing environment. Yao et al. (2022) showed that interleaving
chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) can further improve the planning ability of interactive
LLM-based agents; similarly in MemGPT, LLM is able to ‘plan out loud’ when executing functions
(see Figure 5 and 8 for examples). Liu et al. (2023b) introduced a suite of LLM-as-an-agent bench-
marks to evaluate LLMs in interactive environments, including video games, thinking puzzles, and
12

Preprint
web shopping. In contrast, our work focuses on tackling the problem of tackling the problem of
equipping agents with long-term memory of user inputs.
5
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we introduced MemGPT, a novel LLM system inspired by operating systems to man-
age the limited context windows of large language models. By designing a memory hierarchy and
control flow analogous to traditional OSes, MemGPT provides the illusion of larger context re-
sources for LLMs. This OS-inspired approach was evaluated in two domains where existing LLM
performance is constrained by finite context lengths: document analysis and conversational agents.
For document analysis, MemGPT could process lengthy texts well beyond the context limits of
current LLMs by effectively paging relevant context in and out of memory. For conversational
agents, MemGPT enabled maintaining long-term memory, consistency, and evolvability over ex-
tended dialogues. Overall, MemGPT demonstrates that operating system techniques like hierarchi-
cal memory management and interrupts can unlock the potential of LLMs even when constrained by
fixed context lengths. This work opens numerous avenues for future exploration, including apply-
ing MemGPT to other domains with massive or unbounded contexts, integrating different memory
tier technologies like databases or caches, and further improving control flow and memory manage-
ment policies. By bridging concepts from OS architecture into AI systems, MemGPT represents a
promising new direction for maximizing the capabilities of LLMs within their fundamental limits.
5.1
LIMITATIONS
Our reference implementation leverages OpenAI GPT-4 models that are fine-tuned specifically for
function calling. While the inner workings of OpenAI’s models are proprietary and not publicly dis-
closed, OpenAI’s API documentation states that when using function fine-tuned models, the function
schema provided is converted into a system message that the model is trained to interpret through a
fine-tuning process. While GPT models that have been finetuned for function-calling still require a
parser to verify outputs as valid function syntax, we observed that GPT-4 function fine-tuned models
rarely made syntactic or semantic errors on the MemGPT function set, whereas GPT-3.5 finetuned
models consistently generated incorrect function calls, or used attempted to use functions incor-
rectly. Similarly, we also found that the most popular the Llama 2 70B model variants (even those
fine-tuned for function calling) would consistently generate incorrect function calls or even halluci-
nate functions outside the providede schema. At present reasonable performance is only achieved
using specialized GPT-4 models, however, we anticipate that future open-source models will even-
tually improve to the point of enabling MemGPT-style operation, either through improvements in
fine-tuning (e.g. on larger function call datasets, or more specialized function call datasets), prompt
engineering, or improved quality of base models. Nonetheless, for the time being reliance on the
performance of proprietary closed-source models remains a significant limitation of this work.
REFERENCES
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al.
Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
nov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
13

Preprint
Zican Dong, Tianyi Tang, Lunyi Li, and Wayne Xin Zhao. A survey on long text modeling with
transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14502, 2023.
Mandy Guo, Joshua Ainslie, David Uthus, Santiago Ontanon, Jianmo Ni, Yun-Hsuan Sung, and
Yinfei Yang.
Longt5: Efficient text-to-text transformer for long sequences.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.07916, 2021.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
PMLR, 2020.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open
domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01282, 2020.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09118, 2021.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Herv´e J´egou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas O˘guz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020.
Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.04451, 2020.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
9459–9474, 2020.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Xi Victoria Lin, Xilun Chen, Mingda Chen, Weijia Shi, Maria Lomeli, Rich James, Pedro Rodriguez,
Jacob Kahn, Gergely Szilvasy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Scott Yih. Ra-dit: Retrieval-
augmented dual instruction tuning, 2023.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
Percy Liang.
Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03172, 2023a.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al.
AgentBench: Evaluating llms as agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.03688, 2023b.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al.
WebGPT: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
27730–27744, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
David A Patterson, Garth Gibson, and Randy H Katz. A case for redundant arrays of inexpensive
disks (raid). In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management
of data, pp. 109–116, 1988.
14

Preprint
Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases
enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409, 2021.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-
Brown, and Yoav Shoham.
In-context retrieval-augmented language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.00083, 2023.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess`ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
SillyTavern. Sillytavern docs: Character design, 2023. URL https://docs.sillytavern.
app/usage/core-concepts/characterdesign. Accessed: 10-11-2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
H. Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal.
Interleaving re-
trieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions.
ArXiv,
abs/2212.10509,
2022.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
254877499.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
2021a.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
2021b.
Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Beyond goldfish memory: Long-term open-domain
conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07567, 2021.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.
15

