arXiv:2311.06881v1  [gr-qc]  12 Nov 2023
The Synge G-Method: Cosmology, Wormholes,
Firewalls, Geometry
G F R Ellis1 and D Garﬁnkle2
1 Mathematics and Applied Mathematics Department, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town 7700, South Africa.
email: george.ellis@uct.ac.za
2 Dept. of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA
email: garﬁnkl@oakland.edu
November 2023
Abstract.
Unphysical equations of state result from the unrestricted use of the Synge
G-trick of running the Einstein ﬁeld equations backwards; in particular often this
results in ρ + p < 0 which implies negative inertial mass density, which does not occur
in reality. This is the basis of some unphysical spacetime models including phantom
energy in cosmology and traversable wormholes.
The slogan “ER = EPR” appears to have no basis in physics and is merely the
result of vague and unbridled speculation. Wormholes (the “ER” of the slogan) are
a mathematical curiosity of general relativity that have little to no application to a
description of our universe. In contrast quantum correlations (the “EPR” of the slogan)
are a fundamental property of quantum mechanics that follows from the principle of
superposition and is true regardless of the properties of gravity.
The speculative line of thought that led to “ER = EPR” is part of a current vogue
for anti-geometrical thinking that runs counter to (and threatens to erase) the great
geometrical insights of the global structure program of general relativity.
Keywords Wormholes, energy conditions, black hole evaporation, AdS/CFT, ER = EPR
1. Introduction
J L Synge many years ago showed how a simple process (his “G-Method”) could lead
purely by diﬀerentiation to exact solutions of the Einstein Field Equations (“EFE”).
However this often leads to a negative inertial mass density, hence they are unphysical
solutions of the EFE. In this paper we discuss how this occurs both in cosmology, and
in proposals made by members of the string theory community for the existence of
“traversable wormholes”. We argue they can neither come into existence by physically
plausible processes, nor - even disregarding that problem - can they actually exist .
There is a tension as regards gravitational theory between those who come from
the general relativity side, who by and large approach the subject in a geometric fashion
[Hawking and Ellis (2023)], and those who come from the particle physics/string theory
side, who by and large treat it non-geometrically [Weinberg (1972)] except sometimes

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
2
for the use of some causal diamonds to represent causal relations. A key feature is that
for the former, the “force of gravity” is a ﬁctitious force resulting from the eﬀects of the
curvature of spacetime seen in an accelerated frame, so that while the idea of quantising
the gravitational force may be a useful eﬀective theory, at a fundamental level it does
not make sense. For the latter, gravity is just another force, to be quantised like all
the others. This is a key aspect of the diﬀerence between geometric and non-geometric
approaches.
This paper discusses §2, The Synge Trick and Energy Conditions, with applications
to cosmology; §3, Wormholes in General Relativity; §4, AdS/CFT, Wormholes and EPR;
§5, Horizons, Firewalls and Atlases; §6, Geometric and non-geometric approaches.
2. The Synge Trick and Energy Conditions
There are two quite diﬀerent ways of solving EFE: the standard way, and the Synge
G-Method (§2.1). The latter is very easy to do but often results in unphysical matter
tensors, and violates stability conditions (§2.2). However it can be useful in inﬂationary
contexts (§2.3), but can lead to problems with dark energy phenomenology (§2.4).
2.1. Two ways of solving the EFE
Many years ago, J. L. Synge [Synge (1961)] pointed out an inverse way of solving the
the EFE
Rab −1
2Rgab + Λgab = κTab, Λ,c = 0,
(1)
where κ > 0 is the gravitational constant, with integrability condition
(Rab −1
2Rgab);b = 0 ⇔(T ab);b = 0.
(2)
These are usually solved by the following process, from right to left:
• Assume a speciﬁc form for the energy-momentum tensor Tab (a vacuum, perfect
ﬂuid, electromagnetic ﬁeld, scalar ﬁeld, and so on),
• Impose some symmetries on gab(xi) to represent an interesting physical context
(a cosmological model, a black hole, a gravitational wave, and so on), possibly
linearising about a space with exact symmetries,
• Calculate the Ricci tensor Rab(xi) and Ricci scalar R(xi) as a function of the metric
gab(xi), its inverse gcd(xi), and their ﬁrst and second derivatives,
• Substitute in (1) to obtain partial diﬀerential equations (PDE) for the metric and
any matter ﬁelds. Also impose any additional PDE that the matter ﬁelds themselves
have to satisfy (e.g. Maxwell’s equations for the electromagnetic ﬁeld).
• Solve those PDE for gab(xi) and any associated matter ﬁelds.
However one can proceed in the opposite manner, from left to right:
• Assume a speciﬁc spacetime geometry gab(xi),

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
3
• Calculate the Ricci tensor Rab(xi) and Ricci scalar R(xi) from gab(xi),
• Substitute in the EFE (1) to determine Tab(xi).
• The solution {gab(xi), Tab(xi)} will automatically satisfy (2).
This is the Synge G-method, a simple process that generates an exact solution of the
EFE without the need to solve any partial diﬀerential equations.
Note that to apply the Synge G-method without any restrictions is to deprive the
Einstein ﬁeld equations of all content. To see why, consider the following analogy with
Newton’s second law ⃗F = m⃗a. Pick any particle trajectory ⃗x(t) and calculate ¨⃗x(t).
Now assert that you have a solution to ⃗F = m⃗a where the force is given by m¨⃗x(t).
Since this can be done with any trajectory, the statement “I have a trajectory that is a
solution of ⃗F = m⃗a ” then has no more content than the statement “I have a trajectory.”
Similarly, if one uses the Synge G-method without restriction, the statement “let (M, gab)
be a spacetime satisfying the Einstein ﬁeld equations” has no more content than the
statement “let (M, gab) be a spacetime.”
However, the Synge G-trick does become meaningful (and indeed quite useful)
with the imposition of only a causality condition (like the presence of a Cauchy
surface or the absence of closed timelike curves) and an energy condition (to be
discussed below). Indeed it is the great triumph of the global structure program (see
[Hawking and Ellis (2023)] and references therein) that powerful results can be obtained
using only such mild restrictions.
The main problem with the unrestricted G-method is that the stress-energy
tensor Tab(xi) determined this way will in general not correspond to any known form
of matter, thus it will be unphysical.
Furthermore it will in general not satisfy
the stability conditions that are required for a solution to be physically meaningful
[Bishop and Ellis (2020)].
2.2. Energy conditions and stability conditions
In many cases a ‘perfect ﬂuid’ description is used in general relativity, where the stress-
energy tensor takes the form
Tab = (ρ + p)uaub + pgab, ua = dxa/dτ, uaua = −1
(3)
where ρ(xi) is the matter density, p(xi) its pressure in units where the speed of light
c = 1, and τ is proper time along the ﬂuid world line xa(τ).
In the case of a perfect ﬂuid (3), the conservation equations (2) become the energy
equation (4) and momentum equation (5):
˙ρ + (ρ + p)Θ = 0,
(4)
(ρ + p) ˙ua + ∇p = 0,
(5)
where Θ := ua
;a is the ﬂuid expansion, ˙ua := ua
;bub its relativistic acceleration, and
∇p := (ga
b + uaub)p;b the spatial gradient of the pressure [Ehlers (1993), Ellis (1971)].

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
4
The weak energy condition is that
ρ ≥0, (ρ + p) ≥0.
(6)
No known matter violates (6). If it were violated, the inertial mass density would be
negative:
ρinert := ρ + p < 0 ⇒p < 0
(7)
which leads to unphysical behaviour of two kinds.
• From (5), if you push the ﬂuid to the left, it goes to the right, unlike any ordinary
matter. If p = wρ where w is constant or almost constant, the speed of sound cs is
given by c2
s = dp
dρ = w [Ellis et al (2007)]. Then (6) can be rewritten as
(1 + w)ρ < 0 ⇒1 + c2
s < 0.
(8)
Thus the speed of sound is imaginary and mechanical instability arises (perturbation
gives exponential expansion or collapse rather than oscillations).
Also runaway
motion occurs [Bonnor (1989)].
Thomas Gold suggested such runaway linear
motion could be used in a perpetual motion machine if converted to circular
motion by attaching positive and negative masses to the rim of a wheel
([DeWitt-Morette and Rickles (2017)]:159), hence it cannot occur.
This is to be distinguished from gravitational instability, which occurs whenever
the active gravitational mass is positive: ρgrav := (ρ + 3p) > 0. This is obeyed by
all baryonic matter and plays a key role in structure formation in the universe,
but can be violated by eﬀective scalar ﬁelds, as in the inﬂationary era in the early
universe [Peter and Uzan (2009), Ellis and Uzan (2017)] .
• From (4), if the ﬂuid expands and ρinert < 0, the density goes up, not down,
contrary to all experimental evidence for known matter, and the pressure has to
become even more negative to preserve inequality (7). This unphysical behaviour
results in the prediction of Sudden Singularities [Barrow (2004)]: the ﬂuid density
diverges in a ﬁnite time as it expands. Nothing we know behaves like this. If it
were true, you could in principle obtain an inﬁnite amount of energy from such a
ﬂuid in a ﬁnite time - which is unphysical [Ellis et al (2018)].
In summary: the standard method produces solutions of the EFE that correspond to
the kind of matter we know exists. Use of the Synge G-method results in “solutions”
that in general do not correspond to any kind of matter we have ever encountered, and
arguably allow perpetual motion - that is, they represent unphysical behaviour.
2.3. Inﬂationary potentials and dark energy phenomenology
An interesting variant of the G-method is that when inﬂation takes places in cosmology
[Peter and Uzan (2009), Ellis and Uzan (2017)], driven by a scalar ﬁeld φ with potential
V (φ), one can choose an (almost) arbitrary scale factor a(t) and then run the EFE
backwards to determine a potential V (φ) that will lead to that scale factor a(t)

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
5
[Ellis and Madsen (1991)]. Indeed this is what is done in practice in many inﬂationary
cosmology studies [Martin et al (2014)]. Such potentials will in general not be directly
related to any deeper physical models: they are simply designed to give the desired
dynamic result. They are simply a phenomenological ﬁt of the “matter” potential V (φ)
as required to give the desired inﬂationary dynamics a(t).
2.4. Dark energy equations of state
Famously, the late time universe has been determined to be accelerating, where the scale
factor a(t) obeys ¨a(t) > 0 [Peter and Uzan (2009), Ellis and Uzan (2017)]. This might
be due to a cosmological constant but many possibilities of “dark energy” are also being
explored, with a phenomenogical equation of state w(t) deﬁned by
p(t) = w(t)ρ(t).
(9)
Here w(t) is to be determined from the observational relation rO(z(t)) between
observed area distance rO(t) and redshift z(t) where t is the time of emission of light
[Ellis (1971)]. This relation determines a(t) and hence, on using the EFE, p(t) and
so w(t), and many investigations are under way to do this.
These are examples of
the Synge G-method: the logic is, rO(z(t)) ⇒a(t) ⇒w(t). Observational analyses
usually include cases where w < −1 (called phantom energy), that is ρinert < 0
[Melchiorri et al (2003)],[Vazquez et al (2012)]).
This runs into the same kind of
stability issues as just discussed [Carroll et al (2003), Vikman (2004)]. In our view this
domain of the parameter space for a(t) should be rejected as being unphysical.
3. Wormholes in General Relativity
Before delving into the exotic, implausible claims that have been recently made about
wormholes, it is helpful to go over what general relativity has to say about wormholes.
To begin, note that general relativity has an initial value formulation: that is we
pick the initial conﬁguration and the theory tells us how it evolves. But because general
relativity is a geometric theory it has a degree of freedom not present in our other
theories: the topology of space. In all our other theories the topology of space is R3.
But in general relativity other topologies are allowed. In particular, the topology of space
in the extended Schwarzschild spacetime is S2XR, that is there are two asymptotically
ﬂat spaces connected along a sphere. This is what is referred to as a “wormhole”.
Though we have referred to spatial topology as a “degree of freedom” it is so only
in a very restricted sense: the topology of space remains whatever it was at the initial
time, as shown in the Geroch no topology change theorem: In classical GR, no topology
change can occur in the development of initial data on a spatial hypersurface without
causal violations or a singularity occurring [Geroch (1967)]. An example is that the
spatial topology of standard cosmological models cannot change [Ellis (1987)].
Thus we either live in a space of exotic topology or we don’t. In either case we have
no power to change this. Nonetheless, one might think that if we did happen to live in

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
6
future singularity
II
I
black hole interior
i0
i0
i−
i+
i−
i+
I −
I +
I +
I −
Figure 1. Penrose diagram of the maximally extended Schwarzschild spacetime. The
two asymptotically ﬂat regions, I and II, share a common black hole interior
a space with exotic topology, we might explore this space at our leisure and map out its
topology. That we can’t do this is shown in two sets of results: Gannon’s theorem and
the topological censorship theorems. Gannon’s theorem [Gannon (1975)] says that the
evolution of initial data with exotic topology results in the production of a spacetime
singularity. Thus, for example the initial data for the extended Schwarzschild spacetime
evolves to the extended Schwarzschild spacetime:
a black hole with a spacetime
singularity in its interior.
The topological censorship theorems [Friedman et al (1993)] say that no observer
can visit more than one part of the exotic topology and thus that no observer will
notice that they live in a space with exotic topology. Thus, for example in the extended
Schwarzschild spacetime (Figure 1) observers either remain in asymptotically ﬂat region
I or remain in asymptotically ﬂat region II, or fall into the black hole. Observers who
remain in asymptotically ﬂat region I have no contact with those in asymptotically ﬂat
region II and have no way of knowing that they are there. Or to put it another way,
these observers have no way of knowing that the black hole in their space is really a
wormhole. The only observable consequence of the exotic topology is that observers
from the two regions can each jump into the black hole and brieﬂy meet each other on
their way to being crushed by the spacetime singularity (and without any way to tell
the people back home what happened).
4. AdS/CFT, Wormholes and EPR
Following a paper by Maldacena and Susskind [Maldacena and Susskind (2013)], a
huge literature has developed around the slogan “ER = EPR” linking “Einstein-Rosen

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
7
Bridges” (ER: the idea of traversable wormholes [Einstein and Rosen (1935)]) on the one
hand, and the idea of quantum entanglement following on the groundbreaking paper by
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR: [Einstein et al (1935)]) on the other (the idea of
quantum entanglement was also proposed by Schr¨odinger [Schr¨odinger (1935)]). It is
often alleged that experimental demonstration of the existence of entanglement, as has
been done, proves spacetime wormholes exist. It is even alleged that such wormholes
have been created in a quantum computer, whose operation is based in entanglement.
However traversable wormholes do not occur naturally in GR: the wormhole
in the maximal Schwarzschild extension ([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:154, see Fig.1)
is non-traversable,
as is also the case in the the maximal Reissner-Nordstr¨om
([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:158) and Kerr solution ([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:165).
The Weak Energy Condition is violated in the case of traversable wormholes
[Friedman et al (1993)] - a result known as “topological censorship”.
Sure one can
construct a traversable wormhole by choosing a suitable metric and using the Synge
G-Method. The resulting spacetime will be non-physical, as it will violate the weak
energy condition (6).
Here we discuss, the claims made (§4.1), Can they come into existence? (§4.2), Can
they exist? (§4.3), A simulation is not the thing (§4.4), and Is ER = EPR true? (§4.5).
4.1. The claims made
The paper [Maldacena and Susskind (2013)] (hereafter MS) considers two diﬀerent
wormhole spacetimes:
(1) the Schwarzschild-anti-de Sitter spacetime,
and (2)
the
spacetime
for
black
hole
pair
creation
by
a
magnetic
ﬁeld
treated
in
[Garﬁnkle and Strominger (1991)].
In both cases these are non-traversable wormholes. That is, just as in the extended
Schwarzschild spacetime, these are two spaces where their black holes share a common
interior.
Thus when MS consider signals sent from an observer in one space to an
observer in the other space, these messages can only be received when the second
observer jumps into the black hole.
In both cases there are quantum correlations between the two sides of the wormhole
spacetime, but in each case these correlations seem to have nothing to do with the fact
that the spacetime contains a wormhole: In Schwarzschild-anti-de Sitter spacetime the
wormhole is eternal and the quantum correlations are there simply because the vacuum
state has quantum correlations. Or to put it another way, there are quantum correlations
between the two halves of the wormhole for the same reason that there are quantum
correlations between the two Rindler wedges in Minkowski spacetime. In the black hole
pair creation case, the correlations are there because pair creation produces correlations:
again nothing to do with the fact that there is a wormhole.
Thus, in terms of their slogan “ER=EPR” up to that point MS had produced
two examples of ER that also happened to be EPR, though not for any reason to do
with the fact that they were ER. However, MS then went on to make (what even they

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
8
considered at the time to be) the bold speculation that all cases of EPR (i.e. quantum
correlations) are dual (in the sense of AdS/CFT) to ER (i.e. wormhole) spactimes. We
will attempt to evaluate this claim in subsequent sections, but for now we note (as a
tidbit of sociology of science) that in the years since 2013, ER=EPR seems to have gone
from bold speculation to received wisdom without any solid arguments on its behalf
having ever been oﬀered.
In contrast to MS, [Maldacena et al (2023)] consider traversable wormholes. The
matter needed to hold these wormholes open necessarily violates the weak energy
condition. Similarly the wormholes in [Gao et al (2017)] are also traversable and also
involve matter that violates the weak energy condition.
4.2. Can they come into existence?
Do wormholes satisfy the conditions of Assembly Theory [Sharma et al (2023)]? That
is, can they come into existence by an assembly process from pre-existing components ?
Classically: no. In general relativity theory, not only can’t wormholes be assembled
from existing components, but also they can’t be made by any process at all: either a
wormhole has existed forever or it won’t exist at all. Certainly a wormhole exists in the
maximally extended Schwarzschild solution ([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:154), but that
wormhole has existed for ever, and so does not relate to any process of astrophysical
formation as understood either from the general relativity side [Penrose (1965)] or the
astrophysical side [Begelman and Rees (2020)]. In realistic astrophysical processes, the
potential wormhole that exists in the maximal Schwarschild solution as represented
in the Kruskal diagram is cut oﬀby the infalling matter that creates the black hole
([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:300,302,309; [Hawking (1975)]:Figs 2,3). As for the original
Einstein-Rosen paper [Einstein and Rosen (1935)], it involves modifying the EFE so it
is not in fact a General Relativity solution.
Quantum mechanically:
maybe.
Not through assembly but through quantum
tunneling. The most reliable way to do calculations in quantum ﬁeld theory is within
a perturbative regime using Feynman diagrams. But quantum wormhole production is
a non-perturbative quantum tunneling process calculated using instantons (as e.g. in
[Garﬁnkle and Strominger (1991)]). Here it is helpful to recall the limitations of such
calculations: (1) since we don’t have a quantum theory of gravity we don’t know whether
such a theory has a topology superselection rule (a quantum analog of the Geroch no
topology change theorem) that would forbid the production of wormholes. (2) we don’t
know for sure that the action of a Euclidean spacetime is the correct quantity to put
in the quantum tunneling formula. We do this because it is analogous to what does
work in (non-gravity) quantum theories where we know how to do calculations. (3)
instanton calculations are semiclassical but also exponentially suppressed. This means
that the wormholes produced need to be suﬃciently larger than the Planck mass that
we can trust the calculation, but also suﬃciently small that their production rate is
not negligibly tiny. That amounts to a wormhole mass of order say 10 Planck masses.

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
9
Note that such a mass is much too small for any of the thought experiments envisioned
in MS. So to perform any of their thought experiments they would need to ﬁrst grow
the wormhole to a much larger size. However, since their thought experiments involve
observers sending messages “suﬃciently early” it is not clear which (if any) of those
thought experiments are compatible with the wormhole production and growth process.
4.3. Can they exist?
So can they in fact exist? Insofar as traversable wormholes are solutions of the EFE,
they are examples of use of the Synge G-method without restriction (§2.1). Vacuum
wormhole EFE solutions exist (the Kruskal maximal extension of the vacuum spherically
symmetric Schwarzschild solution is a wormhole) but are not traversable. Traversable
wormholes are derived by assuming a traversable spherically symmetric geometry and
then running the EFE backwards to determine whatever form of “matter” allows such
solutions to exist. This does not imply that such “matter” is physically plausible, or
can indeed exist in reality. [Morris and Thorne (1988)] acknowledge that traversable
wormholes require unphysical matter, but press on anyhow suggesting they are a good
tool for teaching general relativity. We strongly disagree. Maldacena et al present a
traversable wormhole in four dimensions in [Maldacena et al (2023)], but it is based in
the concept of charged massless fermions - which do not exist in physical reality and
would be subject to the Coleman-Weinberg instability. We conjecture that if they were
indeed to exist despite these considerations, they would be highly unstable and subject
to singularities such as “sudden future singularities” [Barrow (2004)] in a ﬁnite time
because of the nature of the “matter” involved.
4.4. A simulation is not the thing
Recently some excitement was generated by a paper ”Traversable wormhole dynamics on
a quantum processor” [Jaﬀeris et al (2022)], claiming that traversable wormholes had
been created by a quantum computer. But this was actually a simulation of (a system
speculated to be the dual of) such wormholes, not the thing itself, and the press release
proclaiming this event generated much incredulity‡. In any case a quantum computer
generates a negligible gravitational ﬁeld - not remotely large enough to create a black
hole let alone any associated wormhole.
For what it’s worth, we also note that computer simulations of classical non-
traversable wormholes are done routinely and have been done for decades as a byproduct
of a particular method for binary black hole simulations.[Campanelli et al (2005)] This
is because this method (called the moving puncture method) chooses initial data where
each of the black holes is connected to another space with initial data close to that of
the extended Schwarzschild spacetime. For the region outside the black hole horizon,
these simulations with wormholes are in complete agreement with other binary black
‡ See This Week’s Hype by Peter Wojt

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
10
hole simulations that don’t use wormhole initial data,[Pretorius (2005)] thus once again
showing that in GR you can’t tell if there is a wormhole.
4.5. Is ER = EPR true?
The
original EPR
paper
[Einstein et al (1935)] as well
as Schr¨odinger’s
basic
paper
on
entanglement
[Schr¨odinger (1935)]
are calculations
in
ﬂat spacetime,
as are subsequent discussions of quantum entanglement [Horodecki et al (2009),
Susskind and Friedman (2014)]. They have nothing whatsoever to do with wormholes,
as denoted by ER. Experimental proofs that entanglement is possible over macroscopic
scales, such as those that won the Nobel Prize in 2022, were also based on ﬂat
spacetime calculations.
By contrast a standard wormhole solution of the EFE
represents the maximal spacetime curvature that is possible - spacetime is curved
so highly by matter that both closed trapped surfaces and event horizons exist
[Penrose (1965), Hawking and Ellis (2023)]. These are manifestly completely diﬀerent
spacetime situations both geometrically and physically. Entanglement (EPR) is possible
in both cases: it does not require a spacetime wormhole (ER).
Thus despite what has been claimed vociferously by some, ER = EPR is not true in
general, and in particular experimental veriﬁcation of quantum entanglement either in
a laboratory or at macroscopic scales does not imply that spacetime wormholes exist.§
How a wormhole is deﬁned in a quantum gravity context, where a spacetime metric may
not be deﬁned, is not even clear.
5. Horizons, Firewalls, and Atlases
Where did the the ER = EPR conjecture originate? To fully understand this we have
to consider the phenomenon of black hole evaporation. We discuss here in turn, Atlases
and local wavefunctions (§5.1), Is there a Black Hole Information Paradox? (§5.2), Black
hole evaporation (§5.3), and The Firewall and ER = EPR (§5.4).
5.1. Prolog: Atlases and local wavefunctions
Preliminary to the subsequent discussion, we consider coordinate atlases and local
wavefunctions.
5.1.1. Atlases
A crucial feature enabling global studies in GR was the introduction of
coordinate atlases {Uα, xi
α} ([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:§2.1). The coordinate system
{xi
α} is valid only in the open set Uα, and the relevant manifold M is covered by a
union ∪α{Uα} of such coordinate neighbourhoods. Diﬀerent coordinate systems for the
same manifold are related by diﬀeomorphisms. Even as simple a space as the 2-sphere
S2 cannot be covered by a single coordinate system.
§ One of us (GE) has been vociferously attacked on social media for denying that experimental proof
of entanglement implies existence of spacetime wormholes.

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
11
5.1.2. Local Wave functions
A key puzzle for quantum theory is how a strictly linear
theory - a wave function |ψ(t)⟩obeying the time-dependent ﬁrst order Schr¨odinger
equation [Laughlin and Pines (2000)]
iℏ∂|ψ(t)⟩
∂t
= ˆH|ψ(t)⟩
(10)
can underlie all the non-linear emergent dynamics we see around us all the time. It can
be proposed that the same kind of analysis as in the GR case is needed: in complex
systems, only local wave functions |ψ(t)⟩α exist, each valid in a local region {Uα} small
enough that the dynamics is still linear, enabling physics to be locally unitary everywhere
but linked in non-linear ways to create complex outcomes [Ellis (2023)]. The implication
is that in cases such as quantum cosmology or the emission of Hawking radiation, one is
not entitled to simply assume a priori that a global wave function exists for the system
concerned: this has to be justiﬁed. In the case of black holes forming by astrophysical
processes, this is almost certainly not the case. The “black hole information paradox”
assumes (1) unitary dynamics (10), perhaps expressed in terms of the associated Klein-
Gordon equation, which in turn assumes (2) existence of a single relevant wave function
|ψ(t)⟩in all relevant domains. We will question both assumptions below.
5.2. Is there a Black Hole Information Paradox?
Black body radiation is emitted by black holes [Hawking (1975)] irrespective of the
matter out of which the black hole is formed. By the black hole uniqueness theorems,
the result will be a Schwarzschild or Kerr black hole with closed trapped surfaces and
with the interior hidden behind an event horizon (in astrophysical reality, charged black
holes will not occur), The solution is fully characterised by just two parameters; the
mass m and rotation parameter a. Thus all information about the matter that created
the black hole, or anything that later falls into it, is completely lost to those who remain
outside the black hole. This contradicts the intuition that diﬀerent initial states should
always lead to diﬀerent ﬁnal states, no matter how small the diﬀerence is. More formally,
the assumption is made that the associated quantum evolution is unitary. But this is
not true, either classically or quantum mechanically
5.2.1. Classically
In the classical case, of course no black hole radiation takes place.
Information is not conserved: if you drop anything in, there is a singular boundary
to spacetime and both matter and information get lost as they leave spacetime. No
conservation law applies within spacetime because of this local boundary.
5.2.2.
Quantum Mechanically In the quantum case, Hawking radiation is emitted
[Hawking (1975)] and information is lost in the sense that diﬀerent starting states lead
to the same outcome [Hawking (1976), Mathur (2009)].
The “information paradox”
arises from the assumption that the dynamics is unitary.
One possible resolution
of this paradox is that black hole evaporation can be regarded as a wave function

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
12
collapse situation, not a unitary one, because the initial quantum state leads to
a classical detection event - and any such quantum to classical transition is non-
unitary and information is lost [Ellis (2012)].
It is basically a measurement event
([Aaronson (2016)]:§1.2.1 2.).
Furthermore while the calculation done uses diﬀerent
bases for the inward and outward wave functions, it nevertheless assumes a single
wave function exists for the entire spacetime - which may not be justiﬁed. There may
be no such single wavefunction, just as there is no “Wave Function of the Universe”
[Ellis (2023)]. In particular this lack of a single wavefunction may be expected to be
the true in the case of astrophysical black holes [Begelman and Rees (2020)], where
manifestly the dynamics is very non-linear.
The underlying issue is whether these
discussions are related to highly idealised models of the situation, or more realistic non-
linear cases where unitary evolution will not in fact take place [Ellis (2012), Ellis (2023)].
Moreover, any quantum description that neglects the black hole interior will always
be non-unitary because it traces over states in the interior and thus uses a density
matrix, not a wave function. But to properly include the interior one must include
the singularity. If the singularity exists even in a quantum gravity description of black
holes then information can be lost because singularities can destroy information. If the
singularity does not exist in quantum gravity then the answer to the information paradox
is likely to be tied to the nature of whatever quantum gravity replaces the singularity
with. In any case that description is unlikely to be a single classical spacetime with an
associated quantum state for the matter ﬁelds.
5.3. Black hole evaporation
When a black hole emits radiation through the Hawking eﬀect those of us who stay
outside the black hole will describe the radiation by tracing over the state in the interior
of the black hole and thus obtain a density matrix.
But then once the black hole
evaporates completely, it sounds like we’re just left with a density matrix. That doesn’t
sound like something quantum mechanics should do, allowing a pure state to evolve
into a density matrix. So what (if anything) was missing from the original calculation
of black hole evaporation?
The original calculation was done in the semiclassical approximation in which
gravity is treated classically (using general relativity) and everything else is treated
using quantum mechanics.
So clearly one thing that was missing from the original
calculation is the eﬀects of quantum gravity. The singularity deep in the interior of the
black hole is where quantum gravity eﬀects are important, but it is far from where the
radiation is emitted, so instead string theorists decided to concentrate on the eﬀects of
quantum gravity near the event horizon.
On the face of it, this sounds like a terrible idea (and in our opinion it really is a
terrible idea), but that’s the path most researchers decided to pursue and have pursued
to this day. What’s disturbing to us about regarding the horizon and its vicinity as a
place of strong gravity is that it seems like a giant step backwards from the hard-won

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
13
geometric insights of the global structure program.
Recall that the coordinate components of the Schwarzschild metric are singular
in the usual Schwarzschild coordinate system. But one of the insights of the global
structure program is that geometry is important and coordinates aren’t. So the horizon
is ﬁne, but the Schwarzshild time coordinate t is not: it goes to inﬁnity on the horizon.
More generally, the horizon is a null surface, but if you regard a null surface as a limit
of a family of timelike surfaces, then in the limit the geometry of the surface becomes
singular. One can consider a “stretched horizon”[Susskind (1993)] a timelike surface
very near the event horizon and thus a place where (if you don’t think geometrically) it
sounds like the eﬀects of quantum gravity might be strong.
Ironically the stretched horizon is almost identical to Kip Thorne’s black hole
membrane paradigm [Price and Thorne (1988)].
But Thorne wasn’t so much trying
to generate new insight as trying to make black holes user friendly to astrophysicists
who (Thorne thought) wouldn’t have the time or inclination to absorb the insights of the
global structure program. The irony is that now that there is plenty of astrophysical data
about black holes, astrophysicists have shown themselves nimble enough to understand
black holes just ﬁne. So the main use of membranes (a.k.a stretched horizons) is to
those who want to think of black hole horizons as extreme environments.
Another diﬃculty with concentrating on the horizon is that the black hole interior
is a four dimensional spacetime, while the horizon is a three dimensional null surface.
Are there really enough degrees of freedom in the horizon to account for all the stuﬀwe
trace over in the interior? For this to be the case, nature would have to satisfy some sort
of “holographic principle”[Susskind (1993)] by which a surface has as much information
as the volume it surrounds.
At the time the holographic principle was proposed, no system was known that
satisﬁed it, but the proposed principle motivated the search for such a system and in
due course one was found: the AdS/CFT correspondence [Maldacena (1998)]. Here AdS
stands for string theory in a spacetime that is asymptotic to anti-de Sitter spacetime,
and CFT stands for a supersymmetric conformal ﬁeld theory on the boundary at inﬁnity
of the spacetime. The correspondence is that the predictions of one theory in the limit
of strong coupling are also those of the other theory in the limit of weak coupling.
AdS/CFT is an interesting mathematical system. But we have serious doubts as
to whether it describes the physics of our universe. To begin with, our spacetime is not
asymptotically anti-de Sitter, which has a negative cosmological constant Λ contra to
astronomical observations, and the standard model is not a supersymmetric conformal
ﬁeld theory. Moreover, from the geometric point of view there is something disturbing
about using anti-de Sitter spacetime as a model: recall that in addition to energy
conditions, the global structure program also uses causality conditions, in particular the
existence of a Cauchy surface. Anti-de Sitter spacetime violates the energy condition by
having a negative cosmological constant. In addition it violates the causality conditon
by not having a Cauchy surface. This is because there are accelerated observers who
can get to inﬁnity in a ﬁnite AdS time. Thus the boundary at inﬁnity (which is needed

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
14
for there to be any correspondence) is there only because from the geometric point of
view anti-de Sitter spacetime is pathological. It is not the universe in which we live.
The holographic principle also gave rise to an argument that information gets out
of an evaporating black holes as follows: If an evaporating black hole is equivalent to
a conformal ﬁeld theory, then since in ﬁeld theories pure states evolve to pure states,
therefore the ﬁnal state of an evaporating black hole is a pure state. Since we’re not
convinced that nature obeys a holographic principle, we’re not convinced by holographic
arguments involving extra dimensions about black hole evaporation .
5.4. The Firewall and ER = EPR
Nonetheless, even if one is convinced by holographic arguments there remains the
following question: exactly how does the information get out of the black hole? Several
mechanisms were considered, but ﬁnally one group [Almheiri et al (2013)] (hereafter
known as AMPS) produced a no-go result: any mechanism eﬀective enough to get the
information out would actually give rise to a huge amount of stress-energy on the horizon
(a “ﬁrewall”). No mechanism would work.
Though the AMPS paper is often thought of as predicting a ﬁrewall, its structure is
actually that of a standard proof by contradiction: one of their assumptions (in addition
to information getting out) is the absence of huge stress-energy in the vicinity of the
horizon (i.e. the absence of a ﬁrewall). When their reasoning then leads to the presence
of a ﬁrewall they have obtained a contradiction with one of their original assumptions
thus showing that the original set of assumptions can’t obtain.
From our point of view, the result of the AMPS paper is both welcome and
unsurprising. Everything that we know about quantum mechanics and null surfaces
leads us to believe that quantum information can’t emerge from behind a null surface.
One really nice feature of the AMPS paper is that it also gives the reason why
information can’t get out: the quantum no cloning property. Though for many purposes,
we get to ignore black hole interiors, they contain a lot of quantum information. For
that information to also get out, there would have to be two copies of it: one inside the
black hole and one outside, which would violate quantum no-cloning.
We mention in passing that though we are quite fond of no-go theorems, not
everyone feels that way.
For example, Werner Israel liked to refer to people who
prove no-go theorems as “mathe-morticians” by which he meant people who use their
mathematical skills to bury an idea.
For those who dislike either no-go theorems
in general, or just a particular no-go theorem, there is always a way to evade the
consequences of the theorem. This is because all theorems have assumptions, so if you
don’t like the conclusions of the theorem, you can evade the conclusions by considering
a situation where one or more of the assumptions don’t obtain.
And now we (ﬁnally) come to the reason for ER=EPR: it is a way to evade the
no-go result of AMPS. Essentially the evasion works as follows: suppose that all black
holes are really wormholes.
Then there are enough degrees of freedom in the other

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
15
spacetime that we could imagine people in the other spacetime doing things that would
cancel out the ﬁrewall that would occur if the black hole were just a black hole. This
still doesn’t tell us anything about how the information is supposed to get out, but at
least it’s no longer impossible.
On the formal level, the assumption of AMPS that is being dropped is that we are
dealing with the evaporation of a black hole (rather than a wormhole). While formally
this sort of maneuver is perfectly acceptable, from the geometric point of view (and it
seems to us also the physical point of view) the statement “maybe there just aren’t any
black holes” seems like a pretty extreme maneuver. It will certainly surprise all those
who study black holes from an astrophysical viewpoint [Begelman and Rees (2020)]
6. Geometric and non-geometric approaches; “computational complexity”
Though we ﬁnd the question of black hole evaporation very interesting, we are dismayed
by how much of it is done in an explicitly anti-geometric way. We note that it is a
little over 50 years since Penrose and Hawking and Geroch and the other researchers
of the global structure program brought new geometric insight to the relativity
community [Penrose (1965), Hawking and Ellis (2023), Senovilla and Garﬁnkle (2015)]
and the physics community in general. We are concerned that much of that insight will
be lost: drowned in a deluge of anti-geometric attitudes.
We close with two last examples. The ﬁrst has to do with the concept of spacetime
and foliations. Physics is about dynamics: the development of a system as a function
of time.
But to treat general relativity this way, one needs to divide spacetime up
into space and time:
that is one needs a foliation.
One important insight of the
global structure program is that the spacetime is the physics: the choice of foliation
is completely arbitrary to be chosen by the user for their own convenience. This insight
was crucial for understanding black holes since otherwise one might be tempted to
look at the Schwarzschild spacetime only in the foliation by constant Schwarzschild
coordinate time slices. One would then be misled into thinking that it takes forever to
fall into a black hole since the Schwarzschild time slices never reach the future event
horizon. In contrast to this geometric insight consider the work of [Susskind (2014)]
which treats black hole interiors and speculates about what their ﬁeld theory duals
might be. This work makes a particular choice of foliation: maximal slicing. Much of
the paper is taken up with speculation on a supposed dual relation between growth of
volume of the slices and “growth of complexity” on the ﬁeld theory side. This growth of
volume of maximal slices inside black holes is well known in numerical relativity where
it is associated with the “collapse of the lapse” i.e. the fact that the slices slow down
inside the black hole and stay well away from the singularity. But maximal slicing is
just one of many slicing conditions that could be chosen. So to single out this particular
slicing as the right slicing, the one whose dynamics has physical meaning, is to adopt a
speciﬁcally anti-geometric attitude.
The second example has to do with a growing body of work on the idea

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
16
of “computational complexity” and black holes [Susskind (2016), Aaronson (2016),
Haferkamp et al (2022,
Chapman and Policastro (2022)]
which
derives
from
the
literature on ﬁrewalls plus that on the AdS/CFT formalism as well as that on ER
bridges. [Susskind (2016)] states (§3),
“It is commonly believed that black holes can be modeled as systems of N qubits
with N is of order the entropy of the black hole.”
We are completely baﬄed by such statements. The concept of a physical qubit∥only
arises in the context of a quantum computer, where they are controlled by algorithms
as explained in [DiVincenzo (2000)]:
‘‘A quantum algorithm is typically speciﬁed as a sequence of unitary
transformations U1, U2, U3,..., each acting on a small number of qubits...
The most straightforward transcription of this into a physical speciﬁcation is
to identify Hamiltonians which generate these unitary transformations”.
In the context of a black hole, precisely what are the qubits, and what generates these
unitary transformations?
Where does the relevant algorithm come from?
Why is
any such concept needed or relevant? As a consequence of the black hole uniqueness
theorems [Robinson (2009)], the geometry of a black hole B is classically described by
just three parameters: its mass m, rotation a, and charge e, so its number of degrees
of freedom D(B) is 3. That is a measure of its complexity. If we consider quantum
gravity, the graviton is presumably a massless spin-2 boson (see [Weinberg (1972)] and
references therein). There is nothing remotely resembling qubits in sight. Solid physics
has given way to what appears to be pure fantasy: layer upon layer of unsubstantiated
concepts being invoked¶.
The actual geometry of black holes ([Hawking and Ellis (2023)]:§5.5, see Fig. 1)
has nothing to do with AdS/CFT, which is the centre of such speculation, or qbits. It is
perfectly well described by General Relativity as usually understood. As for holography
and general relativity proper, there are cases where the idea can be understood in a
sensible way that does not involve AdS/CFT. It is basically a restatement of the null
initial value problem [Goswami and Ellis (2017)] but runs into problems in the cosmo-
logical case because of cusps and folds in null surfaces [Tavakol and Ellis (1999)].
Acknowledgement
DG was supported by NSF Grant PHY-2102914 and GE by the UCT Science Faculty
Research Fund.
∥‘‘A qubit is a two-state (or two-level) quantum-mechanical system, one of the simplest quantum
systems displaying the peculiarity of quantum mechanics” (Wikipedia).
¶ See y Scott Aaronson to get the ﬂavour.

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
17
References
[Aaronson (2016)] Aaronson, S. (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05256.
[Almheiri et al (2013)] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski, and J. Sully (2013) “Black holes:
complementarity or ﬁrewalls?” JHEP 2:62
[Barrow (2004)] Barrow, J. D. (2004) “Sudden future singularities”. Classical and Quantum Gravity
21:L79.
[Begelman and Rees (2020)] Begelman, M., and Rees, M. (2020). Gravity’s Fatal Attraction: Black
Holes in the Universe (Cambridge University Press).
[Bishop and Ellis (2020)] Bishop, R. C., and Ellis, G. F. (2020). “Contextual emergence of physical
properties”. Foundations of Physics 50:481-510.
[Bonnor (1989)] Bonnor, W. B. (1989). ”Negative mass in general relativity”. General Relativity and
Gravitati f21: 1143–1157.
[Campanelli et al (2005)] M. Campanelli, C. O. Lousto, P. Marronetti, and Y. Zlochower (2006),
“Accurate Evolutions of Orbiting Black-Hole Binaries Without Excision” Phys. Rev. Lett.
96:111101
[Carroll et al (2003)] Carroll, S. M., Hoﬀman, M., and Trodden, M. (2003). “Can the dark energy
equation-of-state parameter w be less than -1?”. Physical Review D68:023509.
[Chapman and Policastro (2022)] Chapman, S., and Policastro, G. (2022). “Quantum computational
complexity from quantum information to black holes and back”. The European Physical Journal
C82:128.
[DeWitt-Morette and Rickles (2017)] DeWitt-Morette, C., Rickles, D. (eds.) (2017). Edition Open
Access)
[DiVincenzo (2000)] DiVincenzo, D. P. (2000). Fortschritte der Physik: Progress of Physics, 48:771-
783.
[Dyson et al (2002)] Dyson, L., Kleban, M., and Susskind, L. (2002). ”Disturbing Implications of a
Cosmological Constant”. Journal of High Energy Physics 2002: 011
[Ehlers (1993)] Ehlers, J. (1993). “Contributions to the relativistic mechanics of continuous media”.
General Relativity and Gravitation Golden Oldie 25:1225-1266.
[Einstein et al (1935)] Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen (1935) “Can quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete?”, Physical Review 47: 777–780.
[Einstein and Rosen (1935)] Einstein, A., and Rosen, N. (1935). “The particle problem in the general
theory of relativity”. Physical Review, 48:73.
[Ellis (1971)] Ellis, G. F. R. (1971). “Relativistic cosmology”. In General relativity and cosmology.
Proceedings of XLVII Enrico Fermi Summer School, Ed. Sachs RK, New York Academic Press.
Reprinted as a Golden Oldie in Gen Rel Grav 41:575 (2009)
[Ellis (1987)] Ellis, G. F. R. (1987). “Note on“Symmetry Changes in Friedmann Cosmologies”by SS
Bayin”. Astrophysical Journal 314:1.
[Ellis (2012)] Ellis, G. F. R. (2012). “On the limits of quantum theory: Contextuality and the quantum–classical cut.”
Annals of Physics 327:1890-1932.
[Ellis (2023)] Ellis, G. F. R (2023). “Quantum physics and biology: The local wavefunction approach”.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2533: 012019
[Ellis et al (2007)] Ellis, G. F., Maartens, R., and MacCallum, M. A. (2007). “Causality and the speed
of sound”. General Relativity and Gravitation, 39:1651-1660.
[Ellis and Madsen (1991)] Ellis, G. F. R, and Madsen, M. S. (1991). “Exact scalar ﬁeld cosmologies”.
Classical and quantum gravity 8:667.
[Ellis et al (2018)] Ellis, G. F., Meissner, K. A., and Nicolai, H. (2018). “The physics of inﬁnity”.
Nature Physics 14:770-772.
[Ellis and Uzan (2017)] Ellis, G. F., and Uzan, J. P. (2017). “Modern cosmology” Scholarpedia
12:32352.
[Friedman et al (1993)] Friedman,
J. L.,
Schleich,
K.,
and Witt,
D. M. (1993). “Topological

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
18
censorship.” Physical Review Letters, 71:1486.
[Gannon (1975)] Gannon, D. (1975) “Singularities in Nonsimply Connected Space-Times,” J. Math.
Phys. 16:2364
[Garﬁnkle and Strominger (1991)] D. Garﬁnkle and A. Strominger “Semiclassical Wheeler Wormhole
Production” (1991) Phys. Lett. B 256:146
[Gao et al (2017)] Gao, P., Jaﬀeris, D. L. and Wall, A. C. (2017) “Traversable Wormholes via a Double
Trace Deformation.” JHEP 151
[Geroch (1967)] Geroch, R. P. (1967) “Topology in general relativity.” Journal of Mathematical Physics
8:782-786.]
[Goswami and Ellis (2017)] Goswami, R., and Ellis, G. F. “4-dimensional spacetimes from 2-dimensional conformal null data
Classical and Quantum Gravity 34, 055009.
[Haferkamp et al (2022] Haferkamp, J., Faist, P., Kothakonda, N. B., Eisert, J., and Yunger Halpern,
N. (2022). Linear growth of quantum circuit complexity. Nature Physics 18:528-532.
[Hawking (1975)] Hawking, S W (1975). ”Particle Creation by Black Holes” Commun. Math. Phys.
43: 199–220.
[Hawking (1976)] Hawking,
S. W. (1976). ”Breakdown of predictability in gravitational collapse”.
Physical Review D. 14: 2460–2473.
[Hawking and Ellis (2023)] Hawking, S. W., and Ellis, G. F. (2023). The large scale structure of space-
time: 50th Anniversary Edition. (Cambridge University Press).
[Horodecki et al (2009)] Horodecki, R., et al (2009). “Quantum entanglement”. Reviews of modern
physics 81:865.
[Horowitz (1991)] Horowitz, G. T. (1991). “Topology change in classical and quantum gravity”.
Classical and Quantum Gravity 8:587.
[Jaﬀeris et al (2022)] Jaﬀeris, D., et al (2022). “Traversable wormhole dynamics on a quantum
processor” Nature 612:51-55.
[Laughlin and Pines (2000)] Laughlin, R B, and Pines, D (2000) “The theory of everything”.
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 97:28-31
[Maldacena (1998)] Maldacena, J. M. (1998) “The Large N Limit of Superconformal Field Theories
and Supergravity” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2:231
[Maldacena et al (2023)] Maldacena, J. M., Milekhin, A., and Popov, F. (2018). “Traversable
wormholes in four dimensions”. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 40, 155016
[Maldacena and Susskind (2013)] J. Maldacena and L. Susskind (2013), ”Cool horizons for entangled
black holes.” Fortschr. Phys. 61:781; arXiv:1306.0533.
[Martin et al (2014)] Martin, J., Ringeval, C., and Vennin, V. (2014). “Encyclopædia inﬂationaris”
Physics of the Dark Universe 5-6, 75-235.
[Mathur (2009)] Mathur, S D (2009). ”The information paradox: a pedagogical introduction”. Classical
and Quantum Gravity 26: 224001. arXiv:0909.1038.
[Melchiorri et al (2003)] Melchiorri, A., Mersini, L., ¨Odman, C. J., and Trodden, M. (2003). “The state
of the dark energy equation of state”. Physical Review D68:043509.
[Morris and Thorne (1988)] Morris, M. S., and Thorne, K. S. (1988). “Wormholes in spacetime and
their use for interstellar travel: A tool for teaching general relativity.” American Journal of
Physics 56:395-412.
[Penrose (1965)] Penrose, R. (1965). “Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities” Physical
Review Letters 14: 57.
[Peter and Uzan (2009)] Peter, P., and Uzan, J. P. (2009). Primordial cosmology. (Oxford University
Press).
[Pretorius (2005)] F. Pretorius (2005 “Evolution of Binary Black-Hole Spacetimes” Phys. Rev. Lett.
95 121101.
[Price and Thorne (1988)] Price,
R.
H.,
and
Thorne,
K.
S.
(1988).
“The membrane paradigm for black holes”. Scientiﬁc American, 258:69-77.
[Robinson (2009)] Robinson, D. (2009). “Four decades of black holes uniqueness theorems”. The Kerr

The Synge G-Method: cosmology, wormholes, ﬁrewalls, geometry
19
spacetime: Rotating black holes in general relativity, 115-143.
[Rovelli (2001)] Rovelli, C. (2001). ”Notes for a brief history of quantum gravity”. arXiv:gr-qc/0006061.
[Schr¨odinger (1935)] Schr¨odinger, E. (1935). “Die gegenwartige Situation in der Quantenmechanik”
Die Naturwissenschaften 23:807-812.
[Senovilla and Garﬁnkle (2015)] Senovilla, J. M. M., and Garﬁnkle, D. ”The 1965 Penrose singularity
theorem.” Classical and Quantum Gravity 32 (2015): 124008.
[Sharma et al (2023)] Sharma, A., Cz´egel, D., Lachmann, M., Kempes, C. P., Walker, S. I., and
Cronin, L. (2023). “Assembly theory explains and quantiﬁes selection and evolution”. Nature
622:321–328.
[Susskind (1993)] Susskind, L. (1993) “The Stretched Horizon and Black Hole Complementarity”
(1993) Phys. Rev. D 48:3743
[Susskind (2014)] Susskind, L. (2014) “Entanglement is not enough” arXiv:1411.0690
[Susskind (2016)] Susskind,
L.
(2016).
“Computational complexity and black hole horizons”.
Fortschritte der Physik 64:24-43.
[Susskind (2018)] Susskind,
L.
(2018).
Black holes and complexity classes.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1802.02175.
[Susskind and Friedman (2014)] Susskind, L., and Friedman, A. (2014). Quantum mechanics:
the
theoretical minimum (Basic Books).
[Synge (1961)] Synge, J.L. (1961) Relativity: the General Theory (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
[Tavakol and Ellis (1999)] Tavakol, R., and Ellis, G. (1999). Holography and cosmology. Physics
Letters B469:37-45.
[Vazquez et al (2012)] Vazquez, J. Alberto, M. Bridges, M. P. Hobson, and A. N. Lasenby (2012)
“Reconstruction of the dark energy equation of state.” Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics 2012: 020.
[Vikman (2004)] Vikman, A. (2005) “Can dark energy evolve to the phantom?”
Physical Review
D71:023515.
[Weinberg (1972)] Weinberg, S. (1972). Gravitation and cosmology: principles and applications of the
general theory of relativity. (New York: Wiley).
Version 2023/11/12

