The Developing Approaches to Evolutionary 
Epistemology: An Historical Perspective  
Ren Qiaohua,  
School of Marxism, Shenyang Jianzhu University 
 Shenyang, China, 110168 
tony805@163.com 
Zhang Jingzhu 
School of Marxism, Shenyang Jianzhu University 
 Shenyang, China, 110168 
1058954011@qq.com 
 
 
Abstract—Evolutionary epistemology has been developed in 
various historical stages that responds to different approaches, 
namely, adaptationism, non-adaptationism and interactionism. 
This paper gives an account of three approaches in terms of the 
hot debate on confirming the mechanism of biological evolution 
and elucidates why these approaches have been developed in 
different contexts. It is suggested that the development of 
evolutionary epistemology should be of implications on the 
studies of epistemology.  
Keywords—evolutionary 
epistemology, 
adaptationism, 
non-adaptationism, organism, environment 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Nathalie Gontier, an American professor of philosophy at 
the University of Lisbon, has addressed the different 
approaches to evolutionary epistemology. She suggests that the 
traditional approach is based upon biological adaptionism 
whereas this approach has ignored the mental process of 
organism. By contrast, the non-adaptionism approach is 
proposed to compensate for the flaws of the traditional ones. [1] 
Her understandings of evolutionary epistemology has been 
drawn increasingly attention around the field of bio-philosophy. 
From the available literature, more focuses have been on 
exploring the general evolutionary epistemology mechanism 
but little is known about the theoretical basis for the changing 
approaches to evolutionary epistemology. Hereby, it is of 
significance for us to clarify the reasons for these changes and 
to account for implications for traditional epistemology. 
II. THE ADAPTATIONISM APPROACHES TO EVOLUTIONARY 
EPISTEMOLOGY: NATURAL SELECTION BASED 
Since the early 20th century, adaptationism prevailed in 
biology has directly influenced the approaches to evolutionary 
epistemology. By the approach to adaptationism, organism and 
environment are viewed as two separate entities, which interact 
only in a selective process, but are independent of each other 
during its development [2]. Neo-Darwinism as a dominant 
theory in that period strictly insists on the dualism and 
maintains that organisms are passively selected by environment. 
In the early period of evolutionary epistemology, it follows the 
ways by giving priority to natural selection when interpreting 
biological evolution, including cognitive development. 
A. Natural selection - as an absolute power 
The biologist, Symons (1990) sees the trait as a result of 
adaptation, believing that the organism gene in the gene pool 
corresponds to the trait. From parents to future generations, 
genes are adapted to this channel. Genes can influence human 
cognitive constructs.[3] Since genes will affect human 
cognitive constructs, behavioral ecologists gradually stand in 
the adaptationist position to test the variation and successful 
reproduction fitness from the view of natural induced traits and 
the variation of experimental traits. In the eyes of Buss (1995), 
this approach poses two problems: (1) The evolutionary 
adaptedness 
of 
organism 
coincides 
with 
evolutionary 
adaptedness of environment whereas the previously adapted 
environment is different from the existing environment. (2) 
The psychological mechanism common to mankind is 
unique.[4]  
Dusenbery (1996) tries to explicate the origin of species’ 
specificity from three points: (1) Biological adaptation 
conforms to the psychological mechanism. (2) biological 
variation drives natural selection. (3) The genetic mechanism is 
transmitted.[5] As far as he is concerned, biological adaptation 
is the way of determining the psychological mechanism. 
Through natural selection, human cognitive ability is the 
product of evolution, so the interpretation of human traits must 
be consistent with the natural selection theory. Human 
behavior science and other studies are also required to follow 
the approach to natural selection. As it should be, the 
explanation of other animal traits also follows this approach. In 
addition, from a view of species specificity, even if biological 
variation drives natural selection, different species in the face 
of evolutionary adaptive environment will have different 
problems with the corresponding solutions, so that biological 
adaptation itself has become the key to solve the adaptive 
problems. It is true that, from the biogenetic gene transfer 
mechanism, all the complex mechanisms of biology are 
evolved from thousands of genes. Recombination of genetic 
factors between individuals is a prerequisite for maintaining 
complex mechanisms. Recombination of natural selection and 
sexual reproduction often leads to a relatively uniformity of 
complex adaptive design. 
 Adaptationism approaches to Evolutionary epistemology 
just follow Dusenbery’s interpretation of the priority to natural 
selection, but is it possible that this adaptationism approach can 
be carried out in different contexts? 
This paper is sponsored by Projects of the National Social Science 
Foundation of China (15CZX014), “EEM Program’s Theoretical 
Development and Methodological implications” 
3rd International Conference on Social Science and Higher Education (ICSSHE-17)
Copyright © 2017, the Authors. Published by Atlantis Press. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 99
383

B. The external environment- as a dominant power 
Wuketits (1989) states briefly that the adaptationist 
approaches to evolutionary epistemology involve two basic 
assumptions: (1) The sense organ of any organism will be 
adapted to the external world. (2) What the organism perceives 
is a real but simplistic mirror or part of the external world.[6] 
Wuketits’s assumptions point to the adaptability of cognitive 
structures 
and 
the 
external 
world’s 
structure. 
The 
adaptationism approach to evolutionary epistemology attempts 
to examine the adaptability of biological cognitive phenotypic 
traits, by use of the term “function” to refer to the traits by 
satisfying special needs, emphasizing the implications of 
environmental selection. Hereby, adaptation is also defined 
from the perspective of the evolution of species. On this basis, 
Godfrey-Smith(2001) distinguishes with three paradigms of 
adaptionism :[7] 
(1) Empirical adaptationism. Maynard Smith is seen as a 
typical representative in this area. He indicates that natural 
selection has a strong, ubiquitous causal power whereas the 
biological variation can be ignored. From a view of natural 
selection, the results of the evolutionary process can be 
predicted and explained. Natural selection promotes the 
formation of organism 
structures, 
including 
cognitive 
structures. There are no other evolutionary factors that can 
produce such a powerful force. 
 (2) Explanatory adaptationism. The neurologist Daniel 
Dennett is treated as a typical representative in this area. He 
highlights natural selection has a unique explanatory power 
and theory of selection can solve the “design” problems of 
organism as well as problems of the interactions between 
environment and organism. In other words, natural selection is 
seen as a naturalistic and non-theological solution to the 
“design” problem, as the only the process to result in a 
complex physiological and psychological mechanisms. 
(3) Methodological adaptationism. Ernst Mayrt is regarded 
as a typical representative in this area. He encourages scientists 
to solve biological system problems by examining the adaptive 
function and design. In order to elucidate the biological 
function, 
an 
important 
prerequisite 
of 
evolutionary 
epistemology will include the understanding and description of 
cognitive mechanisms, so as to solve the special adaptive 
problems. 
Methodological 
adaptationism 
treats 
biocompatibility as an organizational principle, with special 
ways of studying organisms.  
 In 
addition 
to 
the 
above 
three 
adaptationism, 
Murphy(2003) also proposes forward-looking adaptationism 
conception. [8] Forward-looking adaptationism begins with the 
assumptions of the Environment of Evolutionary Adaptedness 
(EEA) and the problems faced by biological ancestors in the 
environment. So its strategy is to assume that the designing 
traits can effectively solve the adaptive problem. In other 
words, from an empirical point of view, they support special 
adaptation and indirectly support the EEA hypothesis. It is 
suggested that EEA is seen as an important concept of 
adaptationism approach to evolutionary epistemology. In 
examining non-human species, the old problems of species are 
often studied as existing problems, so they assume that 
non-human species can adapt to the living environment, as the 
EEA has not been changed. In contrast, during the process of 
human evolution, the adaptation to earlier environment is 
different from adaptation to current environment, so it seems 
that the EEA of human has been changed in this respect. 
The early study of evolutionary epistemology is based upon 
the theory of evolutionary biology. The standpoint of 
adaptionism has been defensed by theory of selection. Due to 
the dominant position of adaptionism in biology during the first 
half of the 20th century, many scholars tend to argue that this 
approach is legitimate to reveal the problems of mental 
organization with special psychological structures. This 
approach to evolutionary epistemology must start with the 
discovery and description of biological adaptation, because the 
complex functional organization of the organism is embedded 
into the organ design by means of the adaptive mechanism. 
Natural selection is known as the only designer of biological 
functional organ. Thereby, the success of evolutionary biology 
lies so much in the use of adaptionism approaches to explain 
the functional design of organic traits. 
This approach to evolutionary epistemology is encouraged 
to regard the physiological trait of biological cognition as a 
successful extension of the other mental traits of the organism, 
such as vertebrate eyes. Under the influence of this approach, 
evolutionary epistemologists advocate that the interpretation of 
the mind needs to start from the relationship between mind and 
body, so the cognitive structure and function is no longer a 
by-product 
of 
other 
traits. 
Thus, 
early 
evolutionary 
epistemology 
supports 
the 
principle 
of 
adaptionism, 
particularly in favor of the theoretical basis of adaptive 
maximization to biological behavior. However, this approach 
has long ignored the important process of knowledge 
generation, namely, mental construction. 
III.  THE NON-ADAPTATIONISM APPROACH TO EVOLUTIONARY 
EPISTEMOLOGY: INITIATIVES BASED 
Adaptationism follows the principle that natural selection is 
viewed as most important evolutionary casual powers. 
Non-adaptionists advocate that the evolutionary mechanism 
cannot be confined to the adaptation to the external 
environment, but also should include historical contingencies 
and other factors. Thus, the refutation of adaptationism is 
finally focused on the discussion of whether random factors 
can play an important role in the process of biological 
evolution. In the study of evolutionary epistemology, 
adaptationists hold that the biological evolutionary mechanism 
of cognition is based upon an external natural selection, 
whereas non-adaptationists do believe that cognitive biological 
evolution is determined by both the external environment and 
organism itself, rather than their complete passively adaptation 
to the environment. 
A. Subjective initiative of the organism  
After the 1970s, biological system theory has been 
constructed by indicating that we can’t ignore the internal 
selection of organism in a process of cognition. This theory 
reflects the inherent initiative of organism. In terms of 
Darwinism, biological system theory does not deny the 
externally environment selection, but attaches importance to 
the internal selection. Since internal selection is directed at the 
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 99
384

organism’s structure that will constrain their own adaptation 
and evolution. The biological adaptation is defined by 
organism itself, rather than that by environment or mysticism. 
In terms of evolutionary epistemology, biological system 
theory transcends the scope of natural selection theory, which 
overcomes the one-sidedness of adaptationism, providing the 
communicative platform between cognitive science and 
biology.  
B. Adaptive Subjectivity in a complex biological system 
The 
non-adaptionism 
approach 
to 
evolutionary 
epistemology lays stress on the fact that biological adaptation 
is not defined by environment, but by organism itself. In 
particular, although the biological system and environment 
share a history together, but are not subject to independent 
evolution. 
Firstly, the organism is taken as the hardcore to describe 
and explain their role in the process of evolution. Gould (1983) 
states briefly that the organism’s appearance and embryonic 
development form are inherited, which brings constraint to its 
future changes and adaptation. In many cases, the evolutionary 
path reflects the genetic pattern rather than the existing 
environmental 
requirements.[9] 
He 
departs 
from 
the 
evolutionary process of biological genetic mechanism, 
describing the complexity of biological systems.  
Secondly, the organism is a complex, orderly system that 
involves the interactive elements. From organs and tissues, to 
cells and molecules, it is considered that the organism is a 
highly ordered system with different hierarchical structures that 
allow organs and functions to correspond to each other. The 
basic structure of the chromosome can achieve the goals of 
collective 
movement 
and 
transformation 
coherently, 
highlighting the general high degree of coordination between 
time and space. The ultrastructure of living cells is a complex 
network structure, on the grounds of certain rules to produce 
the overall pulse and transformation, and to maintain the unity 
of the system. 
Thirdly, the organism itself is a complex and active system 
that can run, fly, swim, dig and nest, etc., which demonstrate 
the complexity of the organism system, so that the organism is 
not only affected by environment, but also affect the 
environment. This indicates that organism has hierarchical 
structures of the developmental system, which achieve the 
goals of self-maintenance through the components’ exchanges 
in system. It also explains why the organism is not entirely 
determined by environment. 
IV. THE NEW APPROACHES TO EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY: 
INTERACTIONISM BASED 
Munz (2001) has suggested that this new approach to 
evolutionary epistemology indicates that knowledge comes 
from the interaction between organism and environment.[10] 
The empiricist argues that rationality is based on the inductive 
process of experience, through the associative process to draw 
reasoning conclusions. The rationalist believes that knowledge 
is born of innate elements and rational knowledge is seen as the 
logical relationship between ideas. In knowledge sociology, 
knowledge is a result of agreement between different cognitive 
subjects.  
Since the 21st century, the focuses of evolutionary 
epistemology have been on the constructivist approach, in 
which coherent theory and constructivism theory play a central 
role. In accordance with this new approach, knowledge derives 
from the relationship between organism and environment, so 
that the tension between adaptionism and non-adaptionism has 
been maintained through addressing the interaction between 
organism and environment  
A.  Transforming correspondence theory to coherent theory 
The traditional approach to evolutionary epistemology 
points to the correspondence between cognition and the 
external world, believing in “one to one” mapping relations 
between environment and organism. This stereotypical 
correspondence theory often overlooks the fact that the 
organism is a active system and that knowledge comes from 
the interaction between environment and organism. The 
biological system itself is integrating the internal mechanism 
with the external environment through the feedback loop, 
coupled with the special nature of the evolution of human 
cognitive mechanism, so that this new approach to 
evolutionary epistemology strongly initiates the integration of 
internal and external mechanisms. 
 The coherent theory reflects the internal initiative of 
organism. This approach to evolutionary epistemology 
vigorously advocates the perceived coherence is reduced to the 
functional ones. The external information can be accurately 
perceived by organism in an given environment, which can be 
coherently transformed into internal structure or the life 
systematic organization. This forms a feedback chain from the 
organism to the outside world. Each organism’s interpretation 
of reality, to a certain extent, is not simply described by their 
sense organs. It is seen as transcendence to epistemology of 
analyst philosophy. In particular, it is important to note that in 
terms of coherent theory, the specific organization of organism 
determines their perceived differences in the external world, 
which confirms the basic relationship between the organism 
and environment. It is not free from the environment but is 
integrated into the environment. In this sense, environment can 
influence the organism that can adapt to it. The organism also 
acts on the environment, resulting in environmental behavior. 
It is of great survival significance for the creatures in the 
interaction between environment and organism. 
B. A constructivism approach  
Wuketits(2000) formulated three hypotheses in accordance 
with this new approach: (1) Cognitive is an active biological 
system function;(2) Knowledge comes from the complex 
interaction between organism and environment; (3) Cognition 
is a continuous process of trial and error .[11] This new 
approach is in line with the constructivism theory. 
The constructivism theory reflects the initiative of 
organism’s internal selection. Lewontin (2000) does not see the 
organism as a negative element of selection, whereas he 
introduces an evolutionary constructivist approach that 
distinguishes between different aspects of organism and 
environment: The evolutionary constructivist approach focuses 
not only on the interrelationships between the organism and the 
environment, but on the internal processes of organism and 
environment. The organism is determined by itself. The 
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 99
385

elements from the external environment include their own 
environment or niche, and to a large extent determine how they 
relate to each other. The organism not only selects its 
environment, but also constructs its own niche. Organisms 
continue to actively change their environment and learn to 
provide the external conditions of the environment. [12] 
This new approach to evolutionary epistemology is not to 
examine how organism evolves by adapting to a given 
environment, but rather a way of thinking about how organism 
and environment interact, confirming that organism do not 
passively adapt to the external world but actively build and 
transform the external environment, so that it can flourish in a 
changing environment. In other words, life is a process of 
information processing, whose development depends on the 
interaction between the given environment and species. 
Therefore, for the sake of survival, the organism actively 
interacts in different ways by pursuing knowledge included in 
the organism’s structure. 
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Evolutionary epistemology is seen as a multidisciplinary 
field, which includes biology, neurophysiology, cognitive 
science, 
psychology, 
philosophy, 
etc. 
Evolutionary 
epistemology continually faces challenges from biological 
facts due to the constantly changing research paradigms within 
disciplines. This makes evolutionary epistemology necessary to 
be changed for improvement. With the development of modern 
scientific methods, the problems of biodiversity and the 
complexity of evolution have to be faced by epistemology. The 
philological intuitive or speculative approach cannot directly 
be used to understand thoroughly about organism’s behavior in 
a microscopic sense, let alone knowing clearly about their 
perception 
to 
environment. 
Consequently, 
the 
overall 
development of epistemology must be accompanied by the 
overall development of biology, neurophysiology and other 
disciplines. From the implications of adaptionionism to 
epistemology, it is considered that cognition is a kind of 
passive adaptation or a mechanical reactive behavior. From the 
implications of non-adaptionionism to epistemology, it is 
believed that active cognitive behavior is seen as a general 
feature of all species. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This paper is sponsored by Projects of the National Social 
Science Foundation of China (15CZX014), “EEM Program’s 
Theoretical Development and Methodological implications”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gontier, Nathalie. "Evolutionary epistemology as a scientific method: a 
new look upon the units and levels of evolution debate." Theory in 
Biosciences129.2-3 (2010): 167-182. 
[2] Lewontin, Richard C. The triple helix: Gene, organism, and environment. 
Harvard University Press, 2001. APA  
[3] Symons, Donald. "Adaptiveness and adaptation." Ethology and 
Sociobiology11.4-5 (1990): 427-444. 
[4] Buss, David M. "Evolutionary psychology: A new paradigm for 
psychological science." Psychological inquiry 6.1 (1995): 1-30. 
[5] Dusenbery, D.B. Life at a small scale: The behaviour of microbes. New 
York: Scientific American Library, 1996: 68. 
[6] Wuketits, F.M. “Cognition: A non-adaptationist view.” La Nuova Critica, 
1989, 9 (1): 5. 
[7] Godfrey-Smith, P. Adaptationism and Optimality. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2001: 335-357. 
[8] Murphy D. Adaptationism and and Psychological Explanation. Boston, 
Ma: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003. 
[9] Gould, S.J. Hen's Teeth and Horse's Toes: Further Reflections in Natural 
History. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1983: 156. 
[10] Munz, Peter. Philosophical Darwinism: on the origin of knowledge by 
means of natural selection. London: Routledge, 2001: 9. 
[11]Wuketits, F.M. Functional Models of Cognition: Self-organizing 
Dynamics and Semantic Structures in Cognitive Systems Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000b: 27. 
[12] Lewontin, Richard. The Triple Helix: Gene, Organisms and Environment. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 2000: 51-64.
 
 
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 99
386

