 
 
Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
Author(s): Antonia Peacocke
Source: Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic
Tradition, Vol. 174, No. 2 (February 2017), pp. 353-377
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/26001772
Accessed: 26-03-2023 02:02 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophical
Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Philos Stud (2017) 174:353-377 (■)CrossMark
 DOI 10.1007/sl 1098-016-0685-4 W
 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 Antonia Peacocke1
 Published online: 3 May 2016
 © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2016
 Abstract You can come to know that you believe that p partly by reflecting on
 whether p and then judging that p. Call this procedure "the transparency method 
 belief." How exactly does the transparency method generate known self-attributi
 of belief? To answer that question, we cannot interpret the transparency method
 involving a transition between the contents p and I believe that p. It is hard to 
 how some such transition could be warranted. Instead, in this context, one men
 action is both a judgment that p and a self-attribution of a belief that p. The notion 
 embedded mental action is introduced here to explain how this can be so and
 provide a full epistemic explanation of the transparency method. That explanat
 makes sense of first-person authority and immediacy in transparent self-knowled
 In generalized form, it gives sufficient conditions on an attitude's being known
 transparently.
 Keywords Self-knowledge ■ Belief • Transparency • Mental action • Agency
 One way to know that you believe that p involves coming to judge that p. As Eva
 (1982) famously observed, in answering the question '"Do you think there is goi
 to be a third world war?', I must attend ... to precisely the same outward phenom
 as I would attend to if I were answering the question, 'Will there be a third wo
 [2! Antonia Peacocke
 peacocke@berkeley.edu
 1 Department of Philosophy, University of California, Berkeley, Moses Hall, Berkeley,
 CA 94720, USA
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 354
 A. Peacocke
 war?'" (p. 225).1 Call this way of answering this question "the transparency metho
 for belief," and the attributions it generates "transparent self-attributions of belief
 What explains the knowledge status of such transparent self-attributions?
 There is a challenge facing any such attempt at epistemic explanation: th
 transparency method seems to involve a move from a judgment about the world t
 judgment about one's own beliefs. But the content of the former judgment does n
 stand in any ordinary justificatory relationship to the latter. The task at hand is 
 describe the connection between a judgment that p and a self-attribution of a beli
 that p that makes sense of the epistemic warrant involved in the transparen
 method.2
 Ideally, a successful explanation will also make sense of first-person authority
 about belief—the authority you enjoy over all others in attributing beliefs to
 yourself. The transparency method is one strong candidate for a method of belief
 attribution that enjoys epistemic privilege in its first-personal use.
 This paper offers a new epistemic explanation of the transparency method.
 Crucial to that explanation is the fact that the transparency method does not involve
 any move between p and I believe that p. This fact has been recognized in the past,
 but never fully explained: how can a judgment that p also be a self-attribution of a
 belief that pi This paper has two main goals: first, to explain how just one mental
 action can be both; and second, to use that explanation to explain why transparent
 self-attributions of belief have the status of knowledge.
 1 Attempts to explain the epistemology of the transparency method
 Why accept the claim that you can come to know that you believe p in part by
 considering whether pi Besides a certain phenomenological appeal, the suggestion
 has two clear attractions. First, it coheres elegantly with Moore's famous
 observation that assertions of the form "p, but I don't believe that p" are absurd.3
 If judging that p enjoys a close connection with knowing you believe that p, the
 second conjunct may directly conflict with knowledge gained by judging the first.4
 Additionally, accepting the transparency method as a way of knowing your beliefs
 has the potential to anchor a metaphysically economical explanation of first-person
 authority about belief.
 1 Evans's (1982) characterization of the transparency method is the most often cited, but—as Moran
 (2001) notes—Edgley (1969) seems to have provided the first characterization.
 2 Here I follow Burge (1996) in taking "warrant" to be a broad term that covers epistemic entitlement,
 inferential justification, evidentiary support, and so forth (see pp. 93-94).
 3 See Moran (2001), Barnett (2015), Williams (2004), Gallois (1996), Byrne (2011), and Shoemaker
 (1995) for more on the connection between transparency and self-knowledge.
 4 There is naturally far more to say on this point to make proper sense of an explanation of Moorean
 absurdities. Note, too, that not all those philosophers aiming to explain the absurdity of Moorean
 assertions and judgments accept that an epistemic explanation is the right kind to give. See Green and
 Williams (2007) for arguments on both sides of this divide.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 355
 In order to offer some such theory, though, we must first understand how the
 transparency method produces known self-attributions of belief. And now we face a
 prima facie explanatory challenge: a challenge to demonstrate how an apparent
 move from a judgment that p to a self-attribution of a belief that p is epistemically
 warranted.
 Two types of attempt to explain the warrant involved in the transparency method
 have been particularly influential. One treats the move from p to I believe that p as a
 form of inference, and the relevant warrant as inferential warrant. The other takes
 the rational agency we enjoy with respect to our own beliefs to explain the relevant
 epistemic warrant. Both explanatory strategies face substantial objections. By
 coming to understand these objections, we can start to see the shape of a more
 promising epistemic explanation.
 1.1 Gallois and Byrne on Moore inferences
 According to Gallois (1996), using the transparency method involves making an
 inference from p to / believe that p—a "Moore inference".5 Though Moore
 inferences are not deductively valid, inductively valid, or abductively plausible,
 Byrne (2005, 2011, 2012) argues that they are "not without epistemic merit" (2011,
 p. 206). Their inferential schema is "strongly self-verifying": self-verifying because
 "inference from a premiss entails belief in that premiss," and strongly self-verifying
 because the conclusion will be true even when the premise is false (p. 206). The
 ensuing self-attributions are "safe in the sense that they could not easily have been
 false" (pp. 206-7).
 Byrne recognizes that this point "falls short of a demonstration that reasoning [in
 this way] is knowledge-conducive": neither strong self-verification nor safety
 ensures warrant (p. 207). However, he has not set out to prove that such reasoning is
 knowledge-conducive; this has not been called into question. What is at issue is how
 to explain privileged and peculiar access. To say that one has privileged access to
 one's own beliefs is just to say that "beliefs about one's mental states are more
 likely to amount to knowledge than one's corresponding beliefs about others' mental
 states" (p. 202, emphasis added). To say that one has peculiar access to one's own
 beliefs is just to say that "one has a way of knowing about one's mental states that
 one cannot use to come to know about the mental states of others" (p. 202, emphasis
 added).6 To explain why we all generally enjoy privileged and peculiar access is
 also to explain first-person authority.7
 Byrne claims to have given privileged and peculiar access a "satisfying
 explanation" (p. 207). But these notions are explicitly epistemic. Why, then, accept
 a view that fails to explain how the transparency method is knowledge-conducive?
 5 Gallois (1996) names these "Moore inferences" because reasoning in this way explicitly avoids
 commitment to the Moorean absurdity "p, but I don't believe that p" (p. 46).
 6 Byrne (2012) credits Ryle (1949) with coining the phrase "privileged access.".
 7 Some, however, reject the converse. Davidson (1984/2001, 1987/2001) and Wright (1989), among
 others, offer non-epistemic explanations of first-person authority.
 "£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 356
 A. Peacocke
 Can the inferential interpretation of the transparency method at least help u
 along the way to some such properly epistemic explanation? It can do that only 
 Moore inferences share some non-trivial structure with inferences in general. In
 recent years, however, more and more disanalogies between Moore inferences an
 inferences in general have been recognized by respondents to Byrne (Barnett 20
 Boyle 2011; Brueckner 1998; Moran 2012; Silins 2012).
 Most obviously, Moore inferences have a generality problem. As Boghossia
 (2014) has pointed out, "something that seems very central to our inferent
 abilities [is that] they are both general and productive" (p. 12). But Moore
 inferences cannot be run in the past or future tense (Byrne 2011, pp. 204-206). Th
 fail in the third person. And Moore inferences are absurd in hypothetical reasonin
 (Barnett 2015; Brueckner 1998).
 Inferential conclusions also inherit the strength or weakness of the justification
 for their premises (Barnett 2015; Setiya 2011; Silins 2012; Shoemaker 2009)
 Moore inferences' premises, on the other hand, are meant to justify thei
 conclusions irrespective of the justification—or even truth—of their premises.9
 It is crucial that inferences to judged conclusions depend on the truth of thei
 premises' contents. "A transition ... counts as inference only if the thinker takes 
 conclusion to be supported by the presumed truth of those other beliefs," write
 Boghossian (2014, p. 4, emphasis changed).10 On the other hand, what actua
 grounds the truth of any transparent self-attribution of belief is the attitudinal aspe
 of the judgment performed in the transparency method: its being judged, rather than
 say, merely entertained.
 Due to these significant disanalogies, it becomes difficult to see how the Gallo
 Byrne proposal could add to our epistemic understanding of the transparen
 method. It's not clear what is being borrowed from ordinary cases of inference th
 could help us make sense of the warrant for transparent self-attributions. 
 challenges to this view are also challenges for any view of the transparency meth
 on which using that method involves a transition—inferential or otherwise—fr
 p to 1 believe that p. How could this transition be warranted, if not by way of an
 recognizable inferential justification?
 8 This is related to the distinct point that knowledge cannot be gained by way of false lemmas. Some t
 that to be the lesson of Gettier's (1963) famous thought experiment. Byrne (2011, p. 207) correctly po
 out. however, that one need not draw that lesson from Gettier; instead, we might restrict knowledge
 safe cases. Moore inferences are, as he points out, as safe as it gets.
 9 See Barnett (2015) for extensive careful discussion of the epistemological ramifications of accep
 Moore inferences as such. He also points out two further disanalogies between Moore inferences
 inferences in general which, for reasons of space, I have omitted here.
 10 Cf. Frege (1979, p. 3), quoted by Boghossian (2014. p. 4): "To make a judgment because we 
 cognizant of other truths as providing a justification for it is known as inferring".
 '£j Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 357
 1.2 Moran on rational deliberation
 Moran (2001, 2003, 2004) rejects the inferential view of the transparency meth
 He argues instead that your first-person epistemic authority on the matter of w
 you believe derives from your deliberative authority. You have deliberat
 authority insofar as you have "the capacity to play a constituting role in determi
 the psychological facts themselves"—that is, the capacity to make up your min
 a rational way (p. 146). Moran (2001) implies that to understand the special firs
 personal "stance of rational agency" is already to understand the epistemology 
 the transparency method (p. 149).
 The suggestion has great intuitive appeal, but Moran's (2001) original
 presentation of it does not provide much further detail about the relevant epistemic
 explanation. In response to questions about how this epistemic explanation is meant
 to work (O'Brien 2003; Shoemaker 2003; Wilson 2004), Moran (2003, 2004) has
 clarified what he takes to be the structure of the warrant involved in the transparency
 method:
 if the person were entitled to assume, or in some way even obligated to
 assume, that his considerations for or against believing P (the outward
 directed question) actually determined in this case what his belief concerning
 P actually is (the inward-directed question), then he would be entitled to
 answer the question concerning his believing P or not by consideration of the
 reasons in favor of P (Moran 2004, p. 457, my emphasis).
 The warrant at issue, then, is a form of entitlement to a guiding assumption that your
 deliberative reasons settle your beliefs.
 On Moran's view, you can't avoid making this entitling assumption: it follows
 from the nature of deliberation that you take yourself to be settling your beliefs. And
 you have the relevant entitlement whenever the assumption is true—whenever
 deliberation does indeed determine your beliefs. However, you can also "lose the
 right" to the assumption when it is not true (2003, p. 406). Moran emphasizes
 several times that your rational deliberations can, and often do, fail to determine
 your beliefs.
 This entitlement-based modification of the account is helpful. With it, Moran's
 view can make sense of how you know your transparent self-attributions in at least
 some cases. Because the entitlement is attached to a specially first-personal
 assumption, the account also offers some promise with regard to explaining first
 person authority.
 However, the account has trouble explaining first-person authority as a general
 phenomenon, precisely because Moran takes the assumption to be frequently false.
 That implies that your transparent self-attributions of belief are also frequently false.
 Not only will they be false: other people will also be better placed epistemically to
 recognize their falsity. From a third-personal standpoint—say, a standpoint of
 someone who knows you and your dispositions very well by way of close
 observation—it may be clear that your deliberating in this way does not settle what
 you believe. But you are always constrained to assume, inaccurately, that your
 deliberation does settle your beliefs. Most of the time, then, the necessary
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 358
 A. Peacocke
 assumption about deliberation (to which you are sometimes entitled) will be 
 epistemic liability, rather than an asset.
 The problem can be partially fixed by abandoning the independently plausible
 claim that the entitling assumption is often wrong. But even if the assumption we
 universally correct, the view would remain incomplete in another distinct way.
 Given Moran's presentation of the assumption, it seems like you would need 
 identify your considerations for or against believing that p as such in order to us
 the assumption to come to know whether you believe p. If that is indeed the cas
 then we need to understand how you could come to know what your consideration
 for and against belief are. Moran's explanation will remain incomplete until 
 have some further explanation of that sort of self-knowledge—or, at the very lea
 good reason to think that we have such self-knowledge in all the relevant cases o
 transparent self-attribution of belief.11
 Moran might simply deny that you need self-awareness of your considerations 
 apply the relevant assumption to come to know what you believe. But if that is th
 case, it's difficult to see how making the assumption that your considerations fo
 and against believing that p determine what you actually believe could help expla
 your knowledge of your own beliefs at all. What is needed here is a bette
 understanding of the types of self-awareness involved in using the transparency
 method to self-attribute belief.
 1.3 Towards a better explanation
 As seen above, explaining the epistemic warrant for a move from p to I believe that
 p is prohibitively difficult. Why not, then, resist understanding the transparency
 method as involving any such move at all? Boyle (2009b, 2011), Crane (2001) and
 Setiya (2011) have all advanced positions of this type, which I will call "no-move
 views."
 Each such view faces further explanatory challenges that have not yet been met.
 In particular, all three views posit the identification of types of attitudes or acts that
 seem entirely distinct. Yet none fully explains how to understand such
 identifications.
 Consider Boyle's (2009b, 2011) picture, the most developed of the three. Boyle
 (2011) argues that the transparency method merely manifests implicit knowledge.
 Writes Boyle: "The step [involved in the transparency method], in other words, will
 not be an inferential transition between contents, but a coming to explicit
 acknowledgment of a condition of which one is already tacitly aware" (2011,
 p. 227). Crucially, what is made explicit here are not two states—a belief, and
 knowledge of that belief—but just one: "believing P and knowing oneself to believe
 11 It is worth noting that self-knowledge of reasons might be transparent in a way directly analogous to
 self-knowledge of belief: you may well know your own considerations for or against believing that p by
 considering what in fact provides evidence for (or logically implies that) p. Yet this observation cannot
 alone complete Moran's explanation. The same issues that motivate this paper—questions about why
 judging that p leads to knowing you believe that p—would then apply in analogous ways for knowledge
 of your considerations for and against belief that p.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 359
 P ... are two aspects of one cognitive state—the state, as we might put it, of
 knowingly believing P" (p. 228).
 Partly to explain this puzzling claim, Boyle (2011) echoes Moran's point that our
 rational authority over our own beliefs must play a role in explaining how we know
 about them: "we have privileged self-knowledge of these sorts of attitudes because
 they are expressions of our capacity for rational self-determination" (p. 237,
 emphasis added).12 As with Moran's (2001) discussion, though, this point alone
 cannot provide the epistemological understanding we are after. And if it is the
 identification of belief and knowledge of belief that is meant to provide such
 epistemological insight, we need to better understand how two such apparently
 distinct states could be one and the same.13
 The denial of any move in the transparency method also appears in a proposal by
 Crane (2001), who claims that "being conscious that one believes that p need
 involve no more than being conscious that p" (p. 108), and a passage by Setiya
 (2011), who writes that the thought that p and the thought 1 believe that p "need not
 even be distinct from one another" in the context of the transparency method (p.
 187).14
 Here Crane and Setiya each disagree with Boyle on one key point. While Boyle
 (2011) argues that belief and knowledge of belief are one and the same state, Crane
 claims that consciousness that p can also be consciousness that one believes that p,
 and Setiya suggests that the thought that p and the thought that one believes that
 p can be identical. Yet each of these proposed identifications is just as puzzling as
 the last.
 To move towards a compelling no-move view, we need to get clear on three
 points. First: what should be identified with what in the transparency method?
 Second: when and how are these two apparently distinct attitudes or acts one and the
 same? And finally: can this identification help us understand the epistemology of the
 transparency method?
 12 Here (2011) and elsewhere (especially 2009a) Boyle makes plausible that a belief is "an exercise of
 agency" (2009a passim) insofar as its subject controls and guides its development.
 13 This challenge is sharpened by the fact that subjects can apparently fail to know their own beliefs.
 Boyle (2011) is constrained to deny this. He writes: "when a belief is present but not consciously
 accessible, so too is the knowledge of that belief' (p. 229). This is a deeply counterintuitive conclusion. It
 certainly seems to be the case that you can discover, with surprise, that you have some belief that you
 previously never knew you had—not even tacitly.
 14 Compare Heal (2002) and O'Brien (2005). Heal argues that the judgment that I believe that p as made
 in the course of the transparency method is also a judgment that p, because it shares the "long-term
 consequences" of the judgment that p (p. 17). Yet it is not clear why meeting this condition requires
 identification of these judgments. O'Brien may also have a no-move view about self-knowledge of
 judgment, if not belief. She writes: "concluding that 'P is true', on considering whether P is true, is ...
 equivalent to the subject realising the practically known possibility of judging that P" (p. 594). This
 practical knowledge just is the knowledge that one is judging that P. However, O'Brien explicitly avoids
 extending this account to belief (pp. 599-600).
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 360
 A. Peacocke
 2 Mental action and embedded mental action
 To answer those questions, I'll introduce the notion of embedded mental action. 
 do that, I'll begin with a discussion of intentional mental action more generally
 2.1 Intentional mental actions and action awareness
 Mental actions are things one does mentally. Imagining what your wedding will be
 like can be a mental action. Recalling what your doctor told you can be a mental
 action. Supposing that x = 4 can be a mental action.
 Three facts about mental action will be crucial to this discussion. First, mental
 actions can be intentional. Second, intentional mental actions have conscious
 contents. Third, in performing an intentional mental action, you have contrastive
 awareness of the kind of thing you are doing in thought.
 Importantly, we do not need to settle any other controversies here about mental
 actions. We do not need to settle, for instance, whether mental actions are
 necessarily or always intentional. Nor do we need to commit to a view about what it
 is that makes a mental action intentional.16 I'll set aside these questions for now.
 To see how mental actions can be intentional, consider an example. You can
 intentionally imagine, say, what your wedding will be like. That is not to say that
 imagining is intentional by definition, but just that you can imagine something
 intentionally. Nor is it to say that all aspects of your imagining are under your direct
 control. It might just happen to occur to you that it might rain on your wedding day,
 bringing to mind visions of soaked guests and stained shoes. That is compatible with
 your ongoing task of imagination being intentional.
 Compare recollection. You can involuntarily recall what your doctor said, or you
 can intentionally recall it. When done intentionally, recalling something can require
 effort and sharp focus. It requires trying to be guided only by what actually
 happened, but that does not mean you have direct control over what you ultimately
 recall. Indeed, it wouldn't properly be recalling anything if you got to choose
 anything to bring to mind. Your act of recollection's being intentional is not only
 compatible with, but also implies, your not having arbitrary control over what
 comes to mind in performing your task.
 The fact that mental actions can be intentional is crucial for the purposes of this
 paper. For that reason, it is worth stressing how strange it would be to deny that
 mental actions can be intentional. Someone who could never perform any mental
 actions intentionally could never set her mind to some particular mental task and
 then do it—even a task as simple as adding twelve and nineteen, or deciding where
 15 For the following characterization of mental action I am indebted quite generally to O'Brien (2007),
 O'Brien and Soteriou (2009), Peacocke (2008), and Ryle (1971a, b, c).
 16 There is one delicacy here. Below, I suggest that deciding what to do (which implies forming an
 intention) can be intentional. If so, and if something's being intentional is partly a matter of having an
 intention to do it, then not all intention formation can be intentional, on pain of vicious regress.
 Sometimes you must be able to decide what to do without doing that (so deciding) intentionally. An
 anonymous reviewer drew my attention to this subtle point.
 <£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 361
 to go for lunch. She might in fact add sometimes, and might in fact decide on
 restaurants, but she would be entirely passive with respect to her train of mental
 events. She might sometimes be able to follow or even participate in a conversation,
 if her thoughts cooperated nicely enough. But she could never intentionally do
 anything requested of her in simple communication. She could never intentionally
 think of a playing card for a magic trick, or intentionally consider whether the soup
 would taste better with more salt. The picture that emerges is beyond belief.
 Someone who could never perform intentional mental actions would be absurdly cut
 off from directing her own mental life.
 When mental actions are intentional, they have conscious contents.17 To say that
 you are trying to imagine what your wedding will be like is also to say that your
 conscious stream of thought has a certain kind of content (perhaps involving a
 banquet or a rabbi). Yet it is not only when imagination is active and intentional in
 this way that its contents are conscious. Involuntary imagined visions can pop into
 your mind as well.
 The fact that mental actions can be intentional has another crucial implication:
 since you can do things intentionally in thought, you can be aware of what you are
 doing in thought. In other words, intentional mental actions involve mental action
 awareness.
 This claim is a particular application of Anscombe's (1
 doing something intentionally involves knowing what
 particular description—the description under which you in
 same points that made this claim plausible for action in gen
 action in particular.
 As Anscombe noted, intentional actions are actions to which a certain kind of
 "Why?" question has application. That "Why?" question is a request for reasons
 that recommended a particular action to you. One important way of rejecting the
 applicability of that "Why?" question is to say that you did not know that you were
 doing that thing (under that description) at all. But if not knowing you are doing
 something (under a particular description) implies that the "Why?" question does
 not apply, and all intentional actions are ones to which the question does apply, then
 lacking awareness of what you are doing implies that you are not doing it
 intentionally. In contraposition, then, doing something intentionally involves
 knowing that you are doing it.
 Consider these points as applied to mental action. When you are doing something
 intentionally in thought, you can be asked why you are doing it in the same special
 sense. For example: if you are trying to plot the social ruin of your rival, I can ask
 17 In personal communication, Christopher Peacocke has suggested that there could be intentional mental
 actions with unconscious contents. Though I disagree, I leave this subtle controversy aside for now. Even
 if some intentional mental actions lack conscious contents, certainly some mental actions have conscious
 contents. That weaker claim is all that is strictly required for the purposes of the epistemic explanation
 provided in Sect. 3 below.
 18 See also Davidson (1963/2001) on the connection between intentional actions and particular
 intensional descriptions of those actions. For more on mental action awareness generally, see O'Brien
 (2007), O'Brien and Soteriou (2009), and Peacocke (2008).
 •£j Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 362
 A. Peacocke
 you why, and you might tell me that you need to be prepared in case the time com
 for revenge. Similarly, if you are intentionally assessing your daughter's skill in
 tennis, I can ask you why, and you can tell me that you need to decide which lesso
 to book for her.
 In either case, you can reject the legitimacy of my question by telling me that you
 didn't know what you were doing.19 You might question whether you were really
 plotting the social ruin of your rival, or just imagining a scenario while making no
 real decisions. If, in your passive train of thought, you did in fact come to a
 judgment that your daughter has no real skill at tennis, you might simply not know
 whether that was a real judgment or merely a case of entertaining a hypothetical.
 Crucially, the uncertainty in either case would attach to the attitudinal aspect of the
 thought, which is precisely that aspect over which you sometimes have intentional
 control. The contrast is between knowing that you're doing this sort of thing
 (judging) or doing that sort of thing (supposing), rather than a contrast between
 being aware or unaware of the contents of those same thoughts.
 In the case of intentional mental action, the awareness in question may not be
 particularly conceptually rich. Indeed, it need be no richer than the description that
 characterizes your action as intentional. For example: to have action awareness of
 an act of imagining, you need not be able to think explicitly in terms of acts of
 imagining. Rather, you can have more basic contrastive awareness of what you are
 doing: you can be aware, that is, that you are doing this sort of thing (e.g. imagining
 one's wedding) rather than that sort of thing (e.g. recalling one's wedding). The
 contrast to which you are sensitive in having mental action awareness is a contrast
 of attitudinal stance between different kinds of mental actions, but you need not
 conceptualize the difference as a contrast in attitudinal stance.
 Mental actions can indeed be intentional. When they are intentional, they have
 conscious contents. To perform an intentional mental action is also to have
 awareness of what you are doing—at least of a basic, contrastive kind.
 2.2 Judgment as an intentional mental action
 As with imagining, judgment is not a mental action by definition, but some
 judgments are intentional mental actions. Those judgments, like all intentional
 mental actions, involve action awareness and have conscious contents.
 It is worth clarifying the sense in which judgment can be intentional. Judgment
 can be intentional insofar as you can set out to judge some things, rather than, say,
 imagine some things. That is what you do when you set out to determine what's
 true. You can also set out to make a judgment that matches some particular content
 criterion—e.g. a judgment about topic T or a judgment whether p.
 19 In order to make best sense of my asking you this question when you yourself do not report to me what
 you are doing, assume that I have insight into what you are currently doing in thought just by watching
 you: I know that particular scowl you make when looking at your rival's portrait is caused by your
 plotting, or I know that your crestfallen expression while watching your daughter's tennis match is a
 result of a real judgment that she has no future at Wimbledon.
 <£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 363
 We need not accept voluntarism about judgment to see that judgments can be
 intentional. Though judgment can be intentional, it is not possible to decide at will
 the precise content of one's judgments: you cannot, without regard for the truth of
 some proposition p, will yourself to judge that p.20
 As Shah and Velleman (2005) have recognized, the falsity of voluntarism about
 judgment proceeds from the nature of judgment. Judgments are just those mental
 actions "that [are] governed, both normatively and descriptively, by the standard of
 truth" (p. 499). That claim involves two important observations. First, judgments
 are in fact regulated by truth-seeking considerations. For example, when I gain
 conclusive evidence that some p is false and recognize that evidence for what it is, I
 will (generally) not judge that p. Second, judgments are normatively assessed
 relative to the standard of truth.
 2.3 Embedded mental action
 There are (at least) two different ways of individuating mental actions. First, me
 actions can be individuated by their thought-types: imagining that you won gold
 the hundred-meter dash is different from recalling that. Second, mental actions
 the same thought-type can be individuated by their thought-contents: judging t
 you won gold is a different action than judging that you won silver. For the purp
 of this paper, take a type of mental action simpliciter to be a class of judgments
 individuated in both ways. An example of a type of mental action is judging th
 you've won gold.21
 Here's an abstract definition of embedded mental action (to be illustrated bel
 with examples): an embedded mental action is any intentional mental actio
 some type T that also belongs to another type U in virtue of your havin
 antecedently conceptualized its content in some particular way {de dicto) in you
 intention to judge. In the context of an ongoing purposeful mental task, when y
 think of the contents of some of your upcoming thoughts (perhaps just th
 meeting a description d) as being F, in performing each such mental action (th
 meets d) you already take that particular content to be F. No further mov
 required for you to take those contents to be F.22
 Two concrete examples will help clarify what an embedded mental action is.
 First: imagine you are writing a short piece of fiction about acclaimed actors
 Lupita Nyong'o and Idris Elba. In this context, you need to think of someth
 Lupita could say to Idris in response to a compliment. To do that, you call to m
 various sentences, e.g. "You flatter me!" In imagining each of these sentences, 
 20 See Williams (1976) for a related argument against doxastic voluntarism.
 21 Broader classes of mental actions I will call "kinds": thus judging is a kind of mental action.
 22 This phenomenon is not particularly circumscribed to mental actions rather than actions in gener
 Compare the following case in non-mental action (with thanks to John Campbell): conceptualizing wh
 you're about to do as aiming for target one partly makes it the case that what you go on to do, when 
 let fly, is attempt to hit target one. I focus here on mental action for simplicity and brevity, bu
 important to note that this point about embedded mental action proceeds from a more general point a
 action and how it is conceptualized in thought.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 364
 A. Peacocke
 are not just thinking of a sentence; you are thinking of something that Lupita cou
 say to Idris.
 It is your antecedent conceptualization of such sentences as things Lupita might
 say to Idris that makes each of these mental acts more than just an act of thinking of
 a sentence. For what else could make each such action into an act of thinking of
 something that Lupita could say to Idris? Perhaps you could conjure a visual image
 of a person matching Lupita's description saying each sentence to someone
 matching Idris's description. But no such visual image is required to imagine Lupita
 saying something to Idris; someone with no capacity for visual imagination could do
 that. Nor is it sufficient: the visual image itself wouldn't settle whether that was
 really Lupita saying something to Idris in your imagination.23
 It is just your antecedent conceptualization of such sentences as things that
 Lupita might say to Idris that makes it the case that each of these embedded mental
 actions is not only an act of imagining a sentence but also an act of thinking of
 something Lupita could say to Idris.
 Consider, now, a different example. In the example of embedded mental action
 just considered, you were not constrained to call to mind new or original sentences
 in order to complete your mental task. You could instead find things for Lupita to
 say by recalling some things that people have said to you, for instance. Any mental
 action that involves entertaining words in thought will do for the task at hand.
 But not all embedded mental action works that way. Other mental tasks demand
 particular kinds of embedded mental action, e.g. judgment. Consider a second
 example: the task of thinking of something you've learned about Lincoln. In this
 case, it's not enough to think what might be true of Lincoln; you need to get at what
 is true about Lincoln, as learning is factive. You must restrict yourself to mental
 actions that are regulated for truth: judgments.
 Moreover, the task is not just to find some fact about Lincoln. It's to think of
 something you have learned about Lincoln. You must judge, of some p pertaining to
 Lincoln, that you've learned that p. That judgment involves committing to the truth
 of p. To make some such judgment about what you've learned about Lincoln, you
 must restrict yourself to making judgments about what's true of Lincoln.
 As a competent speaker of English with the concept LEARN, you recognize that
 you must make judgments for this task (even if you don't think of doing that as
 making judgments).24 In other words, you understand, at least implicitly, that this
 sort of mental action (judgment) is appropriate for finding out what you have
 learned. This understanding contributes to your intention to judge rather than, say,
 imagine.
 In thinking of something you've learned about Lincoln, all along you are thinking
 of the contents of your judgments as things that you've learned about Lincoln. For
 that reason, you already recognize the content of any such judgment as something
 you've learned about Lincoln just in making that judgment. You don't need to check
 23 Conceptualizing these people in the right way would do the trick, but that is precisely the point being
 made here.
 24 In this paper I follow the convention of using small capital letters to refer to concepts.
 •J) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 365
 whether you've just made a judgment, since you are aware of what you are doing.
 There are no two distinct actions here—making a judgment about Lincoln and
 making a judgment about what you've learned about him. You do the latter just in
 doing the former. In this case, the embedded mental action just is that first-order
 judgment about Lincoln.
 2.4 The transparency method
 How can embedded mental understanding help us understand the transparency
 method?
 In my view, you use the transparency method just when you do all of the
 following in the course of a single extended mental task.25 First, you intentionally
 set out to self-attribute a belief meeting some content requirement (e.g. a belief
 about some topic, or a belief whether p). As a result, you intentionally set out to
 make a judgment with some content that meets the relevant requirement, already
 understanding the content of that judgment as the content of a belief you have
 (though you need not think of what you are doing explicitly in terms of judgment).
 As a result of that, you actually do make a judgment with a content that meets the
 requirement on the belief to be self-attributed—and in so doing, you judge, first
 personally, that you have a belief with that content.
 The judgment that meets the content requirement is the embedded mental action
 here. Your antecedent conceptualization of the content of this judgment as the
 content of a belief of yours makes it the case that you already self-attribute a belief
 with the same content just in making this judgment.
 Just as in the case of thinking of something you've learned about Lincoln, here
 you must implicitly understand that judgments (perhaps not understood, by you, in
 that way) are the right sorts of mental actions to perform in order to get at your
 beliefs on the matter. Because you have the concept BELIEF, you recognize that
 you couldn't just imagine things for the same purpose. This time, that's not because
 belief is factive like learning; belief is not factive. Here, your recognition that you
 must use judgment (perhaps not thus conceptualized by you) stems from implicit
 conceptual understanding that the attitude you take in judging is the same sort of
 attitude you have as when you have a belief about the world. You want to end up
 with a judgment about what you believe, and you can't willfully deceive yourself
 into thinking that the contents of some mental actions that aren't judgments (e.g.
 imaginings) are also the contents of your beliefs. Thus you're constrained to make
 judgments to self-attribute a belief whether p.
 25 In fact, these conditions cannot quite be said to be sufficient for use of the transparency method,
 because they do not rule out deviant causal chains of the kind famously discussed by Davidson (1973/
 2001). Suffice it to say, for now, that the transparency method is used only i/all the listed conditions are
 met and the intentions of the first two conditions cause the embedded mental action of the third and fourth
 conditions in the right way.
 £) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 366
 A. Peacocke
 3 The epistemic explanation
 Does this interpretation of the transparency method—as involving embedded mental
 action—offer any hope for a better epistemic explanation of the method as a whole?
 The point of this section is to demonstrate that it does just by giving such an
 explanation.
 The epistemic explanation has four parts. The first three parts are: an explanation
 of the truth of transparent self-attributions; an explanation of their warrant, and an
 explanation of how they come to be believed. The final part of the explanation
 demonstrates the sufficiency of the whole explanation by showing that the warrant
 in question cannot be disqualified in any of the sorts of ways discussed by Gettier
 (1963).
 3.1 Truth
 Transparent self-attributions are guaranteed to be true because judgment is sufficient
 for contemporaneous belief.26 Actively recognizing the truth of p—that is, judging
 that p—must involve at the very least having a momentary belief that p. Why is
 that? Because belief just is the mental state "that is governed, both normatively and
 descriptively, by the standard of truth," and judgment just is the mental action
 governed in precisely the same way (Shah and Velleman 2005, p. 499).27 For that
 reason, one cannot perform the action without being in the corresponding state. The
 ontological difference between action and state does not block the implication
 (although the difference does block the converse). Boyle (2009a, pp.11-14) has
 made this point in a particularly powerful way.
 On scrutiny of putative examples of judgment without belief, these can be shown
 to involve judgments and beliefs with distinct temporal profiles. Silins (2012), for
 example, presents an example of an "accidental" judgment, a "performance error
 which fails to reflect an underlying belief ... you 'blurted out' that p, either in
 speech or merely in thought, consciously endorsing the proposition that p, yet
 failing to have a standing belief that p" (p. 308). Silins here relies on the distinction
 between what he calls "standing belief' or "underlying belief"—a belief state one
 is in for some more extended interval—and momentary belief.28 A better way of
 26 I do not, however, endorse the claim that judgment at some time t is sufficient for belief at any other
 time t', or for any interval of time T.
 27 I do not mean, here, simply to interdefine judgment and belief as (for example) Crane (2001) does:
 "judgment is the formation of belief' (p. 104). I take judgment that p to be possible when one already has
 the belief that p. If judgment just is, by definition, the formation of belief, then either this would not be
 possible, or one would have to be able to supplant a pre-existing belief that p with a new belief that p just
 by judging that p. Both options seem unattractive.
 28 There is no in-principle limitation on how short-lived genuine beliefs can be. There is no absurdity in
 saying "I really believed that for just one moment." Consider the following example. In a hurry to catch a
 flight, I rush through airport security and pause, uncertain which gate is mine. I glance at my boarding
 pass and see "34B." I start towards gate 34B, before realizing, just one moment later, that "34B" is my
 seat and my gate is instead 1 IB. I pivot on my heel and take off in the opposite direction. In this situation
 ^ Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 367
 understanding Silins's example is as an example of rapid doxastic change, or a case
 in which the agent doesn't really ever judge that p.
 Peacocke (1998) offers another example: "someone may judge that undergrad
 uate degrees from countries other than her own are of an equal standard to her own,
 and excellent reasons may be operative in her assertions to that effect. All the same,
 it may be quite clear, in decisions she makes on hiring, or in making
 recommendations, that she does not really have this belief at all" (p. 90). Once
 again the possibility in question trades on different timescales for belief and
 judgment. Peacocke illustrates that you might be best described as lacking a
 particular belief over an extended period of time even though you make genuine
 judgments at moments during that interval with the corresponding content. Even if
 that is true, it would be strange to insist that at no point during this interval, not even
 during those moments of judgment, does one have the relevant belief. One cannot
 fail, at the moment of judgment, to have the corresponding belief, although
 considerations about what it is to have a belief over some extended interval might
 bring us to admit that one doesn't "really" have the belief during that time.29
 Further resistance to the claim that judgment is sufficient for belief may derive
 from a metaphysical view of belief on which it is essentially a complex dispositional
 state (Schwitzgebel 2002, 2012; Cassam 2014, pp. 117-119).30 If we accept that
 belief is a complex structure of dispositions towards behavior, reasoning, and
 mental phenomenology, then judgment may not be sufficient for belief. While a
 judgment that p may sometimes manifest the dispositional structure that is belief, at
 other times a judgment might occur without the presence of the corresponding
 dispositional state.
 Here we cannot do justice to the metaphysical debate about the nature of belief in
 its entirety. But I will briefly argue that we should accept that judgment is sufficient
 for belief even if we endorse a dispositional theory of belief.
 The main condition of adequacy on any view of belief—dispositional or not—is
 that it capture the sense in which belief is a state of taking to be true (to put it
 roughly). To construct a dispositional notion of belief on the general level, we might
 consider whether we should ordinarily include a disposition to assert that p in the
 dispositional complex that is belief that p. How might we decide that? We should
 consider whether having a disposition to assert that p implies (at least defeasibly)
 that you take it to be true that p.
 It is also the main condition of adequacy on an account of judgment that it
 capture the sense in which to judge that p is to take it to be true that p. We might
 give a dispositional account of judgment as well as a dispositional account of
 belief—an account on which an action's being a judgment is a matter of the
 Footnote 28 continued
 it is true that I believed that my gate was 34B—my taking a particular directed action to move towards the
 higher-numbered gates illustrates that—but I believed it just momentarily.
 29 It's not even obvious that we must deny that one has the relevant belief over the extended interval.
 This scenario might best be understood as a case of conflicting belief instead. If one judges that p at t, one
 must also believe that p at t. But one may also judge that p at t while believing that ~p as well.
 30 I'd like to thank an anonymous reviewer for highlighting this point.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 368
 A. Peacocke
 dispositions it causes or manifests. If so, I cannot see any reason to label some 
 dispositions that are together sufficient for judgment as insufficient for (at
 momentary) belief. If both judgment and belief must capture a specific notio
 taking to be true, then there should be an unbreakable implication from judgm
 contemporaneous belief. This implication is entirely compatible with the possib
 of judgment and lack of corresponding belief over time as well as the possibilit
 belief with little or no disposition towards judgment.
 In principle we could also combine a dispositional analysis of belief wi
 different kind of individuation of judgment among mental actions. In this c
 would yet still be strange if judgment turned out to be insufficient f
 contemporaneous belief. The same fundamental characterization that judg
 and belief share (their status as takings-to-be-true) would have to be respecte
 this kind of mixed analysis. On any view of the relationship between belief a
 judgment, then, judgment should come out to be sufficient for at least conte
 raneous, momentary belief.
 Recall that in judging that p in the course of the transparency method, you a
 the same time self-attribute the belief for which that judgment is sufficient—nam
 the belief that p. Thus, due to the sufficiency of judgment for contemporan
 belief, any transparent self-attribution of belief is guaranteed to be true.
 3.2 Three aspects of warrant
 3.2.1 Warrant for self-attribution
 In using the transparency method to self-attribute beliefs, one kind of erro
 impossible: the error you would make by thinking that someone else's belief is
 own. This type of error is impossible because use of the transparency m
 involves no identification of yourself or anyone else. For this reason, 
 transparency method enjoys what Shoemaker (1968) has labeled "immun
 error through misidentification."31
 It is not the case here that there is a particular ground that serves as justifi
 for attributions of beliefs to yourself as opposed to others. Instead, the fact o
 matter is that you cannot err in this way, and so you are entitled to th
 attribution in question given that you have the first-personal concept. Since ju
 I believe that p at all requires having that concept, any user of the transpare
 method is guaranteed to have entitlement to some such .^//-attribution of bel
 3.2.2 Warrant for self-attribution of a belief
 One crucial part of the warrant involved in transparent self-attributions of 
 comes down to an agent's contrastive awareness of what she is doing in m
 31 See also Wittgenstein (1958), Shoemaker (1968), and Pryor (1999).
 32 For more on using the first-person in self-attribution of belief, see Boyle (2009b, pp. 153-4).
 <£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 369
 judgments rather than, say, forming hopes or making suppositions for the sake of
 argument.
 Contrastive awareness is the action awareness discussed in Sect. 2.1 above: the
 basic awareness the agent has of what she is doing when she is making judgments
 rather than forming hopes or making suppositions. It is guaranteed for any user of
 the transparency method, since using the transparency method involves performing
 intentional mental actions, and doing that involves having such contrastive
 awareness.
 The other crucial aspect of warrant for transparent self-attri
 do with what is involved in having the concept BELIEF. It is tr
 have to have that concept to use the transparency method, sin
 of things as beliefs. It is not trivial, however, that part of the un
 have if you have the concept BELIEF entitles you to apply
 course of using the transparency method.
 Part of what it is to have the concept BELIEF is to constrai
 mental action that is judgment (perhaps not thus conceptuali
 the transparency method. That implies that you would not use
 in the same context, and that—given certain idealized conditi
 and capacity for more sophisticated reflection—you would re
 the use of any other mental action in the place of judgment.
 having the concept BELIEF that makes it the case that you are
 concept in the transparency method. Since the transparency 
 concept BELIEF, any user of that method is thus entitled to se
 To see why it is important to have this additional conce
 warranting a self-attribution of a belief, we can consider wha
 someone lacking the concept BELIEF—and thus lacking the im
 that entitles its application in the transparency method
 transparency method. Consider an agent called "Erraticus." Su
 has the same control over his mental actions, and the same contrastive awareness
 that that control implies, as the rest of us do. Now further suppose that Erraticus
 often attempts to use the transparency method for belief and fails, because he does
 not engage in judgment as the relevant embedded mental action. For example:
 sometimes, when asked for his belief whether p, he'll start making suppositions,
 come to a supposition that p, and say: "I believe that p."
 Now, it should be clear that Erraticus could, in fact, stumble on the right way to
 use the transparency method as a matter of mere accident. In one instance, he might
 actually try to self-attribute what he calls a belief by way of making judgments. But
 even if Erraticus did this, he would not be warranted in what he took to be his self
 attribution of 'belief,' because he clearly does not have the concept BELIEF. His
 lack of conceptual understanding is revealed by his erratic attempts and failures to
 use the transparency method for belief.
 33 Here I do not mean to endorse the general principle that any inference or application of a concept
 whose availability to the subject is required for possessing that concept are inferences or applications to
 which the possessor is then entitled at any time. In its general form, this principle has interesting
 counterexamples. See Boghossian and Williamson (2003) for extended discussion.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 370
 A. Peacocke
 To recognize that it is Erraticus's lacking the concept BELIEF that matters to his
 lack of warrant in using a pseudo-transparency method is also to see that yo
 having the concept BELIEF matters to your having warrant in using the actu
 transparency method for belief. Thus an account of the warrant you have for maki
 a self-attribution of a belief, rather than any other attitude, must make essenti
 reference to the entitlement that your conceptual understanding bestows on your u
 of the transparency method.
 Together contrastive awareness and conceptual entitlement account for t
 warrant involved in transparent self-attribution of belief.
 3.2.3 Warrant for self-attribution of a particular belief (that p)
 A transparent self-attribution of a belief that p rather than, say, a belief that q i
 warranted due to the consciousness of the contents of intentional judgments. Whe
 your judgment that p is an intentional mental action, your consciousness has (at lea
 in part) the content p. That consciousness of p in making that judgment is all that 
 needed by way of warranting a transparent self-attribution of a belief that p rath
 than any other belief.34 This warrant is guaranteed for any agent using th
 transparency method as well: to use the transparency method is to perform
 intentional mental action of judgment, and all such intentional mental actions hav
 conscious contents.
 This warrant should not be seen as evidential or inferential justification. The
 point is not that some relation of yours to your own consciousness that p (in judging
 that p) provides support for your self-attribution of the belief that p. Instead, your
 consciousness just constitutes your awareness that it is p that you believe.
 3.3 Belief
 What remains to be explained is the formation of belief in a transparent self
 attribution.35 In using the transparency method, one makes a self-attribution of a
 belief that p in judging that p. To make a self-attribution of some belief is just to
 judge that one has that belief. And judgment is, as argued above, sufficient for
 contemporaneous belief. So in using the transparency method, one comes to believe
 that one believes that p just when one makes a judgment that p.
 34 Those who take content externalism to threaten self-knowledge (e.g. Boghossian 1989) may disagre
 that this is all that's necessary by way of warrant here. I take the line endorsed by Burge (1996), Hei
 (1988), and Peacocke (1996) on this point: there is no such threat. Those still concerned about content
 externalism should at least note one nice feature of any given embedded mental actions: one and the sam
 intentional mental action cannot enjoy two distinct environments that might contribute to th
 individuation of content. Cf. Burge (1996) on self-verifying judgments.
 35 Some might argue that this is not even necessary; true warranted judgment could count as knowledge
 just as much as true warranted belief could. I simply accept this point.
 •2} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 371
 3.4 Sufficiency
 The explanation up to this point demonstrates how transparent self-attributions meet
 three necessary conditions on knowledge: truth, warrant, and belief. But Gettier
 (1963) has shown that these are not generally jointly sufficient for knowledge.
 It has proven notoriously difficult to fill the gap between warranted true belief
 and knowledge. Fortunately that is not necessary here. All that's necessary to show
 that the sort of knowledge at issue here cannot be Gettierized is to show that the
 warrant at issue cannot fail to be the right sort of warrant. But to use the
 transparency method at all is to have all of the right components of warrant for one's
 transparent self-attribution. That is because, as I have argued in Sects. 3.2.1-3.2.3
 above, all these components of warrant are guaranteed for a user of the transparency
 method. Hence this explanation is sufficient as an explanation of the knowledge
 status of transparent self-attributions.
 4 Taking stock
 In this paper thus far I have set forth objections to past interpretations of the
 transparency method and its epistemic structure. I have introduced the notion of
 embedded mental action, and then used that notion to provide an epistemic
 explanation of the knowledge status of transparent self-attributions of belief. How
 does this explanation stack up against those discussed earlier? What are its
 advantages, and what are its disadvantages?
 4.1 Comparison with other explanations of the transparency method
 The proposal of this paper owes a good deal to Moran's (2001, 2003, 2004)
 foundational insights. The deliberative authority you have with respect to your own
 beliefs remains fundamental to the epistemic explanation of the transparency
 method. Indeed, the key fact that embedded mental actions can belong to more than
 one type of mental action depends crucially on the fact that you have the agency to
 intentionally make up your mind on some matter (that is, make judgments).
 However, the proposal presented here has two distinct advantages over Moran's
 epistemological analysis of the transparency method. This new proposal identifies
 mental action awareness as the basic self-awareness that contributes to warrant for
 transparent self-attributions of belief, and provides reason to think that we do indeed
 have such awareness. Moran's view, on the other hand, seems to require that you be
 aware of your own considerations for and against belief as such without providing
 much reason to think you have such awareness in the relevant cases of transparent
 self-attribution of belief.
 Second, the view presented here fares better than Moran's with respect to
 explaining first-person authority. The transparency method is infallible in its
 production of known self-attributions of (contemporaneous) belief—but only in the
 first person.
 •£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 372
 A. Peacocke
 The main goal of this paper, however, is to make better sense of the invaluable
 realization from Boyle (2009a, 2009b, 2011), Crane (2001) and Setiya (2011) that
 using the transparency method involves making no transition between p and 
 believe that p. Only by making sense of this suggestion is it possible to sidestep the
 problems about inferential justification faced by the Gallois-Byrne proposal. The
 notion of embedded mental action is meant to do just that.
 Setting aside the notion of embedded mental action, the proposal set out in this
 paper bears certain undeniable affinities to other no-move views. Crucially, Boyle
 (2011) has highlighted the need to understand the role of action awareness in self
 knowledge. And Setiya (2011) has noted in passing that, in using the transparency
 method, "Evans's procedure is performed in anticipation" (p. 187, emphasis
 added). The discussion of this paper can help spell out what it means to do that: it
 involves antecedent conceptualization of the contents of your upcoming judgments
 as the contents of your beliefs.
 4.2 Advantages
 The proposal to understand the transparency method for belief as involving
 embedded mental action has two important advantages: first, it can explain
 epistemic and psychological immediacy; and second, it can be generalized in a
 principled way to explain when and how transparent self-knowledge of other
 attitudes is possible.
 4.2.1 Immediacy
 The intuition that transparent self-knowledge of belief is both psychologically and
 epistemically immediate is a natural and influential one.36 On the view presented
 here, transparent self-attributions of belief are immediate in both ways.
 Self-knowledge of belief, when produced by the transparency method in the way
 discussed above, is psychologically immediate in that there is absolutely no space—
 that is to say no reasoning, and no inference—between judging that p and self
 attributing the belief that p. On the contrary, the two mental actions are one and th
 same in this context.
 Self-knowledge of belief in this context is epistemically immediate in that your
 warrant for believing that you believe that p is not itself dependent upon your
 warrant for any of your other beliefs (cf. Pryor 2005). Your warrant for any given
 belief that you self-attribute via the transparency method might be severely lacking.
 The poverty of that justification, though, would not weaken your warrant for self
 attributing the belief in question when you do so by using the transparency method.
 36 See Cassam (2014), p. 5-6, for a helpful characterization of these intuitions. Compare Moran (2001,
 Section 4.5), and Heal (2002, p. 2). Russell's (1912) claim that we are directly acquainted with our own
 mental states can also be understood as expressing the thought that our knowledge of our own beliefs is
 both epistemically and psychologically immediate.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 373
 That is just as it should be: a poorly warranted or unwarranted belief is no less a
 belief than a fully warranted one.
 4.2.2 Potential for extension
 The explanation of the transparency method presented above can be generalized to
 explain when and how other attitudes or mental actions can be transparently self
 known.
 Three central facts about belief stood out as crucial to the epistemic explanation
 of the transparency method. In generalized form, these facts provide a set of
 sufficient conditions which, when met, ensure that a mental attitude or action M can
 be transparently self-known in a way analogous to belief.
 If some mental state or action M (with propositional content p) meets the
 following three conditions, then it will also be transparently knowable to its subject:
 1. There is a kind of occurrent mental action a with content p the intentional
 performance of which is sufficient for the contemporaneous presence of M with
 content p:
 2. a's being an action of that kind (the kind sufficient for some such M) is tracked
 by at least basic contrastive mental action awareness guaranteed in the
 intentional performance of a; and
 3. Having the M-concept entitles an agent to its application in the performance of
 an a in a transparency method for M.
 What is a transparency method for any such Ml To use some such transparency
 method for some M is just to do all of the following. First, you intentionally set out
 to self-attribute an M meeting some content requirement. As a result, you
 intentionally set out to perform an action of type a (perhaps not under a particularly
 conceptually rich description) with some content that meets the relevant require
 ment, already understanding the content of that a as the content of some M. As a
 result of that, you actually do go on to perform some such a with a content that
 meets the requirement on the M to be self-attributed—and in so doing, you judge of
 yourself that you have an M with that content. Call any such self-attribution a
 transparent self-attribution of an M.
 For reasons precisely parallel to the ones discussed in Sect. 4 above, any
 M meeting the three relevant conditions can be self-attributed in this way—and the
 resultant transparent self-attribution will have the status of knowledge. It will be
 true because performing some a with content p is sufficient for having (or
 performing) an M with content p; it will be warranted due to immunity to error
 through misidentification, contrastive action awareness, and conceptual entitlement;
 and it will be judged, or believed, because the a in question will be an embedded
 mental action in the context of the relevant transparency method. Any such a will
 also be a self-attribution of an M. The warrant involved in the relevant transparency
 cannot be Gettierized.
 Is there any such M other than belief that meets the three conditions in question?
 Intention is a promising candidate. You can decide to do something as an intentional
 ■£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 374
 A. Peacocke
 mental action (as in practical deliberation), and actually deciding to do something i
 sufficient for having the intention to do it.37 In being aware that you are doing th
 sort of thing (deciding what to do), you can also be aware that you have a particul
 intention.
 4.3 Objections and replies
 4.3.1 The rarity of active self-reflection
 A critic might question how often we really embark on this project of intentional
 directed thought in order to probe our own beliefs. If the answer is "not often," 
 might be thought that this account cannot do all that much to explain the full sco
 of privileged access, or of first-person authority. You are authoritative, the crit
 might claim, over far more of your own beliefs than those that you transparentl
 self-attribute.38
 It seems to me that we do, quite often, use the transparency method—at least a
 often as we explicitly consider the question of what we ourselves believe. Though
 its philosophical explanation is somewhat complicated, actually using this method
 can be so simple as to be practically mindless. It doesn't require deliberation of a
 sort—a judgment that p can express, rather than form, a belief—and you need n
 formulate anything complex to yourself in order to do it.
 Yet the transparency method need not actually be used all that often in order t
 explain the full scope of privileged access or first-person authority. To explain yo
 privileged access to some state such as belief, we need only to explain why you ha
 a method you could use, at any point, to self-attribute a belief such that the sel
 attribution in question is more likely than any third-personal one to amount to
 knowledge. A similar point applies for first-person authority: to say you are an
 authority on what you believe is not necessarily to say that you often explicitly
 consider your beliefs as such. All that the claim of first-person authority implies
 that, were you to consider what you believe, your word would trump anyone els
 word on the matter. For these reasons, the understanding of the transparency meth
 presented in this paper still offers a powerful way to make sense of both privileg
 access and first-person authority.
 4.3.2 Diachronic belief and fallibility
 The transparency method produces infallible self-attributions for the synchron
 case, but—since judgment at some moment t is not sufficient for belief over an
 extended interval of time—it cannot produce infallible self-attributions for the
 diachronic case. A critic might worry that the transparency method may therefore
 completely unable to explain any self-knowledge of diachronic beliefs. And very
 37 See, however, Paul (2012) for an argument to the contrary.
 38 I'm indebted to an anonymous reviewer of this paper for a careful presentation of this objection.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief
 375
 often it is diachronic belief that we care about, rather than what you believe at just
 one particular moment in time.39
 It is undeniable that the transparency method as explained above cannot ensure
 perfect knowledge of diachronic beliefs, and it is important to note the potential for
 error in the transparency method as applied to these diachronic cases. Still, neither
 of these concessions implies that the transparency method can do nothing to explain
 self-knowledge of diachronic belief. Why couldn't you use the transparency method
 as a fallible method for attribution of diachronic belief as well?
 Of course there will be differences in the epistemology of the transparency
 method for diachronic belief. But given an independent theory of the warrant
 required for knowledge, surely some uses of the transparency method can contribute
 to production of diachronic self-knowledge of belief. Perhaps more warrant will be
 needed in such cases than that described in Sect. 3.2 above. Still, there is no reason
 in principle why the understanding of the transparency method advanced in this
 paper cannot be extended to make significant headway towards understanding self
 knowledge of diachronic belief.
 5 Conclusion
 Understanding the transparency method in terms of embedded mental action seem
 to be the best option available. This interpretation of the method makes available
 full epistemic explanation of the transparency method. This explanation mak
 sense of the psychological and epistemic immediacy and first-person authority o
 transparent self-knowledge of belief. The explanation provided here can also 
 extended in a principled way to make sense of other transparent self-knowledge w
 might have—including knowledge of intention, and knowledge of diachron
 attitudes.
 Acknowledgments I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for invaluable commentary on an earlier
 draft. For earlier illuminating commentary and extensive discussion, I would also like to thank John
 Campbell, Barry Stroud, and Christopher Peacocke. Thanks also to Jackson Kernion, Eugene Chislenko,
 Jim Hutchinson, Julian Jonker, Philippe Chuard, Alex Kerr, Michael Martin, Melissa Fusco, Rachel
 Rudolph, Alex Kocurek, Ravit Dotan, Austin Andrews, Adam Bradley, Quinn Gibson, Peter Epstein,
 Umrao Sethi, Dylan Murray, Kathryn Grzenczyk Mantoan, Jeffrey Kaplan, Kirsten Pickering, and Ethan
 Jerzak.
 References
 Anscombe, G. E. M. (1957). Intention. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
 Barnett, D. J. (2015). Inferential justification and the transparency of belief. Nous, 50(1), 1-29.
 Boghossian, P. (1989). Content and self-knowledge. Philosophical Topics, 17( 1), 5-26.
 Boghossian, P. (2014). What is inference? Philosophical Studies, 169, 1-18.
 Boghossian, P., & Williamson, T. (2003). Blind reasoning. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 77,
 225-293.
 Boyle, M. (2009a). Active belief. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 39(sup. 1), 119-147.
 39 I'm grateful to Peter Epstein for expressing this point in a compelling way.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 376 A. Peacocke
 Boyle, M. (2009
 133-163.
 Boyle, M. (2011). Self-knowledge and transparency II: Transparent self-knowledge. Proceedings of the
 Aristotelian Society, LXXXV, 223-241.
 Brueckner, A. (1998). Moore inferences. The Philosophical Quarterly, 48( 192), 366-369.
 Burge, T. (1996). Our entitlement to self-knowledge I. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 96,
 91-116.
 Byrne, A. (2005). Introspection. Philosophical Topics, 33(1), 79-104.
 Byrne, A. (2011). Self-knowledge and transparency I: Transparency, belief, intention. Proceedings of the
 Aristotelian Society, LXXXV, 201-221.
 Byrne, A. (2012). Knowing what I want. In J. Liu & J. Perry (Eds.), Consciousness and the self: Ne
 essays (pp. 165-183). New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Cassam, Q. (2014). Self-knowledge for humans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Crane, T. (2001). Elements of mind: An introduction to the philosophy of mind. New York: Oxfor
 University Press.
 Davidson, D. (1963/2001). Actions, reasons, and causes. In D. Davidson (Ed.), Essays on action and
 events (pp. 3-19). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Davidson, D. (1973/2001). Freedom to act. In D. Davidson (Ed.), Essays on action and events (pp.
 63-81). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Davidson, D. (1984/2001). First person authority. In D. Davidson (Ed.), Subjective, intersubjectiv
 objective (pp. 3-14). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Davidson, D. (1987/2001). Knowing one's own mind. In D. Davidson (Ed.), Subjective, intersubjective
 objective (pp. 15-38). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Edgley, R. (1969). Reason in theory and practice. London: Hutchinson.
 Evans, G. (1982). The varieties of reference. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Frege, G. (1979). Logic. In G. Frege (Ed.), Posthumous writings (pp. 1-8). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
 Gallois, A. (1996). The world without, the mind within. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Gettier, E. (1963). Is justified true belief knowledge? Analysis, 25(6), 121-123.
 Green, M., & Williams, J. N. (Eds.). (2007). Moore's paradox: New essays on belief rationality, and th
 first person. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Heal, J. (2002). On first-person authority. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 102, 1-19.
 Heil, J. (1988). Privileged access. Mind, 97, 238-251.
 Moran, R. (2001). Authority and estrangement: An essay on self-knowledge. Princeton: Princeton
 University Press.
 Moran, R. (2003). Responses to O'Brien and Shoemaker. European Journal of Philosophy, 11(3),
 402-419.
 Moran, R. (2004). Replies to Heal, Reginster, Wilson, and Lear. Philosophy and Phenomenolog
 Research, 69(2), 455^472.
 Moran, R. (2012). Self-knowledge, 'transparency', and the forms of activity. In D. Smithies & D. St
 (Eds.), Introspection and Consciousness (pp. 211-236). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 O'Brien, L. (2003). Moran on agency and self-knowledge. European Journal of Philosophy, 1
 375-390.
 O'Brien, L. (2005). Self-knowledge, agency, and force. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
 71(3), 580-601.
 O'Brien, L. (2007). Self-knowing agents. New York: Oxford University Press.
 O'Brien, L., & Soteriou, M. (Eds.). (2009). Mental action. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Paul, S. K. (2012). How we know what we intend. Philosophical Studies, 161, 327-346.
 Peacocke, C. (1996). Our entitlement to self-knowledge II: Entitlement, self-knowledge, and conceptual
 redeployment. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 96, 117-158.
 Peacocke, C. (1998). Conscious attitudes, attention, and self-knowledge. In C. Wright, B. C. Smith, & C.
 MacDonald (Eds.), Knowing our own minds (pp. 63-121). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Peacocke, C. (2008). Mental action. In C. Peacocke (Ed.). Truly understood (pp. 245-285). New York:
 Oxford University Press.
 Pryor, J. (1999). Immunity to error through misidentification. Philosophical Topics, 26(1), 271-304.
 Pryor, J. (2005). There is immediate justification. In M. Steup & E. Sosa (Eds.), Contemporary debates in
 epistemology (pp. 181-202). Maiden, MA: Blackwell.
 Russell, B. (1912/2004). The problems of philosophy. New York: Barnes & Noble Books.
 Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Barnes & Noble.
 Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedded mental action in self-attribution of belief 377
 Ryle, G. (1971a). A puzzling element in the notion of t
 volume II: Collected essays 1929-1968 (pp. 391-406). L
 Ryle, G. (1971b). Thinking and reflecting. In G. Ryle (Ed.)
 1929-1968 (pp. 465-479). London: Hutchinson.
 Ryle, G. (1971c). The thinking of thoughts: What is 'Le
 papers, volume II: Collected essays 1929-1968 (pp. 480
 Schwitzgebel, E. (2002). A phenomenal, dispositional acco
 Schwitzgebel, E. (2012). Self-ignorance. In J. Liu & J. Per
 essays. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Setiya, K. (2011). Knowledge of intention. In A. Ford. J
 Anscombe's intention (pp. 170-197). Cambridge, MA: H
 Shah, N„ & Velleman, J. D. (2005). Doxastic deliberation. 
 Shoemaker, S. (1968). Self-reference and self-awareness. 
 Shoemaker, S. (1988). On knowing one's own mind. Philo
 Shoemaker, S. (1995). Moore's paradox and self-knowledg
 Shoemaker, S. (2003). Moran on self-knowledge. European
 Shoemaker, S. (2009). Self-intimation and second-order be
 Silins, N. (2012). Judgment as a guide to belief. In D. Sm
 consciousness (pp. 295-327). New York: Oxford Univers
 Williams, B. (1976). Deciding to believe. In B. Williams
 papers 1956-1972 (pp. 136-151). Cambridge: Cambridge 
 Williams. J. N. (2004). Moore's paradoxes, Evans's prin
 348-353.
 Wilson, G. M. (2004). Review: Comments on authority and estrangement. Philosophy and Phenomeno
 logical Research, 69(2), 440-447.
 Wittgenstein, L. (1958). The blue and brown books. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Wright, C. (1989). Wittgenstein's later philosophy of mind: Sensation, privacy, and intention. Journal of
 Philosophy, 86( 11), 622-634.
 <£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:02:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

