https://doi.org/10.1177/27538699221132691
Possibility Studies & Society
﻿1­–10
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/27538699221132691
journals.sagepub.com/home/pst
POSSIBILITY
STUDIES  
& SOCIETY
In the case of jazz and dance improvisation there is 
a skill-informed selective uncertainty, that is, you 
need to know a lot about your craft, about different 
traditions within your genre, and have skilled 
know-how, but you don’t know what you are going 
to do or where the music or movement will take 
you. In improvisation one aims for surprise (self-
surprise), using techniques that allow you to 
achieve novelty (such as the breaking of habits or 
the avoidance of usual affordances). But also, part 
of what allows for the possibility of surprise is 
chance, the source of which may be the environ-
ment or other performers.
Can we explain how these various factors—
knowledge, skill, habit, environmental factors, and 
affordances—interact? I’ve argued that the model 
of a meshed architecture (Christensen et al., 2016; 
Gallagher 2021) provides a good starting point. It 
provides a way to map out the cognitive, motor-
control, environmental, social, cultural, and nor-
mative factors that need to be integrated in 
performance. The further question, however, is 
precisely how this integration takes place. In this 
paper I’ll consider two possible approaches to 
answering this question: predictive processing (PP) 
and enactivism. I’ll argue that PP, which conceives 
of the mind as set up to avoid surprise, will not be 
able to explain improvisation if it remains true to 
its own principles. In contrast, I’ll argue, enactiv-
ism can offer a good explanation of improvisation.
Predictive processing  
(a rough and simple guide)
Predictive processing continues a long tradition, 
going back to Helmholtz (1867), of understanding 
perception as an inferential process. It models this 
Surprise! Why enactivism and  
predictive processing are parting ways: 
The case of improvisation
Shaun Gallagher
University of Memphis, USA
University of Wollongong, Australia
Abstract
Can we explain how the various factors of knowledge, skill, habit, environmental constraints and affordances 
interact or integrate in improvisational performance? In attempting to explain how this integration takes 
place, I’ll consider two possible approaches: predictive processing (PP) and enactivism. I’ll argue that PP, 
which, on a neuroscientific view, conceives of the mind as set up to avoid surprise, will not be able to 
explain improvisation if it remains true to its own principles. In contrast, I’ll argue, enactivism, as a form of 
embodied cognition that takes the explanatory unit to be the brain-body environment, can offer a better 
explanation of improvisation. I’ll also argue that the notion of habit is central to this account.
Keywords
Enactive cognition, habit, improvisation, performance, predictive processing
Corresponding author:
Shaun Gallagher, Department of Philosophy, University of 
Memphis, Clement Hall 327, Memphis, TN 38152, USA. 
Email: s.gallagher@memphis.edu
1132691 PST0010.1177/27538699221132691Possibility Studies & SocietyGallagher
research-article2022
Enacting Chance

2	
Possibility Studies & Society 00(0)
process in terms of prediction error minimization 
(PEM), which begins with the assumption that the 
brain has no access to the external world. By means 
of perceptual inference, neuronal processes repre-
sent that world by forming probabilistic hypothe-
ses about the world based on an internal Bayesian 
(statistical), hierarchical, generative model that it 
constructs informed by prior knowledge (priors). 
The prediction structure can be quite complex, 
involving a nested cascade of precision-weighted 
predictive processes in the brain. If the predictions 
don’t match sensory input, the brain revises its 
model and corrects its inferences in order to mini-
mize prediction errors (conflicts between sensory 
input and the internal model).
The human brain, PP here suggests, commands a rich, 
integrated model of the worldly sources of sensory 
inputs, and uses that long-term model to generate 
on-the-spot predictions about the probable shape and 
character of current inputs. The rich, integrated 
(generative) model takes a highly distributed form, 
spread across multiple neural areas that may 
communicate in complex context-varying manners. 
(Clark, 2018, p. 522).
The aim is to reduce surprisal, that is, the unex-
pected variation from the general statistical pat-
terns that are expected to hold in a situation. 
Surprisal is a subpersonal version of surprise.
The idea that the organism (or brain) has no 
direct access to the world is usually explained in 
terms of a mathematical formalism called a Markov 
blanket—which defines the boundary of the cogni-
tive system. Where do you draw that boundary? 
According to one well-known neurocentric 
account, the boundary does not extend beyond the 
brain (Hohwy, 2013); on another account (Clark, 
2016), the Markov blanket may extend to include 
the body and parts of the environment. Accordingly, 
one point of debate within the PP approach con-
cerns whether the boundary should be understood 
as cutting the cognitive system off from the world, 
or as allowing for a coupling or interaction of sys-
tem and world?
According to Jakob Hohwy, there is a strict 
closure.
PEM should make us resist conceptions of [a mind-
world] relation on which the mind is in some 
fundamental way open or porous to the world, or on 
which it is in some strong sense embodied, extended 
or enactive. Instead, PEM reveals the mind to be 
inferentially secluded from the world, it seems to be 
more neurocentrically skull-bound than embodied or 
extended, and action itself is more an inferential 
process on sensory input than an enactive coupling 
with the environment. (Hohwy, 2016, p. 259)
Although Andy Clark endorses a more liberal 
embodied perspective, he also maintains the idea 
that the brain is in some sense isolated from the 
world.
[The brain] must discover information about the 
likely causes of impinging signals without any form 
of direct access to their source. . .. [A]ll that it 
“knows,” in any direct sense, are the ways its own 
states (e.g., spike trains) flow and alter. In that 
(restricted) sense, all the system has direct access to 
is its own states. The world itself is thus off-limits. . . 
(Clark, 2013, p. 183)
The brain’s task is to take “patterns of neural acti-
vation and, on that basis alone, infer properties of 
the stimulus” (Clark, 2016). Still, Clark allows for 
a more extended concept of the cognitive system, 
namely by emphasizing active inference. In con-
trast to perceptual inference, active inference 
involves holding its world-model steady, but 
engaging in bodily movement or action in a way 
that changes the world, thereby changing sensory 
input to gain a match with the model. This is an 
alternative way of reducing prediction error.
[Active] “inference,” as it functions in the [PP] story, 
is not compelled to deliver internal states that bear 
richly reconstructive contents. It is not there to 
construct an inner realm able to stand in for the full 
richness of the external world. Instead, it may deliver 
efficient, low-cost strategies whose unfolding and 
success depend delicately and continuously upon the 
structure and ongoing contributions of the external 
realm itself as exploited by various forms of action 
and intervention. (Clark, 2016, p. 191).
Active inference is often framed in terms of the 
“free energy principle,” which is an alternative and 
more general way of describing PEM. I will return 
to this point, but I note here that this moves PP 
closer to the enactive starting point, which involves 

Gallagher	
3
a self-generating (autopoietic) system that couples 
with the environment for purposes of sense 
making.
Can PP explain improvisation?
Clearly, prediction is important for improvisa-
tion—to improvise and deal with uncertainty, a 
performer must project ahead in time to anticipate 
a variety of things. Performers need to anticipate 
under pressing time constraints, what comes next, 
including the actions of others with whom they are 
dancing or playing music. It seems clear that PP 
could be an approach that helps to explain improvi-
sation. For example, according to Clark (2016): 
“[t]o deal rapidly and fluently with an uncertain 
and noisy world, brains like ours have become 
masters of prediction – surfing the waves’ noisy 
and ambiguous sensory stimulation by, in effect, 
trying to stay just ahead of them” (p. xiv).
Schaefer (2015) offers just such a PP account of 
musical processing. As an individual responds to 
music, she applies a mental model (prior knowl-
edge), “an internal representation of a percept or 
action, as it is built up through experience and sta-
tistical learning” (2014), in order to predict the 
incoming flows of sensory information. Michael 
and Wolf (2015) apply this account to the example 
of coordination required for ending a song during 
an improvised performance. How do several musi-
cians decide when and how to end a song without 
agreeing on it in advance? “In the context of music, 
two jazz performers might both prefer, having just 
finished what appeared to be the final verse of a 
jazz standard, to start up again for a surprising 
additional repetition of the chorus – but only if the 
other does so as well” (2014). They suggest that the 
musicians’ priors include a set of stock endings that 
are common across a performance community; 
these operate as constraints on prediction, and this, 
together with embodied and gestural cues can help 
navigate the end of a performance, and limit sur-
prise (for the performers).
Ryan (2020), however, points out that this can-
not explain novelty in improvisation (also see 
Froese & Ikegami, 2013). Novelty and surprise are 
not coextensive concepts, yet both are important 
features of improvisation. As such, if PP is to help 
our understanding of how improvisation functions, 
it will need to include an account of novelty. But 
here’s the problem.
1.	
According to PP, an organism’s main aim is 
to maintain its organization (i.e., stay alive), 
and the means by which an organism real-
izes this aim is through prediction-error 
minimization, which is equivalent to mini-
mizing surprise/surprisal as much as 
possible.
2.	
Novelty is something that by definition 
increases surprise, moving outside the 
standard statistical regularities faced by an 
organism.
3.	
Accordingly, an organism will do its best to 
stay away from novelty as much as 
possible.
Philipp Schwartenbek and colleagues phrase the 
question in the right way.
If our main objective is to minimize surprise over the 
states and outcomes we encounter, how can this 
explain complex human behavior such as novelty 
seeking, exploration, and, furthermore, higher level 
aspirations such as art, music, poetry, or humor? 
(Schwartenbeck et al., 2013, p. np)
Improvisation seems a counterexample to the prin-
ciple that organisms avoid surprise: people actively 
seek out and enjoy novelty. They often find it 
pleasurable. One possible response to this objec-
tion is that surprise (at the personal level) is not the 
same as surprisal (at the subpersonal level) (Clark, 
2018). Indeed, surprise may actually come about 
because of a tension between the system’s predic-
tions meant to limit surprisal, and the surprising 
event. Moreover, we might actually predict affec-
tive surprise in specific environments.
According to Schwartenbeck et al. (2013), to the 
extent that our behavior involves active inference, “the 
agent’s generative model includes hidden (future) 
states and actions that the agent might perform (and 
their consequences). This implies that the agent has to 
represent itself in future states performing specific 

4	
Possibility Studies & Society 00(0)
actions. In other words, it necessarily implies a model 
with a sense of agency”. Schwartenbeck et al., apply 
this explanation to economic decision making. The 
representing of itself in future states means that the 
agent infers a “policy” (an action selection rule that 
entails a sequence of actions) that minimizes surprise 
about future outcomes. Such policies are defined by 
fixed goal states.
These goal priors are fixed and do not depend on 
sensory input: they represent a belief concerning 
states the agent will end up in. Desired goal states 
will be accorded a high probability (log-likelihood) 
of being encountered, resulting in a low surprise 
when this state is indeed visited. Undesirable states, 
by contrast, will be assigned with a low prior 
probability 
and 
therefore 
become 
highly 
surprising. . .. In the framework of active inference, 
therefore, agents do not try to maximize reward but 
minimize surprise (about future states).
Improvisational performance, however, as we’ll 
see below, sometimes involves a sense of distrib-
uted agency, and does not necessarily involve a 
definite fixed goal state. If this account of active 
inference can deal with economic decision making 
where alternative actions are clearly delineated, it’s 
not clear that it can capture the type of uncertainty 
involved in improvisation.
Referencing Schwartenbeck et al., Clark (2018) 
addresses the problem directly. Indeed, he agrees 
that this kind of solution does not reach the type of 
improvisational behavior we are concerned with.
These prediction-error-minimizing agents exhibit at 
most 
a 
modest 
and 
instrumentally-motivated 
tendency towards play, exploration, and the search 
for novel experiences. These prediction error mini­
mizing agents remain locked, it seems, into an 
information-theoretic journey whose guiding prin­
ciple is in some way unacceptably conservative. It is 
a journey which, if successful, will be marked only 
by the attainment of expected goals and meta-goals. 
(p. 528).
He suggests that information-theoretic imperatives 
don’t sufficiently address the problem.
In this respect Clark cites the work of Barrett 
and Bar (2009), and the important role of 
affectivity. This response again, I think, pushes PP 
toward a more enactive-embodied view to the 
extent that it involves affectivity. Barrett and Bar 
help to clarify a more embodied PP, which, they 
argue, is consistent with views on active inference. 
Their affective prediction hypothesis suggests that 
“responses signaling an object’s salience, relevance 
or value do not occur as a separate step after the 
object is identified. Instead, affective responses 
support vision from the very moment that visual 
stimulation begins” (2009). Along with the earliest 
visual processing, a train of muscular and hormo-
nal changes occur throughout the body, generating 
“interoceptive sensations” from organs, muscles, 
and joints associated with prior experience, which 
integrates with current exteroceptive sensory infor-
mation. The organism as a whole (or at least in spe-
cific aspects that include its morphology, its 
affectivity, its skill level) is included as an impor-
tant part of the priors. Friston (2013) suggests, in 
this regard, that rather than having a model, the 
organism is the generative model. “We must here 
understand ‘model’ in the most inclusive sense, as 
combining interpretive dispositions, morphology, 
and neural architecture, and as implying a highly 
tuned ‘fit’ between the active, embodied organism 
and the embedded environment” (Friston et  al., 
2012, p. 6). In perception, then, bodily affective 
changes are integrated with sensorimotor process-
ing so that before we fully recognize an object, an 
affordance, or another person for what it or he or 
she is, our bodies are already configured into over-
all peripheral and autonomic patterns shaped by 
prior associations, responding and contributing to 
shaping subsequent actions.
This means that perception or action, is more 
than a nested cascade of predictions in the brain. 
Indeed, it’s not clear how an affective, pleasurable 
enjoyment of surprise or novelty fits with the nar-
row conception of PEM. Even if there may be pre-
diction errors involved if our action or expression 
doesn’t go as planned, it’s not clear that there are 
error criteria for pleasure or enjoyment. More gen-
erally, the improvisational process poses a chal-
lenge for a PP representationalist account since in 
the process of improvisation we are not trying to 
model the world as it is.

Gallagher	
5
Although Clark (2018) tries to keep affectivity 
purely within the brain (in terms of “interoceptive 
predictive coding”—an interchange between corti-
cal and sub-cortical processes), ultimately, he 
admits, “As your bodily states alter, the salience of 
various worldly opportunities alters too.” In the 
end he appeals to cultural constraints, “ecologi-
cally unique, self-engineered contexts of culture, 
technology, and linguaform exchange”—all of this, 
arguably, outside the brain and not entirely within 
our control. Clark considers this idea that such cul-
tural constraints may actually constrain and limit 
possibilities for improvisation and novelty.
The skilled pianist has learnt to reduce prediction error 
with respect to complex melodies and motor repertoires, 
and the skilled mathematician with respect to properties 
and relations among numbers, theorems, and other 
constructs. But the musical and mathematical traditions 
within which they operate reflect the operation of 
cultural forces such as practices of writing, reflecting, 
disseminating, and peer review. (Clark, 2018)
Clark argues that it could go either way—environment 
and cultural practices may provide limits, or may ena-
ble creativity. The question remains, how does it work 
when it enables creativity? And then, almost as if on 
cue: “These powerful effects are further explored in 
work by ‘enactivists’ sympathetic to PP—for exam-
ple, Rietveld and Kiverstein (2014), Bruineberg et al. 
(2018), Gallagher et al. (2013)” (Clark, 2018). That 
seems exactly right; the focus on embodiment, affect, 
and environmental coupling, actually pushes us (away 
from PP) toward more enactive accounts.
Enactivism and dynamical 
processes
Enactivism is an embodied (action-oriented, anti-
representationalist) approach to cognition. Gall­
agher (2017) has summarized enactive approaches 
in seven principles.
1.	
Cognition is not simply a brain event. It 
emerges from processes distributed across 
brain–body–environment.
2.	
The world (meaning, intentionality) is not 
pre-given or predefined, but is structured 
by perception and action
3.	
Cognitive processes acquire meaning in 
part by their role in the context of action, 
rather than through a representational map-
ping or replicated internal model of the 
world
4.	
Cognitive systems are ecologically embed-
ded, intersubjective, and socially situated 
(vs. classic cognitive science, which tends 
to be internalistic)
5.	
Dynamical systems theory can model the 
dynamical coupling and coordination 
across brain–body–environment
6.	
More complex cognitive functions are 
grounded in sensorimotor coordination, 
affective, and autonomic aspects of the full 
body.
7.	
Complex cognitive functions, such as 
reflective thinking or deliberation, are exer-
cises of skillful know-how.
How does an enactive approach explain improvisa-
tion? In contrast to PP, which specifies an impor-
tant role for top-down predictions within the 
individual system, enactivism takes improvisation 
to involve distributed control across brain, body, 
and physical and social environment, something 
closer to active inference, but where the individual 
is one dynamically coupled component and not in 
full control.
As Michael Kimmel puts it:
The phenomenological consequence of distribu­
tedness is ambiguous “ownership of the movement.” 
Occasionally, dancers would report a, what we call, 
“wasn’t me” moment: they sense that neither of the 
dancers has initiated the movement. A dancer 
explicitly described the experience as follows: “there 
are ways and times that we aren’t separate agencies. 
When we come together and the fact of togetherness 
starts to drive what happens.” (Kimmel et al., 2018, 
p. 24).
This same distributed control or distributed agency 
where control or agency is an “emergent product of 
agent environment coupling” (Kronsted, 2021) can 
be found in some forms of improvisation (see also 
Høffding, 2019; Schiavio et al., 2022; also van der 
Schyff et al., 2018; Walton et al., 2018). Factors in 
the improvisational setting involve not only the 

6	
Possibility Studies & Society 00(0)
performer as an agent with specific intentions, but 
a meshed architecture of physical, social, cultural, 
normative factors that operate in a dynamical, non-
linear fashion, in which an agent’s coupling or 
attunement with the environment is modulated 
both by sensorimotor schemes and a broad range of 
environmental features. This may also involve 
habitual behaviors, although habit should not be 
understood to mean automatic response. Instead of 
blind automatic repetition, habit is an open and 
adaptive way in which an autonomous agent learns 
to cope with familiar or unfamiliar situations. 
Merleau-Ponty (2012), for example, argues that a 
habit is developed when the body “acquires the 
power of responding with a certain type of solution 
to a certain form of situation” (p. 143). Habit 
involves intelligent agentive response, where intel-
ligence is built into the movement. John Dewey 
likewise distinguishes between intelligent and rou-
tine habit.
Repetition [i.e., automaticity] is in no sense the 
essence of habit. . .. The essence of habit is an 
acquired predisposition to ways or modes of 
response. . .. Habit means special sensitiveness or 
accessibility to certain classes of stimuli, standing 
predilections and aversions, rather than bare 
recurrence of specific acts. (Dewey, 1922, p. 42).
If habit were strictly automatic there would be no 
possibility of doing something different. Habit 
involves a heedful attitude; and only because it 
does can one break habit in the improvisational set-
ting. Both habitual behavior and the breaking of 
habit involve agentive intention. Improvisation can 
happen when a performer resists the usual 
affordance, or breaks her habitual move, gives up 
control (although in a controlled fashion, so to 
speak), and then lets other factors take over. This 
breaking of habit (declining the usual affordances), 
which happens in the immediacy of performance, 
comes without a prediction of what happens next, 
except the most general prediction or experienced 
anticipation that something will happen (Kronsted 
& Gallagher, 2021). The phenomenology of agency 
attests to the idea that the improvisation is not com-
pletely under the performer’s control (Høffding, 
2019). There is an experienced opening, or “gap” 
(McDowall, 2018), when the agent resists the 
solicitation of an affordance, or acts on the 
affordance in a nonhabitual manner. What fills this 
gap is not a surety of what happens next, but a let-
ting happen of whatever happens, a trust in the pro-
cess. How the improvisation unfolds is a product of 
the whole system, which includes the performer’s 
agentive intentions, rather than any one individual 
component; the system changes its internal states 
and, at the same time, by means of action, changes 
the environment in ongoing dynamical feedback 
loops (contra any strict Markov blanket).1
PP and/or enaction?
Isn’t it possible to integrate predictive processing 
accounts and enactivism, as some have suggested? 
(Gallagher & Allen, 2018; Kiverstein, 2020; Parr 
et al., 2020; Ramstead et al., 2021; Wiese & Friston, 
2021). Ramstead et al., addressing some of the ter-
minological and conceptual differences, suggest 
that proponents of PP don’t really mean inference 
when they say “inference,” or representation when 
they say “representation.” This may be what Cicero 
calls “alterations of terminology rather than of sub-
stance.” More substantial conceptual alterations 
may also be in order, however. Gallagher and Allen 
(2018) have argued that one has to give up neuro-
centric internalism and the concepts of inference, 
internal model, and representation, and go with 
enactivist processes of affordance, attunement, and 
resonance. One might then ask, however, what is 
left of PP?
Constant et al. (2020) propose a truce that would 
introduce a division of labor. “[There] is a subtle, 
yet crucial point, which becomes apparent when 
considering the probability distributions involved 
in various inference processes in the brain” (p. np). 
Here they make the distinction between (1) the 
brain predicting expected sensory neural activa-
tions matching the probability of the generative 
model/belief—a purely internal process, and (2) 
the prediction made about the (hidden) cause of 
such activations. “Getting it right” (truth or success 
conditions) in (1) “is about getting it right with 
respect to one’s own beliefs; e.g., successfully 
exploring the state space of one’s own model of the 
world. . .. This means that under active inference, 
there are two layers of success involved, one 

Gallagher	
7
defined over the model, and one defined over the 
agent-world coupling.”
According to Constant et al., the first is repre-
sentational and fits well with PEM; the second is 
dynamical and could be modeled on active infer-
ence or enactive processes. Specifically, they 
argue, the second (non-representational) process is 
sufficient for deontic actions—automatic behavior, 
which for them includes habitual actions (such as 
stopping at stop signs).
[Such actions] do not have success conditions qua 
brain processes, but rather have success conditions 
qua agent-world coupling processes. They are simple 
observation-action loops; not rich and reconstructive 
policy selection loops.... inferences about states of 
the world – that admit a representationalist 
interpretation – are now replaced by direct action, 
without any intervening inference or representation 
of the consequences of action.
In the case of deontic actions what does the work is 
“a kind of perceptually maintained motor-informa-
tional grip on the world: a low-cost perception-
action routine that retrieves the right information 
just-in-time for use, and that is not in the business 
of building up a rich inner simulacrum” (Clark, 
2016, p. 11).
Although Constant et al. (2020) pitch this as a 
kind of détente, it’s not clear how it moves beyond 
older peace negotiations that involved splitting the 
difference between higher-order representation-
hungry cognition (albeit now framed in PP terms) 
and more basic perceptual-motor processes (e.g., 
Clark & Toribio, 1994), or how enactive, heedful 
or intelligent habit fits this picture.
Another attempt at integrating PP and enactive 
approaches is made by stepping back from some of 
these details into a more basic and abstract frame-
work. For Karl Friston, the important thing is get-
ting the mathematics (in the statistical models) 
right, rather than philosophical interpretations that 
might range from internalist to embodied and enac-
tive versions. Furthermore, for Friston, predictive 
models generalize to life itself explained in terms 
of the free energy principle (FEP). According to 
FEP, biological systems are defined by the ten-
dency to resist the second law of thermodynamics; 
to do otherwise would entail an unbounded increase 
of entropy, that is, systemic death. To maintain 
homeostasis, and avoid entropy (which in thermo-
dynamic terms means too much free energy in the 
system), then you should reduce free energy (which 
means reducing prediction errors and surprisal).2 
To survive, an organism needs to avoid surprise. 
The claim is then that FEP aligns well with the con-
cept of autopoiesis, the emergent or self-organizing 
persistence of an organism in virtue of its own 
dynamical structure. On the enactivist view, 
autopoiesis characterizes the continuous processes 
of life and mind.
The strategy here, to put it simply, is that if FEP 
and autopoiesis can be understood to be consistent, 
then there is a good basis for integrating PP and 
enactivism. This is the view of some enactive-
inclined authors who think we can mesh the basic 
FEP version of predictive active inference models 
with enactivist principles (e.g., Bruineberg et al., 
2018). They emphasize the embodied action that 
the organism uses to control its own viability 
conditions.
So within the free-energy framework, it is action that 
does the work of actually minimizing surprisal. 
Actions change an organism’s relation to the 
environment, thereby changing the sensory states of 
the organism. . .. (Bruineberg et al., 2018)
Action is not something happening in the brain, 
and it’s not just providing new sensory input for 
neural processing; it’s what the whole organism 
does in its interactions with the environment, or 
under a different description, what a person does in 
the world, and this changes the world as much as it 
changes the brain. On this view, the priors that 
inform action are not assumptions or beliefs that 
inform inferences; they’re embodied skills, pat-
terns of action-readiness, and affective dispositions 
that mesh with an affordance space.
In contrast to these various attempts to integrate 
PP and enactivist approaches, Di Paolo et al. (2022) 
identify some deeper (technical and theoretical) 
reasons why PP is not compatible with enaction. To 
put this in its simplest terms, the technical part of 
the argument involves contrasting autopoietic sys-
tems with FEP systems. In autopoietic systems 
organization, as an invariable, is distinguished 
from structure, as a changeable feature—a 

8	
Possibility Studies & Society 00(0)
distinction not maintained in the FEP-Markov 
blanket discussion. So there is a confusion when 
FEP systems are equated with autopoietic ones. 
There is a similar confusion between autopoietic 
operational closure (according to which the system 
nonetheless remains open to the environment) and 
the formalism of the Markov blanket (which sug-
gests statistical independence from the environ-
ment and structural boundaries). Perhaps more 
relevant to the issue of improvisation, as I’ll try to 
make clear, there is also a contrast between the 
non-equilibrium steady-state features of FEP sys-
tems, and the historicity of (the importance of the 
system’s history for) the enactive system. Di Paolo 
et al. (2022) make this last point more generally in 
terms of different conceptions of brain dynamics 
(hierarchical comparators in PP, vs. dynamical 
“history-dependence even in the most basic neuro-
scientific scenario of stimulus processing”). The 
point about historicity, has implications for under-
standing development, plasticity, skill acquisition, 
habit formation, and the ability to break habits—
which brings us back to our topic—improvisation 
in performance.
Improvisation
One way to cash out in pragmatic terms, the theo-
retical incommensurability that Di Paulo et  al. 
point to, is to consider the example of improvisa-
tion. The contrast between PP/FEP models and 
enactive approaches becomes very clear. Impro­
visation is the opposite of deontic action, as char-
acterized by Constant et  al. (2020). Recall that 
deontic actions are said to be automatic, habitual 
actions, “simple observation-action loops; not rich 
and reconstructive policy selection loops. . .. with-
out any intervening inference or representation of 
the consequences of action.” They are good exam-
ples of nonequilibrium steady-states. As Constant, 
Clark and Friston put it: “the back story to active 
inference shows that this kind of dynamical behav-
ior is a necessary aspect of any self-organization to 
nonequilibrium steady-state in any random dynam-
ical system that possesses a Markov blanket.”3 The 
conception of habit, as a kind of automatic, repeti-
tive action, in this context is antithetical to enactive 
conceptions of habit (see above). Again, habit, 
understood in terms of heedful, agentive, intelli-
gent behavior, allows for the possibility of break-
ing habit in the improvisational setting.
On the enactive view, improvisation is thus not 
equivalent to a deontic action modeled on an FEP 
nonequilibrium steady-state.
[Thus], phenomena such as developmental spurts in 
skill level signal changes in dynamical configurations 
(novel constraints, emergent parameters, changing 
variable sets). The variability entailed in changing 
dynamical configurations has been postulated as the 
origin of motor creativity (Orth et al., 2017), the very 
idea of which is rendered problematic on the 
assumption of non-equilibrium steady states [as in 
FEP]. (Di Paolo et al., 2022)
Motor creativity—essential for improvisation in 
jazz and dance—reflects the history and skill of the 
agent. Performers, based on their well-trained 
skills, and well-formed habits (which involve a 
heedful flexibility rather than automaticity or 
repetitiveness) are able to move beyond controlled 
engagement to the point of not-knowing (embrac-
ing a kind of uncertainty or surprise) about what 
precisely will happen—letting the system (brain-
body-environment) move in unpredictable, surpris-
ing ways—without a prediction of what happens 
next. What happens next is that brain-body-envi-
ronment couple in a novel way—they join forces to 
enact something unpredictable—they create corti-
cal patterns, and behaviors, and new affordances 
that are unique to each event.
Enactivism explains the possibility of breaking 
habits (declining usual affordances, resisting predic-
tions) across the various timescales of performance, 
generating higher degrees of uncertainty about what 
will happen. Such processes may differ from one 
genre to another, and from one situation to another 
(jazz vs. dance improvisation (see e.g., Kronsted & 
Gallagher, 2021; Ryan, 2020; Ryan & Gallagher, 
2020) or solo performance versus group performance 
(see e.g., Schiavio et  al., 2022; Van der Schyff & 
Krueger, 2019). If the deeper principles of FEP fail to 
account for such processes, the assumptions made by 
PEM also seem unable to provide an account for how 
the system pursues novelty, creativity.
For both theoretical and pragmatic reasons, 
then, PP and enactive views offer different 

Gallagher	
9
explanations. We can cash out this difference by 
looking specifically at how these accounts apply to 
improvisation. To the extent that PP, following the 
FEP, emphasizes steady-state equilibriums, the 
automaticity implied in deontic actions, and the 
minimization of uncertainty (novelty, surprise), it 
is difficult to see how it can capture the dynamical 
creative configurations (involving novel con-
straints, emergent parameters, changing variable 
sets) which, according to enactivist accounts, are 
characteristic 
of 
skilled 
performance 
and 
improvisation.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest 
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publica-
tion of this article.
Funding
The author disclosed receipt of the following financial 
support for the research, authorship, and/or publication 
of this article: Support for this research was provided by 
the Australian Research Council (ARC) project, minds 
in skilled performance, grant number: DP170102987; 
and the Moss Chair of Excellence in Philosophy at the 
University of Memphis.
ORCID iD
Shaun 
Gallagher 
 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002- 
3147-9929
Notes
1.	
To be sure, even for Hohwy, the Markov blanket is 
not always a strict boundary, and he seems to grant 
to the enactive analysis the possibility of organism-
environment coupling, although he continues to 
insist on a type of boundary-based decoupling. See 
Hohwy (2016, p. 277).
2.	
Mann and Pain (2022) note that the FEP is some-
what obscure in its meaning. The term “energy” in 
FEP “is not energy in the standard sense. Rather, 
it is an information-theoretic term. . ..” They quote 
Colombo and Wright (2018) who suggest: “FEP’s 
epistemic status remains opaque, along with its 
exact role in biological and neuroscientific theo-
rizing. Conspiring against its accessibility are the 
varying formalisms and formulations of FEP, the 
changing scope of application, reliance on unde-
fined terms and stipulative definitions, and the lack 
of clarity in the logical structure of the reasoning 
leading to FEP” (Colombo & Wright, 2018, p. 2).
3.	
Or as Friston puts it: “Any ergodic random dynami-
cal system that possesses a Markov blanket will 
appear to actively maintain its structural and 
dynamical integrity” (Friston, 2013, p. 2)
References
Barrett, L. F., & Bar, M. (2009). See it with feeling: 
Affective predictions during object perception. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 364(1521), 1325–1334.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The 
anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy 
principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. 
Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444.
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., & McIlwain, D. J. (2016). 
Cognition in skilled action: Meshed control and the 
varieties of skill experience. Mind & Language, 
31(1), 37–66.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situ-
ated agents, and the future of cognitive science. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, 
and the embodied mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2018). A nice surprise? Predictive processing 
and the active pursuit of novelty. Phenomenology 
and the Cognitive Sciences, 17(3), 521–534.
Clark, A., & Toribio, J. (1994). Doing without represent-
ing? Synthese, 101(3), 401–431.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2018). First principles in 
the life sciences: The free-energy principle, organi-
cism, and mechanism. Synthese, 198, 3463–3488.
Constant, A., Clark, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). 
Representation wars: Enacting an armistice through 
active inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 
598733.
Dewey, J. (1922). Human nature and conduct. Henry 
Holt & Co.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. (2022). Laying 
down a forking path: Tensions between enaction 
and the free energy principle. Philosophy and the 
Mind Sciences, 3, 3. https://doi.org/10.33735/
phimisci.2022.9187
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The 
Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., Adams, R. A., Perrinet, L., & Breakspear, 
M. (2012). Perceptions as hypotheses: Saccades 
as experiments. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 151. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00151

10	
Possibility Studies & Society 00(0)
Froese, T., & Ikegami, T. (2013). The brain is not an 
isolated “black box,” nor is its goal to become one. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 213–214.
Gallagher, S. (2021). Performance/Art. Mimesis Inter­
national Edizioni.
Gallagher, S. (2017). Enactivist interventions: Rethinking 
the mind. Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S., & Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, 
enactivism and the hermeneutics of social cogni-
tion. Synthese, 195(6), 2627–2648. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11229-016-1269-8
Gallagher, S., Hutto, D. D., Slaby, J., & Cole, J. (2013). 
The brain as part of an enactive system. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 421–422.
Helmholtz, H. (1867). Treatise on physiological optics 
(Vol. III, 3rd ed.). Dover.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University 
Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 
50(2), 259–285.
Høffding, S. (2019). A phenomenology of musical 
absorption. Palgrave-Macmillan.
Kimmel, M., Hristova, D., & Kussmaul, K. (2018). 
Sources of embodied creativity: Interactivity and 
ideation in contact improvisation. Behavioral 
Sciences, 8(6), 52.
Kiverstein, J. (2020). Free energy and the self: An 
ecological–enactive interpretation. Topoi, 39(3), 
559–574.
Kronsted, C. (2021). An enactivist model of improvisa-
tional dance (Doctoral dissertation, The University 
of Memphis).
Kronsted, C., & Gallagher, S. (2021). Dances and 
affordances: The relationship between dance training 
and conceptual problem-solving. Journal of Aesthetic 
Education, 55(1), 35–55.
Mann, S. F., & Pain, R. (2022). Teleosemantics and the 
free energy principle. Biology & Philosophy, 37, 
34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-022-09868-9
McDowall, L. (2018). Exploring uncertainties of lan-
guage in dance improvisation. In V. Midgelow 
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of improvisation in 
dance. Oxford University Press, pp. 185–205.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2012). Phenomenology of percep-
tion. Routledge.
Michael, J., & Wolf, T. (2015). Why apply a hierarchical 
predictive processing framework to music perception 
and performance? Empirical Musicology Review, 
9(3/4), 177.
Orth, D., Kamp, J. van der, Memmert, D., & Savelsbergh, 
G. J. P. (2017). Creative motor actions as emerg-
ing from movement variability. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 
8, 
1903. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.01903
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Markov 
blankets, information geometry and stochastic ther-
modynamics. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society A, 378(2164), 20190159.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, 
K. J. (2021). Multiscale integration: Beyond internalism 
and externalism. Synthese, 198(Suppl 1), 41–70.
Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape 
of affordances. Ecological Psychology, 26(4), 325–
352.
Ryan, K. (2020). Embodied cognition and jazz improvi-
sation (Doctoral dissertation, The University of 
Memphis).
Ryan, K. J., Jr., & Gallagher, S. (2020). Between eco-
logical psychology and enactivism: Is there reso-
nance? Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1147. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01147
Schaefer, R. S. (2015). Mental representations in musi-
cal processing and their role in action-perception 
loops. Empirical Musicology Review, 9(3/4), 161.
Schiavio, A., Ryan, K., Moran, N., van der Schyff, D., 
& Gallagher, S. (2022). By myself but not alone: 
Agency, creativity and extended musical historic-
ity. Journal of the Royal Musical Society. https://
doi.org/10.1017/rma.2022.22
Schwartenbeck, P., Fitzgerald, T., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, 
K. (2013). Exploration, novelty, surprise, and free 
energy minimization. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 
710. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00710
Van der Schyff, D., & Krueger, J. (2019). Musical 
empathy, from simulation to 4E interaction. In A. 
F. Corrêa (Ed.), Music, sound & mind. ABCM. 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Dylan-Van-
Der-Schyff/publication/326998297_Musical_
Empathy_From_Simulation_to_4E_Interaction/
links/5b71f82992851ca65057e17c/Musical-
Empathy-From-Simulation-to-4E-Interaction.pdf 
van der Schyff, D., Schiavio, A., Walton, A., Velardo, 
V., & Chemero, A. (2018). Musical creativity and 
the embodied mind: Exploring the possibilities of 
4E cognition and dynamical systems theory. Music 
& Science, 1, 2059204318792319.
Walton, A. E., Washburn, A., Langland-Hassan, P., 
Chemero, A., Kloos, H., & Richardson, M. J. (2018). 
Creating time: Social collaboration in music improv-
isation. Topics in Cognitive Science, 10(1), 95–119.
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Examining the con-
tinuity between life and mind: Is there a continuity 
between autopoietic intentionality and representa-
tionality? Philosophies, 6(1), 18–18.

