Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
 
 
Review
Reviewed Work(s): The Two-Dimensional Ising Model by Barry M. McCoy and  Tai Tsun Wu
Review by: George A. Baker Jr.
Source: American Scientist, Vol. 63, No. 1 (January-February 1975), pp. 114-115
Published by: Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/27845331
Accessed: 28-02-2023 12:51 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Scientist
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 tion patterns. He compares the Indians
 with the Alaskan Eskimos with whom
 he has also hunted. His conclusion that
 the Eskimos who "live to hunt" are
 better hunters than the Athapaskans
 who "hunt to live" (p. 311) will be ar
 gued for decades to come. VanStone,
 who also knows Eskimos well, and who
 makes briefer comparisons between the
 two groups, does not appear so ready to
 assume Eskimo hunting superiority.
 This and other stimulating questions
 raised by each author make the review
 er particularly regret that space limita
 tions prevent her joining the discussion
 at once!?Catharine McClellan, An
 thropology, University of Wisconsin
 Mathematics and Computer
 Science
 An Introduction To Discrete Sys
 tems. Kenneth Steiglitz. 318 pp.
 Wiley, 1974. $13.95.
 This excellent book is well suited as
 an introductory text in discrete sys
 tems. The material is extremely rele
 vant for students and practitioners in
 the computer-oriented disciplines, in
 cluding industrial and systems engi
 neering as well as electrical engineering
 and computer science. The book is writ
 ten in a lucid fashion incorporating
 theory, application, and implementa
 tion in a manner which is at the same
 time interesting and informative.
 The book has two main parts, the
 first dealing with digital filters and the
 second with graphs and algorithms for
 solving graph problems. Part 2 can be
 read independently of Part 1?an im
 portant consideration since the topics
 related to digital filtering probably ap
 peal to a narrower audience than those
 related to graphs. Major areas covered
 in Part 1 are digital signals and phasors,
 moving average and recursive digital fil
 ters, and frequency analysis. Major top
 ics covered in Part 2 are computer stor
 age of graphs, shortest paths and trees,
 flow networks, and electrical networks.
 The material presented in both parts is
 self-contained and requires only a basic
 knowledge of college algebra as a pre
 requisite.?H. Donald Ratliff, Indus
 trial and Systems Engineering, Univer
 sity of Florida
 Rings with Polynomial Identities.
 Claudio Procesi. 190 pp. Marcel Dek
 ker, 1973. $15.50.
 Procesi's monograph is the first book,
 devoted entirely to the theory of poly
 nomial identities. He gives a fine ac
 count of the state of the theory in 1972,
 with emphasis on structure and repre
 sentation theory, providing a wealth of
 ideas especially for readers already
 versed in polynomial identities. The
 general reader may wish to skip Chap.
 1, which is largely technical, and start
 with Chap. 2 for a better insight into
 the subject. In the last two years, pow
 erful new techniques have been devel
 oped for most facets of the theory, due
 largely to Formanek's discovery of cen
 tral polynomials for matrix rings (cf.
 Chap. 8). Still, most of this book is at
 the frontiers of current research and is
 well worth reading.?Louis Halle
 Rowen, Mathematics, University of
 Chicago
 Stochastic Processes and Applica
 tions in Biology and Medicine. M.
 Iosifescu and P. Tautu. Vol. 1:
 Theory. 331 pp. Vol. 2: Models. 337
 pp. Springer-Verlag, 1973. $21.80
 each.
 This two-volume set is a welcome ad
 dition to the library of any mathemati
 cian interested in the applications of
 modern stochastic process theory to
 biology and medicine. It has applica
 tions to physiology and pathology as
 well as updated population biology ma
 terial. The work has an easy style for
 presentation of difficult mathematical
 material that is nicely complemented
 by historical notes and digressions. A
 novel feature of the authors' approach
 is the inclusion of many statements of
 important theorems without proofs
 (with included references). Because of
 this, the two-volume set, with its very
 extensive bibliography, is a survey of re
 cent work as well as a textbook. It is
 highly recommended by the reviewer.?
 P. L. Antonelli, Mathematics, Univer
 sity of Alberta
 Invariant Subspaces. Heydar Radjavi
 and Peter Rosenthal. 219 pp.
 Springer-Verlag, 1973. $20.50.
 The study of linear transformations
 on a Hilbert space leads to basic ques
 tions concerning the existence, unique
 ness, and special properties of invariant
 subspaces. The authors present a wide
 range of techniques for treating such
 questions. The largest single emphasis
 is on operator algebra methods. The
 book provides an excellent survey and
 introduction to an active research field.?
 James Rovnyak, Mathematics, Univer
 sity of Virginia
 Paul Erd s: The Art of Counting.
 Joel Spencer, ed. 742 pp. M.I.T.
 Press, 1973. $22.50.
 Paul Erd s, one of the best known
 and most colorful mathematicians of
 our time, is most noted for his work in
 number theory, set theory, and com
 binatorics, although his bibliography,
 containing now more than 600 papers,
 has entries in most branches of mathe
 matics. This volume contains reprints
 of a representative selection of his pa
 pers in combinatorics. Most are short
 and can be understood by a bright stu
 dent without much background. One
 caution?a number of open problems
 mentioned in these papers have already
 been solved.?Daniel J. Kleitman,
 Mathematics, M.I. T.
 Algebraic Systems. A. I. Mal'cev.
 Trans, by B. D. Seckler and A. P. Do
 ohovsky. 317 pp. Springer-Verlag,
 1973. $39.60.
 The author, one of the most distin
 guished Russian algebraists, had been
 working on a 2-volume book on general
 algebra since the 1950s, and this volume
 represents the parts he had written by
 the time of his death in 1967 together
 with a section on classical algebras from
 an earlier manuscript. The book falls
 into three parts of about 100 pages
 each: introductory, logical, algebraic.
 After outlining the concepts needed (in
 cluding a closer look at particular sys
 tems such as loops), the author de
 scribes first- and second-order lan
 guages, with an interesting discussion of
 the subtleties of their use in algebra.
 The last part, on varieties and quasi
 varieties, includes much of the author's
 own work.?Paul M. Cohn, Bedford
 College, London University
 The Two-Dimensional Ising Model.
 Barry M. McCoy and Tai Tsun Wu.
 418 pp. Harvard University Press,
 1973. $25.
 No serious student of critical phe
 nomena should be without this book.
 Although it neither tells all about the
 two-dimensional Ising model nor tells
 only about it, the book does develop a
 chain of ideas which are extremely im
 portant in our study of this model. The
 reason why this particular model is of
 such importance is that it is one of the
 very few for which a rigorous, closed
 form solution can be given. Work with
 various approximate methods has made
 it clear that the results can be grossly
 misleading in the critical region. To a
 large extent the basic ideas of the mod
 ern theory of critical phenomena were
 formed by generalization and extension
 of the properties of the exact solution of
 this model.
 The book undertakes a unified ap
 proach based on the Pfaffian method to
 calculate, usually explicitly, or to indi
 cate how to calculate most of the known
 closed-form expressions for various
 properties of the two-dimensional Ising
 model. The bulk specific heat and spon
 taneous magnetization in the absence of
 a magnetic field are studied, along with
 various spin-spin correlation functions.
 In addition the same types of properties
 114 American Scientist, Volume 63
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 are studied in the presence of a magnet
 ic field applied only to the boundary
 layer of spins. In the process of devel
 oping the machinery required to do the
 necessary calculations, the authors de
 velop in a brief but fairly lucid way the
 necessary mathematics beyond what is
 given in a good course on mathematical
 physics. The topics so treated include
 Pfaffians, Wiener-Hopf sum equations,
 Toeplitz determinants, and Szeg theo
 rem on their asymptotic behavior.
 The scope of the book seems to be
 unduly narrow. The original Onsager
 method (as simplified by Kaufmann) or
 Lie algebra approach is omitted. An ex
 position of the Kac-Ward combinatorial
 approach and its relation to the Pfaf
 fian approach would also have greatly
 improved the book. Likewise it is re
 grettable that no mention is made of
 the transfer matrix method of Lieb,
 which is extremely useful for many
 other problems.?George A. Baker, Jr.,
 Applied Mathematics, Brookhauen Na
 tional Laboratory, Upton, NY
 Qualitative Theory of Second-Order
 Dynamic Systems. A. A. Andronov,
 E. A. Leontovich, 1.1. Gordon, and A.
 G. Maier. 524 pp. Halsted Press,
 1973. $44.
 Theory of Bifurcation of Dynamic
 Systems on a Plane. A. A. Andronov
 et al. 482 pp. Halsted Press, 1973.
 $42.50.
 As a unit these books slowly and care
 fully develop the theory of planar dy
 namic systems from the classical works
 of Poincar? and Bendixson through the
 recent works of the Soviet school on
 structural stability and generic bifurca
 tion. The first book develops the basic
 theory of systems in the plane?e.g.
 classification of critical points and
 closed orbits, a and limit sets, s?para
 trices, etc. The second book is devoted
 to structurally stable systems and gen
 eric bifurcation. The theory is illus
 trated by many examples and diagrams.
 The preface states that these books
 were started by Andronov in the 1940s,
 but his death in 1952 left an unfinished
 manuscript. The subsequent comple
 tion by colleagues and students first ap
 peared in Russian in 1967 and has now
 been translated into English. Even
 though the bifurcation theory given in
 the second volume is relatively recent,
 the majority of the material has now
 been superseded. No development of
 the qualitative theory of differential
 equations given today can completely
 ignore the important generalizations to
 higher dimensions which have appeared
 since 1960. Certainly the scientific im
 pact of these books has been considera
 bly diminished by the delays in publica
 tion.?Kenneth Meyer, Mathematics,
 University of Cincinnati
 for researchers... writers
 ... students... librarians
 an invaluable reference guide
 ( lIMULATIVE ?NDEX 7 0
 American Scientist
 The years 1946 to 1973 gave
 rise to unprecedented technologi
 cal advance and rapidly expanding
 research in all scientific disciplines.
 And during this period nearly 1,100
 important articles and research re
 ports ? written by leaders in their
 fields ? were published in Ameri
 can Scientist.
 Many of these articles heralded
 developments in the sciences . . .
 raised controversial issues . . .
 opened new areas of scientific in
 si Tfii;
 COUPON TO
 ORDEK THIS
 HELPFUL
 REFERENCE
 Gl1 IDE
 TODAY!
 Vols, 14-61 (1946-1973)
 quiry. Some were bet?re their time
 . . . others presented a thoughtful
 overview or insight into past events.
 The Cumulative Index provides
 a reference guide essential for lo
 cating these articles. A continua
 tion of the index to the first 33
 volumes (published in 1945), the
 new index is divided into two sec
 tions ? authors and title key-words
 ? for quick and easy reference.
 The result is an indispensable addi
 tion to your reference collection.
 ISBN 0-9144446-01-0 Hardbound 68 pp. $8.50
 American Scientist
 345 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, Connecticut 06511
 Please send me_ copies of the Cumulative
 Index to American Scientist Vois. 34-61 (1946-1973)
 at $8.50 each.
 My check for $-is enclosed. Please bill me.
 Engineering and Applied
 Sciences
 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics. R.
 W. Fox and A. T. McDonald. 630 pp.
 Wiley, 1973. $15.95.
 In the preface the authors state,
 "writing our own book reflected our
 dissatisfaction with existing text
 books." Why is this feeling so universal
 about introductory fluid mechanics
 texts? Why do those new ones con
 stantly appearing come to the same
 fate? At least part of the answer is that
 the job may be an impossible one. The
 subject is of immense breadth and sub
 tlety. It has been attacked by the most
 sophisticated of theoretical methods,
 yet some of the most pervasive aspects
 (e.g. turbulence) are, in a practical
 sense, only slightly beyond empirical
 understanding. For students who al
 ready know something of the subject
 and who have analytical fluency, high
 ly effective monographs and treatises
 have been written. But the writer of
 that elusive introductory text that
 would fit our needs must somehow
 steer between Scylla and Charybdis:
 the text must be simple enough and
 sufficiently well focused not to be over
 the head of the beginner, yet it should
 not deceive or blind him to the rich
 ness and scope of the subject and to
 the fact that the elementary book
 merely scratches the surface. Many
 have tried; few have even come near
 success.
 Fox and McDonald's textbook "was
 written for an introductory fluid me
 chanics course at the junior [college]
 level. ... Our objective has been to
 make the material interesting, easy to
 read, and easy to understand. ... we
 are convinced that students who read
 the book will understand it. Because
 the material is easy to understand, the
 instructor can depart from convention
 al 'lecture' teaching techniques. ... It
 includes all of the topics that we think
 can be covered thoroughly in a 15-week
 course."
 The authors have done well in ap
 proaching these objectives. More than
 with most textbooks, they have formed
 a clear idea of what they are trying to
 do, and why, and they have developed
 a style of presentation in keeping with
 these goals. The emphasis is less on
 breadth of subject matter and more on
 introducing the beginner to the funda
 mental concepts and methods simply
 and lucidly and in a patient, orderly,
 but rigorous manner. This pedagogical
 outlook has always appealed to the re
 viewer.
 After dealing with the usual prelimi
 1975 January-February 115
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

