Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
 
 
The Heart of the Milky Way: A Visual tour of our Galaxy's center reveals astrophysical
oddities seen nowhere else in the Milky Way
Author(s): Fulvio Melia
Source: American Scientist, Vol. 88, No. 4 (JULY-AUGUST 2000), pp. 346-353
Published by: Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/27858058
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:21 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Scientist
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 i?'Ur^phvsirnl oilJii u:s serti
 nowhere else in the \l\lk\ ! \u\
 Fulvio Melia
 346 American Scientist, Volume 88
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Now Playing on the Radio
 Tune in to the galactic center at just the right radio wavelength (about 90 centime
 ters) and you'll see phenomena swirling to a dance seen nowhere else in the Milky
 Way. All of the radiation \isible here is produced by various forms of gas and particles
 moving at hundreds of kilometers per second, some of it at nearly the speed of light.
 Although there are stars near the galactic center, none of them are seen here because
 they are relatively dim at radio wavelengths.
 Near the center of this field (w hich is about 1,500 light-years across) sits the
 bright blob known as the Sagittarius A (Sgr A, pronounced "saj-ay") Complex. This
 structure encompasses the innermost 100 light-years of our Galaxy and, as the
 name suggests, contains detail within that is not evident in this image.
 Although stars are not visible, the drama of their collective births and deaths is
 manifest throughout the galactic center. Regions of star formation (such as Sgr
 Bl, Sgr B2 and Sgr D HII) are discernible as newborn stars heat the surrounding
 gas to the point that it shines in the radio. At the end of their lives, the most mas
 sive stars collapse in supernova explosions, leaving behind debris in the form of
 supernova remnants (SNR) that will glow for millions of years. Other elements here include enigmatic filament
 like structures?such as the Arc, the Snake and the Threads?and various diffuse patches consisting of highly
 ionized hydrogen gas.
 The image on the facing page w as made by the Very Large Array (VLA), a collection of 27 radio telescopes in
 Socorro, New Mexico. Here the plane of the galaxy runs diagonally from the upper left to the lower right (as is
 true for all the images in this article). (Image processed by Namir Kassim and collaborators at the Naval Research
 Laboratory, using Department of Defense High Performance Computing resources.)
 Aglance at the central hub of any galaxy will tell you that there must be something very
 special going on deep inside. Galactic nuclei are inevitably the brightest part of a galaxy,
 and just about everything else in the galaxy orbits the central axis. What could be
 attracting all that attention? For decades now, astronomers have been trying to determine what
 might lie at the center of our own Milky Way. It's been an exceedingly difficult task because
 most of the visible light the center emits is absorbed by thick clouds of dust in the galactic plane,
 where our Sun resides. Despite the intrinsic brightness of the galactic center, optical telescopes
 are nearly useless when it comes to viewing it.
 All is not lost in the dust, however. Photons of other wavelengths?radio, infrared, gamma
 ray and x ray?can wiggle their way through the dust clouds with little interference.
 Fortunately for galactic astronomers, the Milky Way's inner sanctum shines through
 gloriously at these wavelengths.
 The picture that is being uncovered is proving to be more complex and bizarre than anyone
 might have supposed. It has become apparent that there are several components in the central
 region, each more exotic than the next. To make things even more interesting, they also happen
 to be interacting with each other?making for a dynamic astrophysical soup. And in the center
 of it all sits an especially peculiar concentration of mass?the equivalent of nearly three million
 suns?that is packed into an area no more than one-tenth of a light-year across.
 Zeroing in on the identities of this mass and its companions has occupied a good part of many
 astronomical careers, including my own. Our efforts have been rewarded with a fascinating
 story about the galactic center, one that continues to unfold in finer detail nearly every day. Here
 we will take a closer look at what the most recent explorations reveal about the heart that beats
 in the center of our Galaxv.
 Fulvio Melia is professor of
 physics and astronomy at the
 University of Arizona. He is
 also a Presidential Young
 Investigator, a Sir Thomas Lyle
 Fellow and a scientific editor of
 the Astrophysical Journal.
 Address: Steward Observatory,
 The University of Arizona,
 Tucson, AZ 85721. Internet:
 melia@physics. arizona. edu
 2000 July-August 347
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Sgr A Complex and the Arc
 As one zooms in toward the center of the Galaxy (the inner 200 light-years),
 detail becomes evident within Sgr A as a diffuse ovoid region called Sgr A East
 (aqua blob, lower right) and a spiral-like pattern called Sgr A West (pink). The shell
 like structure of Sgr A East (about 30 light-years across) encompasses Sgr A West,
 but much of the shell lies behind this spiral pattern as we view it from the Earth.
 The Arc becomes defined as a set of radio-emitting streamers that appear to
 be interacting with the Sgr A complex. The Arc and the other filamentary
 structures within a few hundred light-years of the center are believed to trace the
 large-scale structure of the magnetic field in the region. These filaments are
 thought to emit synchrotron radiation (high-speed electrons spiraling around a
 magnetic field). The image was made by the VLA at a wavelength of 20
 centimeters. (Image courtesy of Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, Northwestern University.)
 What's Bigger than a Supernova?
 The appearance of Sgr A East (see "The Sgr A Complex and the Arc") is reminiscent of a supernova remnant but
 may have actually been produced by an explosion 50 to 100 times more energetic than a supernova. What
 could produce such a colossal blast? In one scenario, a wayward star wanders too close to the steep
 gravitational potential well of a central black hole, w hich pulls the star into a long, thin spike during its inward
 trajectory. As the intruding star recedes from the center, the gravitational energy is quickly dissipated into
 heat?causing the star to blow up like a supernova shell, except with much greater force.
 Some recent images of the galactic center at energies of 511 kilo-electron-volts (lef t, top) and hundreds of
 mega-electron-volts (left, bottom) support the idea that a massive explosion produced Sgr A East within the
 past 100,000 years. The upper image (about 15,000 light
 years across) showrs that large amounts of antimatter (in the
 form of positrons) are being annihilated at the galactic center
 (yellow), with moderate emissions (orange) along the galactic
 plane and above the galactic bulge. The lower image (about
 1 3,000 light-years across) indicates that the center of the
 Galaxy is a very bright source (white) of high-energy photons.
 Such high-energy emissions w ould be produced if the
 expanding shell of a large explosion w ere to collide with a
 relatively cold molecular cloud surrounding it. Protons that
 bounce back and forth across the resulting shock fronts would
 be pumped up to ultra-relativistic energies (much like a
 basketball that speeds up as a dribbler's hand gets closer to the
 floor). The high-energy protons would then collide with the
 ambient hydrogen gas, producing gamma rays and also
 positrons that are almost immediately destroyed in collisions
 with electrons (producing a characteristic gamma-ray
 emission at 511 kilo-electron-volts).
 Both images wrere made by instruments aboard the
 Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (Top image courtesy of
 D. D. Dixon, University of California, Riverside, and William
 R. Purcell, Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corporation.
 Bottom image courtesy of John Mattox, Boston University.)
 348 American Scientist, Volume 88
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Three Arms Hug the Middle
 At a radio wavelength of 6 centimeters, Sgr A
 West reveals itself to be a three-armed spiral
 consisting of highly ionized gas whirling
 around the galactic center. Each arm in the
 spiral is about three light-years long, but it is
 not clear whether they are part of a physical
 spiral or merely a superposition of
 independent gas streams flowing into the
 middle. At a distance of three light-years
 from the center, the gas moves at a velocity
 of about 105 kilometers per second, which
 indicates a mass concentration of over 3.5
 million suns inside this radius. The hub of
 the gas spiral corresponds to a very bright
 radio source (orange, ovoid shape) known as
 Sgr A* ("saj-ay-star")?the dynamic center
 of our Galaxy.
 Astronomers still lack a complete grasp of
 the gas motions in the region, however,
 because the three-dimensional shape of Sgr A
 West is not fully understood and because fierce
 stellar winds from hot stars in the area collide
 with the gas, pushing it around in complex
 ways (see below). The image was made by the
 VLA. (Image courtesy of Kwok-Yung Lo,
 Academia Sinica, Taiwan, and Farhad Yusef
 Zadeh, Northwestern University.)
 When Stellar Winds Collide
 Massive stars in the central part of our Galaxy are constantly losing mass
 in the form of hot winds (mostly protons and electrons) that blow in all
 directions, colliding with each other and the ambient gas. The collisions
 result in gas condensations of various densities, producing the tesselated
 pattern shown in this hydrodynamic simulation (red is high density; black,
 low density). The density generally increases toward the center as the
 gas is pulled in by gravity. Here Sgr A* lies in the middle and a few stars
 are visible on the right-hand side of the field, which is about 0.5 light
 years across. (Image courtesy of the author.)
 2000 July-August 349
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A Molecular Ring
 A lumpy, doughnut-shaped molecular cloud (violet),
 called the circumnuclear disk, encircles the three
 armed spiral of Sgr A West (orange). More than 10
 light-years across, the drcurnnuclear disk is made of
 fragile molecules and rotates at a velocity of about 110
 kilometers per second. Ionized streamers extend from
 the northwestern part of the ring (upper right) and may
 indicate the general orientation of the powerful
 magnetic field in this part of the Milky Way.
 Here a radio-wavelength image of ionized gas at
 1.2 centimeters (orange) is superimposed on the
 distribution of hydrogen cyanide molecules (violet)
 to reveal the relation between these structures.
 (Image courtesy of Farhad Yusef-Zadeh,
 Northwestern University.)
 A Galactic Doughnut with a Heavy Filling
 A cartoon of the inner 15 light-years of our Galaxy shows the exotic collection of astrophysical phenomena
 that lie within the cavity of the circumnuclear disk. The central attraction is the strong radio source Sgr A*,
 w hich gives all indications of being a supermassive black hole?almost certainly the only one in our Galaxy
 (see "The Dark Monster"facing page). Nearby, a concentrated cluster of at least two dozen hot blue stars (1RS 16)
 bathes the entire cavity with ultraviolet radiation and seems to be
 the source of a powerful wind that sweeps through the galactic
 center with a velocity of nearly 700 kilometers per second. The
 w ind may be the cause of the shocked molecular gas in the ring,
 and the snakelike form of Sgr A West's arms (especially
 noticeable in the Northern Arm). A red supergiant star (1RS 7)
 is also feeling the effects of the wind and radiation from 1RS 16,
 as the star's surface is stripped off to form an ionized comet-like
 tail that points away from the galactic center.
 The existence of a peculiar "Mini-cavity," which forms a hole
 in the radio emission from Sgr A West (below), could also be
 explained by the effects of the winds emanating from 1RS 16.
 The strong gravitational potential of Sgr A* may focus the
 winds tow ard the Mini-cavity, effectively excavating a hole in
 the ionized gas.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 io51
 The Dark Monster
 What darkness lurks in the heart of the Milky Way? Calculations of the mass (white
 circles) enclosed within a given radius of the galactic center indicate that the local
 distribution of luminous stars (yellow line) cannot account for the orbital movement
 of the gas and stars in the region. The bulk of the mass must not be visible. Several
 possibilities have been proposed, including a collection of underluminous objects
 such as brown dwarfs and dead stars. Aside from the fact that a highly compact
 cluster of dead stars is not physically tenable, such models (pink line) are not
 consistent with the mass distribution in the center. Instead the density of dark
 matter in the galactic center indicates a single pointlikc object: a supermassive black
 hole of about 2.6 million solar masses (orange line).
 Darkness Visible
 The bright radio source Sgr A*?sitting
 prominently as an ovoid shape (cross) nestled in the
 crotch of Sgr A West?is a prime candidate for
 the giant black hole that is thought to lie in the
 center of our Galaxy. This of course raises the
 question, if Sgr A* is actually a black hole, why
 does it shine so brightly? A lone black hole should
 indeed be black, w ith no light escaping it
 whatsoever. And there lies the answer, for Sgr A*
 is hardly alone, surrounded as it is by a dense
 cluster of stars, dust and gas. In fact, the density of
 the interstellar medium near Sgr A* is 10,000
 times greater than it is in our solar neighborhood.
 Being so close to the gravitational potential of
 Sgr A* has an eff ect on the gas that is analogous to
 what happens to air compressed inside a bicycle
 pump: it heats up. Of course, the physics is a little more exotic. As the gas plummets toward Sgr A*, it
 accelerates rapidly, at speeds topping 1,000 kilometers per second, and since it is fully ionized it produces an
 intense magnetic field. The gravitational stress on the infalling gas is so severe that it may reach temperatures
 exceeding 10 billion degrees. The net result is that before the matter crosses the black hole's event horizon, it
 emits a show er of radiowaves through a variety of mechanisms, including particle-particle collisions
 (Bremsstrahlung), collisions between energetic particles and the ambient radiation (Compton scattering), and
 by charged particles spiraling around the magnetic field lines (cyclotron and synchroton processes). The
 bright spot know n as Sgr A* is the radiation produced by this gas in its death throes.
 Here a 1.2-centimeter radio image (orange) is superimposed on a 2-micrometer infrared image (blue) of
 the stars in the region. (Image courtesy of the author.)
 2000 July-August 351
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Shadow of a Black Hole
 Although a black hole is itself invisible, its "shadow"
 may betray its presence. Because of the strong
 gravitational field of a black hole, light from the
 infalling gas behind Sgr A* does not make it
 directly to us but is bent away or simply swallowed
 into the darkness. This should be manifested as the
 absence of radiation?a shadow^?at the edge of
 the black hole's event horizon.
 The image shows a general relativistic ray
 tracing calculation of the black-hole event horizon at Sgr A* as it
 would appear if there were no intervening medium betw een us and the
 galactic center. This shadow is predicted to be about 30
 microarcseconds across?a diameter that should be resolved within
 the next 10 years by currently evolving technology (very long baseline
 interferometry at sub-millimeter wavelengths). Such an image would
 not only provide another test of Einstein's theory of general relativity,
 it would conclusively establish that a black hole does indeed exist at the
 j
 center of the Milky Way. (Image courtesy
 Most astronomers are convinced that the galactic c
 black hole of about 2.6 million solar masses. Thi
 but quite small compared to the bloated monste
 the giant elliptical galaxy M87, for example, is believ
 billion solar masses. Nevertheless, the special beauty 
 is merely 28,000 light-years away (unlike M87, whic
 relative proximity to such a beast provides an unprec
 the central engines of galactic nuclei stir up all the ene
 One of the more interesting questions that must be an
 Milky Way's central black hole radiates energy the w
 devouring matter at a fairly healthy rate (about one
 some unknown reason it produces neither x rays nor
 would be expected of a black hole of its size. It thus 
 the energy from the matter it swallows?but why?
 Other phenomena in the galactic center also beg for
 that rise hundreds of light-years above the galactic 
 physicists have suggested that these threads may be
 remnants of the early universe that are presumed t
 "Superconducting Cosmic Strings," May?June 2000), b
 physical relationship between the various componen
 understood, nor is their evolutionary history. As we
 is a complicated place?it should fulfill the careers of 
 352 American Scientist, Volume 88
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Bibliography
 Coker, R. F., and F. Melia. 1997. Hydrodynamical accre
 tion onto Sagittarius A* from distributed point sources.
 Astrophysical Journal (Letters) 488 : L149-L153.
 Falcke, H., F. Melia and E. Agol. 2000. Viewing the shad
 ow of the black hole at the Galactic center. Astrophysical
 Journal (Letters) 5 28 : L13?L16.
 Genzel, R., N. Thatte, A. Krabbe, H. Kroker and I. E.
 Tacconi-Garman. 1996. The dark mass concentration
 in the central parsec of the Milky Way. Astrophysical Jour
 nal 472:153-173.
 Ghez, A. M., B. L. Klein, M. Morris and E. E. Becklin.
 1999. High proper-motion stars in the vicinity of Sgr
 A*: Evidence for a supermassive black hole at the center
 of our Galaxy. Astrophysical Journal 509:678?686.
 Khokhlov, A. and F. Melia. 1996. Powerful ejection of mat
 ter from tidally disrupted stars near massive black holes
 and a possible application to Sagittarius A East. Astro
 physical Journal (Letters) 457:L61?L64.
 LaRosa, T. N., Kassim, N. E., Lazio, T. J. W. and S. Hy
 man. 2000. A wide-field 90 centimeter VLA image of
 the Galactic center region. Astronomical Journal
 119:207-240.
 Maoz, E. 1998. Dynamical constraints on alternatives to
 supermassive black holes in galactic nuclei. Astrophysical
 Journal (Letters) 494:L181 -LI 84.
 Melia, F. 1994. An accreting black model for Sagittarius
 A*. II. A detailed study. Astrophysical Journal
 426:577-585.
 Melia, E and R. F. Coker. 1999. Stellar gas glows into a
 dark cluster potential at the galactic center. Astrophysical
 Journal 511:750-760.
 Menten, K., M. Reid, A. Eckart and R. Genzel. 1997.
 The position of Sgr A*: Accurate alignment of the radio
 and infrared reference frames at the Galactic center. As
 trophysical Journal (Letters) 475 :L111 -LI 14.
 Links to Internet resources for further exploration of "The Heart of the Milky Way"
 are available on the American Scientist Web site:
 http: / /www.americajiscienh^t.org/amsc^
 "Couldn't get the other delivery services to handle this substance, could you?"
 2000 July-August 353
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

