
 Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience 

 
This page intentionally left blank 

3
 Th e Roots of Cognitive 
Neuroscience 
 Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology
  
 EDITED BY  A NJA N CH AT TER JEE
and  
 H. BRANCH COSLET T 

 3
 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
 and education by publishing worldwide.  
  Oxford 
New York 
 Auckland 
Cape Town 
Dar es Salaam 
Hong Kong 
Karachi 
 
 Kuala Lumpur 
Madrid 
Melbourne 
Mexico City 
Nairobi 
 
 New Delhi 
 Shanghai 
 Taipei 
Toronto 
 
 With offices in 
 Argentina 
Austria 
Brazil 
 Chile 
Czech Republic 
France 
Greece 
 
 Guatemala 
Hungary 
Italy 
Japan 
Poland 
Portugal 
Singapore 
 
 South Korea 
Switzerland 
Thailand 
Turkey 
Ukraine 
Vietnam  
  Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 
 in the UK and certain other countries.  
 Published in the United States of America by 
 Oxford University Press 
 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016  
    © Oxford University Press 2014  
  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
 retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
 permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, 
 by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. 
 Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights 
 Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.  
 You must not circulate this work in any other form 
 and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.  
  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The roots of cognitive neuroscience : behavioral neurology and neuropsychology / edited by 
Anjan Chatterjee, H. Branch Coslett.
 
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–19–539554–9
1. Cognitive neuroscience. 2. Clinical neuropsychology. 
3. Neuropsychiatry. 
 
I. Chatterjee, Anjan, editor of compilation. 
II. Coslett, H. Branch, editor of compilation. 
QP360.5.R66 2014
612.8′233—dc23
2013012874  
 
 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  
 Printed in the United States of America 
 on acid-free paper  

v
 CON T EN T S     
 Preface 
 vii  
 A N J A N  C H AT T E R J E E & H . BR A NC H CO S L E T T  
 
 Contributors 
 xi  
 C H A P T E R  1.    Th e Case for Case Reports   1  
 K E N N E T H M .  H E I L M A N  
 C H A P T E R  2.    We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants: Th e Golden 
Era of Behavioral Neurology 1860–1950 and Its Relevance 
to Cognitive Neuroscience Today  11  
 H E I DI RO T H  
 C H A P T E R  3.    Deconstructing Human Memory: Insights 
from Amnesia  53  
 M I E K E V E R FA E L L I E &  M A RG A R E T M .   K E A N E  
 C H A P T E R  4.    Semantic Memory  67  
 A N A S TA S I A M .   R AY M E R &  L E S L I E J .  G ON Z A L E Z RO T H I  
 C H A P T E R  5.    Alexias and Agraphias  89  
 DAV I D P. ROE LTG E N & E L I Z A BE T H H . L AC E Y  
 C H A P T E R  6.    Face Recognition  105  
 S T E V E N Z . R A P C S A K  
 C H A P T E R  7.    Arousal, Attention, and Perception     131  
 M A R K M E N N E M E I E R  

vi
Contents
 C H A P T E R  8.     Perceptual-Attentional “Where” and Motor-Intentional 
“Aiming” Spatial Systems  171  
 A . M . B A R R E T T  
 C H A P T E R  9.     Limb Apraxia: A Disorder of Goal-Directed 
Actions   187  
 A N N E L . FOU N DA S  
 C H A P T E R  10.    Body Representations: Updating 
a Classic Concept  221  
 H . BR A NC H CO S L E T T  
 C H A P T E R  11.    Th e Neuropathologies of the Self  237  
 TODD E . F E I N BE RG  
 C H A P T E R  12.    Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression  252  
 L E E X .  BL ON DE R  
 C H A P T E R  13.    Behavioral and Cognitive Eff ects of 
Antiepileptic Drugs  269  
 K I M FOR D J .   M E A D OR  
 C H A P T E R  14.    Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition   284  
 DAV I D Q.  BE V E R S D OR F  
 C H A P T E R  15.    Attractor Basins: A Neural Basis for the 
Conformation of Knowledge  305  
 S T E PH E N E .   N A DE AU  
 C H A P T E R  16.    Plasticity  334  
 V IC TOR W.   M A R K  
 C H A P T E R  17.    Visual Art  349  
 A N J A N C H AT T E R J E E  
 C H A P T E R  18.    Creativity  367  
 VA L E R I A DR AG O &  G L E N R .   F I N N E Y  
 Aft erword 
 388  
 K E N N E T H M . H E I L M A N , E DWA R D VA L E N S T E I N &  ROBE RT T.   WAT SON  
 Index 
 397  

vii
 PREFACE    
 Cognitive neuroscience is in high fashion. Images with colored patches show-
ing brain regions that are active when we think, perceive, feel, and make deci-
sions grace the covers of the most prestigious scientifi c journals. Every month, 
neuroscientists seem to be making new discoveries about why we are the way we 
are. Even the general public has an inexhaustible appetite for neural explanations 
for our behavior. Advanced technologies promise to demystify the mind as they 
reveal detailed workings of the brain. Most research universities now have imag-
ing centers in which scientists can picture brains functioning in vivo. Many use 
novel electrical recording techniques and non-invasive stimulation methods to 
understand how the brain works. In this climate of progress, driven by technology 
that was inconceivable only a generation ago, why publish a book focused on an 
old approach to the brain? Th e answer is simple. As the chapters in this volume 
demonstrate, behavioral neurology and neuropsychology remain just as relevant 
to advancing our understanding of the biology of cognitive and aff ective systems 
as they were 150 years ago. 
 Examining the behavior of individuals with neurologic disease, sometimes 
referred to as “the lesion method,” informs our understanding of cognitive and 
aff ective systems in several ways. Firstly, as has been noted in the past, patients 
reveal how large-scale systems can be “carved at their joints.” Understanding the 
nature of these joints and the way that diff erent components articulate reveals the 
nature of the system under consideration. Secondly, the lesion method allows us 
to test hypotheses about the role of neural structures in a way not possible by other 
methods. Whether or not a particular region of the brain is necessary for a mental 
operation is tested directly by assessing the consequences of damage to that part 
of the brain. Finally, the striking phenomenology in patients, behaviors that most 
of us would not have imagined possible, allows us to generate hypotheses about 
the organization of the mind. How is it possible for someone to know facts about 
the world and not facts about their own life? Why does someone speak, but not 
understand? What does it mean for a person to recognize some, but not other 

viii
Preface
parts of their body? How can an intelligent and articulate person behave as if one 
side of the universe has vanished? Th ese and many other deeply counterintuitive 
phenomena reveal something about the structure of the mind as implemented 
in the brain. Th ey generate hypotheses to be tested, and, as occurred with the 
most celebrated case in all of behavioral neurology and neuropsychology, Henry 
Molaison (bett er known as H. M.), they can radically change the basic under-
standing of how our minds are organized. 
 Beyond making the case for the central importance of behavioral neurology 
and neuropsychology today, we have another aim in publishing this book. We 
wish to acknowledge the contributions and infl uence of our mentor, Dr. Kenneth 
M. Heilman. We both have been deeply aff ected by Dr. Heilman, whom we met 
at critical times in our peculiarly similar academic paths. We were both medi-
cal students at the University of Pennsylvania (separated by several years) at a 
time when a career of studying cognition as a neurologist was at best regarded 
with bewilderment, and, more typically, with condescension. Aft er our neurol-
ogy residencies, we both did post-doctoral fellowships at the University of Florida 
under Dr. Heilman’s guidance. Branch went on to work at Temple University for 
several years. Anjan started his academic career at the University of Alabama in 
Birmingham. In the late 1990s, we both returned to the University of Pennsylvania 
to join the neurology department and to work at the Penn Center for Cognitive 
Neuroscience. Th e rise of neuroimaging had made behavioral neurology att ractive 
even in a place like Penn that had long been a bastion of neuromuscular research. 
 Over the last 45 years, Dr. Heilman has been and remains one of the most pro-
ductive and creative thinkers in this fi eld. Th e chapters in this book, in addition 
to showing the relevance of patient studies, reveal Dr. Heilman’s infl uence, which 
extends beyond his own research into his impact on subsequent generations of 
neurologists, neuropsychologists, and speech pathologists. Th ese chapters, writ-
ten by his students, represent but a small sample of those whose thinking has been 
touched by his agile mind. 
 Th e book begins with a chapter by Dr. Heilman. He reminds us of the impor-
tance of single case studies. Th is contribution is followed by a chapter that shows 
that the questions asked in the Golden Age of neurology, from the 1860s to the 
beginning of the First World War, were prescient in identifying concerns that we 
still face when theorizing about how mind arises from brain. Th e other chapters 
cover diverse areas such as language and semantics, emotion, att ention, praxis, 
body representations, the nature of self, pharmacology, plasticity, and even art and 
creativity. Dr. Heilman has made his own mark in each of these fi elds. However, 
the chapters are not reviews of his contribution. Rather, they refl ect the current 
understanding of these fundamental areas of cognitive neuroscience as informed 
by the study of people with neurological disease. 
 Th is is a book for cognitive neuroscientists, neurologists, psychiatrists, psy-
chologists, physiatrists, and scholars in general interested in the biology of the 

Preface
ix
human mind. Importantly, the book is also aimed at medical, neuroscience, and 
psychology students who are still forming their views of cognitive neurosci-
ence. We hope the book will disabuse readers of two (in our view) wrong-headed 
notions. Th e fi rst notion is that cognitive neuroscience is synonymous with func-
tional neuroimaging. Th is misconception confuses a domain of scientifi c inquiry 
with a method. While functional neuroimaging has certainly invigorated cogni-
tive neuroscience, the fi eld has deep roots tracing back at least to the second half 
of the 19th century. Th e second notion is that while patient studies might be of 
historical interest, the real way forward is through new technologies such as func-
tional neuroimaging. Th is view is misguided because the interpretation of imag-
ing data is now relatively unconstrained. Th e widespread use of reverse inferences 
(inferring a mental operation based on neural locations of activation patt erns) 
begs to be corralled. Lesion studies off er the perfect foil for functional neuro-
imaging studies as a method for confi rming or rejecting hypotheses generated 
by activation patt erns. Th e tremendous growth of functional imaging research 
makes lesion studies more important than they have ever been, if we are to ground 
our cognitive theorizing. 
 Finally, we should mention that this book would not have been possible with-
out the help and patience of the staff  at Oxford University Press. Joan Bossert, 
our editor, who also edited Dr.  Heilman and Dr.  Valenstein’s classic  Clinical 
Neuropsychology, was unfailingly supportive of our eff orts 
 Anjan Chatt erjee 
 H. Branch Coslett  

 
This page intentionally left blank 

xi
 CON TRIBU TOR S     
 A.M. Barrett  
 Kessler Institute of Rehabilitation
 West Orange, NJ
 David Q. Beversdorf 
 University of Missouri
Columbia, MO
 Lee X. Blonder
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 
 Anjan Chatt erjee
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
 H. Branch Coslett 
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
Valeria Drago
 IRCCS Fatebenefratelli, Laboratorio 
LENITEM
Brescia, Itlay
Todd Feinberg
 Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Bronx, NY
 Glen R. Finney
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 
 Anne Foundas
Louisiana State University
New Orleans, LA
 Kenneth M. Heilman
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 
 Margaret M. Keane
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA
 Elizabeth Lacey
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 
 Victor W. Mark
University of Alabama in Birmingham
 Birmingham, AL
Kimford J. Meador
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 
 Mark Mennemeier
University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences
Litt le Rock, AR
 Steven E. Nadeau
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 

xii
Contributors
 Steven Rapscak
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 
 Anastasia M. Raymer
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 
 David Roeltgen
Cape Regional Medical Center
Cape May Court House, NJ 
 Heidi Roth
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 
 Leslie J. Gonzalez Rothi
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL
 Edward Valenstein
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL
 MiekeVerfaellie
Boston University
Boston, MA 
 Robert T. Watson
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 

1
 C H A P T E R  1 
 Th e Case for Case Reports
  
 Kenneth M.  Heilman    
   In the motion picture  Flash of Genius , the engineer who invented the intermitt ent 
windshield wiper sued Ford Motor Company for stealing his idea. A witness for 
Ford explained that this engineer did not invent the transistors, condensers, or 
other major elements of this wiper system, and that all of this had already been 
invented. Th e engineer who invented this intermitt ent wiper held up a book,  A 
Tale of Two Cities , and started reading. He read the fi rst word, “It” and then asked 
this witness if Dickens invented the word  it ? Th e witness said, “No.” Th e engineer 
then asked if Dickens invented the word  was , or the next words, “the best . . . ,” or 
any of the words in this book, and the witness said, “No.” He then asked the wit-
ness, “If Dickens did not invent these words, why should he get credit for writing 
this book?” Th e engineer won the suit against Ford because it was the  means by 
which he put these components together to develop a system that he created that 
was signifi cant, and creating systems is as important as creating components. 
 Many basic science researchers do not consider the research performed in 
cognitive neuroscience, neuropsychology, and behavioral neurology as sciences 
because cognitive systems neuroscientists, unlike basic scientists, do not discover 
new proteins, neurotransmitt ers and neuromodulators, genes, or new structures. 
Cognitive systems neuroscientists do, however, discover how complex systems 
in the brain perform their functions, and also learn how failures in these systems 
adversely infl uence behavior. Perhaps these same basic scientists would argue 
that, since Dickens did not invent words, he should not be given credit for his 
great novel. 
 One of the aspects of behavioral neurology-neuropsychology that is most 
despised by many basic as well as clinical scientists is the case study. Recently, 
there has been a movement to severely limit these reports because many people 
do not consider them scientifi c. Several journals have also decided not to publish 
case studies. For example,  Johnston and Hauser (2007) , editors of the  Annals of 

2
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Neurology, defi ne case reports as “descriptions of fewer than 10 cases.” Th ey state 
that “one must always be concerned about reliability of inference based on an n 
of one. No statistics are possible in case reports. Inference is entirely dependent, 
then, on subjective judgment.” Th ese editors also noted that, of the various arti-
cles published, reviews were the most highly quoted, and that case reports were 
the least quoted. Th ose case reports published in the  Annals received 60 percent 
fewer citations than “research articles.” Since case reports do receive fewer cita-
tions, these editors believe the research community acknowledges the limited 
quality of these reports. Based on this reasoning, the editors state that they will 
continue to consider case reports. “However, we expect that the vast majority will 
be rejected without review.” 
 Th e editors of the  Annals  are not alone in their de-evaluation of case reports. In 
an editorial in  Brain , John Newsome-David and John Rothwell noted  Brain ’s high 
impact factor and also felt that limiting case reports will help further improve 
that impact factor. Recently, we (Torres, Heilman and Poizner, in press) con-
trasted the reaching movements, in the dark, of patients with Parkinson’s disease 
(PD) who have basal-ganglia network dysfunction with those of a patient with 
a discrete injury to his posterior parietal cortex (PPCL) under three diff erent 
sensory-guidance conditions: (1) brief and temporary viewing of the allocentric 
spatial target location and no viewing of the moving forelimb; (2) continuous 
viewing of the spatial target location (allocentric guidance) with no viewing for 
the forelimb; and (3) brief and temporary viewing of the target with continuous 
viewing of the moving fi nger (egocentric guidance). While the patient with the 
PPCL was helped most with continuous allocentric-based guidance, the patients 
with PD were helped most with continuous egocentric based guidance. Th ese 
results suggest that for the programming and planning of reaching movements, 
the basal-ganglia-frontal circuits and the posterior-parietal cortex default to com-
plementary sources of sensory (egocentric versus allocentric) information. We 
thought that this fi nding was novel and important and sent this paper to  Brain. 
Th e paper was never reviewed, and we received the following response from the 
editors, “Th ank you for submitt ing the above manuscript which we have consid-
ered carefully, but regret to inform you will not be considered further as a submis-
sion to  Brain . Our current policy is very rarely to publish single case studies . . . ” 
 Hospital and medical schools oft en consider surgeons more important than 
neurologists because surgeons make much more money than do neurologists, 
unless the neurologist brings in large sums of research funding. Recently, I was 
told by the director of our Gainesville VAMC Geriatric Research and Educational 
Clinical Center (GRECC) that he had to do his yearly report, and he needed to 
know about our research activities. When I told him that I would get him a list of 
the papers we published this past year, he apologetically told me that, while he was 
interested in these papers, the VA director and chief of staff  were not interested in 
papers; they wanted to know the amount of research funds we brought in. 

Th e Case for Case Reports
3
 Th ere are several serious errors in the Johnston’s and Hauser editorial pub-
lished in the  Annals of Neurology . For example, they state, “No statistics are pos-
sible in case reports.” Th ere are many means of performing statistical analyses in 
case reports. Th ese statistics can allow the investigator to know whether whatever 
is being measured in the case is diff erent from a demographically matched normal 
population. Th ere are statistical methods that can also inform the investigators 
about the reliability of the fi ndings. Johnston and Hauser also state “Inference is 
entirely dependent, then, on subjective judgment.” In single-subject studies, there 
are even statistical means of testing possible causation. For example, a patient can 
be repeatedly tested until they form a stable baseline, and aft er a stable baseline 
is established, a treatment can be instituted. If this treatment is either benefi cial 
or harmful, the patient’s performance will be altered from this baseline, and this 
alteration can be tested for signifi cance. 
 Some critics of case reports are of the opinion that many case reports are 
nothing more than a serendipitous event. It is possible that a person might have 
a genetic defect or some other unique event that caused a disease, and that the 
mutation or event that led to this disease is unique to that person; however, while 
some case reports of previously unreported diseases do turn out to be rare dis-
eases, the vast majority of case reports are subsequently demonstrated not to be 
unique. Th e knowledge that a clinician has discovered a new and unreported fi nd-
ing is also not serendipitous. No matt er how many patients a clinician sees in their 
practice, it is the prepared mind that discovers the new fi ndings that make a case 
reportable. To know that an observation is novel and that this novel observation 
is important, the clinician has to know that which is known, that which is not 
known, and that which may be important for others to know. Louis Pasteur stated 
that, “In the fi elds of observation, chance favors only the prepared mind.” 
 Compared with population studies that may examine diagnostic tests or treat-
ments (i.e., “evidence-based medicine”), case reports intensely investigate and 
describe the individual with the disease-disorder in the context of comorbidi-
ties and individual characteristics. It is oft en the individual diff erences that pro-
duce variability, and thus, population studies require statistical analyses to learn 
whether whatever result they observe is just a random event or unlikely to be a 
random event. It is exceedingly rare with a group or population study to have no 
variability. Learning the factors that caused this variation may be very important. 
However, to learn what caused this variability, the investigators would have to 
perform a series of case studies. Unless all subjects in a population study show the 
same eff ect, shouldn’t a clinician and investigator still be concerned about reli-
ability and making inferences based on these population studies? 
 Many people will state that case reports, case studies, or case series are uncon-
trolled, and since they are uncontrolled, are likely to be incorrect. When people 
prepare to write up case reports or n = 1 studies to submit to a journal, they 
att empt to learn if there have been other similar reports. Now with Internet tools 

4
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
such as PubMed, this task has become relatively easy. If the clinician-investigator 
learns that his or her observation has not been previously reported, and that he 
or she might have a new observation, this observation should be shared with 
others who might see the same phenomenon or who might want to do further 
research. However, it is important for this novel contribution to be confi rmed by 
future studies and reports. If the clinician investigator does fi nd prior reports of 
patients with the same fi nding, he or she might want to perform some type of 
meta-analysis that might allow them to fi nd a thread that unites the fi ndings, and 
thus leads to them to a new level of understanding. 
 Th ese anti-case report messages from editors may be a very serious sign of a 
deeper sociological disorder, and it is possible that this disorder may seriously 
retard medical progress. Th e editorials mentioned above suggest that the “bean 
counters” have even taken control of our journals. And, unfortunately, the 
bean-counter mentality appears to be infectious, and is even corrupting the minds 
of brilliant scientists who make decisions about the type of papers that should be 
accepted for publication. Journals are ranked by “impact factors,” and the impact 
factor is highly dependent on citations of the articles published in that journal. 
Th e editors of the  Annals of Neurology as well as of  Brain boast about their high 
impact factor. Th us, editors can increase the prestige of their journal by accept-
ing papers that are likely to be frequently cited, and rejecting those that are cited 
less frequently, such as case reports. Review papers rarely present information 
that stimulates what  Kuhn (1996 ) termed a “paradigmatic shift .” Th ese papers are 
oft en highly quoted because they summarize advances in a domain of research, 
and when people write papers, a reference to a review paper will oft en reduce the 
number of references required. But are citations really a valid means of measuring 
an article’s importance? Th e real measure of the importance of an article is the 
novelty of the information, and how this information will aff ect clinical care as 
well as future research. 
  Jenicek (1999 ) states that case reports may be the “weakest” level of evidence, 
but they oft en remain the fi rst line of evidence, and it is with the publication of a 
case report that discovery and education about a disease oft en begins. Anyone 
who is familiar with the history of neurology knows that most paradigmatic shift s 
in neurology have been initiated by case reports. It is diffi  cult to think of a neu-
rological disease that was not originally a case report, or a small series of case 
reports. Th us case reports or case studies have been a critical element in advanc-
ing neurology, and especially the sub-specialty of behavioral and cognitive neu-
rology ( Heilman, 2004 ). 
 In the clinic, the clinician-scientist has the opportunity to observe anoma-
lies. By an anomaly, we mean a novel observation (i.e., an observation which has 
not been previously reported). Th e observation of an anomaly suggests that the 
scientifi c theory that att empted to explain the order in a system is inadequate, 
and a new theory that can accounts for this anomaly must be developed. Th e 

Th e Case for Case Reports
5
development of a major new theory based on the awareness of anomaly would be 
a paradigmatic shift . 
 Th ere are many defi nitions of creativity. In a prior publication, I defi ned cre-
ativity as “the ability to understand, develop, and express in a systematic fashion 
novel orderly relationships” ( Heilman et al., 2003 ). In this defi nition, novelty is a 
critical element of creativity, and novel ideas are a product of disengagement and 
divergent thinking. Th omas  Kuhn (1996 ) in his book,  Th e Structure of Scientifi c 
Revolutions, also stated that, “Discovery commences with the awareness of an 
anomaly.” Awareness of an anomaly is a whisper of nature, and the people who 
hear this whisper are able to recognize that our knowledge is incomplete or that 
current theories might be either inadequate or incorrect. When some investiga-
tors hear this whisper of nature, they can develop and test new theories that will 
help account for these anomalies. Th ese new theories and research that are per-
formed to test these new theories oft en lead to a paradigmatic shift . 
 Traditionally, psychiatrists have studied disorders of the mind, and neurolo-
gists have studied disorders of the brain; however, it was with the development 
of behavioral and cognitive neurology that physicians started to study how 
disorders-diseases of the brain caused disorders of the mind. Modern behav-
ioral and cognitive neurology began with four critical papers. Th e fi rst, was the 
report of Phineas Gage by Harlow (1848). Gage, who had a severe frontal injury 
from an iron bar that was propelled into his brain, had a profound change in 
his personality, and Gage’s story is still quoted in many reports about frontal 
lobe function and dysfunction. Th e interest in Gage has remained so strong 
that a reconstruction of Gage’s skull and brain, aft er his injury, was reported by 
 Damasio et al in 1994 . 
 Th e second important paper was that of Paul  Broca (1861) , who reported a 
patient who sustained a left  anterior hemispheric stroke that resulted in a loss 
of speech fl uency. Th e patient, Leborgne, made few meaningful utt erances, but 
frequently repeated the word “tan.” Th is patient had relatively intact comprehen-
sion, but also impaired naming and ability to repeat. Th e third report, by Karl 
 Wernicke (1874) , described a patient who, unlike Lebourgne, spoke fl uently, 
but spoke in jargon, and could not understand or repeat speech. Wernicke not 
only reported this patient with what is now known as Wernicke’s aphasia, but 
also based his case as well as upon knowing about the patient reported by Broca 
Wernicke developed a speech-language information processing model, and based 
on this model, he was able to predict the observation of patients with conduction 
aphasia.  Lichtheim (1885 ) described two patients with diff erent forms of apha-
sia. One, like Wernicke’s patient, could not comprehend, but unlike Wernicke’s 
patient, could repeat. Th e other, like Broca’s patient, was non-fl uent, but unlike 
Broca’s patient, Lichtheim’s patient could repeat. Based on these cases, Lichtheim 
modifi ed and enhanced Wernicke’s speech information processing model that 
helped to explain several new types of aphasia. 

6
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Important case reports which produced paradigmatic shift s are neither lim-
ited to speech disorders-aphasia, nor were they just reported at the founding of 
behavioral and cognitive neurology in the 19th century. For example, the world 
famous patient H. M. recently died. H. M. had epilepsy that could not be con-
trolled by medications. Since he had seizures emanating from both his left  and 
right anterior-medial temporal lobes, both anterior temporal lobes were surgi-
cally removed. When H. M. recovered from surgery, he had a profound defi cit of 
his episodic memory. H. M. was subsequently studied by more than 100 diff er-
ent investigators, and there have been several hundred papers and reports writt en 
about diff erent aspects of H. M.’s memory. Th ese case studies of H. M. produced 
a paradigmatic shift  in our understanding of memory. Before the initial report by 
 Scoville and Milner (1957 ), it was not known that removal of both hippocampi 
would induce this devastating amnesic disorder. Papez posited that a circuit 
comprised of the hippocampus, fornix, mammillary bodies, thalamus, cingulate 
gyrus, and retrosplenial cortex was important for mediating emotions; however, 
the studies initiated by the novel observation that H. M. had impaired episodic 
memory, but not impaired semantic or procedural memory aft er ablation of a por-
tion of this “Papez” circuit (i.e., hippocampus) revolutionized our understanding 
of the neural basis of episodic memory. 
 Temporal lobectomy remains an important treatment of poorly medically 
controlled epilepsy, but now, the neurologists, psychologists, and neurosurgeons 
who take care of these patients att empt to protect the normal hippocampus in 
one hemisphere as well as other portions of the Papez circuit in this hemisphere. 
If Scoville and Milner submitt ed the report of H. M. to  Annals of Neurology or 
 Brain, there is a high probability that it would have been rejected without a review 
because it was just a case report. 
 Since Broca’s and Wernicke’s initial reports, studies of behavioral-anatomic 
fractionation have provided cognitive neuroscientists and clinicians with impor-
tant information as to the modular organization of the brain and how local brain 
dysfunction might lead to specifi c forms of aberrant behavior. Many of the cogni-
tive behaviors performed by humans, such as speech, sensory recognition, and 
memory (episodic, semantic, and procedural) are complex functions that are 
mediated by systems that have many components, and many of these component 
functions are mediated by anatomically distinct areas of the brain. 
 Caramazza (1986) noted that the experimental method used in a study is heav-
ily dependent on the type of question that this research is att empting to answer. 
According to Caramazza, when cognitive scientists are att empting to understand 
brain function in normal subjects, as well as how brain function is altered with 
injury, the case study methods are highly valuable. Although Caramazza notes 
that studies that use large sample of participants do provide information about 
this group’s average performance there is the assumption with group data that if 
there are individual diff erences, these diff erences are random and irrelevant. In 

Th e Case for Case Reports
7
certain studies this irrelevant assumption might be acceptable; however, if group 
data is used to understand the cognitive changes induced by injury, the group 
study of patients with brain damage would only be valid if each patient is identi-
cal in “all theoretically relevant respects . . . .” When studying patients with brain 
damage, such as stroke, it is rare for any two subjects to have exactly the same 
anatomic lesion, and even when studying patients with degenerative diseases, it 
is rare that all participants will have the same severity and loci of degeneration. 
According to Caramazza, since these homogeneity criteria can rarely be met, 
grouped observations cannot be validly used to draw inferences about normal 
cognitive systems. Caramazza also notes that since group studies do not contain 
homogeneous participants, these studies have to use statistical analyses, and any 
conclusions drawn from such studies must contain probabilistic statements. In 
most group studies, there are no detailed analyses of the exceptions, and as dis-
cussed above, it is the exceptions or anomalies that oft en will provide important 
insights that lead to paradigmatic shift s in understanding. 
 Unfortunately, there is no single perfect method of studying the brain, and 
the lesion-case study method, even with double dissociations, also has its limi-
tations. Hughlings Jackson (1932) recognized that with brain injuries, there are 
changes in behavior, and that injuries alter behaviors by two major mechanisms. 
Th e injury to a specifi c area of the brain causes a loss of the functions mediated 
by this portion of the brain; however, in addition to mediating specifi c functions, 
the injured area might have been inhibiting another more phylogenetic “primi-
tive” area that performs a more stereotypical form of behavior, and this injury 
“releases” these more stereotypical primitive behaviors. In addition, as Monakow 
( Finger et al., 2004 ) noted, brain injury causes diaschisis, in which areas of the 
brain that have not been directly damaged, but are connected with the damaged 
area, malfunction; malfunction of an area not directly injured can also produce 
behavioral changes. Lastly, although a specifi c portion of the brain might be medi-
ating a function, there might be other areas of the brain that can also perform 
this function (functional plasticity), and, with damage to an area, other areas can 
compensate for the damaged area. Th us, even damage to an area that mediates a 
specifi c function might not lead to permanent changes in that function. 
 Th ere are several other theoretical problems-limitations of case reports. When 
a report appears in a journal, the authors, editors, and readers want to know 
whether that which has been reported is valid (sound and cogent). Validity in med-
icine and science requires that the fi ndings -observations be replicable-reliable, 
and that conclusions drawn from this case report be demonstrated to be correct. 
Since case studies are based on individual patients, these observations have not 
been replicated, and thus, might not be valid. When reporting a case, the authors 
should invite others to replicate the fi ndings of this case to help establish reli-
ability. However, people have to be aware of the disorder before they can att empt 
to replicate the prior observations. Validity also depends on further testing of the 

8
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
hypotheses that are raised by the case report, which might include gaining a bet-
ter understanding of pathophysiology. 
 For the reasons mentioned above, cognitive-systems neuroscientists have to 
be cautious when deducing the function of a specifi c brain area based on injury 
to or degeneration of that area. It is important to obtain converging evidence. 
In regard to behavioral neurology, neuropsychology, and speech pathology, in 
addition to behavioral analyses designed to determine the functional systems 
that are impaired and, by inference, the systems that normally mediate specifi c 
behaviors, there are now many powerful tools that will allow us to provide con-
verging evidence and help understand pathophysiology, including:  electroen-
cephalography and evoked potentials, fMRI, positron emission tomography 
(PET), magneto-encephalography, electrical stimulation, magnetic stimulation, 
and neurochemical-neurotransmitt er analyses. 
 Case studies can also have an important infl uence on the training of clinical 
investigators. A part of my career that has been very rewarding is introducing new 
neurobehavioral fellows into research. Many of the former fellows had never done 
research, and were concerned as to whether or not they had the ability to perform 
research. One of the things I do is to remind them that, during their training, 
they have already learned to perform research. In their practice, neurologists see 
patients who are oft en referred from other physicians. Typically, based on the his-
tory they obtain and their fi ndings on examination, they use convergent thinking 
to decide where in the brain-spinal cord-neuromuscular system these patients are 
having their dysfunction. Th en, based on this localization, they may use divergent 
thinking to come up with a list of possible causes, and based on these possibilities, 
they may then order tests that will help confi rm or disconfi rm each of the pos-
sibilities. In many respects, almost all new patients seen by clinical neuroscien-
tists are research projects in which the clinician, based on her or his observations, 
develops a-priori hypotheses, and then tests these hypotheses. Th us, case studies 
come closest to the type of clinical functions that the fellows have performed. 
Th ere are times when seeing patients, and asking “where, why and how” ques-
tions, that there is a surprise fi nding. Th is unexpected or novel fi nding may be an 
opportunity to learn something new about the nervous system, and share it with 
others who will fi nd this novel fi nding to be important in their understanding of 
the nervous system and the diseases that might aff ect it. 
 In summary, although there is litt le doubt that controlled studies and 
evidence-based medicine are crucial to the advancement of medicine, these 
advancements are oft en initiated by case reports. One of the fundamental compo-
nents of creativity is novelty, and novelty in the medical, speech, and psychologi-
cal sciences is oft en the product of a careful clinical evaluation. In medicine, and 
especially in neurology, we are continuing to discover new diseases. Clinicians 
and scientists need to know about new diseases so that patients can be diagnosed, 
mechanisms can be determined, and treatments developed. Th e only means of 

Th e Case for Case Reports
9
reporting the observation of new diseases are case reports and case series. Case 
reports and studies also may allow us to uncover the mechanisms of certain dis-
eases. Many medicines currently in use to treat diseases were not developed for 
the purpose that they are currently being used, and these benefi cial, as well as 
adverse, eff ects were oft en initially observed and reported as case reports. Just 
as hospitals’ administrative “bean counters” are att empting to reduce the time a 
physician spends with each patient, several journal editors are trying to reduce 
the number of case reports, case studies, and case series reported in journals. By 
implementing this policy, these editors may be increasing their journal’s cita-
tions and ranking; however, just as seeing patients more rapidly might make more 
money for departments, clinics and health centers, this reduction of time spent 
with patients reduces the quality of care. Not publishing case studies will no 
doubt retard the advancement of medicine. As mentioned by  Jenicek (1999 ), case 
reports may be the “weakest” level of evidence, but they oft en remain the fi rst line 
of evidence, and it is in the publication of case reports that discovery and educa-
tion about a disease oft en begins. 
 We have had a neurobehavioral fellowship program at the University of Florida 
for almost 40 years. One of the greatest gift s in my life has been the privilege of 
helping to train these fellows, many of whom are now leaders in behavioral and 
cognitive neurology, neuropsychology, speech therapy and even anthropology. 
When many of these fellows started their fellowship, they were concerned about 
their ability to perform research, and oft en it was a case study that introduced them 
to research. In this book, several of our most prominent former neurobehavioral 
fellows write about some of their important research contributions, including case 
studies. It will be apparent to people who read these chapters that case studies have 
done much to advance our science, and hopefully they will continue to help.  
 References 
 Broca,  P.  Remarques sur le siege de la faculté de la parole articulée, suives d’une observation 
d’aphemie (perte de parole) .  Bulletins de la Société Anatomique de Paris.  1861 ;  36 :  330–357 . 
 Caramazza,  A.  Th e logic of neuropsychological research and the problem of patient classifi cation 
in aphasia .   Brain and Language .  1984 ;  21 : 9–20 . 
 Damasio,  H. ,  Grabowski,  T. ,  Frank,  R. ,  Galaburda,  A. M. ,  Damasio,  A.R .  Th e return of Phineas 
Gage:  clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient .   Science  . May 20; 1994; 
 264 ( 5162 ):  1102–5 . 
 Finger,  S. ,  Koehler,  P.J. ,  Jagella,  C.  Th e Monakow concept of diaschisis: origins and perspectives . 
 Archives of Neurology .  2004 ; 61 :  283–288 . 
   Harlow,   J.M  .  Passage of an iron rod through the head .  Th e Boston Medical and Surgical Journal. 
 1848 ;  39 : 389–393 .  
   Heilman,   K. M.  ,   Nadeau,   S. E.  ,   Beversdorf,   D. O.    Creative innovation: Possible brain mechanisms . 
 Neurocase . 2003;  9 :  369–379 . 
 Heilman,  K.M .  Case reports and case studies: An endangered species .  Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology. 2004;  17 :  121.  

10
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Jackson,   J.H  .   Selected Writing of John Hughlings Jackson  .  Taylor,  I. , ed.  London :   Hodder and 
Stoughton ,  1932 . 
 Jenicek,  M. Clinical Case Reporting. In   Evidence Based Medicine  ,  Oxford, U.K ,  Butt erworth- 
Heinemann ,  1999 . 
 Johnston,  C. and  Hauser,  S. L .  Message from the Editor: Th e Value of a Case Report .  Annals of 
Neurology.  2007 ;  62 ( 2 ): A11–A12 . 
 Kuhn,  T.S .   Th e Structure of Scientifi c Revolutions  , 3rd ed.  Chicago :  University Chicago Press ,  1996 . 
 Lichtheim,  L.  On aphasia .  Brain .  1885 ;  7 : 433–485 . 
 Scoville,  W.B. and  Milner,  B.  Loss of recent memory aft er bilateral hippocampal lesions .  Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry .  1957 ;  20 : 11–21 . 
 Wernicke,  C.   Der aphasische Symptomencomplex  .  Breslau :  Frank und Weigert ,  1874 .       

11
 C H A P T E R  2 
 We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants: 
Th e Golden Era of Behavioral Neurology 
1860–1950 and Its Relevance to Cognitive 
Neuroscience Today
   
 Heidi L.  Roth   
 Th e golden era of behavioral neurology from 1860 to the mid-20th century 
 generated an enormous literature fi lled with careful clinical observations and 
comprehensive models of cognitive function. Th e extent of this literature can 
easily be underappreciated, but a review of publications by leading scientists and 
physicians of the time reveals its vastness and depth. 
 Among other topics, this period is fi lled with active debates and thoughtful 
consideration of the neurological organization of language, action, and percep-
tion. Th e models derived from this period have in some cases directly shaped, and 
in others, strongly infl uenced modern models in these areas. 
 Here, we will examine important models from this period and highlight how 
they remain relevant to our current understanding of cognition. We will also 
highlight some of the challenges faced by the researchers from the past which are 
not unlike those faced by scientists today. Much of this work was based on the 
examination of patients with brain lesions. We begin with a review of the chal-
lenges faced at the beginning of the 1860s when the concept of modularity of 
higher functions was fi rst established by Paul Broca in his reports on his cases of 
aphasia in France. Aft er that, we will consider Carl Wernicke’s contribution to the 
understanding of language and aphasia and his use of diagrams and connection-
ist fl ow models of higher cognitive function. Finally, we will consider subsequent 
studies of apraxia and visual agnosia that were infl uenced by Wernicke’s approach. 
Th roughout, we will try to elucidate how and why the early contributions were 

12
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
accepted, the criticisms to which they were vulnerable, and how our current mod-
els of function are indebted to them. 
 Language and Aphasia 
 BROC A : MODU L A R IT Y OF H IGH ER-L E V EL 
F U NCT IONS A N D T H E USE OF T H E 
CLI N IC A L-PAT HOLOGIC A L M ET HOD   
 Language is one of the “highest” cognitive functions, closely associated with a 
person’s identity and intelligence. In the early 19th century, there were both sci-
entifi c and ideological arguments opposing the view that language might be local-
ized in the brain, but the paper entitled “Remarks on the Seat of the Faculty of 
Articulate Speech, Followed by a Case of Aphemia (Loss of Speech),” published 
in 1861, by Pierre Paul Broca (1824–1880) in represented an important turning 
point (Broca 1861/1977). Broca’s report and the debates that followed began to 
convince people, at least in France, that higher-level cortical functions might be 
associated with injury in a particular area of the brain. 
 Broca’s description of aphasia was certainly not the fi rst, and there were fairly 
detailed reports of the characteristics of aphasic language that had been previ-
ously recorded. Th e fact that language dysfunction could occur from a head 
injury was even mentioned in the Egyptian Surgical Papyrus from 2300 B.C.E. 
( Breasted, 1930 ). In the early 19th century, not long before Broca, the phrenologi-
cal program introduced by Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828) and popularized by 
Johann Spurzheim, posited that psychological/cognitive functions were localized 
in circumscribed areas of the cortex. Th ey even proposed that language ability or 
verbal memory was located in the front part of the brain. Th ey also suggested that 
the size of the cortical regions should correlate with the degree of development of 
that function, and that diff erences between people could be assessed by feeling 
bumps on the skull, which would refl ect the underlying topography of the brain 
( Gall & Spurzheim, 1810–1819 ,  1835 ). 
 By the time Broca was active, the phrenological ideas of Gall had been strongly 
discredited, and the enthusiasm for searching for the brain basis for higher-level 
cognitive functions had lost momentum. Gall failed to provide scientifi c evidence 
for his theories. At the same time, experimental physiologists failed to fi nd evi-
dence for regional specialization in the cortex of higher-level behavior in their 
studies of animals. Th e most prominent experimental physiologist in France, 
Pierre Flourens (1794–1867), ablated parts of the cerebral hemispheres of pigeons 
and observed that specifi c functions in the higher-level domain (excluding respira-
tion and vital functions, which were controlled by the brain stem, and motor func-
tions, which were controlled by the cerebellum) were not aff ected by where the 
ablation took place ( Flourens, 1824 ). He found only that overall loss of function 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
13
occurred with cortical lesions, irrespective of where they were placed, and the 
fi nal impairment seemed to depend only on the total amount of brain removed. 
Th is supported a view of the brain organization called the “law of mass action.” 
According to the law of mass action, all tissue in the brain could contribute to the 
performance of any specifi c task of higher behavior, and performance of any spe-
cifi c kind would degrade depending on the amount, not on the specifi c area of tis-
sue removed. Flourens’s conclusion and opinions, especially in the context of the 
political and religious milieu at the time, which favored more anti-materialistic 
views of mind, were quite infl uential. A physician named Francois Bouillaud was 
a lonely crusader during this time for the view that language abilities were located 
in the anterior part of the brain, and he collected over 100 clinical-pathological 
cases to support this view ( Bouillaud, 1847–1848 ). 
 Paul Broca was a surgeon interested in brain and skull morphometry, who 
also served as president of the Anthropological Society. He entered the debate on 
language localization when the Anthropological Society was discussing whether 
intelligence could be related to brain volume and skull size. Bouillaud’s son-in-
law, Ernst Aubertin, suggested that, instead, they should turn their att ention to 
the localization of brain functions. He thought that language localization and the 
localization thesis in general could be tested, and challenged the group to fi nd a 
case of language disturbance in which there was not a lesion aff ecting the ante-
rior part of the brain. Only a week later, Broca encountered a patient who had 
been transferred to his hospital service with cellulitis of the leg and a language 
problem. Th e patient, a man named Lelong, had suff ered from epilepsy since 
childhood and had developed severe loss of the ability to speak at the age of 30, 
followed 10 years later by a slowly progressive right hemiparesis. Lelong died six 
days aft er being on Broca’s service, and Broca had the opportunity to analyze his 
brain. Lelong became known as “Tan” since that was the only word he utt ered, 
other than a swear word when exasperated. In the next several months, Broca saw 
a second patient with an aphasic disturbance who died and whose brain he was 
able to evaluate pathologically. 
  Broca (1861/ 1977) described speech function aff ected in these cases very 
carefully. He emphasized that what was aff ected was not intelligence, nor the 
 concept of the word, nor the understanding of words, but rather the ability to  pro-
duce words. Th is ability was not related simply to motor function of the tongue or 
vocal apparatus, since the tongue and mouth movement worked well when pro-
ducing complex non-word sounds, but rather was related to the patients having 
lost the power to “execute the series of systematic and coordinated movements” 
that correspond to the syllable they are looking for. Broca wrote, “What has van-
ished is not the language faculty, nor word memory, neither is it the action of the 
nerves or muscles of phonation and articulation; it is something else, a particular 
faculty, considered by M. Bouillaud to be  the faculty of coordinating the movements 
necessary for spoken language . . . .” (Broca 1861/ 1994, 44). Broca explained that 

14
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
the ability to produce speech is clearly distinct from the ability to understand lan-
guage, as is demonstrated by childhood language acquisition. Children acquiring 
language learn to understand many words before they learn to use these words 
in speech. Broca argued, “Th e gradual perfecting of the spoken language among 
children is due to the development of a particular kind of memory, which is not 
the memory of words, but the memory of the movement necessary to articulate 
words. And this particular memory has no relation whatsoever to other memory, 
nor to the rest of intelligence” (Broca 1861/1994, 44). Broca called the loss of this 
ability to produce speech, in the absence of any diffi  culty understanding speech 
or loss of intelligence, “aphemia,” a term later replaced by “aphasia,” by a physician 
named Armand  Trousseau (1864 ). 
 When Broca examined Tan’s brain, he found an oblong lesion “about the size 
of a hen’s egg” in the anterior left  hemisphere. It was fairly extensive, including 
the inferior portions of the frontal lobe, as well as portions of the insula, corpus 
striatum, and the anterior superior temporal lobe (Broca 1861/1977, 142–143). 
In spite of its extent, Broca argued that the critical area for speech was likely 
to be the area of the third frontal convolution, since that area appeared to be 
the fi rst involved pathologically, and Tan’s speech problem was the fi rst symp-
tom he had developed. Th e second patient who came to Broca’s att ention had a 
smaller lesion that mostly aff ected the third inferior frontal convolution. Based 
on these two cases, Broca argued that this particular “convolution” in the cor-
tex might be in some way responsible for this specifi c language symptom. He 
admitt ed that the evidence was by no means defi nitive and further cases needed 
to be examined. 
 Broca’s paper reportedly “galvanized” the scientifi c community in France 
(Harrington 1987, 44), but was by no means fully accepted initially. Heated debate 
about language localization continued for years aft erwards. Why was the report 
so infl uential and what barriers prevented others from accepting it? As briefl y 
described above, localization of mental function had been discredited in the fi rst 
half of the 19th century in France, despite evidence of clinical-pathological cor-
relations supporting language localization presented by observers like Bouillaud. 
But Broca’s report distinguished itself from others. His discussion of cerebral con-
volutions and sulcal anatomy was new. Rather than simply talking about an ante-
rior lesion in the brain, he referred more precisely to a specifi c part of the anterior 
lobe. Also, his discussion of the language defi cit, was advanced, by the standards 
of the day, specifying the most prominent aspect of language that was aff ected—
the production of speech—and contrasting it with other aspects of language that 
were spared, including comprehension. He also noted that in contrast to speech 
production, other aspects of communication including that of using gestures and 
emotional melodic intonation were intact. 
 Broca’s reception was also helped by his explicit refutation of Gall’s thesis 
that skull topography provided information about localization. Broca stated, 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
15
with obvious reference to Gall, that the anatomy of the convolutions was not 
correlated with “any system of bumps” on the skull. Furthermore, because 
there was a variable relationship between brain convolutions and skull topog-
raphy, any negative conclusions that went against language localization using 
Gall’s method were invalid. Another positive factor for Broca’s reception was 
the cautious tone of his conclusion. Broca’s scientifi c style of arguing from facts, 
and not theories, was becoming ascendant in his time, and contrasted sharply 
with the dogmatic scientifi c styles of Bouillaud and Gall. Finally, the conserva-
tive religious and cultural ideologies, which had presented major obstacles for 
the idea of localization of mental function in the earlier part of the century, were 
no longer as strong. 
 Broca’s personality may have facilitated his success. Th e topic of language 
localization had been associated with lively debates, and localizationists had 
been largely discredited. Broca was willing to voice controversial opinions that 
represented progressive scientifi c thinking. Att esting to this, in 1859, the year 
that Darwin published  Th e Origin of the Species , Broca endorsed the idea that 
species might be transmuted from one another (see  Harrington, 1987 ). Broca 
was also able to frame his presentation sensitively in the context of the history 
of the debate, so as to recognize allies and off er credit to others to whom it was 
due. While clearly rejecting the failed program of Gall, he graciously acknowl-
edged continuity with Bouillaud, who had pursued the language localization 
eff ort in the absence of much interest from the intellectual community for 
decades. 
 While Broca’s initial report represents a landmark in the history of beha-
vioral neurology and neuropsychology, one could ask whether his contribution 
is sophisticated by today’s standards. Over the years there have been a variety of 
criticisms of Broca’s work. 
 A number of studies have shown that the area identifi ed by Broca does not 
necessarily alone produce Broca’s aphasia. Oft en, the full syndrome requires 
additional regions beyond those which Broca initially identifi ed. But, it should 
be borne in mind that whether or not a litt le more brain territory is necessary, or 
whether a closely associated territory is suffi  cient in some cases, the fundamen-
tal fi nding established by Broca is not negated. His fundamental point was that 
a constellation of language defi cits are associated with a disrupted area in a par-
ticular region of the cortex, and that this area was located near the anterior region 
that he identifi ed. 
 Pierre Marie (1853–1940)   was one of those who famously att acked Broca’s 
fi ndings in a paper entitled “Th e Th ird left  frontal convolution plays no special 
role in the function of language ” (Marie, 1906). He cited cases in which lesions 
in that area did not produce Broca’s aphasia as well as cases of aphasia like those 
presented by Broca which did not have a lesion in that area. Marie also argued 
that all cases of aphasia were associated with some degree of dementia or loss of 

16
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
general intellectual function. We know now that although modularity of function 
may be apparent for a specifi c function based on lesions studies, the precision may 
not be apparent in every case because of the dynamic and variable nature of brain 
structure. We also know that, in some cases, language impairment can be associ-
ated with dementia (e.g., in vascular dementia or Alzheimer’s disease), but that 
does not necessarily mean that these abilities cannot be dissociated. 
 Linguists, both then and now, have argued that Broca’s description of his 
patients’ language defi cits lacked sophistication. In particular, there have 
been accusations that grammatical features of language, word formation, and 
sentence level structural impairments were not adequately addressed. One 
scholarly psycholinguist recently found Broca’s papers to show “severe short-
comings” and to lack “originality.” He concluded that Broca failed to charac-
terize suffi  ciently the process of language production, and that his inferences 
with regard to neuroanatomical localization were defi cient and would be “unac-
ceptable to any scientifi cally oriented medical doctor.” ( Eling 1994, 38 ). But, 
it is important to keep in perspective Broca’s achievement in the context of his 
own time. Although Broca did not address grammar or other linguistic phe-
nomena, he did address the essential question of his time, whether functions of 
language could be dissociated and related to specifi c brain lesions. Also, with 
regard to neuroanatomy, Broca’s work was uniformly regarded as exceptional. 
Even Wernicke, who had trained with the great neuroanatomist, Th eodor von 
Meynert, complimented Broca on his anatomical precision. Th e test of time has 
also supported Broca’s conclusions. No one today would argue that the ability 
to articulate language is not located in the anterior region of the brain close to 
Broca’s area (possibly in the anterior insula region or in regions aff ecting the 
underlying white matt er as well). Broca’s great achievement was to give a clear 
example of regional specialization of a distinct brain function rooted in neuro-
science and anatomy.  
 L A NGUAGE L AT ER A LI Z AT ION A N D T H E BI RT H OF 
H E M ISPH ER IC SPECI A LI Z AT ION  
 Another watershed development in the history of cognitive neuroscience was the 
recognition that language function could be lateralized in the left  hemisphere of 
the brain. Two years aft er his original report, in 1863, Broca reported a case series 
of eight patients with language disorders, all of whom had lesions on the left  side 
of the brain. In 1865, he speculated about how left  hemisphere specialization of 
language might occur ( Broca, 1865 ). Prior to the 1860s, there had been very litt le 
consideration that language might be lateralized in the brain. 
 In order to more fully appreciate the signifi cance of this development, it is 
important to understand that the idea of asymmetry of localization did not natu-
rally follow from the idea of localization. Th roughout the 1700s and 1800s the 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
17
entrenched view was that the cerebral hemispheres should be symmetric in all 
functions ( Harrington, 1987 ). Th e original defenders of localization of functions 
in the brain had never spoken of lateralization. Even Broca, when he was arguing 
for localization of the capacity for articulate speech in the third frontal convolu-
tion of the brain in his original paper had not suggested that this was on the left  
side of the brain. From the perspective of the time, the idea of asymmetric spe-
cialization of function in the hemispheres might have seemed even more heretical 
than the localization of functions per se. 
 To understand why the idea of the functional asymmetry of the hemispheres 
was so revolutionary, it is worth reviewing the fundamental principles in biology 
taught at the time. Aft er the success of Newtonian mechanics and its predictive 
laws, biologists sought to discover similar laws in biology. Much of this work 
focused on att empting to discover laws that explained structural anatomy in biol-
ogy. Infl uential theories postulated that the cerebral hemispheres were duplicate 
and symmetric, because as organs that interact with the environment in space, 
they have to be able to have spatially balanced interactions ( Bichat 1805/1978 ). 
Biological organs had been divided into two categories, those that did not need 
to interact with the environment, which could be more variable in structure and 
did not need to occur in pairs (e.g., digestive organs), and those which do interact 
with the both sides of the environment, and need to be in pairs to have balanced 
interactions with the world (e.g., arms, legs, eyes). Th e cerebral hemispheres, 
operating at the highest level of processing and perception and interaction with 
the environment, were entrusted with the most delicate and complex processing 
of the external environment, and it was thought that it was especially important 
that they have this balanced processing in the two hemispheres. 
 Th e pervasiveness of the belief that the hemispheres were symmetric organs is 
seen even in the work of Gall. Despite his localizationist agenda, he never ques-
tioned the brain hemisphere symmetry thesis. He was likely infl uenced by Johann 
Gott fried Herder, a leader of the  Naturphilosophie school, which sought laws gov-
erning the structure of biology. While Gall’s model made detailed claims about 
the localization of functional modules in the hemispheres, according to Gall, each 
functional module had a corresponding module in the other hemisphere, which 
allowed the module on one side to substitute for the corresponding one on the 
other in the case of damage. 
 As a corollary to the entrenched belief about the natural state of cerebral sym-
metry, some physicians explained pathological conditions, including mental 
illness, as resulting from a loss of symmetry of function and a failure of the coor-
dination of the two “minds” located in the two hemispheres. Th ey suggested that 
patients with asymmetric functioning in the hemispheres failed to process signals 
in the two hemispheres in a balanced way that allowed integration. Some writers 
went so far as to suggest that one of the purposes of education and schooling was 
to promote bett er cooperation and balance between the two minds represented in 

18
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
the two hemispheres (See  Harrington, 1987 , pp. 19–26, for discussion of  Wigan 
(1844) and other theories of Benjamin Rush, Jean Esquirol, Hewett  Watson, Sir 
Henry Holland, and Karl Friedrich Burdach for variations on the theme that the 
hemispheres need to be balanced and have integrated capacities, and that pathol-
ogy that results when they do not). Although some anatomists had noted struc-
tural asymmetries between the two hemispheres, or a “lack of correspondence of 
the convolutions on the hemispheres,” these were not interpreted as a refl ection of 
diff erences in functions, specialization, or capacities. 
 With the systematic collection of further cases of aphasia, asymmetry could 
no longer be ignored. Broca was the fi rst to comment on this offi  cially from Paris, 
when he reported his “surprise” at fi nding that the eight cases of language distur-
bance he had collected by 1863 all had lesions in the left  hemisphere. But Broca 
avoided making strong conclusions, indicating how uncomfortable he felt about 
the fi nding. He described how “if it were necessary to admit that the two sym-
metrical halves of the encephalon have diff erent att ributes . . . (it would be) a veri-
table subversion of our knowledge of cerebral physiology . . . .” ( Broca 1877 , p. 509, 
quoted in Harrington 1987, 52). He added that this fi nding might be due to a 
small sample size, and hoped that “others more fortunate” than he would “fi nd an 
example of aphemia caused by a lesion of the right hemisphere.” 
 Th at same year, in 1863,  Gustav Dax  brought to the att ention of the Paris medi-
cal societies that 27 years earlier his father, Marc Dax, who had practiced as a 
country doctor, had collected 40 cases of language disturbances, all of which were 
associated with left -sided brain pathology. Marc Dax had presented the fi ndings 
to medical colleagues in 1836 (Dax 1836/1974), but the prominent contributors 
to the language localization debate in the1860s had been unaware of them. 
 In discussing Dax’s observations, the anti-localizationist physician Paul 
Briquet ridiculed the idea of asymmetry, asking “Is it possible that the right eye 
would see only blue, black, and red, whereas the left  eye would be constructed for 
seeing only green, yellow, and blue? Could the right ear hear in music only  do ,  re , 
 mi ,  fa ? And the left  ear  so ,  la ,  ti ? (Briquet, Discussion sur la faculté (1864–5, 714; 
quoted in Harrington 1987, p. 56). Another anti-localizationist physician, Louis 
Francisque Lélut , commented: “We could suppose that “there is only one eye, the 
left , for example, which sees, (while) the right was used for some wholly diff er-
ent thing. But as is well known, and speaking seriously, matt ers are the same for 
the hemispheres as for the two eyes; they serve the same functions . . . .” (Lélut, 
Discussion sur la faculté 1864–1865, 174, quoted in Harrington, p. 54). But other 
commentators were willing to defend the possibility of asymmetric localization. 
Bouillaud argued that asymmetry was not so unprecedented and absurd as others 
were making it out to be, and drew on the analogy with handedness. Trousseau 
commented upon how other diseases derived from brain function disorders can 
aff ect the body asymmetrically, including hysterical symptoms, which more 
oft en aff ect the left  side of the body. Trousseau also pointed out that the weight of 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
19
evidence favored the Dax position, and that there must be diff erences in localiza-
tion in the brain for language on the left  side. He off ered the hypothesis that this 
might be due to diff erences in cerebral blood fl ow to the left  and right hemispheres. 
In June of 1865, Jules Baillarger introduced the idea of a degree of specialization 
rather than full asymmetry of function, such that the left  hemisphere could be 
more adept at certain functions than the right. He discussed how with writing, 
if one loses function of the right hand with which one usually writes, it may be 
diffi  cult to develop the ability to write with the left  hand, though it is not impos-
sible. Furthermore, Baillarger suggested that structural asymmetry in the devel-
opment of the hemispheres might lead to specialization. He reminded everyone 
of the fi ndings of the anatomist and anthropologist, Louis Pierre Gratiolet, who 
had posited that the left  frontal area developed faster in fetal life than the right. 
Baillarger discussed how faster development in the left  side of the brain might be 
the basis for the tendency to develop greater use of the right hand than the left , 
and similarly to account for preferential development of speech abilities in the left  
hemisphere. 
 In June, 1865, just weeks aft er Baillarger’s comments at the Society of 
Medicine, Broca read his famous treatise on the asymmetry of language local-
ization to the Anthropological Society. To explain the language function asym-
metry, he relied on some of the same arguments as did Baillarger (although 
precedence cannot be established for certain, it is likely that Broca conceived 
of his ideas independently, since he had long been aware of Gratiolet’s work 
and claimed that he had shared his ideas with students the preceding year 
(Harrington 1987, p. 58)). Broca’s explanation posited that the brain starts out 
functionally symmetric, but diff erential structural growth of the left  hemi-
sphere, as described by Gratiolet, causes the left  hemisphere to learn things 
sooner. Th is results in humans utilizing and relying on this side “to the exclu-
sion of the other” as they develop skilled tasks such as the ability to produce lan-
guage. Broca summarizes: “ . . . the two halves of the encephalon, being perfectly 
identical from an anatomical point of view, cannot have diff erent characteris-
tics: but the more precocious development of the left  hemisphere predisposes 
us, during our fi rst groping activities, to execute with that side of the brain, the 
most complicated physical and intellectual acts; among these it being certainly 
necessary to include the expression of ideas by means of language, and more 
particularly by articulate language . . . But this specialization of functions does 
not imply the existence of a functional disparity between the two halves of the 
encephalon ( Broca 1865 , 393; quoted in Harrington 1987, p. 59). 
 Broca’s thesis about lateralization has been dubbed “the maturational hypoth-
esis for asymmetric specialization.” Broca seems to try to avoid endorsing any-
thing too radical when he refers to the asymmetry in development. He makes it 
clear that the specialization is an artifact of learning, so as not to undermine the 
idea that the hemispheres were designed fundamentally to be equal. In his 1865 

20
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
paper, however, he also famously stated that most of us are “left  brained.” In his 
words: “It comes down to the fact that, for language as well as for the much less 
complicated and refi ned actions about which I will speak later, we are left -brained. 
In the same way that we direct our movements in writing, drawing, embroidering, 
etc., with our left  hemisphere, we talk with our left  hemisphere. It is a habit we 
have had since our earliest infancy” ( Broca 1865/1977 , 57). 
 Broca made two further points in his treatise of 1865. First, he discussed left  
handers. He explained that exceptional cases in which the right brain may have 
developed slightly faster than the left  might explain left -handedness. Similarly, 
he noted that, with diff erences in maturational rates, some people might be 
right-brained for language. Interestingly, Broca cautioned people from believing 
that all left  handers should also be right-brained for language, since these might 
not necessarily always be linked together. Second, he discussed what became 
known as the doctrine of substitution. Since Broca’s hypothesis for specializa-
tion of language function rests on a slight diff erence in maturational rates of the 
hemisphere, it does not posit that either hemisphere is theoretically restricted in 
its abilities. Th is means that if there were damage in one hemisphere at birth, the 
other hemisphere could take over the functions of the originally favored hemi-
sphere (similar to what Gall had suggested). Th us, if one were to have damage 
in one hemisphere in a particular area important for motor function, then the 
other hemisphere would be perfectly able to develop skilled functions in these 
capacities. Broca explains: “From the preceding, it follows that a subject whose 
third convolution of the left  frontal lobe, normally the seat of spoken language, 
had been atrophied since birth would learn to speak and would indeed speak with 
the third convolution of the right frontal lobe, as a child born without a right hand 
becomes as skillful with its left  hand as one normally is with the right.” ( Broca 
1865/1977, 58). Th is doctrine of substitution was invoked by Broca to explain 
recovery following language impairment from injury to one side. Th e opposite 
hemisphere could take over some of the injured hemisphere’s capacities. 
 By the late 1860s, left -sided language lateralization was generally accepted. 
New theories proposed that a variety of cognitive abilities were asymmetrically 
localized. Some of these theories were fueled by prejudices of the day, that the 
left  side of the brain is the seat of more loft y and highly cultured abilities, and the 
right side, the seat of more primitive or basic sensory or nutritional functions, and 
of irrational thinking. John Hughlings Jackson had a more complex and balanced 
view of specialization. In his model, “voluntary functions” were oft en localized 
laterally in one specifi c hemisphere, whereas more “automatic functions” were 
distributed bilaterally (and thus less resistant to damage by specifi c lesions). Both 
the right and left  sides of the brain participated in the highest forms of symbolic 
thinking. Th e left  anterior side was specialized for what he called propositional 
language (which was contrasted with emotional utt erances that might be pre-
served aft er unilateral left  hemisphere damage). Th e posterior right side of the 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
21
brain was specialized for the highest level of perceptual integration of think-
ing and visual ideation, something that British philosophers at the time, as well 
as Hughlings Jackson, thought was the critical foundation of our concepts and 
knowledge. 
 W ER N ICK E A N D LICHT H EI M: F U RT H ER A PPLIC AT ION 
OF T H E CLI N IC A L-PAT HOLOGIC A L M ET HOD TO T H E 
ST U DY OF H IGH ER COGN IT I V E F U NCT ION A N D T H E USE 
OF T H E “DI AGR A M” H EU R IST IC  
 Th e general impact of Broca’s work in Germany was not as great as in France. 
In part, this was because of the diff erences in approach taken by the French sci-
entists as compared to the Germans. French scientists were more likely to think 
of psychological functions as separate and unifi ed distinct entities or faculties, 
which might be mapped onto brain regions. Accordingly, Broca had described 
the function of articulating words as a distinct “faculty,” and defi ned a location 
for it in the brain on the basis of the clinical-pathological correlation. In Germany, 
physiology was the dominant science partly because of the infl uence of Hermann 
Helmholtz and his mentor Johannes Mueller. Physiological models emphasized 
the mapping of smaller subcomponents of functions onto physiological processes, 
and uncovering principles of biological function through experimentation and 
fi ne-scaled measurement. With the standard of science based on physiological 
measurement, fi ndings based on clinical correlation and large psychological enti-
ties did not seem as reliable and did not translate well into physiological terms. It 
was not immediately clear, however, how the physiological perspective applied 
to the study of aphasia, and even less so to faculty psychology. In Germany, there 
were also other challenges to the acceptance of Broca’s fi ndings. A preeminent psy-
cholinguist in Germany, Heymann Steinthal, argued that clinicians’ descriptions 
of aphasic language defi cits were sorely lacking and uninformed about concepts 
well established in linguistics. Carl Westphal, a prominent Berlin physician, per-
sonally reviewed cases of aphasia himself, and reported back to Steinthal that, in 
his opinion, aphasic language disturbances also did not seem to be explained very 
well by current linguistics concepts. An exciting physiological discovery related 
to higher cortical function reported in Germany in 1870, was Gustav Fritsch and 
Eduard Hitzig’s demonstration of specialization of motor function in the cortex. 
Fritsch and Hitzig demonstrated how physiological stimulation in the cortex of 
dogs, and later, monkeys, could produce movements in the forelegs and hindlegs. 
Th at cortical regions could be specialized for motor function was a surprise at the 
time. It was considered a well established fact “that the cerebral convolutions are 
not motor organs” because physiologists had never been able to obtain movement 
from cortical stimulation previously. Th is new physiological fi nding might have 
helped paved the way for acceptance of language localization, or at least the motor 

22
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
component of speech, but Hitzig was not initially able to provide any satisfactory 
explanation for how speech could be related to cortical specialization of move-
ment control (Hagner, 1997 ). 
 Carl Wernicke ’s watershed paper:  “Th e Aphasia Symptom Complex:  A 
Psychological Study on an Anatomical Basis” was published in 1874 when he was 
only 26 years old. It satisfi ed many of the concerns raised about language local-
ization in the German scientifi c community. Wernicke presented a new model of 
speech production that was based on motor and sensory components and con-
nections between them. Th e emphasis on the motor and sensory dichotomy and 
their connections (which he discussed in terms of a refl ex arc) used terminology 
that was diff erent from that of faculty psychology and seemed more physiological 
in nature. Wernicke’s paper also represented a new approach to thinking about 
higher cognitive functions in which a cognitive function could be supported by 
a variety of component centers in the brain and the connections between them. 
Th is approach was stimulated by the Austrian neuroanatomist Th eodor Meynert, 
with whom he trained. 
 According to Wernicke, Broca’s aphasia results from destruction of the motor 
component for speech located in the frontal operculum or at the posterior part of 
the third frontal gyrus. Th is motor center (or Broca’s area) contains the memory 
for the motor image of words, or the knowledge of how to produce words. A sec-
ond type of aphasia, called sensory aphasia, results from the destruction of the 
sensory component for speech, located in the posterior portion of the superior 
temporal gyrus. Th e sensory center for speech (subsequently called Wernicke’s 
area) contains the memory for the acoustic image of words, how words sound, 
or what some might now call the acoustic phonological lexicon or phonologi-
cal input lexicon. When Broca’s area is damaged, the familiar symptomatology 
of Broca’s aphasia results, namely non-fl uent speech with reduced vocabulary, 
along with spared ability to comprehend speech. When the sensory language area 
is damaged, patients have more fl uent speech and larger vocabularies because 
Broca’s area is spared, but they have diffi  culty comprehending speech because 
they cannot identify the acoustic images of words or recognize them. Wernicke 
also explained that the speech of patients with sensory aphasia, while having 
well-formed utt erances and relatively fl uent phrasing, is marked by word confu-
sion and transpositions and neologisms (including semantic and phonemic para-
phasic errors) because patients are faulty at monitoring their speech output due 
to the acoustic diffi  culties. He explained that when the sensory center is damaged, 
Broca’s area (the output lexicon) is no longer constrained by information about 
acoustic knowledge from the sensory center (Wernicke’s area) which could aff ect 
speech output accuracy. Compared to patients with Broca’s aphasia, patients with 
sensory aphasia are less aware of their speech problems, since they are not able 
to acoustically recognize words accurately even as they utt er them. Patients with 
sensory aphasia still identify non-speech sounds without diffi  culty (keys jingling, 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
23
or door bell ringing), since it is only the acoustic level of speech recognition that 
is aff ected. To summarize, disruption of the sensory center, and the new sensory 
aphasia described by Wernicke, is characterized by relatively fl uent speech out-
put, word and sound confusions, impaired comprehension, and lack of full aware-
ness of speech defi cits. 
 Wernicke’s model, which identifi ed the two main speech centers, also led him 
to predict that, in addition to the motor and sensory types of aphasia, there might 
be a third type of aphasia in which the centers themselves would be spared, but 
the connection between them disrupted. He initially thought the connections 
between the two might run through the insula region, though when Constantin 
von Monakow later identifi ed the arcuate fasciculus, Wernicke thought this 
might be the basis for the connection. Th is third type of aphasia has been called 
 Leitungsaphasie or conduction aphasia. In this aphasia, damage in the connec-
tion between the sensory and motor word centers produce failures in repetition, 
because of loss of fi delity in transferring information from the word that is heard 
to the word that is spoken. In this aphasia, word production in spontaneous 
speech, was expected to be characterized by paraphasic errors because motor out-
put would fail to be constrained properly by phoneme selection from the sensory 
center. Wernicke described this aphasia as likely to be characterized by very hesi-
tant speech, with long pauses “in which the patient gropes for correct expression.” 
In contrast to patients with sensory aphasia, the patients with this type of aphasia 
would still be able to comprehend speech because their acoustic word memories 
in the sensory center were still intact. Th ey would also be aware of their errors and 
be able to monitor their speech acoustically, since the sensory center was intact. 
Th is theoretically hypothesized aphasia was subsequently recognized clinically 
and is now classically associated with the fi ndings of relatively spared compre-
hension and relatively fl uent output, but with markedly impaired repetition and 
paraphasic errors of which the patient is aware and tries to correct. Since these 
patients are able to monitor their speech, they have been noted to exhibit a phe-
nomenon that has been called  conduit d’approche in which they keep correcting 
themselves when they make paraphasic errors, gradually coming closer and closer 
to the correct target. 
 To understand the basic components of Wernicke’s model, it is useful to think 
of a refl ex arc, an analogy used by Wernicke. Th e concept of the refl ex arc brings 
together the understanding of the sensory and motor components of speech 
while providing a model to explain how they are intimately related. Many physi-
ological processes can be divided into sensory and motor components, but in the 
case of speech, these are particularly interdependent. With respect to the refl ex 
arc, Wernicke argued that children fi rst learn to speak in great part by repeating 
what they hear, and the process of mimicry allows them to associate the sensory 
impressions of words they hear with the motor programs for utt ering those words. 
Th ese associations form the basis for sensori-motor associations in the speech 

24
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
apparatus. In later papers, Ludwig Lichtheim and others emphasized how disrup-
tion of Wernicke’s arc can be specifi cally detected by failures of repetition, since 
all elements of Wernicke’s arc, including both the sensory and motor center and 
the connections between them must remain intact in order for people to repeat 
spoken words that they hear. Wernicke, like most investigators at the time, main-
tained that higher thought, i.e., ideas and concepts, were unlikely be localized in 
any particular brain area. Th us, his model is limited to elements of speech input 
and speech output and the sensory and motor correlates of speech.         
 Interestingly, in the schematic drawing of the language components in his 
original paper Wernicke depicted the components of language on the right side 
of the brain since it was not yet known that language was primarily localized on 
the left . In Wernicke’s diagram, which is depicted in Figure 2.1, “M” represents 
the “Motor” area for speech which contains the motor memories for speech pro-
duction. “A” represents the “Auditory area” for speech that contains the auditory 
memories of how words sound. When a person listens to speech, the sound is fi rst 
heard in the external acoustic apparatus (ear), depicted as “a,” these sounds then 
travel to the center for recognition of how words sound, “A,” located in the poste-
rior superior temporal lobe. In order to produce speech, the center “M” in Broca’s 
area near the premotor oral area must be activated, which contains the memories 
for the motor production of words. “M” in turn sends impulses that direct oral 
facial speech motor neurons in the medulla depicted as “m,” which direct the acti-
vation of musculature to execute speech sounds. Th e arc a → A → M→ m  forms 
the core sensorimotor substrate for speech and language in the brain. Th e rela-
tionships between sensory and motor speech components develop in childhood 
when children mimic what they hear. During the course of mimicry or repetition, 
signals must be transferred from the sensory word center “A” through the pathway 
 
Wernicke’s Arc, 1874
Auditory area
for speech:
Wernicke’s area
A
A
Motor area
for speech:
Broca’s area
(Depicted on more typical
left hemisphere of brain)
a
m
M
M
M
A
m
a
 Figure 2.1   Wernicke’s Arc: Schematic of Wernicke’s model adapted from the figure 
in his original paper.  

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
25
A–M to reach “M,” which can direct the production of speech. Sensory aphasia 
results from a lesion in A; Broca’s aphasia from a lesion in M; conduction aphasia 
from a lesion in the connection between A and M (A–M). Language impairments 
resulting from any lesion in the components of Wernicke’s arc have disrupted 
 repetition ability. 
 Wernicke’s approach to explaining aphasia was very diff erent from that of 
Broca and became the starting place for conceptualizing the brain as consist-
ing of centers, connections, and distributed systems. Wernicke went beyond 
correlating a single function with a specifi c location in the brain and provided 
a more diff erentiated view of possible symptoms and types of language disor-
ders. Many had previously felt that patients were not adequately described by 
the description in Broca’s aphasia, and Wernicke provided a “theory of apha-
sia . . . (that permitt ed) . . . a consolidation of the diversifi ed picture of the disor-
der” (Wernicke 1874/1977, 143). To further satisfy the physiologists and other 
experimental scientists of his day, he had even mentioned how changes in the 
nerve pathways in the brain might come about from changes in the quanta of 
energy required to activate them aft er training and exposure, similar to that 
later proposed by the principles of Hebbian learning that came much later. 
Wernicke also satisfi ed linguists of his day to some extent. He was informed 
of distinctions made by linguists and att empted in his paper to address dif-
ferences between his observations of aphasics and the linguistic concepts. 
Wernicke’s paper, like Broca’s, maintained a positivistic scientifi c tone, mod-
estly acknowledging that his model did not explain all the interesting features 
of abnormal language in aphasia. He conceded that “many of the oddities in 
the province of aphasia must remain unresolved, such as the isolated loss of 
substantives or verbs, etc.” (Wernicke 1874/1977. 143). Wernicke noted that 
“An interpretation of such unexplained symptoms on the basis of our primary 
anatomic elements was deliberately avoided, and it must be clearly stated 
here that whole areas of brain physiology and the odd symptoms observed 
therein . . . are not accessible (in the medical sense) to scientifi c treatment” 
(Wernicke 1874/1977, 143) 
 Wernicke’s paper was well received when it appeared. The approach 
that Wernicke took has subsequently been referred to as a “connectionis-
tic” approach. Those who used this approach were also referred to as “dia-
gram makers” because they often illustrated their models with diagrams 
which mapped centers onto different regions in the brain and showed the 
connections between them that could also be lesioned to produce different 
symptoms. The diagram makers provided a method both for explaining the 
effects of lesions, and for distilling theories of brain behavior relationships 
that allowed for the generation of new hypotheses about brain and behavior 
relationships.  

26
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   F U RT H ER CON T R I BU T IONS TO T H E DI AGR A M MODEL S 
OF L A NGUAGE: T H E W ER N ICK E-LICHT H EI M MODEL A N D 
T H E E X PL A NAT ION OF OT H ER A PH A SIC S Y N DROM E S  
 Wernicke’s model was expanded in 1885 by Ludwig Lichtheim (1845–1928), a 
student of Wernicke. Lichtheim’s paper was a high water mark of sophistication 
in diagram models. His main addition to Wernicke’s model was to add a con-
cept center or a semantic fi eld ( Begriff e )(See Schematic of Lichtheim’s Model, 
Figure 2.2). Th is component was not meant to be an anatomic center like that of 
the sensory repository for word images (Wernicke’s area), or the motor repository 
for word images (Broca and its surrounding area), but, rather, it designated a dis-
tributed knowledge network of associations that contain the concepts to which 
words refer. With this addition to the model, Lichtheim described two new types 
of aphasia based on disruption of the connection of Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas 
to the center for concepts. In both these aphasias, because Wernicke’s arc is intact, 
repetition is normal. In one case, however, the acoustic images or perception of 
speech sounds coming from Wernicke’s center cannot be passed on to concepts 
for recognition, and thus comprehension is impaired (depicted in Lichtheim’s 
model as a lesion 1 in the pathway A–C). In the other case, concepts, which are 
activated in preparation for generating spontaneous speech are not able to acti-
vate Broca’s area for speech output, and thus, speech is not produced fl uently 
(lesion 2 in the pathway C–M). Th ese two aphasias have subsequently come to be 
known as transcortical sensory aphasia and transcortical motor aphasia. 
 Lichtheim’s model can also explain the characteristics of other aphasic syn-
dromes. Adolf Kussmaul (1822–1902), described “word deafness,” in which 
patients have disruption in the connections between the primary auditory areas 
and Wernicke’s acoustic-phonological center ( Kussmaul, 1877 ). Since hear-
ing occurs bilaterally, connections theoretically have to be disrupted from both 
 
Schematic of Lichtheim’s Model, 1885
Deafness
Anarthria
(Speech apraxia)
(Pure word deafness)
Conduction
Aphasia
Broca’s Aphasia
M
A
Concepts: C
m
a
Wernicke’s Aphasia
(Pure meaning deafness)
1. Transcortical Sensory Aphasia
Transcortical Motor Aphasia 2.
 Figure 2.2   A schematic diagram of Lichtheim’s influential model of the language 
system and aphasias.  

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
27
primary auditory areas of the brain where they connect to Wernicke’s area. In 
such cases, which disrupt the pathway a-A on the fi gure, sounds not related to 
speech are perceived well and understood, but speech sounds cannot be recog-
nized because they cannot access the sensory-acoustic phonological input lexicon 
for speech sounds in Wernicke’s area. Because this lesion occurs independently 
of any destruction of Wernicke’s area or Broca’s area or internal connections in 
the brain between these areas and between concepts, speech output is entirely 
normal, as is writing, reading, and naming. Only capacities which rely on pro-
cessing auditory perception of speech are aff ected, including comprehension, the 
ability to repeat what is heard, and the ability to write to dictation. Speech output 
is normal because the ability to monitor speech internally is still intact due to the 
preservation of Wernicke’s area. 
 Another type of aphasia which can be explained using Lichtheim’s model and 
is mentioned in his paper is a condition that has subsequently been called “pure 
meaning deafness.” (reported also by Bramwell and reviewed in  Ellis, 1984 ). In this 
type of aphasia, acoustic information is processed in Wernicke’s area in such a way 
that the phonological forms are recognized and can be repeated, but the informa-
tion is blocked from activating concepts, which impairs comprehension. Unlike 
in Wernicke’s aphasia or transcortical sensory aphasia, spontaneous speech is not 
aff ected by paraphasic errors because top-down connections to Wernicke’s area 
remain intact, and the phonological word form recognition can monitor speech 
production. Since phonological word knowledge is intact, these patients can also 
make phonological-to-orthographic translations and write down words based on 
the phonological information, even when they cannot understand the words that 
they hear. Aft er writing down the words that are incomprehensible to them, they 
can then read these and understand them. In short, these patients can repeat what 
they hear, but do not understand words they hear until they write them down. 
 Finally, disruption of the outfl ow tract from Broca’s area to the musculature 
and innervation of the motor neurons to produce speech can explain another type 
of speech diffi  culty. Th is results in the loss of the ability to produce normal speech 
sounds even though knowledge of the words’ phonology is preserved. Th ere is 
isolated impairment of the execution of speech sounds, despite preservation of 
knowledge of word features. In Lichtheim’s time, this type of speech diffi  culty 
was called either ataxic speech or aphemia. Today, it might be called apraxia of 
speech, or when impairment is more complete, aphemia. Impairment of produc-
tion of speech in this disorder is diff erent from that found in Broca’s aphasia. In 
Broca’s aphasia, there is also loss of knowledge of the sequence of phonemes that 
are part of the word form to be produced, whereas in apraxia of speech, the word 
phonemes are known, but the production of the word is distorted due to prob-
lems in the execution and programming of the phoneme sequences, i.e., motor 
activation of the appropriate motor neurons. Th is causes the distortion of vowels 
and phonemes and syllable sounds, particularly when words are longer or require 

28
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
more coordination from the execution standpoint. Despite distorted production, 
fl uency can be relatively preserved, reading and writing are intact, and knowledge 
about the characteristics of the word components are also preserved. Kussmaul 
described these patients as having “freedom of intellect and of movement of the 
tongue” and they also write words without diffi  culty, but “when asked to articu-
late. . . (the signs) . . . as sounds or words, they cannot, even when they are shown 
how to shape their tongue and lips.”  Th e failure of these patients to produce the 
sounds despite the intact knowledge of acoustic features or phonological knowl-
edge of the identity of the sequence of sounds can be understood in Lichtheim’s 
model to arise from the disruption of the fi nal pathway emanating from Broca’s 
area to the musculature designated as (M–m) in the fi gure. Th is type of disrup-
tion would be expected to cause purely motor diffi  culty in production of speech 
while all other language functions including repetition, comprehension, writing, 
and reading could be completely intact. 
 LICHT H EI M’S MODEL: CR IT ICISMS, CON T ROV ER SI E S, 
PR EDICT IONS OF COM PET I NG MODEL S, A N D OT H ER 
A PH A SIC S Y N DROM E S  
 In 1891 Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) criticized Lichtheim’s model for failing to 
explain why patients should have disrupted repetition in conduction aphasia. He 
pointed out that in Lichtheim’s model, patients with conduction aphasia should 
still be able to repeat words by accessing the word meaning and by taking the 
“detour” (A–C–M), which would allow them to bypass the disrupted direct 
connection between Wernicke’s and Broca’s area (A–M). An interesting conse-
quence of this observation is that patients repeating by this route should only be 
able to repeat “real” words, but not non-words or unknown foreign words, because 
only known real words could activate specifi c meanings or concepts. As Freud 
explains: “If this detour is really available, patients with conduction aphasia would 
have to be characterized as a condition in which . . . repetition of comprehensible 
words . . . (is intact) . . . , but in which repetition of incomprehensible words, such 
as those of a foreign language, is abolished”(Freud 1891/1953, 14). Th is exact dis-
sociation, as predicted by the Lichtheim’s model and pointed out by Freud, was 
subsequently described ( Katz & Goodglass, 1990 ). Patients with this condition 
have what has been called deep dysphasia. Th ey are able to repeat  only words that 
are real, and are unable to repeat non-words like “FLIG” or “BLUB.” One interest-
ing aspect of deep dysphasia is that repetition errors are almost always semantic 
because all repetition proceeds via the concepts or semantic route, thus they do 
not make phonological errors. 
 Lichtheim argued for bi-directionality in the information fl ow between 
Broca’s and Wernicke’s area. Lichtheim explained that this was necessary to sup-
port internal speech, in which one might generate ideas that would be translated 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
29
directly into word output programs, but would then be transferred into acous-
tic form in Wernicke’s area. Lichtheim argued that much of speech is supported 
by “internal speech,” which we might today call phonological working memory. 
Th is allows us to review what we might say or what might have just said. In addi-
tion to using this bi-directionality to explain internal speech, Lichtheim relied on 
this bi-directionality to explain why speech output is still altered with parapha-
sic errors when people only have lesions of the acoustic recognition center and 
Wernicke’s area. He argued that speech production, even when we generate our 
production spontaneously from ideas, always also activates the acoustic forms in 
Wernicke’s area, and Wernicke’s area is always involved internally in monitoring 
and constraining speech production. 
 Lichtheim tried to show that patients with lesions only in Broca’s area and/or 
its surroundings have defi cits of acoustic knowledge of speech. He thought that 
Broca’s area was the only conduit for accessing acoustic information internally. 
Lichtheim famously suggested that this could be tested by asking patients with 
Broca’s lesions to indicate the number of syllables in a word by squeezing their 
hand the appropriate numbers of times, even when they were unable to speak. If 
they still had access to the acoustic knowledge, or Wernicke’s area, they should be 
able to indicate the number of syllables by squeezing, using their acoustic knowl-
edge of these words. Lichtheim showed that his patients with Broca’s- like aphasia 
were unable to indicate the number of syllables in words by squeezing, which sup-
ported his view that internal speech and knowledge of acoustic information have 
to pass through Broca’s area fi rst (this claim has subsequently been tested further, 
see  Heilman, Tucker, & Valentein, 1976 ;  Feinberg, Rothi, & Heilman, 1986 ). 
 Kussmaul’s model (1877) contrasted with Lichtheim’s because it emphasized 
a bi-directional connection from concepts to the acoustic center, but it had no 
direct connection from concepts to the motor production of words. Th us, all 
speech output in Kussmaul’s model had to fi rst be routed through the acous-
tic knowledge center, and there was no direct access to speech output that did 
not fi rst utilize acoustic knowledge. Wernicke, in his later writings, also seemed 
to side with Kussmaul, and suggested that concepts might fi rst activate the 
acoustic word form before the motor form ( Wernicke, 1885–1886 ). Wernicke 
explained how this might make more sense based on speech development, 
since in speech development words are fi rst heard, and speech develops from 
mimicry in which acoustic knowledge becomes intimately linked with motor 
speech knowledge. Th is link is so strong that it might be hard for one to pro-
ceed without the other. Th us, Wernicke suggested that all speech production 
relies to some degree on acoustic knowledge. Spontaneous speech might pro-
ceed by the pathway C–A–M instead of directly from C → M. Th is entire discus-
sion was aimed at explaining why patients who only have lesions aff ecting the 
acoustic center still have problems with motor production. Th at is why patients 
with conduction or Wernicke’s aphasia still make paraphasic errors (something 

30
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
that Freud also brought up as a concern in his critical analysis of the aphasia 
 models). Kussmaul and Wernicke could explain the abnormal speech output 
very directly, because in their models, acoustic knowledge aff ects speech output 
because concepts oft en (Wernicke) or always (Kussmaul) fi rst activate acoustic 
knowledge before proceeding to speech output production. Lichtheim, in con-
trast, argued that Broca’s area is automatically infl uenced by Wernicke’s area by 
its backward connections.  
 With both bott om-up and top-down directions for connections between con-
cepts and acoustic word knowledge (Figure 2.3), Kussmaul’s model more easily 
accounts for an isolated naming disorder or “anomia.”  Anomia is a residual sign of 
many diff erent forms of aphasia, but it can also occur as a discrete lesion. Patients 
with lesions of the conceptual fi eld, Broca’s area, and Wernickes’ area all have 
defi cits in naming; but they also have defi cits in repetition, speech production, or 
comprehension. An isolated defi cit in naming occurs in Kussmaul’s model when 
only the top-down connecting pathway between the concept/ semantic fi eld to 
Wernicke’s area is disrupted, leaving comprehension intact, as well as repetition 
and speech production. Kussmaul’s model also predicts the opposite condition, 
in which only the bott om-up pathway is aff ected, such that the semantic fi eld can 
access the phonological lexicon, but the phonological lexicon cannot access the 
semantic fi eld. In this case, the patient can name, but have diffi  culty understand-
ing, the name of the object that they are able to name. Th is would be expected 
to produce intact naming, repetition, and spontaneous speech, despite defi cits in 
comprehension, a constellation of symptoms reminiscent of word-meaning deaf-
ness. (See  Heilman, Rothi, McFarling, & Rott man, 1981 ). 
 Although language was the starting point for the golden era of behavioral 
neurology, aft er Broca and Wernicke’s infl uential publications, the literature in 
higher-level cognition expanded greatly. In order to expand the consideration of 
the seminal models beyond the topic of language, we will highlight a few of the 
more infl uential contributions in relation to the study of apraxia and visual agno-
sia from this time. 
 
Schematic of Kussmaul’s Model, 1885
C
A
M
a
m
 Figure 2.3   A schematic diagram of Kussmaul’s model of the language system.  

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
31
  Apraxia and Praxis 
 Hugo Karl Liepmann (1863–1925) was the fi rst to establish a systematic account 
of the motor planning and execution disorder known as apraxia. He was a stu-
dent of Wernicke’s and worked as Wernicke’s assistant from 1895 to 1899. His 
approach was similar to that of other diagram makers, and involved the iden-
tifi cation of underlying functional modules that supported the cognitive func-
tion in question and identifi cation of the anatomical organization of the modules 
based on observations of patients with lesions. Liepmann very precisely dis-
cussed his use of the term  apraxia , and clearly contrasted it with others from the 
time, which helped clarify the disorder and its features, and how it was distinct 
from other cognitive issues. 
 In general,  apraxia refers to a defi ciency in the ability to perform complex 
and learned motor acts in the absence of primary motor and sensory defi cits that 
might aff ect execution of the learned motor activity. Although during spontane-
ous activities a person may demonstrate that the motor ability is possible, when 
the apraxic individual intentionally tries to perform these activities, the motor 
activity is incorrectly executed and characterized by a variety of defi ciencies. Th e 
patient with apraxia might have diffi  culty using tools correctly or making hand 
gestures to indicate needs. While the defi ciency might not at fi rst seem particu-
larly debilitating in milder forms, in severe cases it can render a patient strikingly 
disabled (e.g., in advanced corticobasal degeneration or in selected cases of severe 
apraxia aft er stroke). Apraxia can aff ect a variety of motor activities selectively, 
including writing, oral buccal movements, limb movements, and speech. Th e 
study of apraxia provides a window into the organization of complex motor pro-
gramming in the brain. 
 T H E C A SE OF M R . T.  
 Liepmann’s interest in apraxia, and much of the basis for his formulation of 
the defi cit, was based on the extraordinary case of a 48-year-old, right-handed 
German government offi  cial ( Regieurungsrat ), referred to as Mr. T (Liepmann, 
1900/1977). Mr . T. suff ered a stroke that resulted in poor speech output and 
apparent lack of speech comprehension. His speech output initially was lim-
ited to fewer than 15 words, and he was unable to point reliably to designated 
objects, or select designated objects from an array. Mr. T. sometimes responded 
to requests with completely unrelated activities, or employed objects inappropri-
ately. Liepmann’s fi rst impression was that Mr. T failed “almost everything” he 
was asked to do. Specifi cally when asked to do things with objects, he would han-
dle the “objects quite absurdly” and overall “it appeared as if the patient did not 
understand—that he was cerebrally deaf, possibly also cerebrally blind.” In part 

32
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
because of the bizarreness of his use of objects, he was thought to have a dementia, 
along with his aphasia aff ecting both speech production and comprehension. 
 But aft er working with Mr. T. over the course of several days, Liepmann noticed 
some of his abilities to do things and his comprehension were preserved. Mr. 
T. responded to whole body commands to get up and walk to the window and others 
quite readily. Liepmann also noticed that Mr. T. responded to almost every request 
with his right arm, and began to wonder what would happen if Mr. T were required 
to use the left . When required to use the left  arm, Liepmann made the startling dis-
covery, that “ . . . all of a sudden, the picture changed” (Liepmann 1900/1977, 159). 
With the left  arm, Mr. T. showed that he understood commands and was able to 
respond much more accurately. With the left  arm, he could select tools from an array, 
point to specifi ed objects in the room, and gesture accurate responses to  yes and  no 
questions. Th e preservation of responses when Mr. T. used his left  arm meant that 
Mr. T. did not have a generalized comprehension disorder or confusional disorder. 
Instead, he had to have a problem specifi cally with motor execution aff ecting the 
right arm selectively. By requiring Mr. T to use the left  arm, Liepmann discovered 
that Mr. T. was capable of performing the tasks, and understood what was being 
asked of him; he was just not able to do so volitionally with the right arm. 
 Liepmann concluded that Mr. T. had a specifi c problem with implementing 
intentional actions using the right side (arm and leg), but not the left . Rather than 
having a general comprehension disorder, Liepmann concluded, he had a severe 
motor execution disorder. Liepmann determined Mr. T.’s inability to implement 
actions with the right side occurred in many diff erent circumstances with diff er-
ent modes of input or instruction. For example, using the right side, Mr. T. could 
neither imitate nor copy motor gestures, nor could he select an object correctly 
when the name of the object was given to him writt en on a piece of paper in writt en 
form. When given a hairbrush in his right hand, he used it like a spoon bringing it 
to his mouth. When given a comb, he used it as a pencil. He could not accurately 
scratch his right ear when tickled, or point to a bell that was ringing with his right 
side. He could do these tasks with the left  hand. 
 Mr T. did not have visuospatial neglect or hemianopsia. However, in addition 
to the motor action errors aff ecting the right side, Mr. T. had some sensory prob-
lems on the right side, with decreased capacity to respond to touch and pinprick, 
poor ability to localize tactile stimuli, and poor ability to perceive the position 
of his right arm without seeing it (measured by the inability of the of left  arm to 
produce the same posture as the right). 
 With respect to Mr. T’s action defi ciencies, Liepmann argued that Mr. T.’s 
problem was not a pure motor output disorder, but a defi ciency of higher-level 
computation of how to produce purposeful movements. Liepmann emphasized 
that Mr. T. could perform some activities with good dexterity and capacity spon-
taneously, such as when butt oning butt ons, but was not able to do the same activ-
ity when asked to do it intentionally. Th us, it was not the basic ability to do the task 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
33
that was aff ected, but the inability to do it intentionally. Furthermore, the ability 
to execute the task depended on the specifi c circumstances. For example, Mr. T’s 
ability to reach for targets was bett er when he was asked to pick up a single target 
object, compared to when he was asked to pick up a target object from among 
an array of objects. Right-hand movements were also sometimes in confl ict with 
left -hand movements, such that when he poured water with the left  hand, he simul-
taneously raised the glass to his lips with the right, and would get the sequence of 
events out of order. Th us, it was not simply a problem with motor output, but one 
that depended on the need or intention to perform more complex motor actions. 
 R EDEF I N I NG A PR A X I A : LI EPM A N N’S 
PROCE SSI NG MODEL  
 Liepmann’s case helped highlight some essential features of the disorder of 
apraxia that had not previously been as clearly diff erentiated. Prior investigators 
had noted that aft er developing aphasia, patients could have specifi c diffi  culty 
using objects in their environment (trying to use a spoon as a pencil for exam-
ple) or could have a problem performing tasks when asked that involved tools. 
Th e linguist Steinthal is credited with fi rst using the term  apraxia when in the 
context of the misuse of objects in patients with aphasia in 1871. Steinthal sug-
gested that apraxia could be a failure of connecting the purpose and mechanisms 
of tool use to the execution of the movements themselves. Steinthal noted that 
this defi ciency was similar to the general loss of the connection between ideas 
and movements that was also evident in aphasia. He did not necessarily think 
that apraxia was secondary to aphasia, but noted the similarities in this underly-
ing defi cient cognitive component. Other explanations for apraxia included the 
following: Apraxia might be due to loss of knowledge for how objects or tools 
were to be used (what we might call the loss of knowledge for the semantics of 
tools); loss of the ability to perceive and recognize an object fully (agnosia) (Pick, 
Kussmaul, Flechsig, Starr); or the product of a general symbolic disorder, similar 
to that aff ecting language, such that it was due to an overall failure of giving sym-
bols motor expression (Finkelnberg). Some saw the defi cit as a disturbance in the 
central primary motor abilities, but had not explained well how there could be 
spared ability to move on the elemental level of dexterity and capacity for coordi-
nated movement, despite an inability to elicit the program for complex movement 
or movement under more intentional circumstances (Nothnagel, Meynert). 
 Mr. T.’s case allowed Liepmann to defi ne apraxia more systematically than had 
been done previously. Th is was aided to a great degree by the unilateral nature 
of Mr. T’s defi cit. Because Mr. T could demonstrate intact responses in the left  
hand, Liepmann was able to conclude that apraxia (1) was not due to a problem 
with perceiving the object (2) was not a problem with not having knowledge of 
an object, and (3) was not due to a general problem of expression of symbols. 

34
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Instead, Liepmann proposed that apraxia be understood as a defi ciency that 
aff ects  higher-level execution of learned movement , including the ability to initiate 
learned movements upon command, in imitation, or when the object is absent. It 
was importantly  not a defi cit of elemental motor ability or basic ability to execute 
or coordinate motor activity. 
 Aft er publishing the case of Mr. T. in 1900, Liepmann continued to write and 
publish on apraxia for the remainder of his career. In 1905, his fi rst extensive 
theoretical formulation of apraxia appeared. His model included three compo-
nents that underlie motor execution. First, there was “the movement formula,” the 
representation in the brain of the sensory image or patt ern that contains knowl-
edge of the features of a specifi c movement. Second, there was “the innervatory 
apparatus” of the motor system. Th is is where the motor neurons are able to pro-
duce innervatory patt erns when guided by the movement formula to execute the 
movement action. Th ird, there was “kinetic memories.” Th ese could be stored in 
the innervatory apparatus for simple and overlearned movements and could be 
activated independently of any guidance by movement formulae. 
 In this theoretical formulation, the fi rst step in performing an action is the acti-
vation of the memory or representation containing a spatial temporal map that 
defi nes that movement, called the “movement formula.” Th is formula would, in 
most cases, be represented in a form like that of a visual image of the action (in 
some type of spatiotemporal map). Th at image would defi ne information about 
the known spatiotemporal relationships of the action as they should appear. Aft er 
the movement formula was identifi ed, it would need to be connected to a “cen-
tral” region that executed an innervatory patt ern. Th e central region could stimu-
late motor output neurons required for execution of the movement, but had to be 
guided by the movement formula to produce the accurate patt ern of activation. 
Some movements that were highly overlearned or elemental (such as fi nger tap-
ping) could be represented directly in the innervatory machinery, without need-
ing to be guided by a movement formula. Th ese overlearned representations were 
called kinetic memories. 
 With this model, Liepmann defi ned diff erent subtypes of apraxia. For exam-
ple, Mr. T. had a problem related to disruption in the connection of the move-
ment formula to the innervatory apparatus. He had the capacity to produce 
complex movements (thus the innervatory apparatus was intact), and the capac-
ity to recognize them and implement them (thus the movement formula was 
intact). He lacked the connection between the two, so when he willfully wanted 
to produce the movement, the movement formula was not able to connect to or 
guide the innervatory machinery responsible for the action in the right hand. 
When Mr. T. was provided with visual examples of how to perform these move-
ments (as in imitation), it did not help, since these still could not be connected 
to the innervatory machinery. Mr T.’s type of case, in which praxis is especially 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
35
poor for the generation of purposeful movements upon command, but is also 
present at least to some degree when provided with the opportunity to copy 
the movement, Liepmann called  “ idio-kinetic ”  apraxia. Th e hyphen was used 
to emphasize that it is a defect in the  connection between the knowledge of the 
movement form (in the movement formula) and the innervatory apparatus that 
executes the movement. 
 Unlike Mr. T., there are other cases in which a movement cannot be performed 
to command, but demonstrating the movement to the patient fully corrects the 
problem. Th ese patients, in whom mimicry is profoundly bett er, Liepmann sug-
gested, might have a problem with the activation or integrity of the movement 
formula. In these cases, when the movement formula is demonstrated in the form 
of the visual demonstration, it activates that spatiotemporal map bett er, which 
has an intact connection to the executor apparatus, which results in restored per-
formance. In these cases, the visuo spatiotemporal movement image can still be 
applied to the innervatory apparatus if it is made available. Liepmann called these 
cases “ideational apraxia.” Patients with this disorder might substitute the wrong 
whole movement for another, or make errors in the sequence of movements, but 
these errors were reduced by mimicry. 
 Th e fi nal major form of apraxia Liepmann described was called limb - kinetic 
apraxia. Th is was a disturbance that aff ected the basic overlearned sequences 
contained in the primary motor-strip regions which he had called kinetic mem-
ories. Limb-kinetic apraxia aff ects basic elements of movements, such as preci-
sion, dexterity, and simple overlearned activities such as fi nger tapping. In some 
respects, it is unlike other kinds of apraxia, and in some publications, he described 
and included it only under an “extended concept of apraxia.” Patients with limb 
kinetic apraxia have diffi  culties in manipulating any tool or object, since dexterity 
aff ects all movement. Liepmann emphasized that an individual apraxic patient 
might have more than one defi cit of the apraxis spectrum. For example, patients 
with ideo-kinetic apraxia oft en have limb kinetic apraxia. 
 Liepmann described how diff erent apraxic error types could be distinctive of 
diff erent types of apraxia. When lesions are more posterior, and located nearer the 
occipito-temporal junction, he suggested there would be more ideational errors 
characterized by substitution and content mistakes (seen in ideational apraxia or 
ideo-kinetic apraxia), whereas the more anterior a lesion was, the more the errors 
could be morphological in nature, related to the faulty execution of the details of 
the movement sequence (seen in limb-kinetic or ideo-kinetic apraxia). In modern 
terminology,  ideo - kinetic apraxia is most readily translated as ideo-motor apraxia. 
Th e term  ideational apraxia has been diff erentiated into conceptual and ideational 
apraxia subtypes. Dissociation apraxias, which Liepmann did not address specifi -
cally, refer to apraxias that occur only in response to a single input modality (only 
to verbal instruction, but not to visual cues). 

36
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 CON N ECT I NG A PR A X I A TO U N DER LY I NG 
N EU ROA NATOM IC A L SU BST R AT ES  
 Liepmann’s legacy for the fi eld of apraxia also lies in how he connected praxis 
to brain anatomy. He established unequivocally that the left  hemisphere is 
dominant for praxis in right handers. He dramatically highlighted that the right 
hemisphere, which directs actions of the left  hand, actually does not possess full 
control over the left  hand, but is dependent on the left  hemisphere. Essentially, the 
right hemisphere has to “borrow” knowledge from the left  to complete left -hand 
movements. He summarizes: “A part of what the left  hand ‘can do’ is not a posses-
sion of the right hemisphere which directs its mobility, but is a possession which is 
borrowed from the left  hemisphere. Th e right hand centre . . . (may remain) . . . dur-
ing the whole of life in a certain dependency on the left  hemisphere ( Liepmann 
1908 , pg. 34). He describes how the dependency on praxis with respect to the 
left  hemisphere might vary between patients, but it was never the case that the 
left  hemisphere was dependent on the right (page 220, Mr. T. Autopsy part II; 
19: 1905; also in Section 2 of the  Drei Aufsaetze ). 
 His anatomical model was based on his careful examination of a large series 
of 83 right-handed patients with strokes causing hemiparesis ( Liepmann, 1908 , 
Essay 2). Patients were tested on their nonparetic hand with a batt ery of praxis 
tests, including: 1) Intransitive and transitive gestures to command (e.g., intran-
sitive = scolding gesture, saluting gestures, snapping fi ngers vs. transitive = ham-
mering, knocking on a door, catching a fl y, counting out money, playing the piano), 
2) intransitive and transitive gestures to imitation, and 3) transitive gestures with 
tools or props present. 
 Of the 83 patients, the syndrome of apraxia never occurred in the non-paretic 
right hand of any of the 42 patients with right hemisphere strokes, but occurred 
in the non-paretic left  hand of about 50 percent (20/41) of patients with left  hemi-
spheric strokes. All those with apraxia had diffi  culty with gesture upon command; 
usually diffi  culties were not corrected by imitation. Twenty-fi ve percent had prob-
lems with using tools. Th e fi nding that no patients with right-hemisphere stroke had 
apraxia in the right hand, but that 50 percent of patients with left  hemisphere strokes 
had apraxia in the left  hand, showed that the left  hemisphere was particularly spe-
cialized as the repository of the movement formula or images important for direct-
ing movements, even when movement was facilitated by the right hemisphere. 
 Based on a number of cases, Liepmann also showed that lesions of the cor-
pus callosum, particularly the anterior portion, but not the splenium, prevented 
critical information from the left  hemisphere from reaching the right hemisphere, 
and produced similar apraxia ( Liepmann &Maas 1907 ). In these cases, the 
apraxia was due to a pure disconnection problem ( Leitungsunterbrechung ), and 
apraxia would aff ect only the left  hand. In one case, Liepmann also explained how 
left -sided agraphia could be a pure apraxic defi cit caused by a colossal lesion. 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
37
 Liepmann eventually proposed a model to predict when one would encoun-
ter a patient with left -hand apraxia and a left -hemisphere lesion (whether or not a 
right-hand apraxia was also present). Th e left -sided apraxia could be produced by 
a (1) disruption of the corpus callosum, from the loss of white matt er that leads 
from the left  hemisphere to the right, in which case only a unilateral left  hand 
apraxia would occur; or (2) a disruption of the fi bers of the white matt er below 
the sensorimotor area on the left , which would prevent the fl ow of information 
across to the right hemisphere, or (3) disruption of the sensori-motor apparatus 
and cortical infl uences that direct the left  hemisphere praxis system, which would 
no longer be intact to cross to the right hemisphere. In contrast, a lesion of the 
left  internal capsule would not aff ect praxis on the left  side, since the communica-
tion across the corpus callosum would remain intact. In addition, with lesions 
below the capsule, the right hand would have no praxis impairment, only kinetic 
motor impairment, since praxis capacities derived from the cortical repository 
 
Left
Sensorimotor
Cortical Region
Right
Sensorimotor
Cortical Region
Corpus C
1
2
3
4
Left Hand
Right Hand
Internal
Capsule
1. Left Cortical Lesion
2. Left Supracapsular Lesion
4. Collosal Lesion
3. Left Capsular Lesion
Liepmann, Vertical Schema of Apraxia, 1908
 Figure 2.4  Liepmann’s vertical schema of apraxia: This is a translation and 
adaptation of Liepmann’s vertical schema of apraxia from his 1908 paper 
which shows how different types of lesions produce left-sided apraxia. The left 
sensorimotor cortex dominates the right for learned movements. Thus, the right 
cortex depends on input from the left, which is carried in the corpus callosum  to 
produce skilled movements of the left hand. Lesions at 1, 2, and 4 which interrupt 
the corpus callosum pathway from left to right result in apraxia of the left hand. 
Lesions at 3, in contrast, do not affect apraxia of the left hand, since the left 
sensorimotor cortex and corpus callosum pathway remain intact. Lesions of 1, 2, 
and 3 all cause right-sided paralysis. A lesion of 4 causes only left-sided apraxia 
without right sided paralysis; the lesion at 3 causes only right-sided paralysis 
without left-sided apraxia.  

38
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
of movement formulas that activate the sensorimotor central region and both of 
those regions would remain intact. 
  LI EPM A N N ON A PH A SI A A N D A PR A X I A OF SPE ECH  
 When Liepmann suggested that complex learned purposeful motor acts are 
directed in great part by the left  hemisphere when describing praxis, it natu-
rally led to questions about praxis and its relationship to aphasia. Liepmann 
concluded that apraxia occurred independently of aphasia. For example, 6 of 
the 20 apraxic patients in his stroke series did not have aphasia, and 4 of the 21 
patients without apraxia had aphasia. In the individual cases in which aphasia 
and apraxia coexisted, comprehension problems could also not explain apraxia, 
since all patients were tested on gestures to imitation which bypassed language, 
and he reported that, in his series, most were not improved by imitation. In a 
lett er to Henschen, quoted in Henry Head’s book on aphasia, Liepmann wrote 
“not all motor aphasics suff er from apraxia, that is to say, apraxia of the extremi-
ties. Apraxia of the face muscles, inability to whistle, to wrinkle the forehead, to 
make a grimace, etc., is frequently combined with motor aphasia. Apraxia of the 
hands, though common, is less oft en present. Th ere are motor aphasics, espe-
cially those with so-called “pure word-dumbness,” without apraxia; conversely, 
I have observed apraxic patients, not only without motor aphasia, but without 
any form of aphasia. Graver degrees of apraxia appear occasionally with sensory 
aphasia, probably owing to the proximity of the temporal and parietal lobes” 
(Head, 1926  vol I. pp. 99–100). 
 Although Liepmann demonstrated that praxis diffi  culties were independent of 
aphasia, he also acknowledged that the aspects of motor aphasia which resulted 
in diffi  culty producing and articulating sounds might have something in com-
mon with apraxia. As Henry Head describes, the apractic component of a speech 
defi cit is characterized by “mutilation of lett ers and syllables with great slowness 
and diffi  culty of articulation that resembles at fi rst sight a dysarthria.” Liepmann 
describes how the movement formula, which in the sett ing of limb movements 
is usually contained in the form of a visual image, would, in the case of speech, 
be contained in the form of an acoustic image or sketch, which according to his 
model of apraxia, would be used to guide the spatiotemporal coordination of the 
innervatory apparatus. Lichtheim explains:  “In order for the action of speech 
to take place properly, the acoustic sketch must infl uence the kinematic of the 
speech muscles, just as in an apraxia of the extremities, the visual sketch infl u-
ences the kinematic of the extremities.” (quoted in Head 1926, Vol 1, p. 100). 
Head also notes that Liepmann indicated that “the analogy must not be carried 
to extreme lengths and all aphasic manifestation cannot be classed as forms of 
apraxia.” ( Head, 1926 , Vol. I, p. 100). 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
39
 Speech diffi  culty and apraxia were similar in the sense that both were highly 
complex motor gestures that were performed without the use of objects (in one 
case, because objects are never part of the action, and in the other case, when 
actions are independent of objects, the apraxia is most evident. Liepmann 
speculated in some of his writing that the left  hemisphere specialization with 
regard to both speech and praxis might in some way be derived from a predis-
position of the left  hemisphere to have a greater underlying capacity to learn 
and store knowledge about actions with symbolic associations independent of 
concrete objects. 
 In Liepmann’s era, the fact that functional modules could be located in the 
brain was not so much in dispute, since his career followed Broca, Wernicke, 
Lichtheim and others who created models of higher-order neurological abnor-
malities based on the analysis of brain injuries including stroke. But his approach 
to determining the anatomical relationships of apraxia to the brain diff ered in 
some respects. Most notably, he systematically studied a very large group of over 
80 patients, which in his day was unusual. While he studied this large series of 
patients, he also was highly indebted to case studies, and in particular, his fi rst 
case of Mr. T. Liepmann acknowledged at the conclusion of this third paper on 
Mr. T. that the value of the case lay in the very thorough clinical description and 
pathology of it, a value “that will last beyond the current state of our understand-
ing and could still provide new conclusions when reviewed in the light of future 
discoveries and questions.” ( Liepmann, 1905 , personal translation, p. 243)   
 Visual Agnosia 
 Heinrich Lissauer (1861–1891), also a student of Carl Wernicke, provided the fi rst 
comprehensive discussion of visual agnosia that distinguished between diff erent 
components of the disorder and its types (1890, 1988). His distinction between 
apperceptive and associative agnosia is referred to today over a hundred years 
aft er his classic publication on the topic in 1890 and remains the most infl uential 
framework for discussing visual agnosia. He died at the age of 30 and published 
his only work on visual agnosia the year before his death. 
 Th e concept of visual agnosia and some of its characteristics had already been 
described and considered theoretically before Lissauer. Hermann Munk, an 
experimental physiologist in Berlin, had made partial ablations of the occipital 
cortex in dogs, and demonstrated that certain ablations would cause dogs to fail to 
recognize objects in a meaningful way, even when they still were able to navigate 
around these objects ( Munk, 1878 ). Aft er these ablations, the dogs would not be 
excited when they saw food or familiar people or their owners. Th e recognition of 
objects and people was intact if the dogs were allowed to smell or touch them; it 

40
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
was only the visual input modality that was aff ected. Munk described the defi cit 
as related to a loss of the memories for visual images. With the loss of visual mem-
ories, the image could still be perceived, but the image did not elicit any memory 
of what the object stood for. Munk called the condition “mind blindness,” and 
showed how it diff ered from other forms of blindness, caused by more extensive 
occipital lesions. Lesions that destroyed more of the primary visual cortex left  the 
dogs unable to see anything, and they ran right into objects. 
 Aft er Munk, HermannWilbrand assembled a lengthy monograph (1897) 
 entitled “Mind Blindness” in which he collated cases from the literature and also 
discussed in general how the mind established relationships between visual forms 
and meanings. He included a case of his own, Mrs. G., as well as the famous case 
of Mr. X. of Charcot. At the onset of her illness, Mrs. G. could recognize objects 
and people immediately by touch or by sound, but had great diffi  culty recogniz-
ing them visually, especially when they were in complex scenes. For example, she 
mistook her dog for her physician and mistook her servant for a dining table. She 
had trouble fi nding things that she had just been handling and had recently put 
away, even when they were right in front of her. She described having been able 
to see them the whole time, but not being able to recognize them. She came to 
realize that “one sees more with the brain than with the eye . . . because I see abso-
lutely anything quite clearly and lucidly, but I do not recognize it, and frequently, 
I do not know what the thing that I am seeing could be” (Solms et al, 1996, p. 95). 
Mrs. G. also had diffi  culties with topographical orientation, even in her neighbor-
hood, though she could imagine scenes quite well. Charcot’s famous case, Mr. X., 
was a highly educated man who had had an exceptional visual memory prior to 
his illness. Aft er his injury, he could recognize objects much bett er than Mrs. G., 
but was completely unable to imagine anything visually or even dream in visual 
images. Th e inability to imagine visual images, including in dreaming, has been 
called the Charcot-Wilbrand syndrome. Mr. X., like Mrs. G., had problems with 
topographical agnosia, which had not been as clearly distinguished at that time. 
 Wilbrand’s theoretical discussion of the concept of “mind blindness” empha-
sized, as had Munk’s, that the lack of recognition of visual objects had something 
to do with the inability to activate visual memories. Th us, even if the image com-
ing from the retina reached the brain intact, it might not activate the memory of 
that object. Normally, when perceiving an object, the retinal image reaching the 
brain should activate a visual memory of the object, which would then activate 
related knowledge associated with a variety of aspects of the object. Associated 
knowledge might include such properties as the object’s smell, the writt en word 
for the object, gestures associated with activities in response to the object, emo-
tional att itudes toward the object, etc.; which together would constitute its mean-
ing. In addition, Wilbrand distinguished between mind blindness and a defi cit in 
understanding spatial relationships between objects, which he notes can occur 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
41
in other cases. He also described how patients with mind blindness can have a 
feeling of alienation from objects they see, even when they recognize what they 
are. For example, a cherished or frequently used object in a bedroom might seem 
foreign. One explanation for this could be a failure of activation of the aff ective 
associations usually linked with the object. 
 Lissauer’s classic work was based on a case of an 80-year-old salesman, 
Gott lieb L., who had a profound disturbance of object recognition that was more 
severe than those of either Charcot or Wilbrand’s cases ( Lissauer, 1890/1988 ). As 
described by Lissauer, “he was quite incapable of visually recognizing the most 
common objects, although he could recognize everything by touch or hearing. 
Furthermore . . . it was clear from the way that he was able to look at and to handle 
objects that he was able to perceive visual stimuli . . . the patient could be made 
to draw simple unfamiliar objects placed in front of him, a clear indication that 
he was well able to perceive form” (Lissauer, 1890/1988, 160). Mr. L. had appar-
ently developed his visual recognition problem gradually aft er being blown over 
on a fence in a storm. Lissauer’s examination of Mr. L. was more systematic than 
that of other cases. Mr. L.’s visual acuity was mildly reduced, but not enough to 
account for his diffi  culties. He also had a right homonymous hemianopsia. He 
could perceive, but not name colors. His estimation of size and relationships of 
size—e.g., matching distances and bisecting lines—was accurate. His immediate 
visual memory was preserved for simple items: when he was given a line to draw of 
a certain length, he did well when asked to draw it immediately on another paper 
from memory. Longer term memory of visual experiences seemed to be no worse 
than his general memory. His ability to draw was more primitive than it had been, 
but he could draw the outline of real objects and make line drawings, even while 
he could not identify aft erwards what they were. It was very challenging for him 
to draw from memory, possibly in part, Lissauer explained, because as soon as 
he had drawn part of the object, he could no longer recognize that part. Quoting 
Lissuauer, when Mr. L. drew from memory, he drew everything in 
 . . . a bit by bit fashion . . . As soon as he had drawn one part of the object 
according to the image in his memory, this part, like all the other objects 
in his environment, became strange to him. He was no longer able to 
comprehend it, and therefore, was unable to complete his drawing of the 
whole object. Th e problem was not one of memory impairment, but of 
no longer being able to recognize the object or the part of the object 
which he had just drawn, and therefore not being able to compare it with 
the original template in his memory. For example, if he att empted to 
draw a boot, the leg and foot part were there but the heel had then to be 
att ached. Th is the patient realized well enough but where did it belong? 
At this moment he was unable to comprehend his own drawing. It might 

42
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
just as well have been drawn by someone else. He drew the heel fi rst here, 
then there, and eventually, he commented that he had no idea where it 
belonged (Lissauer 1890/1988, 168)  
Th e patient could write fl uently, but could not read. Form perception was intact 
for simple fi gures, but was impaired for more complex ones. If Lissauer provided 
the patient with simple forms with slight diff erences, the patient could point them 
out. But if the form was more complex, Mr. L. could not detect diff erences imme-
diately recognizable to an average viewer. Lissauer explained the diffi  culty with 
form perception as stemming from the diffi  culty with recognizing the overall 
form semantically. Knowledge of the meaning helps a viewer more easily see dif-
ferences in complex forms. Lissauer explains: “Imagine, for example, two pictures 
which show human shapes identical in all details; however, in one picture, the per-
son has a happy face, and in the other, a sad face. To most people, this diff erence 
would be immediately obvious. However, to someone for whom these human 
shapes were no more than a combination of meaningless squiggles requiring 
line-by-line comparison, this diff erence would be diffi  cult to discern” (Lissauer 
1890/1988, 171). 
 Mr. L.’s greatest problem lay in the simple recognition of common objects. Mr. 
L.’s responses to objects presented in front of him oft en appeared to take the form 
of guesses which could be infl uenced by his response to another item, even when 
that item had no visual features in common. He identifi ed a pen as a light, glasses 
as a lamp, and a piece of paper as a handkerchief. He oft en was curious to know if 
he was right. When given the opportunity to touch or hear a sound from the item, 
he usually could immediately recognize it, and would correct himself, saying that 
he had been mistaken. His own explanation for his errors was oft en that his “eyes 
had been mistaken.” When asked to explain this further, he described that the 
object still looked familiar when he saw it initially, but he just could not remember 
what it was due to his weak memory. However, he did not have a weak memory 
when he touched the object, or heard it, only aft er he viewed it. His defi cit was 
not simply a failure to fi nd the name for the object, since he had no idea what 
the object was and could not provide any semantic information about it until he 
had identifi ed it through other means (the diff erence between optic aphasia and 
agnosia). An excerpt from the patient’s att empt to identify items illustrates how 
profound Mr. L.’s inability to recognize individual objects was:
 Th e patient is given a purse; he responds: “A lighter to light.” Th e full 
purse is shaken close to his ear so that its contents ratt le. “It’s a purse.” 
 
Th e patient is given a pocket watch; he responds: “A lamp”; aft er a bit,“a 
lighter”. He is requested to draw the watch and draws the watch clearly. 
Th e watch is then put to his ear. He recognizes it at once: “Oh, it’s a watch.” 
 (From Lissauer, 1890/1988, 175)  

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
43
 Th is patient’s preserved ability to draw the outlines of items at which he was look-
ing without the ability to recognize the items, prompted Lissauer to formulate a 
model for visual recognition with two stages. In the fi rst stage, the item is identi-
fi ed on a perceptual level, and in the second stage, it is connected to meanings. He 
postulated that Mr. L. perceived the visual form suffi  ciently to identify the item, 
but that the form was cut off  from the associated knowledge and memories, such 
that the meaning of the item could not be ascertained. Normally, a person who 
could draw the outline of a watch, indicating that they could see the watch to the 
degree that it contained this information, would automatically call up informa-
tion that would tell him immediately what the object was. Mr. L. did not activate 
that associated knowledge. 
 Lissauer explained how it might not be enough when viewing a violin just to 
see the visual outline or form of the item, however unique that might be, unless 
it was connected with the knowledge associated with it. He described how, aft er 
the form has been identifi ed visually, “the excitation” should “spread” to memory 
images “distributed throughout the whole of the cortex since they involve diff er-
ent modalities” (Lissauer 1890/1988, 186). Th e sound of the violin, and the tac-
tile experiences that go along with handling it, along with the mental image of a 
violinist in his or her characteristic pose should all come to mind. Without these 
associations, the form’s meaning would not be identifi ed. Lissauer thought his 
patient primarily had the inability to activate these associations, and called this a 
type of agnosia, where recognition of the form of the objects was relatively intact, 
but the associations were disrupted. Neuroanatomically, associative agnosia was 
posited to be caused by a disconnection or failure of linkage among transcortical 
tracts coming from the visual cortex where the percept was perceived. 
 Implied in this formulation, is that a diff erent type of agnosia would be caused 
by the failure of the fi rst stage of perceiving the form of the object. Without recog-
nition of the basic form of the object, it would be impossible to elicit the associa-
tions for further identifying the nature of the object. In this case, the patient would 
not be able to copy simple outlines of the object such that it would be impossible 
to proceed to the next stage of activating associations. Lissauer called this type of 
agnosia “apperceptive agnosia.” He used the term  apperceptive as opposed to  per-
ceptive  in an eff ort to indicate that this perception was at the highest level of per-
ception, in which the global form of the object is registered as a sensory impression 
with conscious awareness. In these cases, as for all agnosia patients, the patient 
had suffi  cient visual acuity and visual processing to register basic sensory features. 
 On an operational level, Lissauer discussed how the degree of a patient’s apper-
ceptive abilities might be indexed by having the patient compare two visual forms 
and try to fi nd small diff erences between them. He also discussed how, for com-
plex visual forms, it was likely that anyone with associative agnosia would have 
some impoverishment of their apperceptive abilities (as did Mr. L.), since some 
analysis of form on the complex level is shaped or guided by the knowledge of its 

44
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
associations. Lissauer was pointing out that  top-down infl uences from our knowl-
edge and associations help refi ne our perceptual experiences. Lissauer also noted 
that although the apperceptive agnosias and associative agnosias are relevant for 
understanding the nature of the processing problem, it might be rare to fi nd “pure 
forms.” It would be unlikely in the case of associative agnosia, because of the impor-
tance of top-down infl uences on higher level perceptual processing, that one would 
not fi nd some simultaneous degree of degradation of the apperceptive process, as 
was found with Mr. L. when he tried to fi nd small diff erences in sample complex 
visual forms. 
 Lisssauer described three recognition errors: First, there are errors which have 
a visual similarity to the object. In such cases, a patient might identify a pencil as 
a candle or a swan as a giraff e because they have similar shapes. Second, there are 
errors with no apparent relationship on an associative or visual percept level with 
the objects. In these cases, responses tend to be surprising and bizarre. In this cat-
egory, he included Mr. L.’s tendency to think an object was the same object he had 
experienced recently, even when it had nothing visually or conceptually in com-
mon. He commented that this type of error is strange when the patient has just seen 
the fi rst object and therefore might be expected to distinguish it easily from the 
next object. Th ird, there is a type of error where the error has a conceptual link to 
the actual object, even when it is not related on the visual dimension. In this case, a 
patient might call a watch a clock, or a paper a pencil. Th ese were less prevalent in 
his patient. 
 Lissauer also points out that, in many cases of visual agnosia, it is not just that 
the patient does not recognize what is in front of him, but rather that the patient 
comes up with alternative ideas, in some cases even becoming reasonably con-
vinced that he might be seeing another object. Th e reason why patients would 
start to believe they are seeing other things, rather than feeling simply that they 
have diffi  culty identifying an object, might have something to do with top-down 
processing. Th us Mr. L. thinks a coat brush is a live cat, and Ms. G. mistakes her 
dog for her physician. Lissauer suggests that there are two possible explanations 
for such positive errors of misrecognition. One explanation for the positive error is 
that the object is truly misperceived and appears by way of a distorted perceptual 
processing in a form that patients identify. Th e other is that the associations from 
another object within the mind are transferred to that of the object perceived. 
Lissauer preferred the second explanation, that internal active associations seem 
to be transferred to that of the percept presented (some type of top-down misat-
tribution). Lissauer also makes the interesting suggestion that the misplacement 
of the associative connections might occur based on the proximity in which they 
were made in time. Th us, soon aft er the patient has seen a live grey cat, he is pre-
sented with a coat brush, and misidentifi es the brush as the live grey cat. Th e asso-
ciations of the live grey cat had been activated and were mis-att ached to the new 
percept (producing what one might call a conceptual visual perseveration). He 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
45
describes: “From this category of errors, we may draw an even more strange con-
clusion that, under these same pathological conditions, a tendency exists to link 
ideas which have come to mind at the same time by chance and apart from this 
have no connection with each other whatsoever.” 
 Lissauer’s treatment of agnosia diff ered from that of his predecessors and later 
investigators. In his monograph, Lissauer used the term “mind blindness” as had 
his predecessors who discussed this issue. Th e exception was Sigmund Freud, who 
actually coined the term agnosia for visual agnosia (1891). Wilbrand and  others 
were aware of the idea of an associative network as the model to understand how 
concepts are represented in the brain. Th ey were also aware that the connection 
to this associative network was disrupted in cases of visual agnosia, but the origin 
of this disruption was not so clear. Th e degradation of visual memories had previ-
ously been considered to be the cause for visual agnosia, and it seemed that this 
memory was something that was located in the visual cortex or near it. Based on 
a reading of Wilbrand, they assumed that this visual memory was not activated 
because associations to that image were not activated. Th at left  it unclear whether 
this visual memory was in fact just something related to a visual disturbance and 
not a memory at all, that is, a failure to perceive a complete form of the image, 
an idea that Munk and Wilbrand rejected. Lissauer’s formulation helped clarify 
that there were two stages involved in agnosia: one, in which the highest level 
percept or visual form is poorly perceived, and another, in which the associations 
connected to other knowledge about the image are disrupted. Lissauer divorced 
knowledge and memory of the concept from its percept. His formulation helped 
to direct investigators to establish more carefully how well patients with visual 
agnosia perceived forms (e.g., by using copying and matching tasks) rather than 
only recording their mistakes in identifying objects. 
 Lissauer’s work distinguished between the perceptual or apperceptive stage of 
visual recognition, and what he conceived of as the subsequent “associative stage” 
in which recognition of the meaning and nature of the visual object is appreci-
ated. Lissauer’s model and approach was fundamentally infl uenced by Wernicke’s 
information-processing scheme. Th e careful att ention to detail recorded in his 
observations were like those recorded by Wernicke in his publications on apha-
sia. Th is type of model tried to identify functional stages or processing units that 
might be to a greater or lesser extent localized neuroanatomically. In the case of 
visual agnosia, Lissauer, like Wernicke postulated that the disruption in local 
areas of the cortex was more likely to disrupt a single modality of processing, 
such as vision. Th e connections to the meanings and concepts would be distrib-
uted in the brain. Apperceptive agnosia would be based more on circumscribed 
lesions of the occipital cortices and nearby regions, whereas associative agnosia 
would be based on disruption of transcortical pathways that connected that per-
cept to associations that were simultaneously represented in various perceptual 
modalities.  

46
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Th e Information Processing Model and the Connectionistic 
Framework of Wernicke and his Followers versus Alternative 
Models and Perspectives   
 T H E I N FOR M AT ION PROCE SSI NG MODEL A N D 
CON N ECT ION IST IC F R A M E WOR K  
 As is apparent from this chapter, one of the dominant frameworks for under-
standing relationships of the brain to cognitive function in the late 1800s and early 
1900s is the “connectionistic” perspective of brain organization, a conception of 
cognitive architecture that developed primarily out of the Wernicke school. In 
this framework, the brain was understood to have specialized anatomical centers 
that supported specialized functions that would be connected to each other to 
allow information fl ow between them. Pathological behavior could be predicted 
from an understanding of how information fl ow had been disrupted between 
the centers or how the centers themselves had been destroyed. Particular theo-
ries put forward within this information processing framework are well depicted 
by diagrams that highlight the critical anatomical centers and their directional 
connections of information fl ow (e.g., as seen for example in both Lichtheim and 
Liepmann’s work and fi gures). 
 Some have suggested that the information-fl ow modeling and connectionist 
approach that derives from Wernicke’s school represents the birth of cognitive neu-
roscience. Hypotheses could be tested by predicting behaviors that would be gen-
erated by disruption in the centers and their various connections. Th e relation of 
behavioral defi cits to brain anatomy could be inferred. Such models also provided a 
useful heuristic for understanding the essential components of complex processes, 
one that separated out the key components for further hypothesis testing.  
 A LT ER NAT I V E PER SPECT I V E S OF BR A I N ORG A N I Z AT ION 
F ROM T H E GOL DEN ER A OF BEH AV IOR A L N EU ROLOG Y   
 Despite the strength of the contributions of the connectionistic approach from 
this era, certain aspects of mental function, including certain aspects of lan-
guage and aphasia, were not well explained with this approach. For example, 
it was diffi  cult to explain why aphasics might predictably utt er a sentence in 
one context, but not in another, such as only when motivated by emotion, or 
when singing. It was also not clear how connectionistic models could explain 
positive symptomatology exhibited by aphasics, such as an increased ten-
dency to utt er expletives. Th e British neurologist, John Hughlings Jackson, a 
contemporary of Broca and Wernicke, off ered diff erent perspectives on brain 
organization. He emphasized hierarchical structures in the brain and dynamic 
interactions between levels of brain function. In his framework, when damage 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
47
occurred to what he called higher levels, i.e., those that were based on func-
tions acquired later in development, disinhibition of lower levels would result. 
He suggested that basic lower level functions in the brain would be more 
resistant to damage because they were redundantly represented by overlearn-
ing than would less strongly represented higher-level functions. Th is would 
explain how global changes in function aff ect some systems more than oth-
ers without requiring diff erent localized lesions. Th us, normal speakers when 
they are tired have reduced generalized global processing effi  ciency that can 
result in paraphasic errors like those of aphasic speakers. Jackson’s perspective 
showed an understanding of dynamic inhibitory relationships between levels 
of function ( Jackson, 1915 ). 
 Unfortunately, although the connectionistic modelers themselves were the 
fi rst to admit that their models did not account for every fascinating fi nding in 
aphasia or in other behavioral defi cits (see Wernicke), att acks against the con-
nectionist approach led to an abandonment of important insights into cognition 
developed in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Starting in the early 1900s, att acks 
on connectionist views became frequent at the intersection of psychology and 
neurology. One of the fi rst challengers was Pierre Marie in 1906. While Marie 
did not entirely reject localization, he argued that Wernicke’s aphasia was the 
only true aphasia, and that aphasia was based on a unitary comprehension of lan-
guage module. He argued that the motor aphasia of Broca and its localization had 
been improperly interpreted because of  a priori assumptions and oversimplifi ca-
tions. Th is aphasia was a motor output disruption caused by an internal capsule 
lesion and was independent of Broca’s area. Marie’s papers led to a lively debate in 
France about whether the localizationists and connectionists had overreached in 
their models of language and other functions. 
 Th e neurologists Henry Head and Kurt Goldstein, played a further infl uential 
role in discrediting the information-fl ow connectionistic models. Henry Head, 
in his 1926 book on aphasia and kindred disorders of speech, called the legacy of 
the “diagram makers” (a term he coined and used derogatively) to be “chaos.” He 
went so far as to allege that the “diagram makers” would “lop and twist their cases 
to fi t the procrustean bed of their hypothetical conceptions.” ( Head, 1926 , vol. 1, 
p. 63). Although Head contributed important insights in many areas of neurol-
ogy, his particular dedication to recording phenomenology in detail (he famously 
cut his own nerve to record the subjective experience of aspect of pain and the 
time course of their resolution) may have led him to reject the connectionistic 
models.. Head’s dedication to the details of the phenomenology may have made 
it more diffi  cult for him to appreciate how larger distinctions, which might not 
account for every detail, could be explanatory. Head extolled the virtues of 
John Hughlings Jackson for providing alternative theories. Head’s own theories 
of aphasia did not off er much greater elucidation of the topic, and many of his 
aphasia subtypes could be mapped fairly readily onto the aphasia subtypes of the 

48
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
classical connectionist era. Evidence of the general infl uence of Head, is apparent 
in the comments of Shepherd Ivory Franz, a prominent American experimental 
psychologist, who criticized the work of connectionists like Liepmann and Joseph 
Jules Déjerine as being “crowded with the mental-cerebral assumptions which 
have been disputed by Head, and which are not supported by careful analysis of 
the material” (Franz 1916, pp. 167). 
 Kurt Goldstein, who had been a student of Wernicke and had originally, pub-
lished contributions based on localizationist and connectionist modeling prin-
ciples (1908), turned against those principles in his later years aft er working with 
Gestalt psychologists and emigrating to the United States. Goldstein’s major trea-
tise, entitled “Th e Organism,” tried to explain how the organism responds to dis-
ruption in any part of the system as a whole . While Goldstein wrote on aphasia, 
and deemphasized the topographical approach to identifi cation of aphasic syn-
dromes, he was clearly steeped in this tradition and his explanations of aphasic 
syndromes, located in the technical aspects of his books, still relied heavily on 
principles derived from the classic models (see Geschwind on  Th e Paradoxical 
Stance of Kurt Goldstein  ). Th e strong and prominent opinions of such infl uential 
fi gures as Head and Goldstein led to a loss of interest in the carefully developed 
models of functional anatomy from the late 1800s and early 1900s. 
 Schools of thought in the early part of the century which promoted a more holis-
tic view of mind were very infl uential in the early 20th century and also worked to 
reduce enthusiasm for the connectionistic models. Such schools included Gestalt 
psychology, Freudian psychology, behaviorism, and an experimental psychology 
which was coming to anti- localizationists conclusions. Gestalt psychologists, 
many from Germany, were interested in probing how the mind actively imposes 
a unifi ed perception on external stimuli in the context of changing fi gure and 
ground relationships. Th ey were interested more in how the mind was organized 
in terms of patt ern recognition rules that process contiguity and context than with 
the identifi cation of discrete processing stations and connections of the fl ow mod-
elers. Freudian psychology developed a psychodynamic model of mind compo-
nents, which relied on introspective reports of subjective experience and personal 
history that were impossible to reduce to mechanistic fl ow models. Behaviorism, 
which arose partly from the rejection of reliance on subjective reports, regarded 
the brain as a black box, and restricted itself to the measuring of inputs and outputs 
to understand behavior. Eschewing any discussion of internal components of mind 
and brain, behaviorism was remote from the concerns of connectionists. Finally, 
Karl Lashley, who became head of the American Psychological Association, was 
representative of a group of experimental psychologists who had diffi  culty dem-
onstrating that specifi c brain lesions produced critical eff ects on brain functions 
such as memory (based on lesioning animals). He revived a view that harked back 
to that of the anti-localizationist stance of brain equipotentiality promoted by 
Flourens in his debates with Gall one hundred years earlier (e.g.,  Brain Mechanisms 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
49
and Intelligence , 1929). Lashley, who concentrated on the complexity of brain 
organization, argued that the brain has hierarchical internal programs, a position 
diff erent from that of behaviorists, but was still unconvinced that specifi c brain 
centers were dedicated to specifi c higher level complex functions.  
 NOR M A N GE SCH W I N D A N D T H E R E V I VA L OF I N T ER E ST 
I N CL A SSIC A L MODEL S  
 Norman Geschwind described how in the 1950s he proudly regarded himself a 
member of the “philosophically sophisticated Jackson-Head-Goldstein school 
of neurology,” and how, like others raised in the British and American traditions 
in the mid-20th century, he considered the work of Wernicke and the informa-
tion processing modelers to be essentially misguided, unscientifi c, irrelevant, and 
supplanted by more important theories. But Geschwind was prompted to revisit 
the older literature at the encouragement of a European-trained neurologist Fred 
Quadfasel, and discovered that neurologists at the turn of the century had been 
detailed in their analyses and insightful in their conclusions. Th ey had generated 
models that continued to be relevant, if not more so than the ones with which he 
had been trained. Geschwind described how, due to his former training, he had 
expected the older work not to be helpful, but instead discovered the “broadside 
accusations of carelessness, of inadequate examination, of unconcern with psy-
chology all unfounded” (Geschwind, 1964/1997, 54). Geschwind  subsequently 
became a champion of these former models, bringing them to prominence 
again, in particular with his discussion of the work of Lichtheim, Wernicke, and 
Liepmann in his magnum opus “Disconnection Syndromes in Animals and Man” 
(Geschwind, 1965). Geschwind’s later career continued to be infl uenced by the 
connectionistic approach. Aft er him, these models once again became a starting 
point for modeling the cognitive architecture of the brain.   
 Summary 
 Th is chapter has reviewed some of the most infl uential models of language, 
apraxia, and agnosia from the beginning and the height of the classical period 
in behavioral neurology, a time when there was great amount of energy focused 
on att empting to understand the underlying functional and anatomical organi-
zation of higher mental functions in the brain. Although the contributions of 
Wernicke, Lichtheim, Liepmann, and Lissauer have been highlighted here, there 
were also many other contributors in the late 1800s and early 1900s who were 
involved in elucidating the modular architecture of the mind and brain (e.g., to 
name a few: Déjerine, Boenhoff er, Bastian, Charcot, Henschen). Th is prolifi c 
and rich period of behavioral neurology, sometimes referred to as the Golden 

50
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Era, left  a legacy of fascinating and insightful perspectives on higher-level brain 
organization. 
 On reviewing the work from this era, one is impressed with the neuroanatomi-
cal knowledge and insight that formed the basis for hypothesizing the location of 
specialized centers. Th e neurologists typically not only utilized careful observa-
tions of behavior, but also considered cytoarchitectonic and embryological fac-
tors when they posited the neuroanoatomical location of functions, while also 
considering broader organisational principles of neuroanatomic function related 
to basic motor and sensory processes. 
 Th e connectionistic approach taken by the Wernicke school and his followers, 
has a surprising affi  nity to current approaches to modeling in cognitive neurosci-
ence, despite hailing from over 100 years ago. While there is strong interest today 
in distributed networks that support functions today, there is also recognition 
that there is modularity on a variety of levels, with specialized anatomical centers 
specialized to support more specifi c functions. 
 Although there are fl aws of methods based on clinical-pathological cor-
relation, work derived from the study of neurological patients with lesions is 
a critical approach that helps defi ne the limits of structural mental anatomy. 
Lesion-based studies, because they are not generated by experimental manipu-
lation devised by the investigator, can challenge major psychological theories 
in their broader limits. Convergent evidence from a variety of methods gives us 
the greatest confi dence in our hypotheses. Th e conclusions and controversies 
of the classical period of connectionist modeling have persisted over time and 
continue to frame the approach to the neural bases of cognitive systems in the 
modern era.  
 References 
   Bichat ,  F. X. ( 1978 ). Physiological researches on life and earth (F. Gold, Trans.). In   D. N.  
 Robinson (Ed.),  Signifi cant contributors to the history of psychology  (pp. i–334). Ser. 
E. Physiological psychology: Vol 2,   X.   Bichat  .   J.G.   Spurzheim  .,   P   Fluorens  .  Washington, 
DC :  University Publications of America . (Original work published 1805). 
  Bouillaud ,  J. B. ( 1847–1848 ). Recherches cliniques propre à démontrer que la sens du lan-
guage articulé et le principe coordinateur de movements de la parole resident dans le 
lobules antérieuer du cerveau. Bulletin de l’Académie Royale de Médicine, XIII,  699–710 , 
 778–816 . 
 Breasted ,  J. H. ( 1930 ).  The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus .  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Broca ,  P.   ( 1861 ).  Remarques sur le siège de la faculté du langage articulé, suivie d’une observation 
d’aphémie (perte de la parole) .  Bulletins de la Société Anatomique ,  6 ,  330–357 . 
 Broca  P. ( 1994 ). Notes on the faculty of articulated language, followed by an observation of aphe-
mia. (incl. pp 330–336 and 342–346 of original). In   P.  Eling (ed.),  Reader in the history 
of aphasia .  Amsterdam/ Philadelphia :   John Benjamins Publishing Company . pp.  41–55. 
(Original work published 1861 ). 

We Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
51
   Broca   P.  ( 1977 ). Remarks on the Seat of the Faculty of Articulate Speech, Followed by the 
Report of a Case of Aphemia (Loss of Speech). (incl. pp. 332–33 and 343–357 of  original). 
Translated by  C.  Wasterlain and  D. A.  Rott enberg . In  D.A.  Rott enberg and  F.H.   Hockberg 
(eds.),  Neurological classics in modern translation ,  New  York :   Macmillan Press . 
pp. 136–149. (Original work published 1861).  
   Broca ,  P.  ( 1865 ).  Sur le siège de la faculté du langage articulé.  Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie  , 
 6 ,  377–93 . (laterality) 
   Dax ,  M.   ( 1836 ). Lésion de la moitié gauche de l’encéphale coincident avec l’oubli des signes de 
la pensée (Lu a Montpellier en 1836). Gazett e Hebdomadaire de Médecine et Chirurgie 
11 (Sér. 2), 1865. In English Translation in  Th e roots of psychology , ed.  S.  Diamond . 
 New York :  Basic Books ,  1974, 29–40 .  
 Eling ,  P. (Ed.). ( 1994 ).  Reader in the History of Aphasia:  From Gall to Geschwind .  John 
Benjamins Publishing Company .  Amsterdam . 
 Ellis, A.W. (1984). Bramwell’s (1897) case of word meaning deafness. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 
1, 245–258. 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1986 ).  “Inner Speech” in conduction aphasia . 
 Archives of Neurology ,  43 ( 6 ),  591–593 . 
 Flourens ,  P. P. M. ( 1824 ).  Recherches experimentales sur les propriétiés et les fonctions due sys-
téme nerveux, dans les animaux vertebres .  Paris :  Crevot . 
 Franz, S. I. (1916). Th e function of the cerebrum. Psychological Bulletin, 13(4), 149–173. 
 Gall ,  F. J. , &  Spurzheim ,  J. C. ( 1810–1819 ).   Anatomie et physiologie du systême nerveux en général 
et du cerveau en particulier  .  Paris :  F. Schoell . 
 Gall ,  F. J. , &  Spurzheim ,  J. C.   ( 1835 ). On the functions of the brain and of each of its parts: With 
observations on the possibility of determining the instincts, propensities, and talents, or the 
moral and intellectual dispositions of men and animals, by the confi guration of the brain 
and head (W. Lewis, Jr., trans.).  Boston :  Marsh, Capen, and Lyon . (Original work, Sur le 
Fonctions du Cerveau, published  1822–1825 ). 
 Geschwind ,  N. ( 1965 ).  Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man .  Brain ,  88 :  237–294 and 
 585–644 . 
   Hagner ,  M.   ( 1997 ).   Der Wandel von Seelenorgan zum Gehirn.    Berlin :  Berlin Verlag . 
 Harrington ,  A.   Medicine, Mind, and the Double Brain  .  Princeton, NJ :   Princeton University 
Press ,  1987 . 
 Head ,  H. ( 1926 ).   Aphasia and kindred disorders of speech.  2 Vols.  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
   Heilman ,  K. M.  ,   Tucker ,  D. M.  , &   Valenstein ,  E.   ( 1976 ).  A case of mixed transcortical aphasia 
with intact naming.  Brain ,  99 ,  415–525 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Gonzalez-Rothi ,  L. J. ,  McFarling ,  D. , &  Rott mann ,  A.  Transcortical Sensory 
Aphasia with Relatively Spared Spontaneous Speech and Naming .   Archives of Neurology 
 38 :  236–239 ,  1981 . 
 Jackson  H. ( 1915 ).  On Aphasia and kindred aff ections of speech, together with a complete bibli-
ography of his publications on speech and a reprint of some of the more important papers . 
 Brain ,  xxxviii ,  1–190 . 
 Katz ,  R.B. ,  Goodglass ,  H. ( 1990 ).  Deep dysphasia: Analysis of a rare form of repetition disorder . 
 Brain and Language ,  39 ( 1 ),  153–185 . 
   Kussmaul ,  A.   ( 1877 ).   Die Störungen der Sprache  .  Leipsig :  Vogel . 
 Lichtheim ,  L. ( 1885 ).  On Aphasia .  Brain .  7 ,  433–484 . 
 Liepmann ,  H. ( 1905 ).  Der weitere Krankheitsverlauf bei dem einseitig Apraktischen und der 
Gehirnbefund auf Grund von Serienschnitt en .  Monatschrift  für Psychiatrie und Neurologie , 
 17 :  289–311 ;  19 :  217–243 . 
 Liepmann  H , &  Mass  O. ( 1907 ).  Fall von Linksseitiger Agraphie and Apraxie bei rechtsseitiger 
Lähmung .  Journal für Psychologie und Neurologie. 10 ,  214–227 .  
 Liepmann ,  H.   Drei Aufsätze aus dem Apraxiegebiet  .  Berlin :  Karger ,  1908 . 

52
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Lissauer ,  H. ( 1890 ).  Ein Fall von Seelenblindheit nebst einem Beitrag zur Th eorie derselben . 
 Archiv für Psychiatrie .  21 : 222–270 . In Translation in Cognitive Neuropsychology, Vol 5 (2), 
1988, 157–192. (M. Jackson, transl). A case of visual agnosia with a contribution to theory. 
 Marie, P. (1906). Th e third left  frontal convolution plays no special role in the function of lan-
guage.  Semaine Médicale ,  26 , 241–247. 
  Munk ,  H. ( 1878 ).  Über der Funktionen der Grosshirnrinde: Gesammelte Mitt heilungen s den 
Jahren 1877–90 .  Berlin :  Hirschwald . 
 Trousseau ,  A.   ( 1864 ).  De l’aphasie, maladie décrite récemment sous le nom impropre d’aphémie.  
 Gazett e Hôpitaux Civils Militaires ,  37 ,  13–14 ,  25–26 ,  37–39 ,  49–50 . 
 Wernicke  C.  Einige neuere Arbeiten über Aphasie ,  Fortrshcritt e der Medizin  3 ( 1985 );  824–830 ; 
 4 ( 1886 )  371 ,  463–469 . Reprinted in “C. Wernicke Gesammelte Aufsätze und kritische 
Referate zur Pathologie des Nervensystem.” Berlin: Fisher, (1893). Excerpts translated in 
Eling P. Reader in the History of Aphasia. pp. 90–98. Eling, P (Ed.) Reader in the History 
of Aphasia: From Gall to Geschwind. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
 Wigan ,  A. L. ( 1844 ).   A New View of Insanity. Th e Duality of the Mind  .  London :  Longman, Brown, 
Green, and Longmans .  

53
 C H A P T E R  3 
 Deconstructing Human Memory: Insights 
from Amnesia
  
 Mieke  Verfaellie and  Margaret M.  Keane  
 Th e Amnesic Syndrome 
 Th e central feature of amnesia is an impairment in new learning (anterograde 
amnesia) that is evident regardless of the nature of the information (i.e., verbal or 
visuospatial) or modality of study presentation (i.e., auditory or visual); it is typi-
cally accompanied by diffi  culty in the ability to retrieve memories acquired prior 
to the onset of illness (retrograde amnesia), but the severity of this impairment 
is more variable. Amnesia occurs in the context of otherwise relatively preserved 
intellectual functioning and cognitive abilities. Most strikingly, amnesic patients 
have intact immediate or short-term memory, as evidenced by the ability to follow 
an ongoing conversation, or to immediately repeat back a sequence of words or 
numbers. Following any interference or delay, however, memory for the informa-
tion is lost. 
 Amnesia can arise from a number of diff erent etiologies, including anoxia, her-
pes simplex encephalitis (HSE), stroke, Wernicke-Korsakoff  syndrome (WKS), 
and rupture and repair of an anterior communicating artery (ACoA) aneurysm 
( O’Connor & Verfaellie, 2002 ). Th e amnesia is a direct consequence of dam-
age to structures in the medial temporal lobes including the hippocampus and 
surrounding entorhinal, perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices (e.g., anoxia, 
HSE), midline diencephalon (e.g., thalamic stroke, WKS), basal forebrain (e.g., 
ACoA aneurysm) or the fi ber tracts that connect these regions, such as the fornix. 
Despite the etiological heterogeneity of the syndrome, the core characteristics of 
amnesia are relatively consistent. Eff orts to delineate qualitative diff erences as 
a function of etiology have focused on both the contribution of lesion site (e.g., 
diencephalon vs. medial temporal lobe (MTL)  Parkin, 1993 ); and lesion extent 

54
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
(e.g., hippocampus proper vs. hippocampus and surrounding cortices;  Aggleton 
& Brown, 1999 ), but such distinctions remain the focus of debate. More clearly 
established is the impact of disruption of frontally mediated executive functions, 
which is oft en superimposed on the core amnesia in patients with diencephalic 
and basal forebrain lesions. In such cases, the anterograde amnesia may be exac-
erbated by additional impairments in planning and organizing incoming infor-
mation, as well as in the initiation and evaluation of memory search and eff ortful 
retrieval ( Moscovitch & Winocur, 2002 ). In clinical practice, these additional 
impairments, when severe, can cloud the distinction between selective amnesia 
and more pervasive cognitive impairment. 
 Despite the wide-ranging nature of the long-term memory impairment in 
patients with amnesia, it is striking that the impairment is not uniform across all 
forms of long-term memory. Th e distinction between preserved and impaired 
aspects of memory has guided much cognitive neuropsychological research and 
has contributed greatly to our understanding of the cognitive and neural architec-
ture of various components of memory. However, the interest in dissociations in 
patients’ performance led to a strong focus on isolating distinct forms of memory. 
Th is eff ort may have overshadowed the fact that many tasks draw on multiple 
memory processes, not all of which are equally aff ected in amnesia. More broadly, 
distinct forms of memory may commonly interact in the service of task perfor-
mance. We review below some of the salient experimental fi ndings that have led 
to these insights.  
 Amnesia: Experimental Studies 
 I M PLICIT V ER SUS E X PLICIT M E MORY  
 Patients with amnesia show severe impairments in their ability to intentionally 
retrieve recently acquired information, whether in recall or recognition tasks. 
Th is explicit memory impairment stands in striking contrast to their intact per-
formance in a number of other memory tasks in which learning is expressed 
implicitly, through performance rather than recollection. Over the last two 
decades, an extensive body of research in amnesia has focused on one partic-
ular example of implicit memory, namely repetition priming (for reviews, see 
 Moscovitch, Vriezen, & Gott stein, 1993 ;  Verfaellie & Keane, 2001 ). Repetition 
priming is typically assessed in tasks in which subjects identify briefl y presented 
words, complete word stems or fragments with the fi rst word that comes to mind, 
freely generate words in response to cues, or make decisions about characteris-
tics of presented words or pictures. Priming manifests as improved performance 
(i.e., detection, generation, or faster decision) for those stimuli to which an indi-
vidual was previously exposed relative to comparable, not previously exposed, 
stimuli. Dissociations in amnesia between intact performance on implicit 

Deconstructing Human Memory
55
memory tasks and impaired performance on explicit memory tasks have laid the 
ground work for the view that memory is a not a unitary function, but rather, 
that there are distinct forms of memory that may have functionally and neurally 
diff erent bases. 
 Most tasks involve a range of processes from stimulus identifi cation to respond-
ing, and accordingly, facilitation as a result of prior experience can occur at sev-
eral processing stages, including perceptual, phonological/lexical, semantic, and 
response stages. One particularly infl uential distinction has been that between 
perceptual and conceptual priming ( Roediger & McDermott , 1993 ): perceptual 
priming is sensitive to the reinstatement of physical features of previously pre-
sented stimuli at test, whereas conceptual priming is sensitive to the reinstate-
ment of semantic features. Th e preservation of both of these forms of priming 
in amnesia establishes that these eff ects are independent of MTL structures. 
Behavioral evidence from patients with lesions outside of the MTL implicates 
posterior visual areas in visuoperceptual priming eff ects ( Gabrieli, Fleischman, 
Keane, Reminger, & Morrell, 1995 ;  Keane, Gabrieli, Mapstone, Johnson, & 
Corkin, 1995 ;  Kroll et al., 2003 ) and higher-order multimodal association areas 
in conceptually based priming eff ects ( Fleischman & Gabrieli, 1998 ;  Keane, 
Gabrieli, Fennema, Growdon, & Corkin, 1991 ). Subsequent imaging research has 
confi rmed and refi ned these neuroanatomical distinctions, pointing to posterior 
neocortical regions that represent the perceptual form and structure of items as 
the neural basis of perceptual priming, and areas in inferior temporal and frontal 
regions that underlie the conceptual features of items as the neural basis of con-
ceptual priming (for review, see  Schacter, Wigg, & Stevens, 2007 ). Further, these 
imaging studies have generally shown reductions in cortical activity associated 
with priming; such activity reductions refl ect the increased effi  ciency of process-
ing of primed stimuli, possibly due to increased “tuning” of neocortical represen-
tations ( Wiggs & Martin, 1998 ). 
 At a cognitive level, increased processing effi  ciency has been conceptual-
ized as enhanced fl uency or ease of processing of stimuli that were previously 
encountered ( Jacoby, 1983 ). Manipulations of processing fl uency infl uence 
judgments about a variety of non-memorial att ributes, such as duration, percep-
tual clarity, and liking, but they also can impact memorial judgments. Indeed, 
one infl uential view of recognition memory suggests that recognition judg-
ments can be based on one of two processes:  recollection (i.e., retrieval of 
contextual detail) or familiarity (i.e., an undiff erentiated sense of oldness) 
( Mandler, 1980 ). Judgments of familiarity are thought to be based on fl uency of 
processing ( Jacoby & Dallas, 1981 ): since prior experience enhances processing 
fl uency, such fl uency can be used as a heuristic to make decisions about prior 
occurrence. Consistent with this notion, a large number of cognitive studies 
have documented that fl uency can be used as a basis for familiarity-based rec-
ognition (for review, see  Yonelinas, 2002 ). Importantly, several patient studies 

56
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
similarly have shown that amnesic patients ( Verfaellie & Cermak, 1999 ) and 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease ( Wolk et al., 2005 ) can use fl uency as a cue 
for recognition. Nonetheless, the link between fl uency and familiarity has 
remained a matt er of intense debate in the neuropsychological literature, as 
fi ndings of chance recognition (i.e., familiarity) in the face of intact priming 
(i.e., fl uency) have been taken as powerful evidence for the notion that implicit 
and explicit memory tasks do not share underlying processes or memorial sig-
nals ( Hamann & Squire, 1997 ;  Levy, Stark, & Squire, 2004 ). 
 In our own work, we have taken a diff erent approach to att empt to reconcile 
these seemingly contradictory fi ndings. In line with the cognitive literature, we 
assume that fl uency signals support both implicit memory and familiarity-based 
explicit memory, but we argue that whereas priming is a direct (unmediated) 
consequence of fl uent processing, familiarity-based recognition requires an addi-
tional step whereby fl uency is att ributed to a memorial source. Th e need for an 
additional att ributional process (and the potential reluctance of amnesic patients 
to use that process) may provide an explanation for the apparent paradox that 
despite the fact that priming is largely intact in amnesia, the fl uency that supports 
implicit memory does not support more fully familiarity-based recognition in 
these same patients. 
 In several studies, we have demonstrated that amnesics’ use of a fl uency- 
heuristic in recognition can be experimentally enhanced. In one study ( Verfaellie, 
Giovanello, & Keane, 2001 ), we encouraged fl uency att ributions through task 
instructions that provided participants information about the alleged proportion 
of old items on a recognition test (30 percent vs. 70 percent). Th e actual propor-
tion of old items on the test was constant across conditions, but we hypothesized 
that providing participants instructions that a majority of items were old would 
lead them to relax their response criterion and rely to a greater extent on process-
ing fl uency. Consistent with this hypothesis, amnesic patients had higher recogni-
tion accuracy in the 70 percent than in the 30 percent condition. In another study 
( Keane, Orlando, & Verfaellie, 2006 ), we manipulated the salience of fl uency 
cues by drawing targets and distractors from the same pool of lett ers (yielding 
high perceptual overlap between targets and distractors) or diff erent pools of let-
ters (yielding low perceptual overlap between targets and distractors). Amnesic 
patients had higher accuracy in the low- compared to the high-overlap condition, 
presumably because of the increased salience of the fl uency “contrast” between 
targets and distractors in the low-overlap condition. Th ese fi ndings suggest that 
the increased salience of fl uency cues promotes the use of a fl uency heuristic that 
is ordinarily not fully engaged in amnesia. Findings such as these highlight the 
importance of understanding factors that infl uence the use of a fl uency heuristic in 
amnesia, as a means of gaining a fuller understanding of the relationship between 
priming and recognition memory (see also  Voss & Paller, 2009 ;  Willems, Salmon, 
& Van der Linden, 2008 ). 

Deconstructing Human Memory
57
 So far we have focused on priming and fl uency eff ects for single items; another 
area of interest concerns amnesics’ performance on tasks that assess priming of 
associations newly established at study. Th e interest in new-associative priming in 
amnesia stems from its relevance to theories that postulate that the hippocampus 
is critical for computing arbitrary links between unrelated stimuli, and to theories 
that characterize the core defi cit in amnesia as one of binding arbitrary pieces of 
information ( Ryan, Althoff , Whitlow, & Cohen, 2000 ). Here, we focus specifi -
cally on implicit memory for novel perceptual associations, because at present, 
most research has focused on the establishment of novel associations in the con-
text of visual perceptual tasks. Even within this restricted domain of study, diff er-
ent outcomes have been obtained. On the one hand, several studies have assessed 
priming for the association between two words by comparing performance when 
a target stimulus at test is presented with the same context word as at study rather 
than with a diff erent (albeit also studied) context word. Using both perceptual 
identifi cation and lexical decision tasks, associative priming has been found to be 
intact in amnesia ( Gabrieli, Keane, Zarella, & Poldrack, 1997 ;  Goshen-Gott stein, 
Moscovitch, & Melo, 2000 ; but see  Yang et al., 2003 ). On the other hand, sev-
eral studies have examined the formation of associations between visual contex-
tual information and target items in the context of a visual search task. Whereas 
normal individuals show facilitation in visual search for a target embedded in 
repeated arrays, amnesic patients ( Chun & Phelps, 1999 ), and specifi cally those 
with extensive MTL lesions ( Manns & Squire, 2001 ), have not shown such con-
textual facilitation. In a somewhat diff erent paradigm examining preferential 
looking, normal participants show enhanced eye movements to regions of a previ-
ously viewed scene that have been altered, but again, amnesic patients have failed 
to show this patt ern ( Ryan et al., 2000 ). Importantly, the priming eff ects in these 
tasks, refl ecting the establishment of relationships between diff erent elements of 
complex visual displays, occur in control subjects even in the absence of explicit 
memory for repeated contexts or changes in scenes, and thus appear to refl ect an 
unaware memory mechanism (but see,  Smith, Hopkins, & Squire, 2006 ). 
 How can we understand the presence of intact new associative priming 
for perceptual associations between two words, but impaired new associa-
tive priming for more complex visuospatial contexts? One possibility relates 
to the nature of the binding operations that are required in these respective 
tasks. Mayes and colleagues ( Mayes, Montaldi, & Migo, 2007 ) make a useful 
distinction between within-domain associations (formed between the same or 
very similar kinds of items) and cross-domain associations (formed between 
items from distinct modalities or linking information spatially), and suggest 
that whereas the former may be mediated by activation in closely adjacent neo-
cortical regions, the latt er may be mediated by activation in distant neocortical 
regions that requires integration through the MTL. Although this formulation 
was proposed to account for fi ndings in explicit memory, it may also provide 

58
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
an explanatory framework for the divergent fi ndings concerning implicit asso-
ciative memory: associations between two words may be established directly 
within visual word processing areas, through co-activation of the representa-
tion of individual word forms. In contrast, associations between objects and a 
spatial context or scene may require MTL mediation. Supporting this notion, 
neuroimaging studies of implicit memory point to the importance of MTL cor-
tical regions ( Goh et al., 2004 ;  Preston & Gabrieli, 2008 ) and hippocampus 
proper ( Goh et al., 2004 ) in the establishment of spatial and contextual repre-
sentations that integrate multiple elements. 
 An additional consideration relates to the fact that neocortically- and 
hippocampally-mediated associations are qualitatively diff erent ( Eichenbaum & 
Cohen, 2001 ): whereas neocortical binding leads to the establishment of unit-
ized representations that are infl exible and can only be accessed as a whole, hip-
pocampal binding allows for the establishment of relational representations that 
can be accessed fl exibly through their separate parts. Consistent with the notion 
that amnesic patients can only form infl exible unitized representations, studies 
examining implicit memory for words pairs, in which the study and/or test stim-
uli were presented sequentially rather than simultaneously, have yielded impaired 
associative priming in patients with amnesia ( Carlesimo, Perri, Costa, Serra, & 
Caltagirone, 2005 ;  Paller & Mayes, 1994 ). 
 SE M A N T IC V ER SUS EPISODIC M E MORY   
 Th e cardinal impairment in amnesia is an inability to form and retrieve memo-
ries of personally experienced events (i.e., episodic memory). Seen in contrast to 
patients’ generally preserved intelligence and good fund of general knowledge, 
this led to early conceptualizations of amnesia as a selective impairment in epi-
sodic memory, with sparing of semantic memory ( Cermak, 1984 ;  Wood, Ebert, 
& Kinsbourne, 1982 ). Further research, however, has made clear that such a view 
is inaccurate: whereas premorbid semantic memory is largely intact in amnesia, 
new semantic learning is substantially impaired. Here we briefl y describe fi ndings 
both in the retrograde and anterograde domain, with the aim of demonstrating 
that, although functionally and neurally separable, episodic memory and seman-
tic memory do not operate in isolation. 
 Within the domain of remote semantic memory, with the exception of infor-
mation acquired within the years immediately preceding the onset of amnesia, 
MTL patients show sparing of general semantic and factual knowledge ( Manns, 
Hopkins, & Squire, 2003 ;  Verfaellie, Reiss, & Roth, 1995 ). Th is sparing stands 
in stark contrast to their impairment in retrieving detailed, episodic memories, 
an impairment that is temporally extensive and, in cases of severe amnesia, can 
cover the entire lifespan ( Moscovitch, Nadel, Winocur, Gilboa, & Rosenbaum, 
2006 ;  Rosenbaum et al., 2008 ;  Steinvorth, Levine, & Corkin, 2005 ) although 

Deconstructing Human Memory
59
this has not always been observed ( Bayley, Gold, Hopkins, & Squire, 2005 ; 
 Kirwan, Bayley, Galvan, & Squire, 2008 ). Th e diff erential impairment in amne-
sia in remote episodic compared to semantic memory reinforces the distinction 
between these two forms of memory. Further, it suggests that the permanent 
storage and retrieval of detailed episodic information is mediated by MTL struc-
tures, whereas the storage and retrieval of semantic memories, once consolidated, 
occurs neocortically, without MTL mediation. 
 Whether the acquisition of new semantic memories can occur independent 
of the MTL structures that mediate episodic learning is more controversial. Th e 
impairment of new semantic learning in amnesia is now fi rmly established, and 
it is clear that the severity of the semantic learning impairment is linked to the 
extent of MTL pathology ( Verfaellie, 2000 ). However, it is equally clear that 
some new semantic information can be acquired even in patients with dense epi-
sodic impairment ( Kitchener, Hodges, & McCarthy, 1998 ;  Vargha-Khadem et al., 
1997 ). Th ese fi ndings can be reconciled if it is assumed that the acquisition of 
semantic memory can occur independent of episodic memory/MTL structures, 
but that nonetheless, semantic learning is typically enhanced by MTL mediation. 
Newly acquired information is always embedded in an episodic context, and as 
such, episodic learning helps support semantic acquisition. Only with time and/
or repeated presentation will the gist information become dissociated from its 
spatiotemporal context, refl ecting a process of gradual neocortical transfer with 
the establishment and consolidation of context-free semantic representations. In 
patients with extensive MTL lesions, however, gradual neocortical learning may 
occur of necessity in isolation. Th us, whereas the acquisition of semantic and epi-
sodic memory may be tightly coupled in normal cognition, in patients with MTL 
lesions, this coupling is disrupted, exposing the operation of neocortical learning 
by itself. 
 Th e contribution of episodic memory, however, is not limited to new seman-
tic learning. Recent evidence suggests that even in tasks measuring retrieval of 
long-established semantic information, episodic memory may play a role. Ryan 
and colleagues (Ryan, Cox, Hayes, & Nadel, 2008) observed hippocampal activa-
tion during a prototypical semantic memory task—retrieval of category exem-
plars. Th is fi nding suggests that the hippocampus is involved in the retrieval 
of semantic information, but leaves unanswered whether it is needed to do so, 
and if so, what role it plays. To address these questions, we ( Greenberg, Keane, 
& Verfaellie, 2009 ) asked patients with MTL lesions to generate category exem-
plars for three types of categories that tended to elicit diff erent retrieval strategies 
in control participants: categories that elicited autobiographical spatial retrieval 
strategies, categories that elicited autobiographical but nonspatial strategies, and 
categories that elicited neither autobiographical nor spatial strategies. Patients 
with MTL lesions were more impaired for the former two types than for the latt er, 
and once phonemic fl uency was taken into account, the impairment was selective 

60
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
to categories that elicited autobiographical strategies. Th ese fi ndings suggest that 
the hippocampus may contribute to semantic retrieval through the retrieval of 
autobiographical detail; hippocampal damage prevents this contribution of auto-
biographical memory to semantic retrieval in amnesia. In a similar vein, it has 
been shown that having a personal autobiographical experience associated with 
famous names (as evidenced by judgments of recollective experience) facilitates 
fame judgments, but amnesic patients with MTL lesions fail to show this facili-
tation ( Westmacott , Black, Freedman, & Moscovitch, 2004 ). Th e inverse also 
holds: in patients with semantic dementia, relatively unimpaired autobiographi-
cal memory can help preserve or re-establish degenerating semantic knowledge 
( Snowden, Griffi  ths, & Neary, 1994 ;  Westmacott  et al., 2004 ). Such fi ndings rein-
force the notion that episodic memory and semantic memory do not operate in 
isolation. 
 While so far we have considered the contribution of episodic memory to 
semantic learning and retrieval, there is also evidence for the contribution of 
semantic memory to episodic learning. Th e “levels of processing” framework 
established many years ago that new information is remembered bett er when it is 
processed semantically, presumably because semantic encoding allows new infor-
mation to be linked with prior knowledge ( Craik & Lockhart, 1972 ). In keep-
ing with this framework, patients with semantic dementia and aphasic patients 
with semantic impairments perform poorly on verbal learning tasks ( Graham, 
Simons, Pratt , Patt erson, & Hodges, 2000 ;  Ween, Verfaellie, & Alexander, 1996 ). 
However, the contribution of semantic memory extends beyond the simple 
analysis of incoming formation. Evidence in normal individuals suggests that 
information is remembered bett er when it can be anchored to pre-existing sche-
matic knowledge (e.g.,  Anderson & Pichert, 1978 ;  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ). To 
evaluate whether schematic activation can support episodic learning in amnesic 
patients, we asked patients to remember prices of everyday grocery items ( Kan, 
Alexander, & Verfaellie, 2009 ). In one condition, the to-be-remembered prices 
were consistent with prior knowledge about the items, whereas in another condi-
tion they were not. Control subjects had higher recognition memory for prices of 
items in the congruent than in the incongruent condition. A similar congruency 
benefi t was seen in patients with restricted MTL lesions, who had intact seman-
tic systems, but patients with lesions extending into the lateral temporal lobes, 
who had compromised semantic systems, failed to show a congruency benefi t. 
Th ese fi ndings suggest that when prior knowledge structures are intact, they can 
support the acquisition of new information by facilitating the integration of new 
information into existing knowledge structures. Th e contribution of pre-existing 
semantic memory to episodic learning illustrated by these fi ndings provides a 
potential explanation for the surprising clinical observation that some amnesic 
patients are able to acquire a considerable amount of new information relevant to 
long-standing personal interests.   

Deconstructing Human Memory
61
 Lessons Learned 
 In the ‘80s and ‘90s, cognitive neuropsychological studies of amnesia, with their 
focus on demonstrating dissociations between diff erent aspects of memory, played 
a critical role in laying bare distinct forms of long-term memory. Th e emphasis on 
fractionation of memory was useful in that it allowed broad distinctions, such 
as those between implicit and explicit memory and between semantic and epi-
sodic memory, and allowed researchers to fully characterize these distinct forms 
of memory. More recent patient studies have led the way to a more refi ned under-
standing of the processes that are impaired and preserved in amnesia, revealing that 
process-impairments associated with amnesia do not necessarily respect taxonomic 
boundaries. Rather, these component processes contribute to putatively diff erent 
forms of memory. Moreover, selective impairments in amnesia provide a window 
onto functional interactions between diff erent forms of memory in normal cognition. 
 Th is gradual shift  in emphasis refl ects the accumulation of critical evidence. 
Early studies of implicit memory in patients with amnesia, under conditions 
where explicit contamination was carefully avoided, were essential to elucidat-
ing the nature of the processes that underlie priming in diff erent tasks. Similarly, 
systematic study of amnesics’ performance on recall and recognition tasks was 
necessary to recognize the existence of distinct explicit memory processes that 
may be diff erentially aff ected in amnesia. Th e emphasis on processes under-
lying performance within each type of memory task was prerequisite to the 
examination of their potential overlap, leading to the recognition that a fl uency 
process is not unique to implicit memory, but is also a critical building block for 
familiarity-based (explicit) recognition memory. 
 Th e recognition that there is not a one-to-one mapping between cognitive 
processes and categories of memory is similarly illustrated by more recent fi nd-
ings indicating that amnesia does not yield a uniform dissociation between bind-
ing processes in the service of implicit and explicit memory task performance. 
First, the fi nding that amnesic patients show intact performance on associative 
priming tasks that require the establishment of a novel association among similar 
items, but impaired performance on associative priming tasks that require the 
establishment of associations among heterogeneous items, suggests that—even 
within the domain of implicit memory—not all implicit binding processes are 
alike. Rather, they diff er depending on the nature of the representations that 
are created, with within-domain associations being instantiated directly in the 
neocortex and cross-domain associations requiring hippocampal mediation. 
Second, the fi nding that hippocampal damage interferes not only with the forma-
tion of episodic memories, which inherently places high demands on associative 
processes, but also with some forms of implicit associative memory, challenges 
the notion that the hippocampus plays a selective role in binding processes that 
support explicit or aware memory performance. Rather, it suggests that memory 

62
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
representations made up of disparate, non-local elements require hippocampal 
mediation, regardless of whether they are accessed in the context of implicit or 
explicit memory tasks. Taken together, these insights have shift ed the focus of 
memory research from an emphasis on long-term memory systems that can be 
diff erentiated according to conscious awareness, to an emphasis on the nature 
of the representations and processes that support performance on any particular 
task (see e.g.,  Reder, Park, & Kieff aber, 2009 ). 
 A similar emphasis on the nature of memory representations enhances our 
understanding of the operation of and interactions among episodic and semantic 
memory. While episodic representations bind together the diff erent aspects that 
make up an experienced event in its contextual richness, semantic representa-
tions are acontextual abstractions formed across time and repeated experience. 
In many tasks, however, these representations operate in concert. As discussed 
above, episodic contextual information may routinely support the acquisition 
of new semantic knowledge, making it diffi  cult to disentangle the two forms of 
learning. In this respect, the study of patients with extensive MTL lesions off ers a 
unique opportunity to elucidate neocortical semantic learning in isolation. Such 
learning occurs very gradually and lacks the fl exibility associated with episodic 
memory ( Bayley, Frascino, & Squire, 2005 ), but its boundaries are still not fully 
established ( Stark, Stark, & Gordon, 2005 ). 
 Perhaps even more compelling are interactions between episodic memory 
and already well-established semantic memory, in that they suggest continued 
MTL-neocortical interactions once neocortical representations are fully estab-
lished. Such interactions refl ect the fact that retrieval from semantic memory 
may be enhanced through the use of autobiographical retrieval strategies—a pro-
cess that is impaired in patients with amnesia. Th is process may be particularly 
benefi cial when relatively preserved autobiographical memory can help butt ress 
degraded semantic memory, as in patients with semantic dementia. A question 
that remains to be addressed more fully concerns the nature of the “episodic” 
representations that support semantic retrieval. In some cases semantic retrieval 
may be supported by autobiographical retrieval strategies that lead to recovery of 
information pertaining to a unique past event. In other cases, semantic retrieval 
is more likely supported by autobiographical memory for repeated events or 
contexts (e.g., retrieval of a variety of past tea-making experiences when asked 
to identify a teapot). Such summarized events, which are highly detailed and 
contextualized despite the fact that they are not time-specifi c, may fi t  Neisser’s 
(1981) concept of “repisodic memory” or  Conway’s (2001) “general events” level 
of autobiographical knowledge. Interestingly, neuroimaging work suggests that 
such repeated events also activate the autobiographical memory network, and 
that such activation is modulated by the richness of retrieved memory ( Addis, 
Moscovitch, Crawley, & McAndrews, 2004 ). Such memories share with unique 
episodic events the quality of recollective experience ( Moscovitch, 2008 ), and 

Deconstructing Human Memory
63
it is this recollection of details that facilitates retrieval of information from the 
semantic knowledge base. 
 Finally, there is also support for the converse interaction—semantic memory 
aff ecting episodic memory—as evidenced by the fact that the integrity of seman-
tic memory in general, and the availability of premorbid semantic information in 
particular, infl uence new episodic learning. As illustrated in the study by  Kan et al. 
(2009) , new learning can be facilitated by the existence of an established schematic 
structure into which new information can be incorporated. However, the impact 
of pre-existing knowledge need not always be benefi cial. For instance, in patients 
who confabulate, the content of their confabulation is oft en based on true per-
sonal history ( Schnider, 2003 ). In this case, established knowledge structures may 
interfere with the retrieval of episodic information, leading to the production of 
context-inappropriate information. Nonetheless, it appears likely that such inter-
actions can be usefully exploited in the context of memory rehabilitation. Future 
studies are needed to delineate the boundary conditions of such eff ects. 
 In closing, key insights about the functional and neural organization of mem-
ory have emerged from the study of patients with amnesia. Th ese studies in turn 
have infl uenced the direction of both cognitive and neuroimaging studies of 
memory in normal cognition. Th e studies reviewed herein have highlighted the 
fact that complex interactions among distinct forms of memory can be elucidated 
by careful att ention to the nature of processes and representations that mediate 
task performance. Systematic study of patients with well-characterized lesions 
will remain central in further advancing this eff ort. 
 Acknowledgments 
 Writing of this chapter was supported by NIMH grants MH71783 and MH70830 
and the Offi  ce of Research and Development, Medical Research Service, 
Department of Veterans Aff airs. 
 References 
 Addis ,  D. R. ,  Moscovitch ,  M. ,  Crawley ,  A. P. , &  McAndrews ,  M. P. ( 2004 ).  Recollective qualities 
modulate hippocampal activation during autobiographical memory retrieval .  Hippocampus , 
 14 ,  752–762 . 
 Aggleton ,  J. P. , &  Brown ,  M. W. ( 1999 ).  Episodic memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal-anterior 
thalamic axis .  Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  22 ,  425–489 . 
 Anderson ,  M. C. , &  Pichert ,  J. W. ( 1978 ).  Recall of previously unrecallable information following 
a shift  in perspective .  Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior ,  17 ,  1–12 . 
 Bayley ,  P. J. ,  Frascino ,  J. C. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2005 ).  Robust habit learning in the absence of aware-
ness and independent of the medial temporal lobe .  Nature ,  436 ,  550–553 . 
 Bayley ,  P. J. ,  Gold ,  J. J. ,  Hopkins ,  R. O. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2005 ).  Th e neuroanatomy of remote 
memory .  Neuron ,  46 ,  799–810 . 

64
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Brewer ,  W. F. , &  Treyens ,  J. C. ( 1981 ).  Role of schemata in memory for places .  Cognitive 
Psychology ,  13 ,  207–230 . 
   Carlesimo ,  G. A.  ,   Perri ,  R.  ,   Costa ,  A.  ,   Serra ,  L.  , &   Caltagirone ,  C.   ( 2005 ).  Priming for novel 
between-word associations in patients with organic amnesia .  Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society ,  11 ,  566–573 . 
 Cermak ,  L. S. ( 1984 ).  Th e episodic/semantic distinction in amnesia . In  L. R.  Squire &  N.  Butt ers 
(eds.),  Th e Neuropsychology of Memory (pp.  55–62 ).  New York :  Th e Guilford Press . 
 Chun ,  M. M. , &  Phelps ,  E. A. ( 1999 ).  Memory defi cits for implicit contextual information in 
amnesic subjects with hippocampal damage .  Nature Neuroscience ,  2 ,  844–847 . 
 Conway ,  M. A. ( 2001 ).  Sensory-perceptual episodic memory and its context :  autobiographical 
memory .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: B ,  356 ,  1375–1384 . 
 Craik ,  F. I. M. , &  Lockhart ,  R. S. ( 1972 ).  Levels of processing :  A framework for memory research . 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior ,  11 ,  671–684 . 
 Eichenbaum ,  H. , &   Cohen ,  N. J. ( 2001 ).  From conditioning to conscious recollection . 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Fleischman ,  D. A. , &  Gabrieli ,  J. D. E. ( 1998 ).  Repetition priming in normal aging and Alzheimer’s 
disease :  A review of fi ndings and theories .  Psychology and Aging ,  13 ,  88–119 . 
 Gabrieli ,  J. D. E. ,  Fleischman ,  D. A. ,  Keane ,  M. M. ,  Reminger ,  S. L. , &  Morrell ,  F. ( 1995 ).  Double 
dissociation between memory systems underlying explicit and implicit memory in the 
human brain .  Psychological Science ,  6 ,  76–82 . 
  Gabrieli ,  J. D. E. ,  Keane ,  M. M. ,  Zarella ,  M. , &  Poldrack ,  R. A. ( 1997 ).  Preservation of implicit 
memory for new associations in global amnesia .  Psychological Science ,  8 ,  326–329 . 
 Goh ,  J. O. S. ,  Siong ,  S. C. ,  Park ,  D. ,  Gutchess ,  A. ,  Hebrank ,  A. , &  Chee ,  M. W. L. ( 2004 ).  Cortical 
areas involved in object, background, and object-background processing revealed with func-
tional magnetic resonance adaptation .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  24 ,  10,223–10,228 . 
 Goshen-Gott stein ,  Y. ,  Moscovitch ,  M. , &  Melo ,  B. ( 2000 ).  Intact implicit memory for newly 
formed verbal associations in amnesic patients following single study trials .  Neuropsychology , 
 14 ,  570–578 . 
  Graham ,  K. S. ,  Simons ,  J. S. ,  Pratt  ,  K. H. ,  Patt erson ,  K. , &  Hodges ,  J. R. ( 2000 ).  Insights 
from semantic dementia on the relationship between episodic and semantic memory . 
 Neuropsychologia ,  38 ,  313–324 . 
   Greenberg ,  D. L.  ,   Keane ,  M. M.  , &   Verfaellie ,  M.   ( 2009 ).  Impaired category fl uency in medial tem-
poral lobe amnesia :  Th e role of episodic memory .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  29 ,  10,900–10,908 . 
 Hamann ,  S. B. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 1997 ).  Intact perceptual memory in the absence of conscious 
memory .  Behavioral Neuroscience ,  111 ,  850–854 . 
 Jacoby ,  L. L. ( 1983 ).  Perceptual enhancement :   Persistent eff ects of an experience .  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition ,  9 ,  21–38 . 
 Jacoby ,  L. L. , &  Dallas ,  M. ( 1981 ).  On the relationship between autobiographical memory and 
perceptual learning .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General ,  110 ,  306–340 . 
 Kan ,  I. P. ,  Alexander ,  M. P. , &  Verfaellie ,  M. ( 2009 ).  Contribution of prior semantic knowledge to 
new episodic learning in amnesia .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  21 ,  938–944 . 
   Keane ,  M. M.  ,   Gabrieli ,  J. D. E.  ,   Fennema ,  A. C.  ,   Growdon ,  J. H.  , &   Corkin ,  S.   ( 1991 ).  Evidence 
for a dissociation between perceptual and conceptual priming in Alzheimer’s disease . 
 Behavioral Neuroscience ,  105 ,  236–242 . 
   Keane ,  M. M.  ,   Gabrieli ,  J. D. E.  ,   Mapstone ,  H. C.  ,   Johnson ,  K. A.  , &   Corkin ,  S.   ( 1995 ).  Double 
dissociation of memory capacities aft er bilateral occipital-lobe or medial temporal-lobe 
lesions .  Brain ,  118 ,  1129–1148 . 
 Keane ,  M. M. ,  Orlando ,  F. , &  Verfaellie ,  M. ( 2006 ).  Increasing the salience of fl uency cues reduces 
the recognition impairment in amnesia .  Neuropsychologia ,  44 ,  834–839 . 
 Kirwan ,  C. ,  Bayley ,  P. J. ,  Galvan ,  V. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2008 ).  Detailed recollection of remote auto-
biographical memory aft er damage to the medial temporal lobe .  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA ,  105 ,  2676–2680 . 

Deconstructing Human Memory
65
 Kitchener ,  E. G. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , &  McCarthy ,  R. ( 1998 ).  Acquisition of post-morbid vocabulary 
and semantic facts in the absence of episodic memory .  Brain ,  121 ,  1313–1327 . 
 Kroll ,  N. E. A. ,  Yonelinas ,  A. P. ,  Kishiyama ,  M. M. ,  Baynes ,  K. ,  Knight ,  R. T. , &  Gazzaniga ,  M. S. 
( 2003 ).  Th e neural substrates of visual implicit memory: Do the two hemispheres play dif-
ferent roles?   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  15 ,  833–842 . 
 Levy ,  B. J. ,  Stark ,  C. E. L. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2004 ).  Intact conceptual priming in the absence of 
declarative memory .  Psychological Science ,  15 ,  680–686 . 
 Mandler ,  G. ( 1980 ).  Recognizing :  Th e judgement of previous occurrence .   Psychological Review , 
 87 ,  252–271 . 
 Manns ,  J. R. ,  Hopkins ,  R. O. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2003 ).  Semantic memory and the human hippo-
campus .  Neuron ,  38 ,  127–133 . 
 Manns ,  J. R. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2001 ).  Perceptual learning, awareness, and the hippocampus . 
 Hippocampus ,  11 ,  776–782 . 
 Mayes ,  A. ,  Montaldi ,  D. , &  Migo ,  E. ( 2007 ).  Associative memory and the medial temporal lobes . 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,  11 ,  126–135 . 
   Moscovitch ,  M.   ( 2008 ).  Th e hippocampus as a “stupid” domain-specifi c module :  Implications for 
theories of recent and remote memory, and of imagination .  Canadian Journal of Experimental 
Psychology ,  62 ,  62–69 . 
 Moscovitch ,  M. ,  Nadel ,  L. ,  Winocur ,  G. ,  Gilboa ,  A. , &  Rosenbaum ,  R. S. ( 2006 ).  Th e cogni-
tive neuroscience of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory .  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology ,  16 ,  179–190 . 
   Moscovitch ,  M.  ,   Vriezen ,  E.  , &   Gott stein ,  J. ( 1993 ).  Implicit tests of memory in patients with 
focal lesions or degenerative brain disorders . In  H.   Spinnler &  F.  Boller (eds.),  Handbook of 
Neuropsychology (Vol. 8, pp.  133–173 ).  Amsterdam :  Elsevier . 
 Moscovitch ,  M. , &  Winocur ,  G. ( 2002 ).  Th e frontal cortex and working with memory . In  D. T. 
 Stuss   &   R. T.   Knight   (eds.),   Principles of fr ontal lobe function (pp.  188–209 ).  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Neisser ,  U. ( 1981 ).  John Dean’s memory :  A case study .  Cognition ,  9 ,  1–22 . 
 O’Connor ,  M. G. , &  Verfaellie ,  M. ( 2002 ).  Th e amnesic syndrome :  Overview and subtypes . In 
 A.  Baddeley ,  B.  Wilson &  M.  Kopelman (eds.),  Handbook of Memory Disorders (2nd ed., 
pp.  145–166 ).  Chichester, UK :  Wiley . 
 Paller ,  K. A. , &  Mayes ,  A. R. ( 1994 ).  New-association priming of word identifi cation in normal 
and amnesic subjects .  Cortex ,  30 ,  53–73 . 
   Parkin ,  A. J.   ( 1993 ).  Functional signifi cance of etiological factors in human amnesia . In   L. R.  
 Squire &  D. L.  Schacter (eds.),  Neuropsychology of Memory   (3rd ed., pp.  122–129 ). 
 New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Preston ,  A. R. , &  Gabrieli ,  J. D. E. ( 2008 ).  Dissociation between explicit memory and confi gural 
memory in the human medial temporal lobe .   Cerebral Cortex ,  18 ,  2192–2207 . 
 Reder ,  L. M. ,  Park ,  H. , &  Kieff aber ,  P. D. ( 2009 ).  Memory systems do not divide on conscious-
ness :   Reinterpreting memory in terms of activation and binding .   Psychological Bulletin , 
 135 ,  23–49 . 
 Roediger ,  H. L. , &  McDermott  ,  K. B. ( 1993 ).  Implicit memory in normal human subjects . 
In  H.  Spinnler &  F.  Boller (eds.),  Handbook of Neuropsychology (Vol. 8, pp.  63–131 ). 
 Amsterdam :  Elsevier . 
 Rosenbaum ,  R. S. ,  Moscovitch ,  M. ,  Foster ,  J. K. ,  Schnyer ,  D. M. ,  Gao ,  F. Q. ,  Kovacevic ,  N. , et al. 
( 2008 ).  Patt erns of autobiographical memory loss in medial temporal lobe amnesic patients . 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  20,  1490–1506 . 
 Ryan ,  J. D. ,  Althoff  ,  R. R. ,  Whitlow ,  S. , &  Cohen ,  N. J. ( 2000 ).  Amnesia is a defi cit in relational 
memory .  Psychological Science ,  11 ,  454–461 . 
   Ryan ,  L. R.  ,   Cox ,  C.  ,   Hayes ,  S. M.  , &   Nadel ,  L.   ( 2008 ).  Hippocampal activation during episodic 
and semantic memory retrieval :  Comparing category production and category cued recall . 
 Neuropsychologia ,  46 ,  2109–2121 . 

66
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Schacter ,  D. L. ,  Wigg ,  G. S. , &  Stevens ,  W. D. ( 2007 ).  Reductions in cortical activity during prim-
ing .  Current Opinion in Neurobiology ,  17 ,  171–176 . 
 Schnider ,  A. ( 2003 ).  Spontaneous confabulation and the adaptation of thought to ongoing real-
ity .  Nature Reviews Neuroscience ,  4 ,  662–671 . 
 Smith ,  N. C. ,  Hopkins ,  R. A. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 2006 ).  Experience-dependent eye move-
ments, awareness, and hippocampus-dependent memory .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  26 ,  11, 
304–11,312 . 
 Snowden ,  J. S. ,  Griffi  ths ,  H. , &  Neary ,  D. ( 1994 ).  Semantic dementia :  Autobiographical contribu-
tion to preservation of meaning .   Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  11 ,  265–288 . 
 Stark ,  C. ,  Stark ,  S. , &  Gordon ,  B. ( 2005 ).  New semantic learning and generalization in a patient 
with amnesia .  Neuropsychology ,  19 ,  139–151 . 
 Steinvorth ,  S. ,  Levine ,  B. , &  Corkin ,  S. ( 2005 ).  Medial temporal lobe structures are needed 
to re-experience remote autobiographical memories :   Evidence from H.M.  and W.R.  
 Neuropsychologia ,  43 ,  479–496 . 
  Vargha-Khadem ,  F. ,  Gadian ,  D. G. ,  Watkins ,  K. E. ,  Connelly ,  A. , Van  Paesschen ,  W. , &  Mishkin , 
 M. ( 1997 ).  Diff erential eff ects of early hippocampal pathology on episodic and semantic 
memory .  Science ,  277 ,  376–380 . 
  Verfaellie ,  M. ( 2000 ).  Semantic learning in amnesia . In  L. S.  Cermak (ed.),  Handbook of 
Neuropsychology (2 ed., Vol. 2, pp.  335–354 ).  Amsterdam :  Elsevier Science . 
 Verfaellie ,  M. , &  Cermak ,  L. ( 1999 ).  Perceptual fl uency as a cue for recognition judgments in 
amnesia .  Neuropsychology ,  13 ,  198–205 . 
 Verfaellie ,  M. ,  Giovanello ,  K. S. , &  Keane ,  M. M. ( 2001 ).  Recognition memory in amnesia :  Eff ects 
of relaxing response criteria .  Cognitive, Aff ective and Behavioral Neuroscience ,  1 ,  3–9 . 
   Verfaellie ,  M.  , &   Keane ,  M. M.   ( 2001 ).  Scope and limits of implicit memory in amnesia . In   B.  De 
 Gelder ,  E. De  Haan &  C.  Heywood (eds.),  Unconscious minds (pp.  151–162 ).  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Verfaellie ,  M. ,  Reiss ,  L. , &  Roth ,  H. ( 1995 ).  Knowledge of new English vocabulary in amne-
sia :  An examination of premorbidly acquired semantic memory .  Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society ,  1 ,  443–453 . 
 Voss ,  J. L. , &  Paller ,  K. A. ( 2009 ).  An electrophysiological signature of unconscious recognition 
memory .  Nature Neuroscience ,  12 ,  349–355 . 
   Ween ,  J. E.  ,   Verfaellie ,  M.  , &   Alexander ,  M. P.   ( 1996 ).  Verbal memory function in mild aphasia . 
 Neurology ,  47 ,  795–801 . 
 Westmacott  ,  R. ,  Black ,  S. E. ,  Freedman ,  M. , &  Moscovitch ,  M. ( 2004 ).  Th e contribution of auto-
biographical signifi cance to semantic memory :  Evidence from Alzheimer’s disease, semantic 
dementia, and amnesia .  Neuropsychologia ,  42 ,  25–48 . 
   Wiggs ,  C. L.  , &   Martin ,  A.   ( 1998 ).  Properties and mechanisms of perceptual priming .   Current 
Opinion of Neurobiology ,  8 ,  227–233 . 
 Willems ,  S. ,  Salmon ,  E. , & Van der  Linden ,  M. ( 2008 ).  Implicit/explicit memory dissociation in 
Alzheimer’s disease :  Th e consequence of inappropriate processing? Neuropsychology, 22, 
710–717 . 
 Wolk ,  D. A. ,  Schacter ,  D. L. ,  Berman ,  A. R. ,  Holcomb ,  P. J. ,  Daff ner ,  K. R. , &  Budson ,  A. E. 
( 2005 ).  Patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease att ribute conceptual fl uency to prior experi-
ence .  Neuropsychologia ,  43 ,  1662–1672 . 
 Wood ,  F. ,  Ebert ,  V. , &  Kinsbourne ,  M. ( 1982 ).  Th e episodic-semantic memory distinction in 
memory and amnesia :   Clinical and experimental observations . In  L. S.  Cermak (ed.), 
 Human memory and amnesia   (pp.  167–193 ).  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum . 
 Yang ,  J. ,  Weng ,  X. ,  Guan ,  L. ,  Kuang ,  P. ,  Zhang ,  M. ,  Sun ,  W. , et al. ( 2003 ).  Involvement of the 
medial temporal lobe in priming for new associations .  Neuropsychologia ,  41 ,  818–829 . 
 Yonelinas ,  A. P. ( 2002 ).  Th e nature of recollection and familiarity :  A review of 30 years of research . 
 Journal of Memory and Language ,  46 ,  441–517 .  

67
 C H A P T E R  4 
 Semantic Memory
   
 Anastasia M.  Raymer and  Leslie J.  Gonzalez Rothi  
 Several decades ago,  Tulving (1972) coined the term “semantic memory” to refer 
to “memory necessary for the use of language. It is a mental thesaurus, orga-
nized knowledge a person possesses about words and other verbal symbols, their 
meaning and referents, about relations among them, and about rules, formulas, 
and algorithms for the manipulation of these symbols, concepts, and relations.” 
(p. 386). Semantic memory is distinguished from episodic memory for our per-
sonal autobiographical life experiences, although establishing semantic memory 
depends upon personal experiences for learning ( Garrard et al., 1997 ). Over time, 
however, it is unlikely that the episodic circumstances through which knowledge 
was acquired remain closely linked with the knowledge that is stored in semantic 
memory. Moreover, the knowledge is likely to transform over time as our personal 
experiences lead to modifi cations in semantic memory. Whereas both semantic 
and episodic memory are types of declarative knowledge systems ( Squire, 1982 ), 
the distinction between them is supported by studies of patients with neurologic 
damage who are impaired in episodic memory with retained abilities in seman-
tic memory, or are impaired in semantic memory with retained episodic memory 
abilities ( Buccione et al., 2008 ;  Kopelman, 2008 ). 
 Within cognitive psychology, a good deal of interest has centered on understand-
ing the structure and functioning of semantic memory ( Shelton & Caramazza, 
2001 ). Evidence for theories of semantic memory is obtained through studies in 
experimental psychology of healthy individuals, developmental changes in mem-
ory, and pharmacologic infl uences on memory (Nyberg & Tulving, 1996). An 
additional fruitful line of evidence comes from examination of acquired semantic 
impairments in individuals with damage to the brain ( Chatt erjee, 2005 ;  Fellows 
et al., 2005 ; Tulving, 1986). Semantic memory is engaged in a variety of lexical 
and object-processing tasks. Th erefore, impairments of semantic memory are 
typically represented by failure in verbal and nonverbal tasks, including spoken 

68
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
and writt en picture naming, spoken and writt en word/picture matching, match-
ing associated objects, answering questions about semantic att ributes of objects 
and words, gesturing to verbal command and to viewed objects, among others 
( Garrard et al., 1997 ;  Hillis et al., 1991 ; Raymer & Rothi, 2008). Patt erns of break-
down across language and object processing tasks provide evidence concerning 
the structure and functions of semantic memory. 
 Th e purpose of this chapter is to review studies of individuals with brain 
impairments that inform models of semantic memory. We will introduce several 
neurologic conditions and patt erns of brain damage that are commonly associ-
ated with semantic memory impairments. We will then review evidence from 
brain damaged patients with semantic impairments that guide the development 
and modifi cation of theories of semantic memory. In the end, the story will be 
quite convincing that patient studies can provide an important converging line of 
evidence for the refi nement of theories of semantic memory. 
 Neural Correlates of Semantic Impairment 
 In Hart and colleague’s (2002) review of the neural substrates of semantic mem-
ory, he noted that several regions subserve semantic processing, among them 
left  inferior prefrontal, left  inferior parietal/posterior temporal, and left  fusiform 
regions. Neurologic conditions that impact on this distributed network can lead 
to semantic dysfunction and inform models of semantic processing. Several acute 
neurologic conditions lead to the sudden onset of semantic diffi  culties, whereas 
other conditions have a more insidious onset, leading to slowly progressive devel-
opment of semantic impairments. 
 Studies of patients with cerebrovascular accident (CVA) or stroke, that impact 
on either broad left  hemisphere regions or circumscribed left  hemisphere corti-
cal (e.g., Brodmann’s area 37) and subcortical structures (e.g., thalamus) have 
been examined for semantic breakdown ( Raymer et al., 1997 ;  Foundas et al., 
1998 ; Jeff ries et al., 2007).  Schwartz and colleagues (2009) used voxel-based 
lesion mapping in individuals with chronic stroke and further supported the role 
of the left  middle temporal (area 37) and the inferior frontal regions (area 45/46) 
in semantic stages of lexical processing. In a further analysis of spoken nam-
ing errors in individuals with aphasia,  Schwartz et al. (2011) distinguished the 
roles of the left  anterior temporal lobe (ATL) and the temporal-parietal junction 
(TPJ), two multimodal association areas, in semantic processing. Specifi cally, 
they proposed that the left  ATL represents perceptual features of an object’s tax-
onomic category, whereas the TPJ is interconnected with the associated context 
for an object. 
 Hillis and her colleagues ( DeLeon et al., 2007 ;  Hillis, 2007 ;  Hillis et al., 2006 ; 
 Newhart et al., 2007 ) have studied individuals with hyperacute stroke who are 

Semantic Memory
69
examined immediately upon onset of language symptoms and then reperfused as 
part of their clinical care. Th ey proposed that such studies demonstrate essential 
cortex subserving language functions, and have provided support for the role of 
the left  temporal, inferior parietal, and posterior frontal lobes in semantic pro-
cessing. In particular, Hillis and colleagues ( Hillis et al., 2006 ;  Cloutman et al., 
2009 ) reported that impairment in both word comprehension and word naming, 
a patt ern suggestive of semantic impairment, was associated with damage aff ect-
ing Brodmann’s area  22 on the left , that is, the left  superior temporal cortex. Th is 
fi nding has been subject to some dispute, however, because of the lack of con-
verging evidence in chronic aphasia and in functional neuroimaging of healthy 
individuals ( Schwartz et al., 2009 ). 
 Models of semantic processing have also been infl uenced by studies in patients 
with acute infection of the brain from herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE). Th e 
region most vulnerable in HSE tends to be the mesial temporal cortex, leading 
to episodic memory impairments; to the extent that the infection also impacts 
upon the lateral inferotemporal regions, semantic impairments may occur as well 
( Garrard et al., 1997 ). Descriptions of HSE have contributed to discussions, in 
particular, of semantic category impairments and the categorical structure of 
semantic memory. 
 Several degenerative conditions also tend to impact neural regions that medi-
ate semantic processing. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of 
dementia, leading to progressive deterioration in a variety of cognitive domains 
in association with the earliest pathologic changes in the bilateral mesial and infe-
rior temporal cortex (Garrard, Lambon Ralph, Patt erson, Pratt , & Hodges, 2005) . 
Th e most frequently reported early symptoms of AD are defi cits of episodic mem-
ory and language ( Cummings, Benson, Hill, & Read, 1985 ;  Huff , Becker, Belle, 
Nebes, Holland, & Boller, 1987 ). Within language, defi cits have been att ributed 
in large part to deterioration of semantic processing ( Bayles & Kazniak, 1987 ; 
 Chertkow & Bub, 1990 ;  Hodges, 2000 ), with preserved phonologic and gram-
matical functions. Many semantic (“cat” for DOG) and unrelated errors (“thing” 
for DOG) are observed in constrained picture naming tasks for objects (nouns) 
and actions (verbs) ( Bayles & Tomoeda, 1983 ;  Martin & Fedio, 1983 ;  Williamson, 
Adair, Raymer, & Heilman, 1998 ). AD patients are oft en impaired in a vari-
ety of word and picture comprehension tasks (Grossman, Robinson, Biassou, 
White-Devine, & D’Esposito, 1998;  Hier, Hagenlocker & Shindler, 1985 ;  Huff , 
Mack, Mahlmann, Greenberg, 1988 ;  Martin & Fedio, 1983 ), and performance is 
particularly degraded when distracters in matching tasks are semantically related 
to target responses (e.g., target:  dog; distracters:  cat, horse) ( Diesfeldt, 1989 ; 
 Raymer & Berndt, 1996 ). Patients with Alzheimer’s disease also demonstrate 
conceptual apraxia, that is, impaired knowledge of action/object relationships, 
leading to diffi  culty knowing what tools, objects, and actions to use in daily activ-
ities ( Ochipa, Rothi, & Heilman, 1992 ;  Schwartz et al., 2000 ). Th ese fi ndings 

70
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
indicate that degradation of semantic knowledge aff ects processing across all 
modalities of processing, verbal, object, and gestural. Even in patients with mild 
cognitive impairment, in which episodic memory impairments are the most evi-
dent area of cognitive decline, mild impairments of semantic processing may be 
noted ( Ahmed et al., 2008 ), oft en heralding the evolution of cognitive decline 
toward probable Alzheimer’s disease. 
 Additional degenerative conditions are associated with isolated language 
decline, sometimes termed primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Although the 
prototypic form of PPA is word retrieval diffi  culty in association with atrophy of 
left  anterior temporal regions leading to nonfl uent aphasia (Mesulam et al., 2003), 
other types of degenerative language decline also have been described. Semantic 
dementia, in particular, refers to a disorder in which patients present with impair-
ments of language and visual processing, thereby expanding the cognitive dimen-
sions beyond what is seen in PPA ( Hodges et al., 1992 ;  Hodges, 2000 ;  Garrard 
et al., 1997 ). Impairments are evident in word recognition and retrieval, as well 
as in recognition of objects and faces. In contrast to the patt ern typical of AD, 
episodic memory and frontal executive functions remain intact in semantic 
dementia. 
 A variety of acute and degenerative neurologic conditions that impact critical 
left  hemisphere regions lead to semantic defi cits in language, object, and action 
processing. Studies of patients with neurologic conditions therefore provide a rich 
source of evidence for understanding the structure and functioning of semantic 
memory. 
 Structure of Semantic Memory 
 For more than a century, researchers have investigated the brain and its role in 
cognitive-linguistic processing.  Wernicke (1874 ) developed one of the fi rst mod-
els of “centers” involved in language abilities, and  Lichtheim (1885 ) expanded 
upon this model, adding centers for reading, writing, and concepts (cited in 
 Caplan, 1987 ). Whereas Lichtheim proposed only a single conceptual center, 
 Lissauer (1890/1988) implied that semantic memory may be multimodal in 
nature as he proposed that meaning is derived through an association process 
in which there is “activation of memories laid down through diff erent sensory 
modalities” ( Lissauer, 1890/1988 , p. 182). 
 In modern times, models of cognitive mechanisms are considerably more 
explicit than the originally proposed Wernicke-Lichtheim model. For example, 
a version of the model of components involved in lexical-semantic processing is 
shown in   Figure 4.1 (Hillis & Newhart, 2008; Raymer & Rothi, 2008). 
 Separate modality-specifi c input mechanisms store structural representations, 
that is, memories for familiar spoken and writt en words, and viewed objects. 

Semantic Memory
71
Activation of these modality-specifi c input systems allows for recognition of 
previously experienced items. Similarly in the output mode, components are 
proposed for storage and production of familiar spoken and writt en words and 
actions (gestures). Th ese modality-specifi c input and output mechanisms are 
interconnected by way of a semantic system through which meaning is derived 
for words, objects, and actions. Semantic memory, in this regard, encompasses 
previously learned shared knowledge, including category and associated infor-
mation about related objects, actions, locations, att ributes, and events. Implied in 
these models when not explicitly stated are other sublexical assembly processes 
and peripheral perceptual and motor processes essential to the completion of 
 
“In the oven, we baked
a loaf of—”
bread
Object Recognition
System
Lexical Orthographic
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Output Processing
Lexical Orthographic
Output Processing
Action
Output Processing
slicing motion
b-r-e-a-d
“bread”
Semantic
System
“In the oven, we baked
a loaf of—”
bread
Object Recognition
System
Lexical Orthographic
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Output Processing
Lexical Orthographic
Output Processing
Action
Output Processing
slicing motion
b-r-e-a-d
“bread”
Verbal
Semantics
Verbal
Semantics
 Figure 4.1   Unitary semantics model of lexical processing (upper panel); lexical 
processing with modality specific verbal and visual semantic subsystems (lower 
panel).  

72
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
various cognitive tasks. Th is discussion focuses on the central semantic system 
that mediates input and output mechanisms and has been the subject of consider-
able interest and controversy. 
 Unitary Semantics 
 As represented in  Figure 4.1 , an issue discussed with respect to semantic memory 
considers whether meaning information is stored in a single unitary semantic 
mechanism (upper panel) or in modality-specifi c semantic subsystems (lower 
panel). In the unitary semantics theory, a single semantic representation specifi es 
all perceptual properties, functions, and associated knowledge relevant for the 
meaning of a given referent word, object, or action ( Caramazza, Hillis, Rapp, & 
Romani, 1990 ;  Humphreys & Riddoch, 1988 ;  Seymour, 1973 , 1979). Th at uni-
tary representation is then activated to achieve meaning for spoken or writt en 
words, viewed objects and actions, and all other sensory input. 
 Neuropsychological evidence has been cited in support of the unitary seman-
tics account. For example,  Caramazza, Berndt, & Brownell (1982) demonstrated 
the relationship between failure to classify objects and impaired verbal labeling 
of objects in a subgroup of their patients with stroke-induced aphasia and posited 
a defi cit to a single semantic system to represent the impairment. As further sup-
port of the unitary semantics view,  Hillis, Rapp, Romani, & Caramazza (1990)  
described a patient with a large left  hemisphere stroke who made comparable 
numbers of semantic errors in auditory and reading comprehension, oral and 
writt en naming, writing to dictation, and oral word reading. Th ey argued that 
this quantitatively- and qualitatively-similar patt ern of impairment across lexical 
tasks occurred because of impairment of a single semantic mechanism that was 
engaged across all lexical tasks. 
 Studies of patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease (AD) also have been 
cited as support for a unitary semantic theory. Several studies have shown a 
strong association between impairments of language comprehension and limb 
praxis in patients with AD ( Kempler, 1988 ;  Glosser et al., 1998 ;  Rapcsak et al., 
1989 ).  Dumont, Ska, &Joanett e (2000) reported a similar patt ern in that their 
participants with AD were impaired in both verbal and action semantic tasks 
to the same level of severity. Th ey interpreted these fi ndings as supportive of a 
model in which a single distributed semantic system is accessed during language 
and action tasks. Similarly, patients with semantic dementia who are impaired 
across all lexical-semantic and object-processing tasks, in the absence of episodic 
memory problems, provide further evidence for an impairment emanating from a 
unitary semantic system ( Roger et al., 2004 ). 
 Consider optic aphasia.  Freund (1889 ) reported a patient with a right hom-
onymous hemianopsia who could not name visually presented objects, but 

Semantic Memory
73
could name them when explored through the tactile modality. Because he 
demonstrated recognition of objects through use of appropriate gestures, a 
visual agnosia was not indicated. Freund termed this disorder optic apha-
sia. Additional patients with optic aphasia have been described ( Beauvois & 
Saillant, 1985 ;  Coslett  & Saff ran, 1989 ;  Hillis & Caramazza, 1995 ;  Lhermitt e 
& Beauvois, 1973 ;  Riddoch & Humphreys, 1987 ), all with the common pat-
tern of impaired object naming in the context of intact naming through nonvi-
sual modalities (e.g., naming to spoken defi nitions), and intact recognition of 
objects as indicated by the ability to gesture the use of or indicate the functions 
of viewed objects that they are unable to name. Beauvois and Saillant (1985) 
argued that the prevalent unitary semantics models of lexical processing could 
not effi  ciently account for this patt ern of breakdown. Th erefore, modifi cations 
to the semantics model have been proposed to account for the observed disso-
ciations noted in optic aphasia. 
 Privileged relationships.  To account for optic aphasia,  Caramazza and col-
leagues (1990) proposed the Organized Unitary Content Hypothesis (OUCH), 
later elaborated upon by  Caramazza & Mahon (2006 ) when they noted that 
“certain types of input/output modalities have a privileged relationship with, 
or privileged access to, certain types of semantic information” (p. 14). Within 
this account, a semantic representation is viewed as a set of interconnected fea-
tures representing the defi ning att ributes and associated information for a given 
concept, whether corresponding to an object or a word. Like concepts, such as 
objects from the same semantic category (e.g., fruit), would have sets of shared or 
overlapping semantic features (outer skin, edible, sweet, juicy), that is, privileged 
relationships. Object-naming impairment in optic aphasia relates to a defi ciency 
in which representations in the object recognition system fail to activate a com-
plete semantic representation in a unitary system ( Hillis & Caramazza, 1995 ). 
Some features in the object recognition system are able to access some features 
of the semantic representation that are relevant to the viewed object (privileged 
accessibility), making it is possible to retrieve the corresponding gesture or state 
the function of the object, yet not name the object which requires a full semantic 
specifi cation. 
 Although privileged access and privileged relationships ( Caramazza et  al., 
1990 ) provide a reasonable explanation for dissociations of performance in cases 
of optic aphasia, the theory may have problems accounting for other cases reported 
in the literature. Th e assumptions when applied to object processing lead one to 
predict that, given a semantic-level impairment, the ability to retrieve a gesture 
for a viewed object may be retained in spite of impaired object-naming abilities. 
Th e converse situation in which object naming exceeds gesturing abilities for the 
same objects would not be predicted under the privileged access account.  Ochipa, 
Rothi, & Heilman (1989) reported a patient with precisely this patt ern of perfor-
mance, however, suggesting that the OUCH model is not suffi  cient to fully explain 

74
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
the patt ern of impairments observed in optic aphasia and other modality-specifi c 
disorders. Other proposals have been presented to account for these varied pat-
terns of breakdown in language, object, and gesture processing. 
 Modality-Specifi c Semantics 
 Beauvois  (1982;  Beauvois & Saillant, 1985 ) invoked a modality-specifi c seman-
tics perspective aligned with that of  Paivio (1971 , 1986) to account for the visual 
modality-specifi c naming impairment observed in optic aphasia. Th ey suggested 
that object naming failure in optic aphasia results from impairment in the inter-
actions between separate visual and verbal semantic systems ( Figure 4.1 , lower 
panel). Intact processing from visual object recognition to visual semantics 
allows for successful completion of tasks such as gesturing to a viewed object. 
Intact processing from phonologic lexical stores to verbal semantics allows for 
successful performance on tasks such as naming to spoken defi nitions. Th at is, 
processing is adequate within verbal and visual modalities, but is impaired when 
cross-modality visual plus verbal semantic processing is necessary for successful 
completion of a task, such as object naming. 
 Th e situation is further complicated by the existence of modality-specifi c 
aphasias for auditory input ( Denes & Semenza, 1975 ) and tactile input ( Beauvois, 
Saillant, Meininger, & Lhermitt e, 1978 ), among others. By analogy, one may 
propose an even more complex structure of the semantic system, with specifi c 
mechanisms for all modalities of input including tactile semantics and auditory 
semantics. Several researchers have invoked such an elaborate structure of the 
semantic system as represented in   Figure 4.2  a ( Allport, 1985 ;  Shallice, 1988 ). 
 Hillis & Caramazza (1995 ) argued that the modality-specifi c account needed fur-
ther elaboration, however, in order to adequately evaluate its viability as a hypoth-
esis. Another compelling line of neuropsychological data, category-specifi c 
 
Sensory
(a)
(b)
Motor
Functional
vegetables
Semantics
Semantics
tools
Animals
 Figure 4.2  Sensory/Functional hypothesis (a) and domain specific semantic 
structure (b).  

Semantic Memory
75
semantic impairments, must be considered in discussions of modality specifi city 
in the structure of the semantic system. 
 Category-specifi c semantic impairments.  Patients have been described whose 
spared or impaired language abilities relate to specifi c semantic categories, most 
oft en in the realm of living versus nonliving objects. In one of the earliest descrip-
tions,  Warrington & McCarthy (1983 ) described a patient with a large left  hemi-
sphere stroke who had preserved naming and comprehension abilities for living 
objects (foods, animals, fl owers) and impaired performance for nonliving objects 
(tools, etc.).  Warrington & Shallice (1984 ) then reported the opposite patt ern of 
breakdown in four individuals with herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE), that is, 
greater impairment for living things than for nonliving things. Since that time, 
many additional studies too numerous to list have reported patients with defi cits 
in selective semantic categories. 
 Capitani, Laiacona, Mahon, and  Caramazza (2003) undertook a comprehen-
sive review of the category-specifi c defi cit literature. Th ey identifi ed 84 studies 
of patients with a variety of neurologic conditions leading to category-specifi c 
defi cits or retained performance for a specifi c category in such categories as ani-
mals, fruits/vegetables, foods, body parts, musical instruments, and tools. A dis-
proportionate impairment for living categories was evident in 103 patients, most 
commonly with a neurologic diagnosis of HSE or AD, and an inordinate impair-
ment for nonliving categories was evident in 52 cases, most oft en due to stroke 
or AD. Further, patients have been described with even more selective impair-
ments within the category of living things. Some patients have been described 
who are more impaired for living inanimate things (fruits and vegetables) 
than living animate things (animals) (e.g.,  Hart, Berndt, & Caramazza, 1985 ; 
 Caramazza & Shelton, 1998 ) and others have displayed the converse patt ern 
favoring animate over inanimate living categories (Farah & Wallace, 1992;  Hillis 
& Caramazza, 1991 ). 
 Although such category dissociations may imply that the semantic sys-
tem is structured according to some kinds of category relationships, research-
ers have att empted to propose a more principled account for these divergent 
category defi cits. Warrington and her colleagues ( Warrington & McCarthy, 
1983 ;  Warrington & Shallice, 1984 ;  Warrington & McCarthy, 1987 ) explained 
category-specifi c defi cits in relation to the type of semantic information that is 
critical for specifi cation of that category. Th ey proposed a distinction between 
functional semantic information, which is most relevant to nonliving catego-
ries like tools and transportation, versus visual sensory feature semantics which 
are most relevant to living categories like animals and plants. Th is sensory/
functional hypothesis (SFH) ( Figure 4.2 a) is a corollary to the view proposed 
by Beauvois (1982) with respect to optic aphasia: modality-specifi c semantic 
systems for function information (verbal semantics) versus sensory modalities 
(visual semantics). 

76
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Action semantics:  Warrington & McCarthy (1987 ) refi ned their proposal 
when they observed their patient YOT to experience more diffi  culty with small 
manipulable objects than with large objects, that is, subcategories within the 
broader category of nonliving objects where function information is crucial 
for semantic interpretation. Th erefore, it was necessary to consider in addi-
tion the infl uence of motor information in the specifi cation of the semantics 
of certain categories such as small manipulable objects, that is, a sensory/func-
tional/motor distinction in semantic memory (  Figure 4.2 a)(see also Martin, 
Ungerleider, & Haxby, 2000 , for a similar perspective). Th is type of motor infor-
mation is a component of what  Rothi, Ochipa, & Heilman (1991) called “action 
semantics,” that is, stored knowledge about tools, including the mechanical 
advantage that tools provide, the objects they act upon, their functions, and 
associated actions (motor information). In fact, a distinction between verbal 
and action semantics may explain the performance of a patient described by 
 Ochipa, Rothi, & Heilman (1989) . Following a right hemisphere stroke, this 
left -handed patient demonstrated preserved verbal knowledge regarding tools 
he could not use; that is, preserved verbal semantics in the context of impaired 
action semantics.  Ochipa, Rothi, & Heilman (1992) provided further evidence 
for the dissociation between verbal and action semantic knowledge in a study 
of patients with probable AD. A subset of AD patients who had relatively pre-
served verbal semantic abilities had signifi cant impairments of tool and action 
knowledge as indicated by diffi  culty determining appropriate tools and objects 
to use to complete tool puzzles and matching tasks, suggesting a selective defi cit 
of action semantics.  
 Domain Specifi c Hypothesis 
 One criticism of the many studies of patients with category-specifi c impair-
ments is that other psycholinguistic stimulus variables were oft en not well con-
trolled and may be a factor in the observed dissociations across categories. In 
their review of the literature on patients with category-specifi c semantic impair-
ments,  Capitani and colleagues (2003) found that, considering only those stud-
ies where other confounding factors were controlled, the most consistently 
impaired category across studies was living objects, observed for 16 cases. Th ey 
also found that fractionations could be found within the category of living 
objects for animals (animate living objects) versus fruits/vegetables (inanimate 
living objects) in 12 cases. Impairments were evident for nonliving artifacts 
in four cases; no clear fractionations were evident within the category of arti-
facts. Capitani and colleagues argued that the overall patt erns of category- spe-
cifi c defi cits that emerged are contrary to predictions of the modality-specifi c 
sensory/functional hypothesis (Farah & McClelland, 1991 ;  Warrington & 

Semantic Memory
77
McCarthy, 1987 ). Importantly, there was no relationship between the category 
that was impaired (e.g., living things) and the type of semantic information 
that was impaired (e.g., visual sensory semantics), as predicted in the sensory/
functional hypothesis. Most oft en, patients with category-specifi c impairments 
were comparably impaired for both sensory and functional semantic informa-
tion. Further, the contrasting impairments observed for animals versus fruits/
vegetables across at least 12 diff erent patients is problematic for the sensory/
functional hypothesis, as an impairment of visual semantics should lead to defi -
cits for all categories that weight heavily toward visual semantic att ributes for 
their category membership, living items, not isolated categories (e.g., animals 
only) within the category of living items. 
 Capitani et al. (2003) also noted that the observation of defi cits within the 
category of living things is also not well explained within the OUCH privileged 
access perspective of unitary semantics discussed earlier.  Caramazza & Shelton 
(1998 ) noted that the OUCH model does not impose constraints that explain 
why certain categories tend to be impaired more oft en, as confi rmed in the sys-
tematic review (Capitani et al.). To resolve this discrepancy, Capitani and col-
leagues noted that the patt erns of category specifi c semantic impairments seen in 
the literature are most compatible with a modifi cation of the unitary semantics 
account proposed by Caramazza and colleagues ( Caramazza & Shelton, 1998 , 
2001;  Caramazza & Mahon, 2006 ), the domain specifi c hypothesis. 
  Caramazza & Shelton (1998 ;  Shelton & Caramazza, 2001 ) proposed that, 
rather than certain processing or organizational principles in semantic memory, 
as in the sensory/functional/motor perspective, that lead to the emergence of 
category-specifi c impairments, semantic memory may indeed have subsystems 
for certain semantic categories (  Figure 2  b). Not all categories are represented. 
Rather, subsystems would exist only for certain categories that have advan-
tages and adaptations for the well-being of a species, as might be claimed for 
categories such as plants, animals, and possibly tools. Further, these categories 
would be innately present. Caramazza and Shelton called this the domain spe-
cifi c hypothesis. Th ey further proposed several implications of their theoretical 
perspective: 1) that there should be no further breakdowns within one of those 
domain-specifi c categories, say for land animals versus other types of animals; 
2) the most common type of category-specifi c defi cit should be for living things, 
which should be localized more proximally in the brain, and thus vulnerable to 
neural damage; 3) because plants and animals have an important human value 
as foods, it may be that other foods may be neurally-represented in close prox-
imity to these domains, leading to possible category-specifi c defi cits for foods in 
general. 
 In their careful review of the category-specifi c defi cit literature,  Capitani et al. 
(2003) found evidence in support of several of these predictions. As noted ear-
lier, category impairments for living things occurred much more frequently than 

78
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
impairments for nonliving things. Further, some patients were identifi ed who, 
along with impairments for living categories, demonstrated impairments for 
other foods as well. Capitani et al. concluded that the results of their review were 
most compatible with the domain specifi c hypothesis. 
 Overall Structure 
 Th e truth may lie somewhere in a blend of the strengths of the contrasting theo-
ries of semantic memory (Martin & Caramazza, 2003;  Snowden, Th ompson, & 
Neary, 2004 ;  Tyler & Moss, 2001 ).  Caramazza & Shelton (1998 ) noted that a 
combination of a domain-specifi c structure along with “domain general learn-
ing principles” (p. 20) may account for the structure of semantic memory for 
the full range of categories that constitute conceptual knowledge. In addition to 
the domain specifi c hypothesis,  Shelton & Caramazza (2001 ) further proposed 
that other theories, such as those that discuss the relationships among features 
in semantic memory, also may need to be considered to encompass the represen-
tational structure within domains of semantic memory. In fact, several research-
ers have now recognized that that the diff erent theoretical perspectives, unitary 
semantics, domain-specifi c semantics, modality-specifi c semantics, may be able 
to answer questions at diff erent levels of consideration from the overall struc-
ture to the unique characteristic features of semantic representations (Martin & 
Caramazza, 2003;  Snowden, Th ompson, & Neary, 2004 ).  Caramazza & Mahon 
(2006 ) emphasized the need to change directions in discussions of semantic 
memory from a focus on the overall structure of the semantic system to renewed 
eff orts to understand the content of semantic memory. A number of recent neu-
ropsychological studies of patients with semantic impairments have provided 
perspectives on the organization of semantic representations themselves.  
 Organization of Semantic Representations 
 Semantic representations are composed of networks of interconnected fea-
tures corresponding to any meaningful elements that contribute to that 
concept ( Altmann & McClung, 2008 ). The OUCH model reviewed earlier 
( Caramazza et al., 1990 ;  Caramazza & Shelton, 1998 ) considered the struc-
ture of semantic representations when invoking the principles of privileged 
access and privileged relationships. These principles recognize that there is 
some texture to semantic representations, with certain features having stron-
ger connections with other related features, leading to what has been termed 
a “lumpy” conceptual space. These notions have been elaborated upon in sev-
eral similar theories.  

Semantic Memory
79
 Conceptual Structure Account 
 Tyler and colleagues ( Tyler & Moss, 2001 ;  Tyler, Moss, Durrent-Peatfi eld, & 
Levy, 2000 ;  Tyler et  al., 2003 ;  Taylor et  al., 2008 ) have described a connec-
tionist account of semantic representations within a unitary semantic system 
( Figure 4.3 ). In their account, some elements of a semantic representation corre-
spond to  perceptual features and others are  functional  features. Th e relationships or 
interactions among these features will vary along with the fact that some of these 
may be  shared features among related concepts and others are  distinctive features 
 that are unique to that concept. Members of a category will tend to have many 
shared, overlapping features among category members, along with some distinc-
tive features.  Tyler and colleagues (2000)  further proposed that the category of 
living things tends to have more shared features that are highly interconnected; 
shared perceptual features tend to become connected to shared functional fea-
tures. Biological motion is an important component of functional features for liv-
ing things and that feature is shared across members of the category. In contrast, 
nonliving things tend to have distinctive functional features that are associated 
with distinctive perceptual features. 
 Under conditions of brain damage as in AD or HSE, category defi cits emerge 
as a function of the loss of certain types of semantic features that comprise liv-
ing and nonliving things and the strength of the correlations among features, 
with stronger relationships being maintained.  Tyler et al. (2000) proposed that 
 
“The farmer milked the...”
cow
Object Recognition
System
Lexical Orthographic
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Recognition
Lexical Phonological
Output Processing
Lexical Orthographic
Output Processing
Action
Output Processing
milking motion
C-o-w
“cow”
legs     ears    snout
tail   black/white  udder
milk     farm    barn
moo  milking   steek
 Figure 4.3  Semantic features for the Conceptual Structure Account ( Tyler et al., 
2008 ), with perceptual features (left) and functional features (right), including 
shared features for most animals, and distinctive features pertaining to a cow 
(italics).  

80
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
“distinctive perceptual features for artifacts and shared perceptual features for 
biological kinds will be correlated with functional information and will be the 
most resistant to damage” (p. 204).  Altmann & McClung (2008 ), in considering 
the conceptual structure account ( Tyler et al., 2000 ), noted that living things are 
more susceptible to impairment than nonliving things because when the few dis-
tinctive features are lost for living things, then the remaining features tend to be 
shared features, which would lead to confusion across category exemplars that 
share those same features. If distinctive features are lost for nonliving things, 
they will still have many remaining distinctive features to allow for diff erences to 
exist relative to other category members and avoid confusion and errors in con-
ditions of brain damage.  Hodges (2000) noted that when patients with semantic 
dementia lose distinctive or “fi ner-grained” features due to semantic degrada-
tion, it is still possible to respond accurately in certain types of language tasks, 
such as making basic category judgments. Yet, these patients will be impaired 
in other tasks that require a full semantic specifi cation, such as picture naming. 
 Some aspects of the conceptual structure account ( Tyler et al., 2000 ) resem-
ble the ideas proposed by  Devlin, Gonnerman, Andersen, & Seidenberg (1998) , 
including the focus on shared and distinctive features. Th ey proposed that liv-
ing things have more shared semantic features that are strongly intercorrelated 
than nonliving things that have more distinctive features. Th eir interpretation 
of the patt erns of defi cits that emerge in conditions such as AD diff ered from 
the conceptual structure account, however. Th ey proposed that mild semantic 
impairments will be associated with more problems with artifacts, which rely 
on distinctive features that have been lost. As semantic damage becomes more 
severe, then sets of correlated features will tend to be lost, leading to problems 
with living things. 
 Th e notions of shared and distinctive perceptual and functional features allows 
for an account of some, though not all, categories of knowledge.  Caramazza & 
Mahon (2006 ) argued that not all predictions of the conceptual structure account 
are supported by observations in the literature. In particular, cases have been 
described in which severe impairment for nonliving things has been observed in 
the context of spared performance for a living category, animals. Th is may relate 
in part to task demands, as how a degraded network will function will be depen-
dent on the type of task that is att empted, whether full semantic specifi cation is 
necessary, as in picture naming, or whether a basic semantic representation is suf-
fi cient, as in category judgments. 
 Embodied Representations 
 Other researchers take a decidedly diff erent perspective on the structure of seman-
tic representations, referred to in various places as “embodied representations” 

Semantic Memory
81
or “grounded cognition” ( Barsalou, 2008 ;  Barsalou, Breazeal, & Smith, 2007 ). 
In this view, the sensory and motor systems that are activated during learning 
eventually become the network that makes up the conceptual representation 
( Antonucci & Reilly, 2008 ; Martin & Chao, 2001). In fact,  Wernicke’s (1874 ) 
account of conceptual knowledge is consistent with such a perspective. Details 
of the models diff er across researchers. For example, Damasio (1989; Damasio, 
Grabowski, Tranel, & Hichwa, 1996) does not ascribe to an actual semantic rep-
resentation per se, but rather, to a semantic association  process whereby a network 
of modality-specifi c sensory and motor representations becomes active to repre-
sent a concept by way of temporal “convergence zones” that are located in the 
anterior temporal lobes ( Figure 4.4 , upper panel). 
 Barsalou (2003, 2008 ) has writt en extensively on the theory of grounded cog-
nition, noting that “cognition emerges from dependencies between all of the basic 
systems in the brain, including goal management, perception, action, memory, 
reward, aff ect, and learning.” ( Barsalau et al., 2007 , p. 79) Th at is, Barsalou has 
a rich interpretation that includes some traditionally non-cognitive elements in 
addition to sensory and motor ones to constitute the basis of conceptual knowl-
edge. He refers to a process of “simulation,” whereby during cognitive activi-
ties, representations in the sensory, motor, and other non-cognitive systems are 
“re-enacted for representational use during cognitive activity” ( Barsalou, 2011 , 
p. 27).  Chatt erjee (2010 ), in contrast, advocates a weaker version of grounded 
cognition, recognizing that sensory and motor experiences contribute in a more 
“graded” manner to the development of concepts. He reviews studies in the realm 
of language and spatial cognition that suggest that some concepts draw upon dis-
embodied “schemas” that develop through perceptual and motor experiences, 
yet lose the specifi city of the original experiences, and seem to give a processing 
advantage during cognitive activities. 
 Rogers and colleagues (2004) also view abstract amodal semantic represen-
tations as developing over time through sensory/motor learning experiences. 
Th ey claimed that the semantic structure that arises during learning is not 
feature-based and is not specialized for function or for perceptual att ributes, 
unlike most models of semantic representations. Th ey entertained this theory in 
their discussion of a connectionist model developed to account for the patt erns of 
breakdown observed across language- and object- processing tasks (picture nam-
ing, matching, drawing) in patients with semantic dementia. 
 Reilly & Peele (2008 ) proposed a blended model of semantic representations 
encompassing aspects of unitary semantics along with modality-specifi c seman-
tic specifi cation (  Figure 4.4  , lower panel). Some aspects of the semantic repre-
sentation are unitary, that is, some features of the representation are activated 
regardless of the modality of input and this tends to be a rather “sparse” represen-
tation of that object. Other modality-specifi c features can be activated as needed, 
based on the demands of the task at hand. Th at is, Reilly and Peele propose that 

82
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
there is “dynamic interactivity in semantic memory between modality-neutral 
and modality-specifi c components” (p. 38) of semantic representations. 
 Summary and Conclusions 
 A number of neurologic conditions lead to damage aff ecting the left  temporal 
region that is especially critical for the mediation of semantic memory ( Hillis 
 
“The farmer milked the...”
cow
Legs ears snout
tail black/white
C-o-w
Concept association process
K - aw
K - aw
C-o-w
moo
milking
milking motion
C-o-w
“cow”
“The farmer milked the...”
cow
Legs ears snout
tail black/white
C-o-w
barn
farm
hay
COW
K - aw
K - aw
C-o-w
moo
milking
milking motion
C-o-w
“cow”
 Figure 4.4  Embodied representations (upper panel) coalesced through a process 
that networks sensory and motor representations (e.g., Damasio et al., 1996); 
blended unitary semantic model (lower panel) with modality-specific semantic 
specifications ( Reilly & Peele, 2008 ).  

Semantic Memory
83
et al., 2006 ;  Schwartz et al., 2009 ). Th e mesial or lateral extent of temporal dam-
age will infl uence impairments evident within episodic or semantic memory. 
Further, within lateral temporal regions, the anterior or posterior extent of dam-
age can impact on the patt erns of impairments that emerge in semantic process-
ing. Impairments may vary by modality of input and output, by semantic category, 
and by other features that are relevant in semantic processing, for example, con-
creteness ( Reilly, Peele, & Grossman, 2007 ). 
 Many years of illustration and debate in the neuropsychological literature may 
be explained by the fact that semantic memory may encompass principles pro-
posed across unitary, domain-specifi c, and modality-specifi c semantic theories 
(Martin & Caramazza, 2001 ;  Shelton & Caramazza, 2001 ). Further, discussions 
that have turned toward examining the structure of semantic representations 
themselves ( Tyler et al., 2000 ;  Rogers et al., 2004 ; Barsalou, 2008) allow for an 
account of the richness of semantic knowledge and the dynamic interplay among 
features of representations as needed for daily semantic processing tasks ( Reilly 
& Peele, 2008 ). Not all aspects of semantic knowledge, e.g., encyclopedic knowl-
edge or abstract concepts, are yet encompassed in theories of semantic represen-
tations. Th erefore, the enterprise of examining the performance of patients with 
neurologic impairments will continue in order to further our understanding of all 
aspects of semantic memory. 
 Acknowledgments 
 Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by NIH (NIDCD) R15 
DC009690 to the fi rst author. 
 References 
 Ahmed ,  S. ,  Arnold ,  R. ,  Th ompson ,  S. A. ,  Graham ,  K. S. , &  Hodges ,  J. R. ( 2008 ).  Naming of 
objects, faces and buildings in mild cognitive impairment .  Cortex,  44 ,  746–752 . 
 Allport ,  D. A. ( 1985 ).  Distributed memory, modular subsystems, and dysphasia . In  S.  Newman 
&  R.  Epstein (eds.),  Current perspectives in dysphasia (pp.  32–60 ).  Edinburgh :  Churchill 
Livingstone . 
 Altmann ,  L. J. P. , &  McClung ,  J. S. ( 2008 ).  Eff ects of semantic impairment on language use in 
Alzheimer’s disease .  Seminars in Speech and Language,  29 ,  18–31 . 
   Antonucci ,  S. M.  , &   Reilly ,  J.   ( 2008 ).  Semantic memory and language processing :   A primer . 
 Seminars in Speech and Language,  29 ,   5–17 . 
   Barsalou ,  L. W.   ( 2008 ).  Grounded cognition .   Annual Review of Psychology,  59 ,  617–645 . 
   Barsalou ,  L. W.   ( 2011 ).  Simulation, situated conceptualization, and prediction . In   M.   Bar   (ed.), 
 Prediction in the brain (pp.  27–39 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Barsalou ,  L. W. ,  Breazeal ,  C. , &  Smith ,  L. B. ( 2007 ).  Cognitive Processes,  8 ,   79–91 . 
 Bayles ,  K. A. , &  Kazniak ,  A. W. ( 1987 ).   Communication and cognition in normal aging and demen-
tia  .  Boston :  Litt le, Brown, and Company . 

84
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Bayles ,  K. A. , &  Tomoeda ,  C. K. ( 1983 ).  Confrontation naming impairment in dementia .  Brain 
and Language,  19 ,  98–114 . 
 Beauvois, M.-F. (1982). Optic aphasia: A process of interaction between vision and language. 
Proceedings fo the Royal Society of London, Series B, 298, 35–47. 
 Beauvois ,  M. F. , &  Saillant ,  B. ( 1985 ).  Optic aphasia for colours and colour agnosia :  A distinc-
tion between visual and visuo-verbal impairments in the processing of colours .   Cognitive 
Neuropsychology,  2 ,  1–48 . 
 Beauvois ,  M. F. ,  Saillant ,  B ,  Meininger ,  V. , &  Lhermitt e ,  F.  ( 1978 ).  Bilateral tactile aphasia :  A 
tacto-verbal dysfunction .  Brain,  101 ,  381–401 . 
 Buccione ,  I. ,  Fadda ,  L. ,  Serra ,  L. ,  Caltagirone ,  C. , &  Carlesimo ,  G. A. ( 2008 ).  Retrograde episodic 
and semantic memory impairment correlates with side of temporal lobe damage .  Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society,  14 ,  1083–1094 . 
  Capitani ,  E. ,  Laiacona ,  M. ,  Mahon ,  B. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 2003 ).  What are the facts of semantic 
category-specifi c defi cits? A critical review of the clinical evidence .   Cognitive Neuropsychology, 
 20 ,  213–261 . 
 Caplan ,  D. ( 1987 ).   Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology  .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
  Caramazza ,  A. ,  Berndt ,  R. S. , &  Brownell ,  H. H. ( 1982 ).  Th e semantic defi cit hypothesis; 
Perceptual parsing and object classifi cation by aphasic patients .   Brain and Language,  15 , 
 161–189 . 
 Caramazza ,  A. ,  Hillis ,  A. E. ,  Rapp ,  B. C. , &  Romani ,  C. ( 1990 ).  Th e multiple semantics hypoth-
esis: Multiple confusions?  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  7 ,  161–189 . 
   Caramazza ,  A.  , &   Mahon ,  B. Z.   ( 2003 ).  Th e organization of conceptual knowledge :  Th e evidence 
from category-specifi c semantic defi cits .  Trends in Cognitive Sciences,  7 ,  354–361 . 
   Caramazza ,  A.  , &   Mahon ,  B. Z.   ( 2006 ).  Th e organization of conceptual knowledge in the 
brain :  Th e future’s past and some future directions .  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  23 ,   13–38 . 
  Caramazza ,  A. , &  Shelton ,  J. R. ( 1998 ).  Domain-specifi c knowledge systems in the brain :  Th e 
animate-inanimate distinction .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,  10 ,   1–34 . 
 Chertkow ,  H. , &  Bub ,  D. ( 1990 ).  Semantic memory loss in dementia of Alzheimer’s type: What 
do various measures measure?  Brain,  113 ,  397–417 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A.   ( 2005 ).  A madness to the methods in cognitive neuroscience?  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience,  17 ,  847–849 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2010 ).  Disembodying cognition .  Language and Cognition,  2 ,  79–116 . 
  Cloutman ,  L. ,  Gott esman ,  R.  ,   Chaudhry ,  P.  ,   Davis ,  C.  ,   Kleinman ,  J. T.  ,   Pawlak ,  M.  , et al. ( 2009 ). 
 Where (in the brain) do semantic errors comes from?  Cortex,  45 ,  641–649 . 
 Coslett  ,  H. B. , &  Saff ran ,  E. M. ( 1989 ).  Preserved object recognition and reading comprehension 
in optic aphasia .  Brain,  112 ,  1091–1110.  
  Cummings ,  J. L. ,  Benson ,  D. F. ,  Hill ,  M. A. , &  Read ,  S. ( 1985 ).  Aphasia in dementia of the 
Alzheimer type .  Neurology,  35 ,  394–397 . 
 Damasio ,  A. R. ( 1989 ).  Th e brain binds entities and events by multiregional activation from con-
vergence zones .  Neural Computation,  1 ,  123–132 . 
 Damasio, H., Grabowski, T. J., Tranel, D., Hichwa, R. D., & Damasio, A. R. (1996). A neural basis 
for lexical retrieval.  Nature, 380, 499–505. 
 DeLeon ,  J. ,  Gott esman ,  R. F. ,  Kleinman ,  J. T. ,  Newhart ,  M. ,  Davis ,  C. ,  Heidler-Gary ,  J. ,  Lee ,  A. , 
&   Hillis ,  A. E.   ( 2007 ).  Neural regions essential for distinct cognitive processes underlying 
picture naming .  Brain,  130 ,  1408–1422 . 
 Denes ,  G. , &  Semenza ,  C. ( 1975 ).  Auditory modality-specifi c anomia :  Evidence from a case 
study of pure word deafness .  Cortex,  11 ,  401–411 . 
 Devlin ,  J. T. ,  Gonnerman ,  L. M. ,  Andersen ,  E. S. , &  Seidenberg ,  M. S. ( 1998 ).  Category-specifi c 
semantic defi cits in focal and widespread brain damage :  A computational account .  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience,  10 ,   77–94 . 
 Diesfeldt ,  H. F.  A. ( 1989 ).  Semantic impairments in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type . 
 Aphasiology,  3 ,  41–54 . 

Semantic Memory
85
 Dumont ,  C. ,  Ska ,  B. , &  Joanett e ,  Y.   ( 2000 ).  Conceptual apraxia and semantic memory defi -
cit in Alzheimer’s disease:  Two sides of the same coin?  Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society,  6 ,  693–703 . 
 Farah, M.J., McClelland, J.L. (1991) A computational model of semantic memory impair-
ment: Modality-specifi city and emergent category-specifi city. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 120(4), 339–357. 
 Farah, M. J., & Wallace, M. A. (1992). Semantically-bounded anomia: Implications for the neural 
implementation of naming.  Neuropsychologia, 30, 609–621. 
 Fellows ,  L. K. ,  Heberlein ,  A. S. ,  Morales ,  D. A. ,  Shivde ,  G. ,  Waller ,  S. , &  Wu ,  D. H. ( 2005 ). 
 Method matt ers :  An empirical study of impact in cognitive neuroscience .  Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience,  17 ,  850–858 . 
 Foundas ,  A. L. ,  Daniels ,  S. K. , &  Vasterling ,  J. J. ( 1998 ).  Anomia :  Case studies in lesion localiza-
tion .  Neurocase,  4 ,   35–43 . 
 Freund ,  C. S. ( 1889 ).  Ueber optische aphasie und seelenblindheit .  Archiv fur Psychiatrie und 
Nervenkrankheiten,  20 ,  276–297 ,  371–416 . 
 Garrard ,  P. ,  Perry ,  R. , &  Hodges ,  J. R. ( 1997 ).  Disorders of semantic memory .  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry,  62 ,  431–435 . 
 Garrard ,  P. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Pratt  ,  K. H.  , &   Hodges ,  J. R.   ( 2005 ).  Semantic 
feature knowledge and picture naming in dementia of Alzheimer’s type :  A new approach . 
 Brain and Language,  93 ,  79–94 . 
   Glosser ,  G.  ,   Wiley ,  M. J.  , &   Barnoski ,  E. J.   ( 1998 ).  Gestural communication in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease .  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology,  20 ,  1–13 . 
 Grossman, M., Robinson, K., Biassou, N., White-Devine, T., D’Esposito, M. (1998). Semantic 
memory in Alzheimer’s disease:  Representativeness, ontologic category, and material. 
 Neuropsychology, 12,  34–42. 
 Hart, J., Moo, L. R., Segal, J. B., Adkins, E., & Kraut, M. (2002). Neural substrates of semantics. In A. E. 
Hillis (Ed.),  Th e handbook of adult language disorders (pp. 207–227). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Hart ,  J. ,  Berndt ,  R. S. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1985 ).  Category-specifi c naming defi cit following cere-
bral infarction .  Nature,  316 ,  439–440 . 
 Hier ,  D. B. ,  Hagenlocker ,  K. , &  Shindler ,  A. G. ( 1985 ).  Language disintegration in demen-
tia: Eff ects of etiology and severity.  Brain and Language,  25 ,  117–133 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. ( 2007 ).  Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging in the study of language .  Brain and 
Language,  102 ,  165–175 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1991 ).  Category-specifi c naming and comprehension impair-
ment :  A double dissociation .  Brain,  114 ,  2081–2094 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1995 ).  Th e compositionality of lexical semantic representa-
tions :  Clues from semantic errors in object naming .  Memory,  3 ,  333–358 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1995 ).  Cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying visual and 
semantic processing :  Implications from “optic aphasia.”  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,  7 , 
 457–478 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. ,  Chaudhry ,  P. ,  Davis ,  C. ,  Kleinman ,  J. ,  Newhart ,  M. , &  Heidler-Gary ,  J. ( 2006 ).  Where 
(in the brain) do semantic errors come from?  Brain and Language,  99 ,   84–85 . 
 Hillis, A. E., & Newhart, M. (2008). Cognitive neuropsychological approaches to treatment of lan-
guage disorders: Introduction. In R. Chapey (Ed.),  Language intervention strategies in aphasia 
and related neurogenic communication disorders (5 th ed., pp. 595–606). Baltimore: Lippincott , 
Williams & Wilkins. 
 Hillis ,  A. E. ,  Rapp ,  B. ,  Romani ,  C. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1990 ).  Selective impairment of semantics in 
lexical processing .   Cognitive Neuropsychology,  7 ,  191–243 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Oxbury ,  S. , &  Funnell ,  E. ( 1992 ) . Semantic dementia :  Progressive 
fl uent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy .  Brain,  115 ,  1783–1806 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ( 2000 ).  Memory in the dementias . In  E.  Tulving &  F. I. M.  Craik (eds.),  Th e Oxford 
handbook of memory (pp.  441–459 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 

86
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Huff  ,  F. J. ,  Becker ,  J. T.  ,  Belle ,  S. H. ,  Nebes ,  R. D. ,  Holland ,  A. L. , &  Boller ,  F. ( 1987 ).  Cognitive 
defi cits and clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease .  Neurology,  37 ,  1119–1124 . 
 Huff  ,  F. J. ,  Mack ,  L. ,  Mahlmann ,  J. , &  Greenberg ,  S. ( 1988 ).  A comparison of lexical-semantic 
impairments in left  hemisphere stroke and Alzheimer’s disease .  Brain and Language,  35 , 
 262–278 . 
  Humphreys ,  G. W. , &  Riddoch ,  M. J. ( 1988 ).  On the case for multiple semantic systems :  a reply 
to Shallice .   Cognitive Neuropsychology,  5 ,  143–150 . 
 Humphreys ,  G. W. ,  Riddoch ,  M. J. , &  Quinlan ,  P. T. ( 1988 ).  Cascade processes in picture identi-
fi cation .  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  5 ,  67–103 . 
 Jeff ries, E., Baker, S. S., Doran, M., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2007). Refractory eff ects in stroke 
aphasia: A consequence of poor semantic control.  Neuropsychologia, 45, 1065–1079. 
 Kempler ,  D. ( 1988 ).  Lexical and pantomime abilities in Alzheimer’s disease .  Aphasiology ,  2 , 
 147–159 . 
 Kopelman ,  M. D. ( 2008 ).  Retrograde episodic and semantic memory impairment correlates 
with side of temporal lobe damage .  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 
 14 ,  1081–1082.  
 Lhermitt e ,  F. , &  Beauvois ,  M. F. ( 1973 ).  A visual-speech disconnexion syndrome :  Report of a 
case with optic aphasia, agnostic alexia and colour agnosia .  Brain,  97 ,  695–714 . 
 Lichtheim ,  L. ( 1885 ).  On aphasia .  Brain,  7 ,  433–484 . 
 Lissauer ,  H. ( 1988 ).  Ein Fall von Seelenblindheit nebst einem Beitrag zur Th eorie derselben . 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology,  5 ,  157–192 , 1988. (Original work published in 1890.) 
 Martin, A., & Caramazza, A. (2003). Neuropsychological and neuroimaging perspectives on con-
ceptual knowledge: An introduction.  Cognitive Neuropsychology, 20 , 195–212. 
 Martin, A., & Chao, L. L. (2001). Semantic memory and the brain: Structure and processes. 
 Current Opinions in Neurobiology, 11, 194–201. 
 Martin ,  A. , &  Fedio ,  P. ( 1983 ).  Word production and comprehension in Alzheimer’s disease :  Th e 
breakdown of semantic knowledge .  Brain and Language,  19 ,  124–141 . 
 Martin, A., Ungerleider, L.G., Haxby, J.V.  Category specifi city and the brain: Th e sensory/motor 
model of semantic represenatations of objects. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), Th e New Cognitive 
Neurosciences, MIT Press, 1999, 1023–1036. 
 Mesulam, M. M., Grossman, M., Hillis, A. E., Kertesz, A., & Weintraub, S. (2003). Th e core 
and halo of primary progressive aphasia and semantic dementia.  Annals of Neurology, 54 
(Supplement 5), 11–14. 
  Newhart ,  M. ,  Ken ,  L.  ,  Kleinman ,  J. T. ,  Heidler-Gary ,  J. , &  Hillis ,  A. E. ( 2007 ).  Neural net-
works essential for naming and word comprehension .  Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 
 20 ,   25–30 . 
 Nyberg, L., & Tulving, E. (1996). Classifying human long-term memory: Evidence from con-
verging dissociations.  European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 8, 163–183. 
 Ochipa ,  C. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1989 ).  Ideational apraxia :  A defi cit in tool selection 
and use .  Annals of Neurology,  25 ,  190–193 . 
 Ochipa ,  C. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1992 ).  Conceptual apraxia in Alzheimer’s disease . 
 Brain,  115 ,  1061–1071 . 
 Paivio ,  A. ( 1971 ) .  Imagery and verbal processes . New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. 
 Paivio ,  A. ( 1986 ).   Mental representations:  A  dual coding approach  .  New  York :   Oxford 
University Press.  
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Croswell ,  S. C. , &  Rubens ,  A. B. ( 1989 ).  Apraxia in Alzheimer’s disease .  Neurology, 
 39 ,  664–668 . 
  Raymer ,  A. M. , &  Berndt ,  R. S. ( 1996 ).  Reading lexically without semantics :  Evidence from 
patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease .  Journal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society,  2 ,  340–349 . 
 Raymer ,  A. M. ,  Foundas ,  A. ,  Maher ,  L. ,  Greenwald ,  M. ,  Morris ,  M. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , &  Heilman ,  K. 
M. ( 1997 ).  Cognitive neuropsychological analysis and neuroanatomic correlates in a case of 
acute anomia .  Brain and Language,  58 ,  137–156 . 

Semantic Memory
87
 Raymer ,  A. M. ,  Greenwald ,  M. R. ,  Richardson ,  L. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1997 ) 
 Optic aphasia and optic apraxia: Case analysis and theoretical implications .  Neurocase,  3 , 
 173–183 . 
 Raymer, A. M., & Rothi, L. J. G. (2008). Cognitive neuropsychological approaches to assessment 
and treatment: Impairments of lexical comprehension and production. In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
 Language intervention strategies in adult aphasia (5th ed., pp. 607–631). Baltimore: Lippincott , 
Williams & Wilkins. 
 Reilly ,  J. , &  Peele ,  J. E. ( 2008 ).  Eff ects of semantic impairment on language processing in seman-
tic dementia .  Seminars in Speech and Language,  29 ,   32–43 . 
 Reilly ,  J. ,  Peele ,  J. E. , &  Grossman ,  M. ( 2007 ).  A unitary semantics account of reverse concrete-
ness eff ects in semantic dementia .  Brain and Language,  103 ,   86–87 . 
 Riddoch ,  M. J. , &  Humphreys ,  G. W. ( 1987 ).  Visual object processing in optic aphasia: A case of 
semantic access agnosia .  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  4 ,  131–185 . 
 Rogers ,  T. T. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Garrard ,  P. ,  Bozeat ,  S. ,  McClelland ,  J. L. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , & 
 Patt erson ,  K. ( 2004 ).  Structure and deterioration of semantic memory :  A neuropsychologi-
cal and computational investigation .  Psychological Review,  111 ,  205–235 . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. G. ,  Ochipa ,  C. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1991 ).  A cognitive neuropsychological model of 
limb praxis .  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  8 ,  443–458 . 
 Schwartz ,  M. F. ,  Kimberg ,  D. Y. ,  Walker ,  G. M. ,  Brecher ,  A. ,  Faseyitan ,  O. K. ,  Dell ,  G. S. ,  Mirman , 
 D. , &  Coslett  ,  H. B.   ( 2011 ).  Neuroanatomical dissociation for taxonomic and thematic 
knowledge in the human brain .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,  108 ( 2 ) , 
 8520–8524 . 
 Schwartz ,  M. F. ,  Kimberg ,  D. Y. ,  Walker ,  G. M. ,  Faseyitan ,  O. ,  Brecher ,  A. ,  Dell ,  G. S. , &  Coslett  , 
 H. B. ( 2009 ).  Anterior temporal involvement in semantic word retrieval :   Voxel-based 
lesion-symptom mapping evidence from aphasia .  Brain,  132 ,  3411–3427 . 
 Schwartz ,  R. L. ,  Adair ,  J. C. ,  Raymer ,  A. M. ,  Williamson ,  D. J. G. ,  Crosson ,  B. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G. , 
  Nadeau ,  S.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 2000 ).  Conceptual apraxia in probable Alzheimer’s dis-
ease as demonstrated by the Florida Action Recall Test .  Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society,  6 ,  265–270 . 
 Seymour ,  P. H.  K. ( 1973 ).  A model for reading, naming, and comparison .  British Journal of 
Psychology,  64 ,  35–49 . 
 Seymour ,  P. H. K. ( 1979 ).   Human visual cognition  .  New York :  St. Martin’s Press . 
   Shallice ,  T.   ( 1988 ).  Specialisation within the semantic system .   Cognitive Neuropsychology,  5 , 
 133–142 . 
 Shelton ,  J. R. , &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 2001 ).  Th e organization of semantic memory . In  B.  Rapp (ed.),  Th e 
handbook of cognitive neuropsychology (pp.  423–443 ).  Philadelphia, PA :  Psychology Press . 
 Snowden ,  J. S. ,  Th ompson ,  J. C. , &  Neary ,  D. ( 2004 ).  Knowledge of famous faces and names in 
semantic dementia .  Brain,  127 ,  860–872 . 
 Squire ,  L. R. ( 1982 ).  Th e neuropsychology of human memory.  Annual Reviews of Neuroscience , 
 5 ,  241–273 . 
 Taylor ,  K. I. ,  Salamoura ,  A. ,  Randall ,  B. ,  Moss ,  H. , &  Tyler ,  L. K. ( 2008 ).  Clarifying the nature 
of the distinctiveness by domain interaction in conceptual structure: Comment on Cree, 
McNorgan, and McRae (2006) .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition,  34 ,  719–725 . 
 Tulving ,  E. ( 1972 ).  Episodic and semantic memory . In  E.  Tulving &  W.  Donaldson , (eds.), 
 Organization of memory (pp.  382–403 ).  New York :  Academic Press . 
 Tulving, E. (1986). What kind of a hypothesis is the distinction between episodic and semantic 
memory?  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 307–311. 
 Tyler ,  L. K. ,  Bright ,  P. ,  Dick ,  E. ,  Tavares ,  P. ,  Pilgrim ,  L. ,  Fletcher ,  P. ,  Greer ,  M.  , &  Moss ,  H. ( 2003 ). 
 Do semantic categories activate distinct cortical regions? Evidence for a distributed neural 
semantic system .   Cognitive Neuropsychology,  20 ,  541–559 . 
 Tyler ,  L. K. , &  Moss ,  H. E. ( 2001 ).  Towards a distributed account of conceptual knowledge . 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences,  5 ,  244–252 . 

88
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Tyler ,  L. K. ,  Moss ,  H. E. ,  Durrant-Peatfi eld ,  M. R. , &  Levy ,  J. P. ( 2000 ).  Conceptual structure 
and the structure of concepts :  A distributed account of category-specifi c defi cits .  Brain and 
Language,  75 ,  195–231 . 
   Warrington ,  E. K.  , &   McCarthy ,  R.   ( 1983 ).  Category specifi c access dysphasia .   Brain,  106 , 
 859–878 . 
   Warrington ,  E. K.  , &   McCarthy ,  R.   ( 1987 ).  Categories of knowledge :  Further fractionations and 
an att empted integration .  Brain,  110 ,  1273–1296 . 
 Warrington ,  E. K. , &   Shallice ,  T. ( 1984 ).  Category specifi c semantic impairment .  Brain,  107 , 
 829–854 . 
 Williamson ,  D. J. G. ,  Adair ,  J. C. ,  Raymer ,  A. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1998 ).  Naming impairments 
for objects and actions in Alzheimer’s Disease .  Cortex,  34 ,  601–610 . 
  Wernicke ,  C. ( 1874 ).  Der Aphasische Synptomenkomplex (trans .).  Boston Studies in Philosophy 
of Science,  4 ,   34–97 .  

89
 C H A P T E R  5 
 Alexias and Agraphias
  
 David P.  Roeltgen and  Elizabeth H.  Lacey  
 Introduction 
 Disorders of writt en language (alexias and agraphias) have been studied since 
the 19th century. Many authors have stressed the associations between writt en 
language disorders and oral language disorders (aphasias) ( Ogle, 1867 ) and oth-
ers have stressed the dissociations between them ( Nielson, 1946 ). Evaluation of 
patients with acquired disorders of writt en language has informed us about ana-
tomic localization of behavior, functional systems and interactions of these sys-
tems. Th ese evaluations have demonstrated associations of alexia and agraphia 
with aphasia, and with each other. Th ey have also demonstrated that alexia and 
agraphia may occur independently and in isolation. Most studies focus on patients 
with strokes. However, studies of progressive disease, including dementia, also 
contribute to studies of disorders of writt en language. 
 Th e studies of patients with stroke have shown an evolution. From the 19th 
century through the mid-20th century, they focused on the clinical anatomic 
correlations of associations and dissociations between alexias and agraphias, and 
between these disorders and other cognitive functions, especially aphasia. Th is 
was probably due, at least in part, to the limits of clinical pathological correla-
tions based on autopsy. For example,  Benson and Geschwind (1969 ) described 
four alexias: hemialexia (reading of only one half of a word) from lesions of the 
corpus callosum; alexia without agraphia (impaired reading with the charac-
teristics of this disorder not further defi ned) from lesions in the distribution of 
the posterior cerebral artery; alexia with agraphia (impaired reading and writ-
ing with the characteristics of these disorders not further defi ned) from lesions 
in the parietal lobe; and aphasic alexia (impaired writing dominated by spell-
ing errors) from multiple anatomic sites associated with the aphasias.  Leischner 
(1969) used a similar method to classify the agraphias. He delineated agraphias 

90
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
due to language disturbances, mostly from lesions in the temporal lobe; primary 
agraphias due to constructional disturbances from lesions of the parietal lobe; 
and apraxic agraphia oft en from lesions of the parietal lobe. 
 In contrast to the use of autopsy, clinical-anatomic analysis in the later decades 
of the 20th century and the fi rst decade of the 21st century have been dominated 
by imaging studies. Th e larger numbers of analyses helped investigators make 
more detailed analyses of the clinical anatomic relationships. With this increased 
ability to do anatomic analyses, the need to utilize more detailed cognitive analy-
ses became apparent, and studies refl ected the greater insight into previously and 
newly described cognitive phenomena. Th ese classifi cations included some dis-
orders that are essentially unchanged in their clinical description, including pure 
alexia and apraxic agraphia. In contrast, others, especially those associated with 
aphasia, have undergone much change since the mid-20th century as analyses of 
aphasia, alexia, and agraphia were increasingly motivated by linguistic concepts 
such as phonology (organization of sounds), syntax (rules covering construction 
of sentences), and semantics (meaning). Simultaneously, with this evolution of 
cognitive analyses, the availability of structural imaging, fi rst computed tomog-
raphy (CT), then magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), allowed not only analy-
sis of larger numbers of clinical anatomic correlations, but also analysis of these 
correlations in the acute and chronic phases of stroke. Th ese changes in method 
have allowed signifi cantly increased sophistication in the studies of alexia and 
agraphia. For example, later in this chapter, the relationships between writt en 
language behavior in acute compared to chronic lesions will be addressed in a 
study of agraphia. 
 An additional important construct is that writt en language is a relatively 
recent addition to human cognitive abilities. While oral language probably dates 
from 100,000 to 35,000 B.C.E. ( Yule, 1996 ), writt en language probably dates 
from only a few thousand years B.C.E. Oral language appears to have been a bio-
logical adaptation associated with the ascent of  Homo sapiens . Writt en language, 
however, appears to have been a societal adaptation associated with expansion 
and socialization within  Homo sapiens . Th erefore, although it can be argued that 
oral language is, at least in part, produced by brain structures that are biologically 
adapted specifi cally for that ability, it is much more likely that writt en language 
is produced by brain structures biologically adapted to other abilities. We might 
therefore expect a signifi cant overlap of writt en-language brain-behavior relation-
ships with non-language brain-behavior relationships. 
 Alexia 
 Alexia is traditionally divided into peripheral and linguistic alexias. Peripheral 
alexias are due to a disruption of systems not specifi c to the language network, 

Alexias and Agraphias
91
such as vision or att ention. Linguistic alexias are due to disruptions in the lan-
guage network and, in that way, tend to refl ect some of the constructs associated 
with language, including lexicality (the concept of whether a series of lett ers is, or 
is not, a word), orthography (standardized spelling), phonology, and semantics. 
Two of the four alexias described by  Benson and Geschwind (1969 ) are consid-
ered peripheral alexias (hemialexia and alexia without agraphia). Pure alexia, or 
alexia without agraphia, may be the most well-known alexia because the behavior 
associated with it is so striking: patients are able to write a word, but are unable 
to read what they have writt en ( Behrmann et al., 1998 ). Other patients are also 
unable to name lett ers and some show a mild naming impairment ( Binder & 
Mohr, 1992 ;  Behrmann et al., 1998 ). Pure alexia was att ributed to a lesion in the 
distribution of the left  posterior cerebral artery that caused right homonymous 
hemianopia. Dejerine described this disorder, and Geschwind applied a discon-
nection model in explaining the clinical-pathological associations. Th is model 
postulated that, because posterior strokes usually involve intrahemispheric con-
nections, the visual information in the intact right hemisphere could not access 
the intact left  hemisphere language systems. Some recent studies have argued 
that pure alexia results from a specifi c lesion location rather than a disconnection 
( Beversdorf, 1997 ). Trying to characterize the lesion that reliably causes certain 
aspects of the syndrome known as pure alexia has implications for which struc-
tures are involved in normal reading. If damage to intrahemispheric connections 
is necessary for pure alexia to result, the implication is that the right hemisphere 
can process the orthographic stimuli, but the damage to its connection to the left  
hemisphere prevents the information from reaching the language centers. If such 
damage is not necessary, the implication is that pure alexia results from damage 
to left  occipital and temporal areas necessary for decoding of visually presented 
orthographic stimuli. 
 Cohen and colleagues att empted to delineate the pathophysiology of pure 
alexia by using an overlap technique to establish a critical lesion for causing pure 
alexia (2003). Th ey suggested that the fusiform gyrus in the posterior left  tempo-
ral lobe was the critical region that, when lesioned, produced pure alexia. Because 
of this and the region’s tendency to show preferential activity for word stimuli in 
fMRI studies, the term Visual Word Form Area (VWFA) was coined to describe 
this region ( Shallice and Warrington, 1980 ;  Cohen et al., 2003 ). However, there 
is much debate about the level of specifi city of this area. Some have argued that 
it is misleading to use the term VWFA, considering that the area is also active 
for other types of stimuli, and because there is evidence that damage to this area 
has not been shown to be specifi c to reading ( Price & Devlin, 2003 ). Th e debate 
as to the specifi city of this region continues ( Tsapkini & Rapp, 2010 ;  Starrfelt 
et al., 2010 ). 
 Studies of patients with pure alexia provide important insights about read-
ing and its relationship to the brain. Some patients with pure alexia cannot read 

92
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
lett ers or words ( Lott  & Friedman, 1994 ;  Binder & Mohr, 1992 ). Some can read 
lett ers, but not words and are unable to piece the word together one lett er at a 
time. Some can read lett ers but not words and use a lett er-by-lett er strategy piec-
ing the word together one lett er at a time. Other patients with a less severe form 
of pure alexia can read words, but show a marked eff ect of length. Th ey make 
errors on longer words and read longer words more slowly. Additionally, there are 
hemianopic patients who read words accurately, but slowly compared to normal 
controls. Th ese fi ndings suggest that these patients represent a continuum of cog-
nitive dysfunction. Th ere also appears to be a continuum related to the size of the 
lesion (larger lesions causing greater disability), but also a continuum of location, 
from primarily inferior and medial occipital to inferior temporal. Lesions that are 
primarily occipital appear to be associated with slowed reading and hemianopia 
( Pfl ugshauptet al., 2009 )] and lesions that are primarily inferior temporal, with or 
without occipital involvement, appear to be associated with greater impairment 
of reading lett ers and words ( Binder & Mohr, 1992 ). 
 Th e continuum of defi cits in this disorder generates questions about how writ-
ten language is organized in the brain. Although the most severe patients are 
unable to name single lett ers, they can be trained to do so using a tactile-kinesthetic 
strategy ( Lott  & Friedman, 1994 ), suggesting that an abstract representation of 
the lett er is intact even though the decoding of the visual stimulus has been dis-
rupted. Th is is consistent with studies showing that representations of orthogra-
phy become increasingly abstract as the ventral processing stream moves from 
the occipital to temporal cortex ( Vinckier, 2007 ). 
 Hemialexia, the other peripheral alexia, is a rare disorder. Typically, these are 
patients who have diffi  culty reading words in the left  visual fi eld. Th ese patients 
invariably have lesions of the posterior corpus callosum, including the splenium, 
and perhaps the posterior aspect of the body ( Sieroff  and Lavidor, 2007 ). Th is 
relationship is best interpreted using a model similar to that used for pure alexia. 
Visual input to the right hemisphere has impaired access to the left  fusiform gyrus. 
 Th e central or linguistic alexias (phonological, deep, and surface alexia) usu-
ally arise from lesions in or adjacent to the perisylvian area. Such lesions also typi-
cally cause aphasia, agraphia, or both.  Benson and Geschwind (1969 ) referred to 
these as alexia with agraphia if patients did not have aphasia, and aphasic alexia if 
they did. However,  Marshal and Newcombe (1966) took an alternative approach 
to the analysis of reading. Instead of focusing on the relationships between read-
ing and other cognitive abilities, especially writing, they described a linguistic 
analysis of alexia. Th eir study and subsequent studies have delineated a category 
of what may be termed linguistic alexias. Th ese studies support the contention 
that there are two routes or systems for reading, a phonological route and a lexi-
cal route. Th e former relies on the relationship connecting the writt en word to a 
series of sounds. Patients with an impairment of this route show an inability to 
read pseudowords (e.g.,  nud ), but are able to read real words, including words with 

Alexias and Agraphias
93
irregular orthographic-phonological relationships (irregular words, e.g.,  yacht ). 
Th is performance demonstrates an inability to use the visual system to access 
word sounds. (accessing phonology from orthography). Th is disability is termed 
phonological agraphia. Patients with phonological alexia may also demonstrate 
reading defi cits for words with low semantic value, such as function words (e.g., 
 it ,  the ) and abstract words (e.g.,  truth ,  faith ), but good performance on reading 
concrete words (e.g.,  dog ,  pencil ). Th is patt ern is interpreted as an over-reliance on 
semantic systems ( Friedman, 2002 ). A controversy similar to that involving pure 
alexia and the word form area is present in the literature that att empts to explain 
phonological alexia, Some authors have argued that patients with phonological 
alexia have a generalized impairment of phonological processing. Th e studies 
that support this position indicate that these patients have impaired ability on 
non-reading phonological tasks in addition to having impaired ability on read-
ing of pseudowords ( Coltheart, 1996 ). In contrast, there is one report of a patient 
with impaired pseudoword reading who does not have other phonological defi cits 
(Derouesné & Beauvois, 1985). Th erefore, it would appear that the transforma-
tion of novel writt en words into the appropriate sound sequences requires a pho-
nological reading system that is closely tied to a more generalized phonological 
ability. A possible subgroup of patients with phonological alexia make semantic 
errors on reading real, concrete words (e.g., reading  pencil as  scissors ) in addition 
to being unable to read pseudowords. Th ey are described as having deep alexia 
( Coltheart et al., 1980 ). Whether this is a separate disorder, or similar to the con-
tinuum of severity described with pure alexia, a more severe form of phonological 
alexia is another area of debate. 
 In contrast to the group of patients who cannot read psuedowords is a group of 
patients who have diffi  culty reading orthographically irregular words (e.g.,  yacht ). 
Additionally, they may make regularization errors, such as reading  island as 
 izland . Th ese patients may also make lexicalization errors such as reporting that 
a pseudoword (e.g.,  sope ) is the real word  soap . Patients with these error patt erns 
are described as having surface alexia. Th e cognitive mechanism that produces 
this disorder is an over-reliance on the phonological system due to the impair-
ment of the ability to utilize links between complex or irregular orthographic 
sequences and their phonological relationships. We may describe this as disrup-
tion of an orthographic system. Much of the recent work on surface alexia focuses 
on patients with semantic dementia because of the relatively consistent pathology 
in the temporal lobe and the high frequency of surface alexia in this population 
( Woolams et al., 2007 ). Surface alexia can be observed aft er stroke, but is more 
common aft er hemorrhage or head injury ( Coslett , 2003 ). 
 Lesions causing phonologic alexia are usually in the distribution of the left  
middle cerebral artery (MCA), oft en involving the superior temporal lobe, angu-
lar gyrus. and supramarginal gyrus ( Coslett , 2003 ). It has been suggested that 
deep alexia is simply a more severe version of phonological alexia on a continuum 

94
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
of phonological reading defi cits ( Friedman, 1996 ). Th ese patients generally have 
larger left  perisylvian lesions ( Coslett , 2003 ). In English reading patients with 
alexia, the dual route model is widely accepted. (See studies by McClelland and 
others for an alternative approach, arguing for a single route model.) Support 
for this model is also present in studies done on patients who read Japanese. Th e 
Japanese language contains both syllabograms (kana) and logograms (kanji). 
Th ere are reports of patients who are severely impaired when reading words, 
including concrete words, in the kana script, in which symbols represent sounds, 
as in English. However, their reading of kanji, in which symbols directly repre-
sent concepts, is relatively preserved. Th e opposite may also occur. Th ese data 
off er further support for a lexical and non-lexical route in reading. ( Coltheart 
et al., 1980 ). 
 Th e dual route model has been quite infl uential in generating hypotheses 
about how humans accomplish the task of reading, and it would not have been 
possible without careful study of patients with lesions to purported anatomical 
areas corresponding to cognitive modules in reading. In an era of highly sophisti-
cated imaging techniques, certain questions can still only be answered by study-
ing stroke patients. For example,  Hillis et al (2001; 2005 ; 2007) studied patients 
at the superacute stage (within 24 hours of stroke) to determine defi cits to the 
major components of reading (orthographic input lexicon, lexical semantics, 
phonological output lexicon). By conducting behavioral testing and imaging the 
areas to which blood fl ow had been restored, these authors were able to determine 
defi nitive links between recovery of specifi c aspects of reading and reperfusion 
of specifi c brain areas. Pseudoword reading (and spelling) appears to rely on a 
network of areas that include Brodmann’s areas 37 and 40 (supermarginal gyrus 
and posterior-inferior temporal/fusiform gyrus). Th is method gives us precise 
information without the confound of reorganization that is inherent in studies of 
chronic (and even acute) stroke patients. Also, unlike functional neuroimaging 
of control subjects, it gives us information about the areas  necessary to reading as 
opposed to the areas  involved  in reading.  
 Agraphia 
 Similar to alexia, there are two general categories of agraphia. Agraphia is tra-
ditionally divided into linguistic and motor agraphias ( Ogle, 1867 ). Linguistic 
agraphias are those that have language dysfunction as their basis. Th e patients 
with aphasic agraphia described by  Leischner (1969) are roughly equivalent to 
the patients described as having linguistic agraphias. Similar to that described 
for reading, there appear to be two routes for spelling, a phonological route and 
a lexical route. Linguistic agraphias include phonological, lexical (or surface), 
and semantic agraphias in this category. (Roeltgen, and  Ullrich, 2012 ;  Roeltgen 

Alexias and Agraphias
95
and Heilman, 1985 ;  Roeltgen and Rapcsak, 1993 ; Rapcsak et al., 2009;  Marien 
et al 2001 ;  Henry et al., 2007 ). Patients with motor agraphias have impairments 
in output, and include primary agraphias (constructional) and apraxic agraphia. 
Current models also include agraphias from impairments of att ention and allo-
graphic knowledge in this category. 
 Phonological agraphia is similar to phonological alexia and was fi rst described 
by  Shallice (1981 ). He described an agraphia characterized by relatively preserved 
ability to spell real words, including words that are orthographically irregular 
(i.e.,  yacht ) but with an inability to spell pronounceable pseudowords (i.e.,  nud ). 
Patients with this disorder usually make phonologically incorrect errors that may 
have a degree of visual similarity to the correct response. Shallice concluded that 
this patient had an impairment of phonological processing, necessary for translat-
ing sounds into lett ers. 
 In contrast to the patient described by  Shallice (1981 ) was a patient with lexi-
cal agraphia described by  Beauvois and Derouesn é  (1981 ). Th eir patient was able 
to spell pronounceable pseudowords, but had diffi  culty spelling orthographi-
cally irregular words compared to regular words (i.e.,  thing ). Th eir patient also 
made frequent regularization errors when spelling irregular words ( yacht ->YAT). 
Impairment of this type is consistent with disruption of an orthographic (lett er 
group) or lexical (whole word) route, with relative preservation of a phonological 
route. Although  Beauvois and Derouesne(1981 ) were the fi rst to describe lexical 
agraphia,  Roeltgen and Heilman (1984 ) were the fi rst to att empt to delineate the 
anatomy underlying it. Th ey proposed that the junction of the posterior angular 
gyrus and the parietal-occipital lobule was an important anatomic substrate for 
this disorder. Subsequent studies have demonstrated that cortical or subcortical 
lesions involving multiple non-perisylvian sites are typically associated with lexi-
cal agraphia ( Wolz & Roeltgen, 1989 :  Alexander et al., 1990 ;  Rothi et al., 1987 ; 
 Croisile et al., 1989 ;  Rapcsak et al., 1988 ;  Roeltgen and Rapcsak 1993 ,  Rapcsak 
and Beeson, 2004 ). Th is heterogeneity is consistent with  Hatfi eld’s (1985 ) posi-
tion that the lexical system might contain multiple cognitive components. 
Additionally, in a cross-sectional study, Roeltgen has found that the typical pat-
tern of lexical agraphia appears to be more common in stroke patients who have 
chronic lesions than in patients who have acute lesions (Roeltgen and  Ullrich, 
2012 ). We have suggested that the ability to utilize the phonological route to spell 
is not necessarily an automatic process, but requires time, training (therapy), or 
brain reorganization to be successful in spelling real words. 
 Roeltgen and colleagues ( Roeltgen et al., 1983 ;  Roeltgen and Heilman, 1984 ) 
originally proposed that the supramarginal gyrus or the insula medial to it was 
the anatomic basis of phonological agraphia. Subsequent studies have demon-
strated a degree of anatomic diversity, with lesions occurring within the entire 
perisylvian region resulting in phonological agraphia ( Shallice, 1981 ;  Bub and 
Kertesz, 1982 ;  Nolan and Caramazza, 1982 ;  Alexander et al., 1992 ;  Baxter and 

96
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Warrington,1986 ;  Bolla-Wilson et al. 1985 ;  Rapcsak and Beeson, 2002 ;  Henry 
et  al, 2007 ;  Marien et  al, 2001 ; Rapcsak et  al., 2009).  Henry and colleagues 
(2007) have suggested that the diversity in phonological agraphia represents indi-
vidual variations in cerebral architecture and functional representation ( Henry 
et al, 2007 ). Th e association of phonological agraphia with the perisylvian area is 
similar to the association of phonological alexia and the perisylvian area. Th ese 
fi ndings of perisylvian involvement support the perisylvian role in phonological 
processing. However, studies have shown that this association does not represent 
a single cognitive and cerebral system that translates all symbolic visual input into 
sounds (phonological reading), then reverses direction to translate sounds into 
symbolic output (phonological writing). A few patients have been described who 
demonstrate dissociations between phonological alexia and agraphia ( Roeltgen 
and Heilman, 1984  and  Roeltgen,1993 ). Clinical and radiological presentations 
of phonological and lexical agraphia create a double dissociation of phonological 
processing and lexical (orthographic) processing, as well as a double dissociation 
of anatomic sites, similar to that found with alexia. 
 Initial reports describing phonological agraphia argued that preserved spelling 
utilized a lexical-semantic route ( Beauvois & Derouesne, 1981 ;  Roeltgen, Sevush, 
& Heilman, 1983 ). However,  Roeltgen and colleagues (1986)  described patients 
who were able to spell pronounceable pseudowords, and therefore had an intact 
phonological system, and many orthographically irregular words, and therefore 
had an intact lexical system, but had diffi  culty providing the semantically correct 
spelling for irregular homophones. For example, when asked to write  doe as in 
“the doe ran through the forest,” these patients might write “dough.” Detailed 
patient analysis demonstrated a disruption of semantic ability or a disconnec-
tion of semantics from spelling. Th ey termed this disorder “semantic agraphia.” 
( Roeltgen et al., 1986 ). Patients with semantic agraphia lose their ability to spell 
and write with meaning. Th ey may produce semantic jargon in sentence produc-
tion ( Rapcsak and Rubens, 1990 ). Th e pathology of the reported patients with 
semantic agraphia is variable, but frequently involves anatomic substrates impor-
tant for accessing meaning in speech ( Roeltgen and Rapcsak, 1993 ). Semantic 
agraphia is also a common fi nding in early Alzheimer’s disease ( Niels and 
Roeltgen, 1995 a), consistent with the early semantic dysfunction in that disorder.  
 Models of Writing 
 Analysis of the three linguistic agraphias described above results in a model such 
as that described in Figure 1. Spontaneous writing initiates activity in the seman-
tic region prior to utilization of the lexical, and perhaps, the phonologic systems 
for production of the correct word. Writing to dictation requires auditory input 
into either the orthographic system (writing words that one can spell, but does not 

Alexias and Agraphias
97
know the meaning of), the phonologic systems (writing words that are unknown, 
but orthographically regular) with or without input from the semantic system, for 
words whose meaning is known. 
 In contrast to the linguistic agraphias described above are the peripheral 
agraphias. Impaired att ention, a common cause of peripheral agraphia, is asso-
ciated with production of correctly formed but linguistically incorrect lett ers. 
Omissions, substitutions, insertions, and transpositions in pseudowords and real 
words in oral and writt en spelling are the prominent error types. Impairment 
occurs in spontaneous writing, writing to dictation, writt en naming, and delayed 
copying. Errors are not aff ected by linguistic factors (i.e., word class, regularity, 
and imageability). Errors are more common at the beginning and ends of and 
in longer words ( Cantagallo and Bonazzi, 1996 ). If there is a lateralized impair-
ment of att ention, there may be a refl ection of that lateralization, leading to a pre-
ponderance of errors on the side of the word that is contralateral to the lesion. 
Studies of patients with these error types have led to the conclusion that there is 
a graphemic buff er or working memory storage system. It has been proposed that 
this temporary store of information contains the abstract lett er concept in prepa-
ration for processing by the output systems for oral or writt en spelling. Lesions 
 
11
1
semantic
system
auditory
input
auditory
association
Heschl’s
gyrus
3
2
10
12
13
4
24
7
25
9
15
17
21
23
19
auditory
engrams
Wernicke’s
area
5
6
orthographic
system
nonperisylvian
regions
14
graphemic
buffer
multifocal
22
allographic
stores
uncertain
16
graphemic
area
dominant
parietal lobe
8
phonological
system
perisylvian
regions
18
nonverbal
visuospatial
orientation
nondominant
parietal lobe,
cerebellum
20
graphemic
output
programming
premotor
region
26
verbal
output
programming
Broca’s
area
motor
programming
area 4
(mouth)
motor
programming
writing
oral spelling
area 4
(hand)
 Figure 5.1   A schematic diagram of the processes involved in writing and spelling.  

98
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
associated with graphemic buff er disturbances have included the left  frontal pari-
etal region ( Hillis and Caramazza, 1989 ;  Lesser, 1990 ), the left  parietal region 
( Miceli et al., 1985 ;  Cubelli, 1991 ;  Posteraro et al., 1988 ;  Annoni et al., 1998 ), and 
the right frontal parietal and basal ganglia region ( Hillis and Caramazza, 1989 ). 
We (unpublished observation) and M.  Laine (personal communication) have 
each observed patients with apparent agraphia due to impairment of the graphe-
mic buff er; these patients had relatively discrete lesions of the left  posterior dorsal 
lateral frontal lobe.  Cubelli (1991 ) described an instance of the disorder from a 
subcortical left  frontal lesion. Of note, these lesions lie in regions not associated 
with the linguistic writt en language disorders. 
 Rothi and Heilman (1981 ) described a patient who had diffi  culty producing 
the correct strokes when writing and had trouble recognizing the correct strokes 
in lett ers when reading. However, this patient was able to spell aloud without 
diffi  culty, and writing improved with copying. Th ey suggested that this repre-
sented dysfunction of a “graphemic area,” a system important for assembling 
the proper strokes in writt en lett er output, and utilized visuokinesthetic motor 
engrams. Th e patt ern of errors is similar to the sequencing and position errors 
made by patients with apraxia. Th e disorder that these patients have is termed 
apraxic agraphia, and these patients may or may not have limb apraxia ( Heilman 
et al., 1973 ,  1974 ;  Valenstein and Heilman, 1979 ;Roeltgen and Heilman 1983; 
 Margolin and Binder,1984 ; Baxter and Warrington, 1986 ;  Carey and Heilman, 
1988 ;  Hodges, 1991 ;  Otsuki et  al., 1999 ;  Del GrossoDestreri et  al., 2000 ). 
Th erefore, the graphemic area appears to be anatomically and conceptually 
distinct from, but closely related to, the structures important for limb praxis. 
Clinical-radiological correlations support the conclusion that the dominant 
parietal lobe is important for this function. Within the parietal lobe, lesions spe-
cifi c to the postcentral gyrus, the intraparietal sulcus, and the anterior intrapa-
rietal sulcus may be associated with clinically distinct types of apraxic agraphia 
( Sakurai et al., 2007 ). However, at least one patient with this disorder has had a 
frontal lesion ( Hodges, 1991 ). 
 Other disturbances of stroke production in writing have been described. Such 
patients show reiteration of strokes and inability to write on a straight horizontal 
line, and insertion of blank spaces between graphemes. Th ey may also write on 
only one side of the paper (when associated with the neglect syndrome). Patients 
with such fi ndings have been described as having constructional agraphia, visuo-
spatial agraphia or aff erent “dysgraphia” (Ellis et al.,1987). Th is syndrome is usu-
ally due to nondominant parietal or frontal lobe lesions (Ardila & Rosselli, 1993). 
 Ellis and colleagues (1987)  emphasized the term  aff erent and suggested that it 
occurred due to failure to utilize visual and kinesthetic feedback.  Silveri and col-
leagues (1997)  provided support for this latt er hypothesis in a patient with spatial 
agraphia from a cerebellar lesion. Th eir patient performed much bett er with his 
eyes open than with his eyes closed. 

Alexias and Agraphias
99
 Evaluations of writing errors in normal subjects (slips of the pen) (Ellis, 
1979) and patients with brain lesions may show errors of case (upper versus 
lower) or style (print [manuscript] versus script [cursive]( Black et al., 1987 ; 
 Debastiani and Barry, 1989 ;  Kartounis, 1992 ;  Trojano and Chichio, 1994 ;  Del 
GrossoDestini et al., 2000 ;  Menichelli et al., 2008 ). Th ese errors include dif-
fi culty producing a specifi c case or style or substitution of one particular case 
or style for another. Analyses of these patients are consistent with a degree of 
functional and anatomic separation between lett ers in diff erent formats. Th e 
abitity to direct the handwriting system to produce the specifi c lett er form 
has been termed the allographic store. Insuffi  cient subjects with this impair-
ment have been described to allow for conclusions regarding possible anatomic 
localization. 
 Hemiagraphia is an inability to write with nondominant hand. It has, in con-
junction with associated impairments, helped the understanding of laterality and 
interhemispheric connectivity by the corpus callosum. In the agraphias previously 
described, the dominant and nondominant hands are equally aff ected, except 
when one hand is paretic.  Liepman and Maas (1907) and others ( Geschwind and 
Kaplan, 1962 ; Bogen, 1969;  Levy, et al.. 1971 ;  Rubens et al.. 1977 ;  Sugishita et al.. 
1980 ;  Yamadori et al., 1980 ;  Gersh and Damasio, 1981 ;  Watson and Heilman, 
1983 :   Tanaka et  al., 1990 ) have described patients who can write with their 
dominant hand, but are unable to with their nondominant hand. Th e production 
with the nondominant hand is usually unintelligible, but improves with copying. 
Some patients can type with their aff ected limb ( Watson and Heilman, 1983 ) and 
others cannot ( Geschwind and Kaplan, 1962 ).  Watson and Heilman (1983 ) sug-
gested that the diff erence was sparing of the genu of the corpus callosum, allow-
ing for transmission of verbal-motor engrams to the nondominant hemisphere. 
Patients with hemiagraphia usually also have unilateral apraxia of the dominant 
hand ( Watson and Heilman, 1983 ). However, this also is not always true ( Gersh 
and Damasio, 1981 ). Additionally, the patient of  Gersh and Damasio (1981 ) had a 
lesion of the posterior corpus callosum and produced aphasic-type errors.  Watson 
and Heilman (1983 ) concluded that language information (correct spellings) was 
transferred in the posterior (splenium) of the corpus callosum and praxis in the 
central (body). Analysis of patients with hemiagraphia, similar to the analysis of 
patients with hemialexia, therefore illustrates many of the clinical dissociations 
that can occur in writt en language and gives insight into the functional localiza-
tion of the corpus callosum. 
 Conclusions 
 Analyses of patients with alexia and agraphia have yielded considerable insight 
into brain function. Important in this regard is the need to consider that writt en 

100
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
language is a late development in human evolution. Th e relationships between 
phonological alexia and agraphia and brain localization of function are consistent 
with a fundamental construct regarding the linguistic processing within the left  
hemisphere. Structures within the perisylvian region appear to be capable of or 
perhaps necessary for (as suggested by the results of Hillis and colleagues) per-
forming sound-to-lett er conversion and lett er-to-sound conversion. Structures 
distinct from those involved in phonological relationships appear important for 
many of the non-phonological facets of writt en language. Th ese relationships are 
consistant with the notion that the evolution of writt en language abilities have 
depended on the presence of oral language. Th e apparent redundancy of brain 
regions associated with a specifi c function (multiple non-perisylvian areas asso-
ciated with lexical agraphia) refl ects the multiple brain systems that appear to 
mutually support a single behavior. Additionally, as is apparent from the issues 
concerning the visual word form area and the associations of agraphia with att en-
tion and praxis, the writt en language system has been constructed utilizing brain 
regions with capacities that are conducive to general relationships of cognitive 
systems or modules, not specifi c localized structures for specifi c writt en language 
functions. 
 References 
 Alexander ,  M. P. ,  Friedman ,  R. B. ,  Loverso ,  F. , &  Fischer ,  R. ( 1990 ).  Anatomic correlates of 
Lexical Agraphia .  Presented at the Academy of Aphasia, Baltimore, MD . 
 Alexander ,  M. P. ,  Friedman ,  R. B. ,  Loverso ,  F., &  Fischer ,  R. S. ( 1992 ).  Lesion localization of 
phonological agraphia .  Brain Language ,  43 ,  83–95 . 
 Annoni ,  J. M. ,  Lemay ,  M. A. , de  Matt os Pimenta ,  M. A. , &  Lecours ,  A. R. ( 1998 ).  Th e contribu-
tion of att entional mechanisms to an irregularity eff ect at the grapheme buff er level .  Brain 
Language ,  63 ,  63–78 . 
 Ardila, A., & Rosselli, M. (1993).  Spatial Agraphia. Brain and Cognition, 22, 137–147. 
 Baxter ,  D. M., &  Warrington ,  E. K. ( 1986 ).  Ideational agraphia: A single case study .  Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry ,  49 ,  369–374 . 
   Behrmann   M.  ,   Nelson   J.  ,   Sekuler ,  E. B.   ( 1998 ).  Visual complexity in lett er-by-lett er read-
ing: “pure” alexia is not pure .  Neuropsychologia ,  36 (  11  ),  1115–1132 . 
 Benson ,  D. F. , &  Geschwind ,  N. ( 1969 ). In  P. J.  Vinken &  G. W.  Bruyn (eds.),  Handbook of Clinical 
Neurology (pp.  112–140 ).  Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company . 
 Binder  J. R. , &  Mohr  J. P. ( 1992 ).  Th e topography of transcallosal reading pathways: a case–con-
trol analysis .  Brain ,  115 ,  1807–1826 . 
   Beversdorf ,  D. Q.  ,   Ratcliff e ,  N. R.  ,   Rhodes ,  C. H.  , &   Reeves ,  A. G.   ( 1997 ).  Pure 
alexia:  clinical-pathologic evidence for a lateralized visual language association cortex . 
 Clinical Neuropathology , 16 (  6  ),  328–31 . 
 Beauvois  M. F ., &  Derouesné  J. ( 1981 ).  Lexical or orthographic agraphia .  Brain ,  104 
( part   1  ),   21–49 . 
   Black ,  S. E.  ,   Behrmann ,  M.  ,   Bass ,  K  ., &   Hacker ,  P.   ( 1987 ).  Selective writing impairment: Beyond 
the allographic code .  Aphasiology ,  3 ( 3 ),  265–277 . 
   Bogen ,  J. E.   ( 1969 ).  Th e other side of the brain I: Dysgraphia and dyscopia following cerebral 
commissurotomy .  Bulletin of the Los Angeles Neurological Society ,  34 ,  3–105 . 

Alexias and Agraphias
101
 Bolla-Wilson ,  K. ,  Speedie ,  J. J ., &  Robinson ,  R. G. ( 1985 ).  Phonologic agraphia in a left -handed 
patient aft er a right-hemisphere lesion .  Neurology ,  35 ,  1778–1781 . 
 Bub ,  D ., &  Kertesz ,  A. ( 1982 ).  Deep agraphia .  Brain Language ,  17 ,  146–165 . 
 Cantagallo & Bonazzi, ( 1996 ).  Acquired dysgraphia with selective damage to the graphemic buf-
fer: a single case report .  Th e Italian Journal of Neurological Sciences ,  17 (  3  ),  249–254 . 
 Carey ,  M. A ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1988 ).  Lett er imagery defi cits in a case of pure apraxic agraphia . 
 Brain Language ,  34 ,  147–156 . 
 Cohen  L. ,  Martinaud  O. ,  Lemer  C. ,  Lehericy ,  S. ,  Samson ,  Y. ,  Obadia ,  M . . .  Dehaene ,  S. ( 2003 ). 
 Visual word recognition in the left  and right hemispheres: anatomical and functional cor-
relates of peripheral alexias .  Cerebral Cortex ,  13 ,  1313–1333 . 
 Coltheart ,  M. ,  Marshall ,  J. C ., &  Patt erson ,  K. E. ( 1980 ).  Deep Dyslexia .  London :  Routledge & 
Kegan Paul . 
 Coltheart ,  M. ( 1996 ).  Phonological dyslexia: past and future issues .  Cognitive Neuropsychology , 
 13 ,  749–762 . 
 Coslett  ,  H,B. ( 2003 ).  Acquired Dyslexia . In  Heilman ,  K. , Valenstein ,  E. (eds.),  Clinical 
Neuropsychology ( 108–125 ).  New York, NY :  Oxford University Press . 
 Croisile ,  B. ,  Trillet ,  M. ,  Laurent ,  B. ,  Latombe ,  D ., &  Schott  ,  B.   ( 1989 ).  Agraphie lexicale par 
hematoma temporo-parietal gauche .  Revista Neurologia ,  145 ,  287–292 . 
   Cubelli ,  R.  ( 1991 ).  A selective defi cit for writing vowels in acquired dysgraphia .   Nature ,  353 , 
 258–260 . 
 Debastiani ,  P ., &  Barry ,  C. ( 1989 ).  A cognitive analysis of an acquired dysgraphic patient with an 
“allographic” writing disorder .  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  6 ,  41–45 . 
 Del Grosso Destreri ,  N. ,  Farina ,  E. ,  Alberoni ,  M. ,  Pomati ,  S. ,  Nichelli ,  P ., &  Mariani ,  C.  ( 2000 ). 
 Selective uppercase dysgraphia with loss of visual imagery of lett er forms: A window on the 
organization of graphomotor patt erns .  Brain and Language ,  71 ( 3 ),  353–372 . 
 Derouesné, J & Beauvois, M. F. (1985). Th e “phonemic state” in the non-lexical reading pro-
cess:  Evidence from a case of phonological alexia.  In  K.  Patt erson  J. C.  Marshall &  M. 
 Coltheart , (eds.).   Surface dyslexia   (pp. 399–457).  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum . 
 Ellis, A. W. (1979). Slipps of the pen.  Visible Language, 113(3) , 265–282. 
 Ellis ,  A. W. ,  Young ,  W. W ., &  Flude ,  B. M. ( 1987 ).  “Aff erent dysgraphia” in a patient and in normal 
subjects .  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  4 ,  465–487 . 
 Friedman ,  R. B. ( 1996 ).  Recovery from deep alexia to phonological alexia: points on a contin-
uum .  Brain and Language , 52 ( 1 ),  114–28 . 
 Friedman ,  R. B. ( 2002 ).  Clinical diagnosis and treatment of reading disorders . In  A. E.  Hillis ,(ed.), 
 Handbook of Adult Language Disorders ( 27–47 ).  New York, NY :  Psychology Press . 
 Gersh ,  F ., &  Damasio ,  A. R. ( 1981 ).  Praxis and writing of the left  hand may be served by diff erent 
callosal pathways .  Archives of Neurology ,  38 ,  634–636 . 
   Geschwind ,  N  ., &   Kaplan ,  E.   ( 1962 ).  A human cerebral disconnection syndrome .   Neurology ,  12 , 
 675–685 . 
 Hatfi eld ,  F. M. ( 1985 ).  Visual and phonological factors in acquired dysgraphia .  Neuropsychologia , 
 23 ,  13–29 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Coyle ,  J. M. ,  Gonyea ,  E. F ., &  Geschwind ,  N. ( 1973 ).  Apraxia and agraphia in a 
left  hander .  Brain ,  96 ,  21–28 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Gonyea ,  E. F. , &  Geschwind ,  N. ( 1974 ).  Apraxia and agraphia in a right hander . 
 Cortex ,  10 ,  284–288 . 
 Henry ,  M. L. ,  Beeson ,  P. M. ,  Stark ,  A. J ., &  Rapcsak ,  S. Z.  ( 2007 ).  Th e role of left  perisylvian corti-
cal regions in spelling .  Brain and Language ,  100 (  1  ),   44–52 . 
  Hillis ,  A. E ., &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1989 ).  Th e graphemic buff er and att entional mechanisms .   Brain 
and Language ,  36 ,  208–235 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. ,  Wityk ,  R. J. ,  Tuffi  ash ,  E. ,  Beauchamp ,  N. J. ,  Jacobs ,  M. A. ,  Barker ,  P. B ., &  Selnes , 
 O. A. ( 2001 ).  Hypoperfusion of Wernicke’s area predicts severity of semantic defi cit in acute 
stroke .  Annals of Neurology ,  50 ,  561–566 . 

102
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Hillis ,  A. E. ,  Newhart ,  M. ,  Heidler ,  J. ,  Barker ,  P. ,  Herskovits ,  E ., &  Degaonkarb ,  M. ( 2005 ).  Th e 
roles of the visual word form area in reading .  NeuroImage ,  24 ,  548–559 . 
 Hillis ,  A. E. ( 2007 ).  Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging in the study of language .  Brain and 
Language ,  102 ,  165–175 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ( 1991 ).  Pure apraxic agraphia with recovery aft er drainage of a left  frontal cyst . 
 Cortex ,  27 ,  469–473 . 
   Kartsounis ,  L. D.   ( 1992 ).  Selective lower-case lett er ideational agraphia .  Cortex ,  28 ,  145–150 . 
 Leischner ,  A. ( 1969 ). Handbook of Clinical Neurology.  Vinken ,  P. J. , &  Bruyn ,  G. W. (eds.). 
 Amsterdam :  North-Holland Publishing Company ,  112–140 . 
 Lesser ,  R. ( 1990 ).  Superior oral to writt en spelling:  Evidence for separate buff ers?  Cognitive 
Neuropsychology ,  7 ,  347–366 . 
 Levy ,  J. ,  Nebes ,  R. D ., &  Sperry ,  R. W. ( 1971 ).  Expressive language in the surgically separated 
minor hemisphere .   Cortex ,  7 ,  49–58 . 
 Liepmann ,  H ., &  Maas ,  O. ( 1907 ).  Ein Fall von linksseitiger Agraphie und bei rechtsseitiger 
Lahmumg .   Journal of Psychological Neurology ,  10 ,  214–227 . 
 Lott  ,  S. N ., &  Friedman ,  R. B. ( 1994 ).  Rationale and effi  cacy of a tactile-kinaesthetic treatment 
for alexia .  Aphasiology ,  8 (  2  ) ,  181–195 . 
  Margolin ,  D. I ., &  Binder ,  L. ( 1984 ).  Multiple component agraphia in a patient with atypical 
cerebral dominance: An error analysis .  Brain and Language ,  22 ,  26–40 . 
 Marien ,  P. ,  Pickuta ,  B. A. ,  Engelborghsa ,  S. ,  Martind ,  J. , De  Deyn ,  P. ( 2001 ).  Phonological 
agraphia following a focal anterior insulo-opercular infarction .  Neuropsychologia ,  39 (  8  ), 
 845–855 . 
 Marshall ,  J. C ., &  Newcombe ,  F. ( 1966 ).  Syntactic and semantic errors in paralexia . 
 Neuropsychologia ,  4 ,  169–176 . 
   Menichelli ,  A.  ,   Rapp ,  B  ., &   Semenza ,  C.   ( 2008 ).  Allographic agraphia:  A  case study .   Cortex , 
 44 (  70  ),  861–868 . 
 Miceli ,  G. ,  Silveri ,  M. C ., &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1985 ).  Cognitive analysis of a case of pure dysgraphia . 
 Brain and Language ,  25 ,  187–212 . 
 Niels ,  J ., &  Roeltgen ,  D. P. ( 1995 ).  Spelling and att ention in early Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence 
for impairment of the graphemic buff er .  Brain and Language ,  49 ,  241–262 . 
 Nielson ,  J. M. ( 1946 ).  Agnosia, apraxia, aphasia:  Th eir value in cerebral localization . 
 New York :  Paul B. Hoeber . 
 Nolan ,  K. A ., &  Caramazza ,  A. ( 1982 ).  Modality-independent impairments in word processing in 
a deep dyslexic patient .  Brain and Language ,  16 ,  236–264 . 
 Ogle ,  W. ( 1867 ).  Aphasia and agraphia .  In  Records of St. George’s Hospital,  2 ,  83–122 . 
London: Medical Research Counsel (reproduction). 
 Otsuki ,  M. ,  Soma ,  Y. ,  Aral ,  T. ,  Otsuka ,  A ., &  Tsuji ,  S. ( 1999 ).  Pure apraxic agraphia with abnormal 
writing stroke sequences: Report of a Japanese patient with a left  superior parietal hemor-
rhage .  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry ,  66 ,  233–237 . 
 Pfl ugshaupt  T. ,  Gutbrod  K. ,  Wurtz  P. , von  Wartburg ,  R. ,  Nyff eler ,  T. , de  Haan ,  B. ,  Karnath ,  H ., & 
 Mueri ,  R. M. ( 2009 ).  About the role of visual fi eld defects in pure alexia .  Brain 2009 ; 132 , 
 1907–1917 . 
 Posteraro ,  L. ,  Zinelli ,  P  ., &  Mazzucci ,  A. ( 1988 ).  Selective impairment of the graphemic buff er in 
acquired dysgraphia .   Brain and Language ,  35 ,  274–286 . 
 Price ,  C. J. ,  Devlin ,  J. T. ( 2003 ).  The myth of the visual word form area .  Neuroimage ,  19 , 
 473–481 . 
  Rapcsak ,  S. Z ., &  Rubens ,  A. B. ( 1990 ).  Disruption of semantic infl uence on writing following a 
left  prefrontal lesion .  Brain and Language ,  38 ,  334–344 . 
  Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Arthur ,  S. A ., &  Rubens ,  A. B. ( 1998 ).  Lexical agraphia from focal lesion of the left  
pre-central gyrus .  Neurology ,  38 ,  1119–1123 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z ., &  Beeson ,  P. M. ( 2002 ).  Neuroanatomical correlates of spelling and writing . In 
 A. E.  Hillis (ed.),  Handbook on adult language disorders: Integrating cognitive neuropsychology, 
neurology, and rehabilitation (pp  71–99 ).  New York :  Psychology Press . 

Alexias and Agraphias
103
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z ., &  Beeson ,  P. M. ( 2004 ).  Th e role of left  posterior inferior temporal cortex in spell-
ing .  Neurology ,  62 ,  2221–2229 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Beeson ,  P. M. ,  Henry ,  M. L. ,  Leyden ,  A. ,  Kim ,  E. ,  Rising ,  K. et  al. ( 2009 ). 
 Phonological dyslexia and dysgraphia: Cognitive mechanisms and neural substrates .  Cortex , 
 45 (  5  ),  575–591 . 
 Roeltgen ,  D. P. ,  Sevush ,  S ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1983 )  Phonological agraphia: Writing by the 
lexical-semantic route.  Neurology ,  33 ,  733–757 . 
 Roeltgen, D. P., & Heilman, K. M. (1983) Apraxic agraphia in a patient with normal praxis.  Brain 
and Language, 18 , 35–46. 
 Roeltgen ,  D. P ., &. Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1984 ).  Lexical agraphia: further support for the two-system 
hypothesis of linguistic agraphia .  Brain ,  107 ,  811–827 . 
 Roeltgen ,  D. P ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1985 ).  Review of agraphia and a proposal for an 
anatomically-based neuropsychological model of writing .   Applied Psycholinguistics ,  6 , 
 205–230 . 
 Roeltgen ,  D. P. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. G ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1986 ).  Linguistic semantic agraphia .  Brain and 
Language ,  27 ,  257–280 . 
 Roeltgen ,  D. P. ( 1993 ) Agraphia. In  K. M.  Heilman &  E.  Valenstein (eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  
(3rd ed., pp. 63–90).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
   Roeltgen ,  D. P  ., &   Rapcsak ,  S.   ( 1993 ).  Acquired disorders of writing and spelling . In   G.   Blanken   
(ed.).  Linguistic disorders and pathologies ( pp.  262–278 ).  Berlin :  Walter de Gruyter . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. G ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1981 ).  Alexia and agraphia with spared spelling and lett er rec-
ognition abilities .  Brain and Language ,  12 ,  1–13.  
 Rothi ,  L. J. G. ,  Roeltgen ,  D. P ., &  Kooistra ,  C. A. ( 1987 ).  Isolated lexical agraphia in a right-handed 
patient with a posterior lesion of the right cerebral hemisphere .   Brain and Language ,  301 , 
 181–190 . 
 Rubens ,  A. B. ,  Geschwind ,  N. ,  Mahowald ,  M. W. , &  Mastri ,  A. ( 1977 ).  Postt raumatic cerebral 
hemispheric disconnection syndrome .  Archives of Neurology ,  34 ,  750–755 . 
   Sakurai ,  Y.  ,   Onuma ,  Y.  ,   Nakazawa ,  G.  ,   Ugawa ,  Y.  ,   Momose ,  T.  ,   Tsuji ,  S  ., &   Mannen ,  T.   ( 2007 ). 
 Parietal dysgraphia: Characterization of abnormal writing stroke sequences, character for-
mation and character recall .  Behavioral Neurology ,  18 ( 2 ),  99–114 . 
 Shallice ,  T ., &  Warrington ,  E. K. ( 1980 ).  Single and multiple component central dyslexic syn-
dromes . In  M.  Coltheart ,  K.  Patt erson &  J. C.  Marshall (eds.). Deep Dyslexia (pp.  119–145). 
 London :  Routledge and Kegan Paul . 
   Shallice ,  T.   ( 1981 ).  Phonological agraphia and the lexical route in writing .   Brain ,  104 ,  412–429 . 
   Siéroff  ,  E  ., &   Lavidor ,  M.   ( 2007 ).  Examination of the split fovea theory in a case of pure left  hemi-
alexia .  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  24 (  3  ) ,  243–59 . 
 Silveri ,  M. C. ,  Misciagna ,  S. ,  Leggio ,  M. C ., &  Moliriari ,  M. ( 1997 ).  Spatial Dysgraphia and cer-
ebellar lesion: A case report .  Neurology ,  48 ,  1529–1532 . 
 Starrfelt ,  R. ,  Habekost  T ., &  Gerlach ,  C. ( 2010 ).  Visual processing in pure alexia: a case study . 
 Cortex ,  46 ,  242–255 . 
 Sugishita ,  M. ,  Toyokura ,  Y. ,  Yoshioka ,  M. , &  Yamada ,  R. ( 1980 ).  Unilateral agraphia aft er sec-
tion of the posterior half of the truncus to the corpus callosum .  Brain and Language ,  9 (  2  ), 
 212–223 . 
 Tanaka ,  Y. ,  Iwasa ,  H ., &  Obayashi ,  T. ( 1990 ).  Right hand agraphia and left  hand apraxia following 
callosal damage in a right-hander .   Cortex ,  26 ,  665–671 . 
 Trojano ,  L ., &  Chiacchio ,  L. ( 1994 ).  Pure dysgraphia with relative sparing of lower-case writing . 
 Cortex ,  30 ,  499–501 . 
   Tsapkini ,  K.  ,   Rapp ,  B.   ( 2010 ).  Th e orthography-specifi c functions of the left  fusiform gyrus: evi-
dence of modality and category speciﬁcity .  Cortex,  46 ,  185–205 . 
 Ullrich ,  L ., &  Roeltgen ,  D. P. ( 2012 ).  Agraphia . In  K.  Heilman ,  Valenstein ,  E. (eds.)  Clinical 
Neuropsychology (pp.  126–145 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
   Valenstein ,  E  ., &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1979 ).  Apraxic agraphia with neglect-induced paragraphia . 
 Archives of Neurology ,  67 ,  44–56 . 

104
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Vinckier ,  F. ,  Dehaene ,  S. ,  Jobert ,  A. ,  Dubus ,  J. ,  Sigman ,  M. ,  Cohen ,  L. ( 2007 ).  Hierarchical cod-
ing of lett er strings in the ventral stream: dissecting the inner organization of the visual 
word-form system .  Neuron ,  55 ,  143–156 . 
 Watson ,  R. T ., &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1983 ).  Callosal apraxia .  Brain ,  106 ,  391–404 . 
 Wolz , W ., &  Roeltgen ,  D. P. ( 1989 ).  Isolated lexical agraphia due to a basal ganglia lesion .  Journal 
of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology ,  11 (  1  ) ,  43 . 
  Woollams ,  A. M. ,  Lambon Ralph,  M. A. ,  Plaut ,  D. C. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 2007 ).  SD-squared: on the 
association between semantic dementia and surface dyslexia .  Psychological Review , 114 (  2  ), 
 316–39 . 
 Yamadori ,  A. ,  Osumi ,  Y. ,  Ikeda ,  H ., &  Kanazawa ,  Y. ( 1980 ).  Left  unilateral agraphia and tac-
tile anomia: Disturbances seen aft er occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery .   Archives of 
Neurology ,  37 ,  88–91 . 
 Yule ,  G. ( 1996 ).  Th e study of Language .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  

105
 C H A P T E R  6 
 Face Recognition
  
 Steven Z.  Rapcsak  
 Introduction 
 Th e human brain’s prodigious capacity for remembering faces is an essential bio-
logical prerequisite of normal social interaction. Although we encounter hun-
dreds, if not thousands, of diff erent individuals in our daily lives, a quick glance 
at the face is usually suffi  cient to determine whether we know the person or not. 
Th e remarkable speed and accuracy that characterizes normal face recognition, 
however, can break down in dramatic ways following brain injury, resulting in 
signifi cant limitations in the area of social functioning. Early descriptions of face 
memory impairment in neurological patients can be traced back to the 19th cen-
tury ( Benton, 1990 ). Since that time, face recognition disorders have been the 
focus of intense study by behavioral neurologists and cognitive neuroscientists. 
In the course of these investigations, it has become apparent that face memory 
impairments are by no means uncommon and can be associated with a vari-
ety of neurological conditions including stroke, epilepsy/temporal lobectomy, 
degenerative disorders (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia), her-
pes encephalitis, and head trauma. Despite variations in terms of the underlying 
pathology, lesion-defi cit correlation studies have consistently implicated certain 
brain structures as being critical for the processing of face identity information. 
Taken together, these observations provide powerful empirical validation of the 
basic tenet of behavioral neurology that the location, rather than the etiology, of 
the brain lesion determines the nature of the cognitive defi cit. 
 From a phenomenological perspective, face recognition impairments in 
neurological patients can manifest either as memory loss or memory distortion 
( Rapcsak, 2003 ). Th e former is refl ected by a striking failure to identify  familiar 
faces (and a parallel impairment in remembering new faces), whereas the latt er 
involves false recognition or misidentifi cation of  unfamiliar faces. Although in 

106
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
some individuals both types of diffi  culties are observed, current evidence suggests 
that these two recognition disorders are potentially dissociable and may have dif-
ferent cognitive mechanisms and neural substrates. Historically, defective recog-
nition of familiar faces has received much more att ention from investigators than 
false recognition of unfamiliar faces. It is clear, however, that a comprehensive 
neuropsychological model of face recognition must be capable of accounting for 
both types of memory disorders. 
 In this chapter, we review what neuropsychological studies have revealed 
about the functional architecture and cortical localization of the neural systems 
involved in face recognition memory. We begin our discussion by presenting a 
cognitive model of face processing that provides the conceptual framework for 
interpreting the diff erent types of recognition disorders encountered in neu-
rological patients. Th is is followed by a detailed description of the behavioral 
manifestations, cognitive mechanisms, and putative neural correlates of three 
distinct clinical syndromes characterized by prominent face memory impair-
ment: prosopagnosia, person recognition disorders, and false recognition/mis-
identifi cation of unfamiliar faces.  
 Cognitive Model of Face Recognition 
 Th e information-processing diagram depicted in   Figure 6.1 is a modifi ed version 
of the infl uential model of face recognition originally proposed by  Bruce & Young 
(1986) . 
 Central to the revised model is the notion that face recognition performance 
refl ects the dynamic interaction of two basic cognitive operations that involve 
processing faces at diff erent levels of specifi city: individuation and categoriza-
tion ( Fiske & Neuberg, 1990 ;  Mason & Macrae, 2004; Quinn & Macrae, 2005 ). 
Individuation entails using facial cues to recognize familiar people at the most 
specifi c taxonomic level corresponding to unique personal identity. As shown in 
 Figure 6.1 , individuation begins with the visual analysis of the face and requires 
the extraction of high-quality perceptual information suitable for distinguish-
ing the face of a particular person from all other faces represented in memory. 
Th e computational diffi  culty inherent in this task can be appreciated by consid-
ering the fact that faces constitute a homogeneous visual category with a high 
level of structural similarity among exemplars. Because all faces share the same 
basic parts in roughly the same general arrangement (i.e., two eyes above the 
nose and mouth), discriminating individual faces depends critically on the effi  -
cient processing of fi ne-grained confi gural information sensitive to subtle diff er-
ences in the spatial relationship among component features ( Maurer et al., 2002 ). 
According to  Figure 6.1 , the next step in the individuation process involves activa-
tion of “face recognition units” (FRUs) that store visual memory representations 

Face Recognition
107
of familiar faces. Th e strength of FRU activation, refl ecting the degree of resem-
blance between the current face percept and the stored memory trace, gives rise 
to a proportionate sense of familiarity. Under normal circumstances, the activa-
tion of FRUs is followed by the retrieval of unique identity-specifi c biographic 
information (e.g., occupation, name) from semantic memory via the activation of 
“person identity nodes” (PINs) that provide the appropriate context for the feel-
ing of familiarity evoked by the face. Unlike the modality-specifi c visual opera-
tions involved in the processing of facial information, conceptual knowledge of 
familiar people is considered multimodal in nature and therefore can be accessed 
not only from faces but also from identity-specifi c cues presented through other 
modalities, such as hearing the voice or name of the person. 
 Th e individuation process outlined above is critical for the rapid and accurate 
identifi cation of familiar people that characterizes normal face recognition perfor-
mance. By relying on the encoding and retrieval of distinct and non-overlapping 
visual and semantic memory representations, individuation allows for maximum 
diff erentiation or “patt ern separation” ( McClelland et al., 1995 ) between memory 
traces and thus avoids the problem of interference that could lead to mistaking 
one familiar person for another. Of course, the ultimate success and effi  ciency 
of the individuation process is strongly infl uenced by the frequency of prior 
 
VISUAL
ANALYSIS
SOCIAL
STEREOTYPES
PERSON
IDENTITY
NODES
EXECUTIVE
SYSTEM
FACE
RECOGNITION
UNITS
Individuation
Categorization
Recognition Decision
+
–
FACE
CATEGORY
PROTOTYPES
 Figure 6.1  Cognitive model of face recognition memory. Recognition performance is 
the integrated product of individuation and categorization and involves distinct visual, 
(blue), semantic (yellow), and executive (magenta) operations (see color insert).   

108
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
exposure to a particular person. Whereas identity-specifi c visual and semantic 
information is readily accessible in the case of highly familiar individuals, rec-
ognizing people we encounter less frequently can create diffi  culties as our stored 
knowledge of these persons is less well diff erentiated. Identifi cation of individuals 
we are less familiar with is typically more eff ortful and strategic, and the process 
is also more error-prone due to increased susceptibility to confusions with similar 
representations in memory. 
 Although individuation provides a reliable mechanism for identifying familiar 
people, most persons we encounter in everyday life are in fact strangers. In these 
situations, the recognition system can make use of facial information to clas-
sify unfamiliar individuals into meaningful social categories ( Fiske & Neuberg, 
1990 ;  Macrae & Bodenhausen, 2000; Quinn & Macrae, 2005 ). Categorization 
processes take advantage of pre-existing knowledge about salient facial charac-
teristics shared by members of distinct social groups that are stored in memory 
as abstract perceptual prototypes ( Figure 6.1 ). Face category prototypes are the 
result of an averaging process that extracts and preserves information about struc-
tural att ributes common to many faces rather than information about the faces of 
specifi c individuals ( Light et al., 1979 ;  Cabeza et al., 1999 ;  Valentine & Bruce, 
1986 ;  Vokey & Read, 1992 ). Novel faces can be assigned to one or more relevant 
categories based on their degree of similarity to stored prototypes. Category 
assignment usually refl ects some combination of gender, age, and race, but it can 
also involve more complex social inferences based on facial att ributes we associ-
ate with certain occupations (e.g., actress, politician) and personality traits (e.g., 
honesty, intelligence) ( Klatzky et al. 1982 ). As shown in  Figure 6.1 , the activation 
of face category prototypes provides access to general semantic knowledge cor-
responding to social stereotypes that contain information about att ributes osten-
sibly shared by members of various groups. Th is process has been referred to as 
the establishment of “visually-derived semantic codes” for the face encountered 
( Bruce & Young, 1986 ). Note that category-based recognition processes rely on 
visual and semantic information stored at more general or superordinate taxo-
nomic levels of abstraction than the representations that support the recognition 
of individual identity. As a rule, categorization is less demanding in terms of cogni-
tive resources and can be accomplished on the basis of more coarse-grained visual 
and semantic information than what is required for individuation ( Gauthier et al., 
1997, 2000a ;  Tarr & Gauthier, 2000 ;  Tanaka, 2001 ;  Tarr & Cheng, 2003 ;  Cloutier 
et al., 2005 ). Although category-based recognition mechanisms have the obvious 
benefi t of simplifying social interaction by allowing pre-existing knowledge to 
generalize to novel individuals, the procedure has signifi cant intrinsic limitations 
due to its over-inclusiveness and lack of diff erentiation. Specifi cally, because of the 
emphasis on shared structure and reliance on overlapping memory representa-
tions, category-level recognition processes tend to treat all exemplars that match 
the generic category description as more-or-less equivalent, distinguishable only 

Face Recognition
109
by their degree of representativeness or “typicality” with respect to the central 
tendency or prototype ( Mervis & Rosch, 1981 ). Due to the strong propensity for 
similarity-based generalization, categorical processing cannot support the recog-
nition of individual identity (e.g., category-level representations presumably do 
not discriminate between the two faces shown in  Figure 6.1 , treating them both as 
essentially interchangeable exemplars within the generic category of elderly white 
males). Furthermore, false recognition of novel individuals may occur when the 
strong feeling of familiarity evoked by “typical-looking” faces with high levels of 
structural similarity to stored prototypes is misatt ributed as evidence of specifi c 
prior exposure to the person ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). 
 Th e cognitive model shown in  Figure 6.1 also postulates the existence of a 
central executive component that interacts with and exerts strategic top-down 
control over the operations of the face recognition system ( Rapcsak et al., 1999, 
2001, 2002 ). Control procedures implemented by the executive system include 
the monitoring and verifi cation of the information retrieved from memory in 
response to the face cue and the sett ing of appropriate response criteria for the 
recognition decision. Eff ective monitoring requires the critical evaluation of 
the evidence provided by activated memory traces, including the determination 
of whether the information available refl ects the outcome of the individuation 
or the categorization process. Note that this type of source memory att ribution 
cannot be made conclusively on the basis of familiarity alone, because individ-
ual and category-level face recognition processes can both give rise to feelings 
of familiarity. Th e critical diff erence, however, is that individuation normally 
results in the retrieval of additional identity-specifi c biographic information 
that provides the appropriate context for the experience of facial familiarity, 
whereas the general sense of familiarity associated with the categorization pro-
cess is relatively undiff erentiated and cannot be att ributed to a specifi c context 
or source. Th us, the products of individuation versus categorization are readily 
distinguishable by monitoring the amount and quality of the identity-specifi c 
details retrieved. Because context recollection off ers more reliable clues to per-
sonal identity than familiarity, we can improve memory accuracy by relying 
primarily on the output of the individuation process and using the presence 
or absence of detailed, identity-specifi c information as the appropriate crite-
rion for recognition decisions ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). It should be emphasized 
that extensive monitoring and memory control operations are not usually 
required for the recognition of highly familiar faces because for these individu-
als, contextual information is readily available in an automatic or bott om-up 
fashion. However, executive processes assume a much more critical role under 
conditions of uncertainty when the face cue does not directly elicit relevant 
identity-specifi c information, leaving the source of familiarity unspecifi ed or 
ambiguous (i.e., when we are not sure whether a familiar-looking face is some-
body we know) ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). 

110
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 To summarize, individuation and categorization are closely related and com-
plementary recognition processes implemented within a single face memory sys-
tem that is capable of operating at diff erent levels  of specifi city. Although distinct 
in terms of underlying cognitive representations and computational require-
ments, under normal circumstances the two recognition procedures are highly 
interactive and may be considered to represent opposite ends of a continuum 
( Fiske & Neuberg, 1990 ). Specifi cally, when att ending to the face of a person both 
processes are automatically initiated in a bott om-up fashion and both types of 
information are available for fl exible use in recognition memory judgments. Th e 
decision to emphasize individuating versus categorical information is under stra-
tegic control and depends on the social context of the recognition task and the 
goals and motivations of the observer. As we have seen, familiar faces enjoy privi-
leged status in social cognition characterized by rapid and automatic access to 
identity-specifi c biographic information via the individuation process. Although 
familiar faces are preferentially recognized at the most unique individual level 
( Tanaka, 2001 ) to the relative exclusion of categorical information, we can also 
use facial appearance to assign the famous person shown in  Figure 6.1 to a num-
ber of relevant social categories. Similarly, although we may elect to rely primarily 
on the obligatory output of the categorization process when looking at the unfa-
miliar face shown in  Figure 6.1 or in the course of our casual daily encounters 
with strangers, if suffi  ciently motivated, we can also decide to go beyond initial 
impressions and “individuate” a novel person by strategically att ending to and 
learning about unique, identity-specifi c details. Th e dynamic fl exibility of the face 
recognition system to shift  between individuation and categorization is critical 
for successful functioning in everyday social sett ings that typically involve mul-
tiple encounters with both familiar and unfamiliar people. 
 Neuropsychological Disorders of Face Memory 
 Face memory disorders can result from damage to the visual, semantic, or execu-
tive components of the recognition system ( Figure  6.1 ). Visual and semantic 
impairments are characterized by a striking failure in recognizing familiar peo-
ple, combined with an equally profound inability to acquire new person-specifi c 
information. Th e pervasive retrograde and anterograde memory loss in these 
patients indicates a severe disruption of the individuation process. By contrast, 
executive defi cits play a major role in the pathogenesis of memory distortions 
manifested by false recognition and misidentifi cation of unfamiliar people. In 
patients with executive impairment, the breakdown of the individuation process 
is usually not severe and memory illusions to novel faces refl ect inappropriate reli-
ance on categorical representations in situations where the recognition task calls 
for identity-based processing. 

Face Recognition
111
 PROSOPAGNOSI A  
 Prosopagnosia is by far the best known and most extensively studied face memory 
disorder in neurological patients ( Damasio et al., 1982, 1990 ;  Sergent & Signoret, 
1992 ). Th e behavioral hallmark of the syndrome is the dramatic inability to rec-
ognize previously familiar faces. In severe cases, patients fail to recognize not 
only the faces of well-known public fi gures and celebrities but also the faces of 
close personal acquaintances and family members. Prosopagnosics do not have 
diffi  culty in distinguishing faces from other object categories, but they frequently 
complain that they cannot discriminate the faces of diff erent individuals and that 
all faces look unfamiliar. However, prosopagnosics can recognize familiar people 
from their voices or names, providing evidence that semantic knowledge of these 
individuals is preserved. Th erefore, prosopagnosia represents a modality-specifi c 
recognition disorder in which the visual appearance of the face no longer serves as 
a reliable clue to personal identity. It is important to emphasize that in addition to 
the prominent defi cit in recognizing familiar faces, prosopagnosics demonstrate 
a severe inability to learn new faces. Th e combined retrograde and anterograde 
impairment of face identity recognition suggests damage to the visual compo-
nents of the individuation process resulting in an inability to perceive and remem-
ber the unique visual att ributes of diff erent faces ( Figure 6.1 ). 
 It has been proposed that prosopagnosia is not a unitary disorder and that the 
syndrome can be subdivided into two distinct clinical subtypes: apperceptive 
and associative ( Damasio et al., 1990 ;  De Renzi et al., 1991 ;  Sergent & Signoret, 
1992 ). In apperceptive prosopagnosia, the recognition defi cit is considered to be 
the result of pervasive perceptual impairment caused by damage to the early visual 
analysis stage of face processing ( Figure 6.1 ). Because the visual analysis stage pro-
vides perceptual input to both the individuation and the categorization process, 
patients with severe damage to this functional component are not only impaired 
in recognizing facial identity, but they also have considerable diffi  culty in decod-
ing category-level facial information including gender, age, or race. By contrast, 
patients with associative prosopagnosia are reasonably successful in interpreting 
categorical information while at the same time being totally unable to recognize 
the individual identity of the face ( Tranel et al., 1988 ;  Sergent & Signoret, 1992 ). 
Th us, the recognition defi cit in these patients cannot be att ributed to low-level 
perceptual impairment and seems to refl ect a selective disruption of face identity 
processing. Within the framework of our model, the retrograde and anterograde 
recognition memory defi cit in associative prosopagnosia can be explained by pos-
tulating damage to the FRUs that store visual memory representations for the 
faces of familiar individuals, combined with an inability to establish new FRUs 
( Figure 6.1 ). Th e dissociation between severely impaired individuation and rela-
tively preserved categorization in these patients is likely to refl ect the diff erent 
visual processing demands of the two recognition tasks. Specifi cally, the recogni-
tion of individual facial identity is perceptually more diffi  cult because it requires 

112
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
the extraction and storage of fi ne-grained confi gural information suffi  cient to 
support within-category discrimination amongst structurally similar exemplars, 
whereas categorization can presumably be accomplished on the basis of relatively 
coarse-grained visual information or by att ending to single diagnostic features 
( Gauthier et  al. 1997, 2000a ;  Tarr & Gauthier, 2000 ;  Tanaka, 2001 ;  Tarr & 
Cheng, 2003 ;  Mason & Macrae, 2004 ;  Cloutier et al, 2005 ;  Zarate et al., 2008 ). 
Consistent with this hypothesis, prosopagnosics demonstrate disproportionate 
impairment in processing confi gural facial information ( Barton et al., 2002 ) and 
their approach to face recognition tasks is characterized by abnormal reliance on 
a slow, feature-based strategy. 
 Prosopagnosia is caused by damage to inferotemporal visual association areas, 
typically occurring in the sett ing of posterior cerebral artery strokes ( Damasio 
et al., 1982, 1990 ;  Sergent & Signoret, 1992 ;  Bouvier & Engel, 2006 ). Although 
initial lesion-defi cit correlation studies suggested that the syndrome required 
bilateral occipito-temporal involvement ( Figure 6.2a ), there are by now many 
cases on record where high-resolution imaging studies only revealed evidence of 
unilateral right-sided damage ( Figures 6.2  b,c ). Collectively, these observations 
indicate that damage to the right inferotemporal visual cortex is both necessary 
and suffi  cient to produce prominent face recognition impairment. 
 Neuroanatomical fi ndings in patients with prosopagnosia are consistent with 
demonstrations of face-selective neural responses in inferotemporal visual cor-
tex by single-cell recording studies in primates and by functional neuroimag-
ing and electrophysiological studies of face processing in human subjects (for 
recent reviews see  Tsao & Livingstone, 2008 and Duchaine & Yovel, 2008). In 
particular, evidence from functional imaging studies suggests that the critical 
neural substrate of prosopagnosia involves damage to two anatomically distinct 
but functionally integrated right-hemisphere extrastriate cortical regions known 
as the fusiform face area (FFA) and the occipital face area (OFA) ( Kanwisher, 
McDermott , & Chun, 1997 ;  Gauthier et  al., 2000b ). Th e FFA occupies the 
mid-lateral portions of the fusiform gyrus, whereas the OFA has been localized to 
a more posterior cortical region within the inferior occipital gyrus ( Figure 6.5 ). 
Th ese face-selective cortical areas show stronger activation when normal subjects 
view faces compared to other visual object categories, and the neural responses 
are generally more robust in the right than in the left  hemisphere (for a review, see 
 Haxby et al., 2000 ). It has been proposed that the processing of facial information 
within the extrastriate visual cortex is hierarchically organized, with the OFA 
primarily involved in the early perceptual analysis of facial features and the FFA 
more critically involved in the recognition of facial identity that requires percep-
tual integration of individual features into unique facial confi gurations ( Haxby 
et al., 2000 ;  Rossion et al., 2000 ; Liu, Harris, & Kanwisher, 2010. Th e central role 
of the FFA in the selective coding of facial identity is supported by demonstra-
tions that the faces of diff erent individuals elicit distinct neural response patt erns 

Face Recognition
113
in this region ( Gauthier et al., 2000b ;  Grill-Spector et al., 2004 ;  Rothstein et al., 
2005 ). Furthermore, FFA activation is modulated by levels of familiarity, with 
novel faces typically producing stronger responses than familiar faces ( Rossion 
et al., 2001, 2003 ). Th e fi nding that the effi  ciency of neural computations within 
the FFA is facilitated by prior experience with a particular face is consistent with 
the hypothesis that this region contains visual memory representations of famil-
iar faces. Additional support for the proposed role of the FFA in face memory 
storage comes from demonstrations that this region is activated not only during 
bott om-up perceptual processing of familiar faces, but also during mental imag-
ery that involves top-down activation of long-term visual memory representa-
tions for the faces of familiar individuals ( Ishai et al., 2002 ;  Mechelli et al., 2004 ). 
 To summarize, converging evidence from lesion-defi cit correlation studies in 
patients with prosopagnosia and functional imaging studies of face processing in 
normal subjects suggests that visual recognition of faces depends critically on a 
right-hemisphere network of hierarchically organized extrastriate cortical areas 
 
1
2
3
4
5
(c)
(a)
(b)
L
R
 Figure 6.2   Bilateral (a) and unilateral right-sided (b) occipito-temporal lesions 
in patients with prosopagnosia following PCA strokes. Lesion overlap map of five 
patients with prosopagnosia due to unilateral right occipito-temporal damage 
(c). The area of maximum damage (red) includes right mid-fusiform cortex 
corresponding to the location of the fusiform face area (FFA) in functional 
neuroimaging studies (see color insert).  

114
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
comprised of the OFA and the FFA. Th e OFA and FFA make distinct contribu-
tions to face processing and the structural and functional integrity of both corti-
cal regions is necessary for normal performance ( Rossion et al., 2003 ;  Bouvier 
& Engel, 2006 ;  Schiltz et al., 2006 ;  Steeves et al., 2006 ;  Sorger et al., 2007 ). Th e 
OFA is involved in the early visual analysis stage of face processing ( Figure 6.1 ) 
and provides perceptual input to the FFA. Damage to the OFA is likely to play an 
important role in the pathogenesis of apperceptive prosopagnosia. By contrast, 
the FFA extracts and stores confi gural information critical for determining the 
individual identity of the face and this region may therefore represent the neural 
substrate of FRUs ( Figure 6.1 ). Damage to the FFA results in associative prosop-
agnosia characterized by the loss of high-level perceptual expertise required for 
within-category discrimination of individual faces and the subsequent inability 
to activate stored biographic records about familiar people from facial cues. In 
patients with associative prosopagnosia, category-level recognition processes 
mediated by facial prototypes can be relatively preserved (  Figure 6.1  ).  
 PER SON R ECOGN IT ION DISOR DER S  
 Memory loss for familiar faces is also a prominent fi nding in patients with person 
recognition disorders (for a review, see  Gainott i, 2007 ). However, unlike prosop-
agnosics, patients with person recognition disorders demonstrate profound 
diffi  culty in identifying familiar individuals, not only from their faces, but also 
from voice or name cues, or when presented with verbal descriptions/biographic 
vignett es. Th e multimodal nature of the defi cit suggests that the underlying 
mechanism of the recognition impairment involves the loss of identity-specifi c 
semantic knowledge about familiar persons. Th e failure to recognize familiar 
people is accompanied by an inability to acquire new person-specifi c semantic 
information (i.e., defective cross-modal integration of face, name, and biographic 
information about novel individuals) ( Tsukiura et al., 2002 ;  Moran et al., 2005 ). 
Within the framework of our model, person recognition disorders refl ect disrup-
tion of the semantic components of the individuation process caused by damage 
to PINs ( Figure 6.1 ). 
 Th e type of errors produced by patients with person recognition disorders on 
retrograde face memory tasks refl ects the severity of the underlying semantic 
defi cit. In mild cases, patients recognize that the face is familiar, but they can-
not recall the person’s name and can provide relatively few identity-specifi c bio-
graphic details (e.g., “one of the Beatles, I think he may have died”). With greater 
degree of impairment, one familiar person may be confused with another based 
on shared semantic att ributes, resulting in the production of semantic errors (e.g., 
misidentifying John Lennon as Mick Jagger). In more severe cases, individuat-
ing semantic information can no longer be retrieved and only general or superor-
dinate category knowledge remains (e.g., “rock musician”). Note, however, that 

Face Recognition
115
such generic responses may refl ect reliance on visually-derived semantic codes 
rather than indicate residual person-specifi c knowledge (e.g., the att ractive face 
of a young actress could potentially be assigned to the correct occupational cat-
egory without the person being recognized). Consistent with this hypothesis, 
category-based processing sometimes leads to incorrect semantic classifi cation of 
famous persons (e.g., one of our patients identifi ed the photograph of the African 
American actor Denzel Washington as a “famous athlete,” refl ecting the infl u-
ence of face category prototypes and social stereotypes). Finally, in patients with 
profound semantic defi cits, “don’t know” recognition responses predominate, 
although a vague sense of familiarity with the face occasionally remains. Taken 
together, behavioral observations in patients with person recognition disorders 
provide evidence of levels of specifi city eff ects in semantic memory (cf.  Rogers 
& McClelland, 2004 ) and indicate that identity-specifi c knowledge of individu-
als is more vulnerable to neurological damage than categorical information. In 
particular, increasing amounts of semantic impairment seem to be accompanied 
by a specifi c-to-general deterioration of familiar person knowledge. Fine-grained 
information about the distinctive semantic properties of unique individuals is 
lost before coarse-grained similarity information about shared att ributes of cat-
egory members. With the erosion of individuating semantic information, recog-
nition responses become susceptible to the infl uence of general or category-level 
knowledge about people corresponding to social stereotypes. 
 Person recognition disorders are associated with neurological conditions that 
produce damage to the anterior temporal lobes, including Alzheimer’s disease 
(for a review, see  Werheid & Clare, 2007 ), semantic dementia ( Evans et al., 1995 ; 
 Gentileschi et al., 2001 ;  Gainott i et al., 2003 ;  Snowden et al., 2004 ;  Th ompson 
et  al., 2004 ; Josephs et  al., 2008;  Joubert et  al., 2006 ), herpes encephalitis 
( Hanley et al., 1989 ;  Eslinger et al., 1996 ), and temporal lobe epilepsy/lobectomy 
( Ellis et al., 1989 ;  Seidenberg et al., 2002 ;  Viskontas et al., 2002 ;  Glosser et al., 
2003 ;  Moran et al., 2005 ). Th e responsible lesions typically involve anterior tem-
poral cortex (ATC) (temporal pole, anterior fusiform, inferior/middle temporal 
gyri) and medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures (hippocampus, perirhinal, 
entorhinal, parahippocampal cortex) in various combinations ( Figure 6.3 ). Th ese 
neuroanatomical observations suggest that both ATC and MTL are necessary for 
the encoding and retrieval of multimodal semantic information about unique 
individuals. 
 Establishing semantic memory representations for people requires cross-modal 
integration of diff erent types of person-specifi c information (e.g., face, voice, 
name) processed in distinct modality-specifi c cortical regions. ATC/MTL 
are ideally suited to accomplish this type of integration as these brain regions 
receive convergent sensory input from all modality-specifi c cortical processing 
areas. It is currently a matt er of debate whether cross-modal semantic integra-
tion in ATC is accomplished by re-coding convergent modality-specifi c sensory 

116
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
input into abstract amodal representations, or whether this regions acts as a relay 
station containing “pointers” for re-activating the entire distributed network of 
modality-specifi c cortical areas that collectively constitute our conceptual knowl-
edge of familiar people from information presented through any sensory input 
channel ( Damasio, 1989 ;  Damasio et al., 2004 ;  Barsalou et al., 2003 ;  Rogers et al., 
2004 ;  Snowden et al., 2004 ;  Gainott i, 2007 ). It is also presently unclear whether 
MTL memory systems have a time-limited role in the encoding and mainte-
nance of multimodal semantic information about familiar people, or whether 
these structures play a life-long role in the retrieval of detailed person-specifi c 
semantic knowledge ( Moscovitch et al., 2006 ;  Squire & Bayley, 2007 ). Regarding 
the hemispheric lateralization of identity-specifi c semantic information, person 
recognition disorders can be associated with left  or right anterior temporal lobe 
lesions, although the defi cit seems both more common and more pronounced 
in patients with right-hemisphere pathology ( Tranel et al., 1997 ;  Damasio et al., 
2004 ;  Gainott i, 2007 ). While this question is far from sett led, the brunt of the 
neuropsychological evidence seems to favor the view that semantic knowledge 
of familiar people is bilaterally represented, with left  and right anterior tempo-
ral lobe regions playing specialized roles in storing or processing verbal versus 
non-verbal person-specifi c information ( Rapcsak, 2003 ;  Snowden et al. 2004 ; 
 Damasio et al., 2004 ;  Gainott i, 2007 ). In addition, retrieving the names of familiar 
people may be disproportionately impaired in patients with left  anterior temporal 
 
L
R
 Figure 6.3   Bilateral atrophy involving anterior temporal cortex (ATC) and medial 
temporal lobe (MTL) structures in patients with person recognition disorders.   

Face Recognition
117
lobe damage ( Damasio et al., 2004 ;  Seidenberg et al., 2002 ;  Glosser et al., 2003 ; 
 Gainott i, 2007 ;  Tranel, 2006 ). 
 Lesion-defi cit correlations in patients with person recognition disorders are 
consistent with the results of functional imaging studies investigating the neu-
ral substrates of identity-specifi c semantic knowledge in normal individuals. 
In particular, these studies have provided evidence that recognition of familiar 
people from face, voice, or name cues is accompanied by activation of ATC/
MTL in addition to activation within the appropriate modality-specifi c corti-
cal areas (e.g., the right FFA for faces, right superior temporal sulcus or STS for 
voices, left  inferior temporo-occipital cortex for writt en names) ( Sergent et al., 
1992, 1994 ;  Gorno-Tempini & Price, 2001 ;  Leveroni et al., 2000 ;  Damasio et al., 
2004 ;  Bernard et al., 2004 ;  Haist et al., 2001 ;  Douville et al., 2005 ;  Nakamura 
et al., 2001 ;  von Kriegstein & Giraud, 2004 ;  von Kriegstein et al., 2005 ; Sugiura 
et al., 2006). Th e engagement of ATC/MTL regardless of the modality of the sen-
sory input is consistent with the proposed role of these regions in cross-modal 
integration and in accessing multimodal semantic knowledge of familiar people. 
Similarly, associative learning of novel face, name, and biographic information 
recruits ATC/MTL, demonstrating the critical contribution of these regions to 
establishing new person-specifi c semantic representations by binding informa-
tion processed in modality-specifi c cortical regions into a unifi ed memory trace 
( Sperling et al., 2001, 2003 ;  Zeineh et al., 2003 ;  Tsukiura et al., 2002, 2006 ). 
Multimodal integration of person-specifi c semantic information, however, may 
not be mediated exclusively via ATC/MTL and may also involve direct crosstalk 
between modality-specifi c cortical regions ( Campanella & Belin, 2007 ). 
 FA L SE R ECOGN IT ION A N D M ISI DEN T I F IC AT ION OF 
U N FA M I LI A R FACE S   
 In contrast to the defective recognition of familiar faces that characterizes 
prosopagnosia and person recognition disorders, in some neurological patients, 
the memory impairment manifests primarily as false recognition of unfamiliar 
faces ( Rapcsak et al., 1999, 2001, 2002 ). Misatt ributions of facial familiarity in 
patients with false recognition can take diff erent clinical forms. In some cases, 
memory illusions are revealed by the strong tendency to produce “false alarms” to 
novel distractor faces in anterograde memory experiments. Other patients, how-
ever, also demonstrate false recognition in retrograde memory paradigms when 
they are asked to judge whether they had ever seen a particular face before. In 
these situations, the spurious sense of familiarity triggered by novel faces may be 
accompanied by the retrieval of false biographic information resulting in frank 
misidentifi cations. In severe cases, patients may mistake unfamiliar individuals 
for famous people or personal acquaintances in real-life sett ings ( Rapcsak et al., 
1994,1996, 1998 ;  Ward et al., 1999 ;  Ward & Jones, 2003 ). 

118
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Although impaired recognition of familiar faces and false recognition of unfa-
miliar faces may co-exist in some patients, the two types of memory disorders 
are dissociable ( Rapcsak et al., 1996, 1999, 2002 ). In particular, whereas right 
temporal lobe damage plays a critical role in producing memory impairment for 
familiar faces in patients with prosopagnosia or person recognition disorders, the 
most striking cases of false facial recognition have been observed in patients with 
damage to right prefrontal cortex (PFC) ( Rapcsak et al., 1996, 1999, 2001, 2002 ) 
( Figure 6.4 ). 
 Th e fact that false recognition errors are more prevalent following right PFC 
damage than in patients with right temporal lobe lesions suggests that memory 
illusions are not simply the result of face memory loss ( Rapcsak et al., 1999, 2002 ). 
Instead, the available evidence indicates that false recognition in frontal patients 
results from abnormal reliance on category-level face memory representations 
that cannot support the recognition of individual identity. For instance, it has 
been shown that following exposure to pictures of white male faces in the study 
phase of an anterograde memory experiment, frontal patients were much more 
likely to false alarm to category-consistent distractors (i.e., other white males) 
than to category-inconsistent distractors that diff ered from target faces in terms 
of race or gender (i.e., non-white males or white females) ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). 
Th is fi nding can be explained by assuming that frontal patients primarily encoded 
 
L
R
4
2
0
 Figure 6.4  Right prefrontal cortex (PFC) lesions in patients with false facial recognition 
(top). Damage involves a ventrolateral frontal lobe region that shows activation during 
face recognition performance in normal subjects (bott om) (see color insert).   

Face Recognition
119
categorical information about study items and, as a result, had diffi  culty opposing 
the sense of familiarity induced by novel distractor faces that matched this gen-
eral or category-level memory description of the study episode. In fact, the perfor-
mance of frontal patients in this face memory experiment demonstrates all the key 
behavioral signatures of categorical processing: preserved between-category but 
poor within-category discrimination and a strong propensity for similarity-based 
generalization to novel items. 
 Category-level processing of faces may also account for false recognition errors 
in retrograde memory tasks ( Rapcsak et al., 1999, 2001, 2002 ). For example, fron-
tal patients may incorrectly claim that a novel face is familiar/famous based on 
strong categorical resemblance to facial prototypes that we associate with celeb-
rity status (e.g., “actress-type”). Activation of facial prototypes automatically cues 
the appropriate social stereotype, leading to the establishment of visually-derived 
semantic codes for the novel person and sett ing the stage for false recognition 
( Figure 6.1 ). However, the general sense of familiarity associated with the acti-
vation of categorical memory representations can be opposed by engaging in a 
strategic memory search to retrieve confi rmatory biographic information via 
the individuation process (e.g., by att empting to recollect specifi c movies the 
“actress” appeared in or by trying to remember her name). Th us, normal subjects 
can avoid false recognition by using the presence or absence of identity-specifi c 
contextual information as the appropriate criterion for making face memory deci-
sions ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). By contrast, frontal patients do not seem to engage 
in eff ortful and strategic context retrieval and are likely to respond on the basis of 
general familiarity that is the undiff erentiated output of the categorization pro-
cess. Due to defective monitoring, patients may fail to realize that the absence 
of individuating contextual information is inconsistent with a positive recogni-
tion decision and consequently mistake “looking famous” for “being famous.” 
Consistent with the hypothesis that face memory distortions refl ect the use of 
inappropriate decision criteria, false recognition errors in frontal patients can be 
dramatically reduced by asking them to call faces familiar/famous only if they 
can remember the profession and name of the person ( Rapcsak et al., 1999 ). Th us, 
frontal patients can use the output of the individuation process to suppress false 
recognition once the appropriate strategy is pointed out to them. 
 In terms of our cognitive model (  Figure 6.1  ), false recognition of unfamiliar 
faces in frontal patients can be explained by postulating damage to the execu-
tive system. In particular, the neuropsychological evidence suggests that frontal 
lobe structures play an important role in face recognition by implementing stra-
tegic memory retrieval, monitoring, and decision functions critical for att ribut-
ing facial familiarity to a specifi c context or source ( Rapcsak et al., 1999, 2001, 
2002 ). Under conditions of uncertainty, when the face cue does not automatically 
elicit identity-specifi c information, eff ortful and strategic recollection of individ-
uating contextual details by the frontal executive system provides the principal 

120
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
mechanism for suppressing false recognition by opposing the misleading infl u-
ence of general or undiff erentiated familiarity associated with the output of the 
categorization process. Consistent with the hypothesis that false recognition is 
based on the activation of categorical memory representations, frontal patients 
typically use generic descriptions to justify their claim that a novel person is famil-
iar/famous (e.g., “saw her on TV”). However, in order to explain the more out-
landish and implausible misidentifi cations produced by some patients, we have to 
assume that in severe cases dysfunctional frontal systems may exert inappropriate 
top-down control over the entire recognition process. In such patients, the defec-
tive frontal executive may override or ignore bott om-up information generated 
by temporal lobe memory systems and assign bizarre and improbable semantic 
contexts and identities to novel faces regardless of their physical att ributes or per-
ceived levels of familiarity, resulting in confabulatory or delusional misidentifi ca-
tion ( Rapcsak et al., 1994, 1996, 1999 ;  Ward et al., 1999 ;  Ward & Jones, 2003 ). 
Frontal lobe dysfunction may also lead to inappropriate questioning of the “real” 
identity of highly familiar persons, as occurs in the Capgras delusion ( Ellis & 
Lewis, 2001 ;  Devinsky, 2009 ). In short, false facial recognition, confabulation, 
and delusional misidentifi cation may represent a clinical continuum of increas-
ingly severe memory distortions and reality monitoring failures att ributable to 
frontal lobe dysfunction ( Rapcsak et al., 1994, 1996, 1999 ). Consistent with the 
proposed monitoring impairment, frontal patients with false recognition/mis-
identifi cation exhibit anosognosia for their face memory defi cit and have diffi  -
culty judging the accuracy of their recognition decisions ( Rapcsak et al., 1994, 
1996, 1998 ;  Pannu et al., 2005 ). In terms of cognitive theory, memory distortions 
in patients with frontal lobe lesions underscore the fact that face recognition is 
not merely the automatic product of a direct match between the face cue and 
representations of faces stored in memory. Instead, remembering faces is more 
appropriately viewed as a constructive process that requires dynamic interac-
tions between temporal lobe face memory systems and frontal executive systems 
involved in the strategic control of conscious recollection ( Rapcsak et al., 2002 ). 
 Consistent with neuropsychological evidence of face memory impairments in 
patients with frontal lobe lesions, imaging studies in normal subjects have dem-
onstrated frontal lobe activation during recognition of familiar faces ( Leveroni 
et al., 2000 ), new face learning ( Kelley et al., 1998 ;  McDermott  et al., 1999 ), and 
in working memory tasks that require the active maintenance and manipula-
tion of face memory information (for reviews, see  Ranganath, 2006 ;  D’Esposito, 
2007 ) ( Figure 6.4 ). Collectively, the results of these studies support the view that 
face recognition requires functional integration between temporal lobe regions 
involved in face perception/memory and frontal executive systems ( Figure 6.5 ). 
Furthermore, imaging evidence that levels of neural activity within temporal 
lobe face processing areas are modulated by top-down signals originating in PFC 
( Gazzaley et al., 2005 ;  Ranganath, 2006 ;  Johnson et al., 2007 ,  D’Esposito, 2007 ) 

Face Recognition
121
is consistent with the notion that the frontal lobes exert executive control over the 
operations of the face recognition system ( Figures 6.1 and 6.5 ). 
 Input from PFC may serve to bias processing in temporal lobe face memory 
systems toward the retrieval of task-relevant information while at the same time 
suppressing the distracting infl uence of task-irrelevant or competing memory 
representations. For instance, when the face memory task calls for the recogni-
tion of individual identity, automatically activated categorical information is 
irrelevant and needs to be inhibited. In these situations, top-down signals from 
PFC may selectively enhance the retrieval of individuating face memory informa-
tion while at the same time limiting interference by suppressing competition from 
categorical memory representations. According to this view, executive functions 
implemented by PFC improve memory accuracy by increasing the signal-to-noise 
ratio within the face memory system ( Rapcsak et al., 2002 ). Determining how 
the various memory control operations postulated by cognitive models map onto 
diff erent functional subdivisions within PFC remains an important challenge for 
future investigations. 
 Conclusions 
 Lesion-defi cit correlation studies in neurological patients have made critical 
contributions to our understanding of the cognitive mechanisms and neural sub-
strates of face recognition memory. Th ese investigations have provided compel-
ling evidence that face memory is not localizable to any single cortical region and 
is mediated instead by a predominantly right-lateralized neural network com-
prised of inferotemporal visual cortex (OFA/FFA), anterior and medial temporal 
lobe structures (ATC/MTL), and prefrontal cortex (PFC) ( Figure 6.5 ). Th e vari-
ous components of this distributed neural system have distinct functional roles 
in the recognition process, and damage to these regions results in qualitatively 
diff erent types of face recognition impairments characterized by memory loss or 
memory distortion. Specifi cally, damage to the visual components of the network 
(OFA/FFA) gives rise to prosopagnosia, multimodal semantic impairment fol-
lowing damage to ATC/MTL is associated with person recognition disorders, 
while executive dysfunction is the primary abnormality contributing to false 
facial recognition in patients with PFC lesions ( Rapcsak, 2003 ). 
 Th e neuropsychological evidence reviewed here suggests further that face 
recognition performance is the integrated product of two basic cognitive opera-
tions that involve processing faces at diff erent levels of specifi city: individuation 
and categorization. Whereas individuated memory traces emphasize unique 
identity-specifi c facial and semantic att ributes that distinguish one person 
from another, categorical representations emphasize similarities across exem-
plars and thus provide information about what the person who is the current 

122
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
focus of att ention has in common with people we have encountered in the past. 
Categorization processes play a useful role in social cognition by allowing us to 
quickly construct a “composite identity” for a novel person based on our prior 
experiences with similar individuals. However, due to the strong propensity for 
similarity-based generalization, categorical memory representations lack speci-
fi city and cannot support the recognition of individual identity. In everyday 
life, individuation and categorization are used in a fl exible and interactive fash-
ion depending on the social context of the recognition task and the goals of the 
observer. However, individuation involves more fi ne-grained visual and semantic 
analysis than categorization. Furthermore, recollection of identity-specifi c infor-
mation may necessitate the deployment of strategic memory retrieval, monitoring, 
 
PFC
ATC
MTL
FFA
OFA
 Figure 6.5  The distributed face memory network. OFA = occipital face area, 
FFA = fusiform face area, ATC = anterior temporal cortex, MTL = medial temporal 
lobe, PFC = prefrontal cortex. Circles identifying different cortical regions are 
color-coded with the visual, semantic, and executive components of the face 
recognition model depicted in Figure 6.1. Only the right-hemisphere network is 
shown here but it is assumed that homologous regions in the left hemisphere also 
contribute to face recognition.  

Face Recognition
123
and decision functions orchestrated by the executive system. Th us, in addition to 
requiring access to more detailed visual and semantic information, individuation 
is also more dependent on executive resources than categorization. Consistent 
with the notion that processing demands in recognition tasks increase with lev-
els of specifi city, functional imaging studies have documented greater activation 
within the face memory network during person individuation than categorization 
( Mason & Macrae, 2004 ;  Turk et al., 2005 ). Because it is normally more diffi  cult 
for the recognition system to extract identity-specifi c information, individuation 
is more vulnerable to the deleterious eff ects of brain damage than categorization. 
Applying the “levels-of-specifi city” framework to the diff erent neuropsychologi-
cal syndromes discussed in this chapter, prosopagnosia and person recognition 
disorders can be interpreted as refl ecting severe damage to the visual and seman-
tic components of the individuation process ( Figure 6.1 ). By contrast, in false 
recognition the automatic or bott om-up aspects of individuation are relatively 
preserved but patients show a bias toward categorical processing in situations 
where identity-specifi c information is not immediately available or is ambiguous 
and therefore requires the eff ortful and strategic expenditure of top-down execu-
tive resources. As we have seen, converging neuropsychological and imaging 
data indicate that individuation or identity-based recognition of faces depends 
critically on right-hemisphere mechanisms and requires fi ne-grained process-
ing of confi gural information (e.g.,  Barton et al., 2002 ;  Rossion et al., 2000 ). By 
contrast, it has been proposed that the left  hemisphere demonstrates an intrin-
sic bias toward categorical or similarity-based processing of faces that involves 
extracting single diagnostic features useful for determining group membership 
( Mason & Macrae, 2004 ;  Zarate et al., 2008 ). Th erefore, the relative preservation 
of categorization in patients with right-hemisphere damage may in part refl ect 
the preferred cognitive style of the intact left -hemisphere face recognition sys-
tem in addition to any residual processing by the degraded right-hemisphere face 
memory network. 
 Finally, we wish to acknowledge that the question of whether face recogni-
tion is mediated by a dedicated or domain-specifi c neural system, or whether 
the same system is recruited in a domain-general fashion whenever non-face 
objects must be discriminated at the unique individual rather than at the basic 
category level (e.g., “my chocolate Labrador Snickers” as opposed to “dog”) has 
been a highly contentious topic in cognitive neuropsychology. Consistent with 
the domain-general hypothesis, patients with prosopagnosia following damage 
to the OFA/FFA oft en have diffi  culty with subordinate-level identifi cation of 
objects within visually homogeneous categories (e.g., cars, animals) ( Damasio 
et al. 1982, 1990 ;  Gauthier, Behrmann, & Tarr, 1999 ). Similarly, patients with 
damage to ATC/MTL are usually impaired not only in identifying familiar peo-
ple but also in subordinate-level recognition/naming of objects, especially living 
things and semantically unique entities such as famous landmarks/monuments 

124
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
( Ellis et al., 1989 ;  Hanley et al., 1989 ;  Rogers et al., 2004 ;  Tyler et al., 2004 ; 
 Moss et  al., 2005 ;  Bright et  al., 2005 ;  Damasio et  al., 2004 ;  Brambati et  al., 
2006 ;  Tranel, 2006 ; Ahmed et al., 2008. Th e fact that person and object recogni-
tion defi cits in patients with anterior temporal lobe lesions show similar levels 
of specifi city eff ects, with bett er preservation of knowledge represented at the 
category than at the unique exemplar level, is consistent with a domain-general 
impairment of semantic individuation. In our experience, the tendency of frontal 
patients to produce false recognition errors to novel items is also not limited to 
faces and can be demonstrated in other anterograde visual object memory tasks 
that require within-category discrimination among structurally similar exem-
plars. Furthermore, some patients produce false recognition/misidentifi cation 
errors not only to novel faces but also to unfamiliar names or voices in retrograde 
memory tasks involving familiarity/fame judgments ( Rapcsak et al., 1994,1998 ; 
 Ward et  al., 1999 ;  Ward & Jones, 2003 ). Th ese observations suggest that the 
frontal lobe regions implicated in false facial recognition play a domain-general 
role in the executive control of memory. On the other hand, consistent with the 
domain-specifi c hypothesis, there are reports of prosopagnosics with recogni-
tion impairments highly specifi c to human faces (for a review, see  Riddoch et al., 
2008 ). Dissociations between person-specifi c and general object knowledge have 
also been documented in patients with semantic impairment following anterior 
temporal lobe damage ( Th ompson et al., 2002, 2004 ). Because the brain lesions 
that result in domain-specifi c versus domain-general recognition impairments 
are oft en anatomically indistinguishable, it is possible that diff erences in the selec-
tivity of the defi cit refl ect individual variations in the cortical representation of 
face and object processing skills. It could also be argued that naturally occurring 
lesions may not be ideal for examining the question of domain-specifi city, as the 
area of brain damage is typically large (  Figures 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 ) and likely to involve 
not only regions ostensibly dedicated to face recognition but also adjacent cortical 
areas specialized for processing other visual object categories. Although imaging 
experiments in normal subjects may seem bett er suited for studying the fi ne-scale 
functional neuroanatomy of face and object processing, these investigations have 
also produced inconsistent results with evidence both for domain-specifi city 
and for domain-generality within the face recognition network ( Gauthier et al., 
1997, 2000a,c ;  Kanwisher, 2000 ;  Kanwisher & Yovel, 2006 ;  Tarr & Gauthier, 
2000 ;  Tarr & Cheng, 2003 ;  Grill-Spector et al., 2004, 2006 ;  Haxby et al., 2001 ; 
 Gorno-Tempini & Price, 2001 ;  Grabowski et al., 2001 ;  Haist, Lee, & Stiles, 2010 ). 
Until the resolution of this debate, it seems prudent to accept the possibility that 
the face recognition system we have described here may not be domain-specifi c 
and that neuropsychological observations in patients with face memory disorders 
may have more general implications for our understanding of the functional orga-
nization and cortical localization of the neural systems involved in recognizing 
objects at diff erent levels of specifi city. 

Face Recognition
125
 Acknowledgments 
 Th is work was supported by NIH grants P30AG19610 and DC008286. Th e 
author wishes to thank Emily C. Edmonds, M.A., Maya L. Henry Ph.D., and 
Sarah Andersen for their help with various aspects of this project. 
 References 
 Ahmed ,  S. ,  Arnold ,  R. ,  Th ompson  S. A. ,  Graham ,  K. S. ,  Hodges ,  J. R . ( 2008 ).  Naming of objects, 
faces and buildings in mild cognitive impairment.  Cortex ,  46 ,  746–752 . 
   Barsalou ,  L. W.  ,   Simmons ,  W. K.  ,   Barbey ,  A. K.  ,   Wison ,  C. D  . ( 2003 ).  Grounding conceptual 
knowledge in modality-specifi c systems.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,  7 ,  84–91 . 
 Barton ,  J. J. S. ,  Press ,  D. Z. ,  Keenan ,  J. P. ,  O’Connor ,  M. ( 2002 ).  Lesions of the fusiform area 
impair perception of facial confi guration in prosopagnosia.  Neurology ,  58 ,  71–78 . 
 Benton ,  A. ( 1990 ).  Facial recognition 1990.  Cortex ,  26 ,  491–499 . 
 Bernard ,  F. A. ,  Bullmore ,  E. T. ,  Graham ,  K. S. ,  Th ompson ,  S. A. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. ,  Fletcher ,  P. C . 
( 2004 ).  Th e hippocampal region is involved in successful recognition of both remote and 
recent famous faces.  NeuroImage,  22 ,  1704–1714 . 
   Bouvier ,  S. E.  ,   Engel ,  S. A  . ( 2006 ).  Behavioral defi cits and cortical damage loci in cerebral achro-
matopsia.  Cerebral Cortex ,  16 ,  183–191 . 
 Brambati ,  S. M. ,  Myers ,  D. ,  Wilson ,  A. ,  Rankin ,  K. P. ,  Allison ,  S. C. ,  Rosen ,  H. J. ,  Miller ,  B. L. , 
Gorno- Tempini ,  M. L . ( 2006 ).  Th e anatomy of category-specifi c object naming in neurode-
generative diseases.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  18 ,  1644–1653 . 
 Bright ,  P. ,  Moss ,  H. E. ,  Stamatakis ,  E. A. ,  Tyler ,  L. K . ( 2005 ).  Th e anatomy of object process-
ing: the role of anteromedial temporal cortex.  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 
 58B ,  361–377 . 
 Bruce ,  V. ,  Young ,  A. W . ( 1986 ).  Understanding face recognition.  British Journal of Psychology ,  77 , 
 305–327 . 
   Cabeza ,  R.  ,   Bruce ,  V.  ,   Kato ,  T.  ,   Oda. ,  M.   ( 1999 ).  Th e prototype eff ect in face recognition: exten-
sions and limits.  Memory & Cognition ,  27 ,  139–151 . 
 Campanella ,  S. , Belin, P.  ( 2007 ).  Integrating face and voice in person perception.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences ,  11 ,  535–543 . 
 Cloutier ,  J. ,  Mason ,  M. F. ,  Macrae ,  C. N . ( 2005 ).  Th e perceptual determinants of person con-
strual: reopening the social-cognitive toolbox.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 
 88 ,  885–894 . 
 Damasio ,  A. R . ( 1989 ).  Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: a systems-level proposal for 
the neural substrates of recall and recognition.    Cognition ,  33 ,  25–62 . 
 Damasio ,  A. R. ,  Damasio  H. ,  Van Hoesen ,  G. W. ( 1982 ).  Prosopagnosia: anatomic basis and 
behavioral mechanisms.  Neurology ,  32 ,  331–341 . 
 Damasio ,  A. R ,  Tranel ,  D. ,  Damasio ,  H . ( 1990 ).  Face agnosia and the neural substrates of mem-
ory.  Annual Review of Neuroscience ,  13 ,  89–109 . 
 Damasio ,  H ,  Tranel ,  D. ,  Grabowski ,  T. ,  Adolphs ,  R. ,  Damasio ,  A . ( 2004 ).  Neural systems behind 
word and concept retrieval.  Cognition ,  92 ,  179–229 . 
   D’Esposito ,  M  . ( 2007 ).  From cognitive to neural models of working memory.    Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B .,  362 ,  761–772 . 
 De Renzi ,  E. ,  Faglioni ,  P. ,  Grossi ,  D. ,  Nichelli ,  P . ( 1991 ).  Apperceptive and associative forms of 
prosopagnosia.  Cortex ,  27 ,  213–221 . 
 Devinsky ,  O . ( 2009 ).  Delusional misidentifi cations and duplications. Right brain lesions, left  
brain delusions .  Neurology ,  72 ,  80–87 . 

126
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Douville ,  K. ,  Woodard ,  J. L. ,  Seidenberg ,  M. ,  Miller ,  S. K. ,  Leveroni ,  C. L. ,  Nielson ,  K. A. , 
 Franczak ,  M. ,  Antuono ,  P. ,  Rao ,  S. M. ( 2005 ).  Medial temporal lobe activity for recogni-
tion of recent and remote famous names: an event related fMRI study.  Neuropsychologia , 
 43 ,  693–703 . 
   Duchaine ,  B.  ,   Yovel ,  G  . ( 2008 ). Face recognition. In:   Basbaum,   A. I.  ,   Kaneko,   A.  ,   Shepherd,   G. 
M. , &  Westheimer,  G. (eds).  Th e senses; a comprehensive reference, vol 2, Vision II .  San 
Diego :  Academic Press . pp.  329–358 . 
 Ellis ,  A. W. ,  Young ,  A. W. ,  Critchley ,  E. M. R . ( 1989 ).  Loss of memory for people following right 
temporal lobe damage.  Brain ,  112 ,  1469–1483 . 
 Ellis ,  H. D. ,  Lewis ,  M. B . ( 2001 ).  Capgras delusion: a window on face recognition.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences ,  5 ,  149–156 . 
   Eslinger ,  P. J.  ,   Easton ,  A.  ,   Gratt an ,  L. M. ,  Van Hoesen ,  G. W . ( 1996 ).  Distinctive forms of partial 
retrograde amnesia aft er asymmetric temporal lobe lesions: possible role of the occipitotem-
poral gyri in memory.    Cerebral Cortex ,  6 ,  530–539 . 
 Evans ,  J. J. ,  Heggs ,  A. J. ,  Antoun ,  N. ,  Hodges ,  J. R . ( 1995 ).  Progressive prosopagnosia associated 
with selective right temporal lobe atrophy. A new syndrome?  Brain ,  118 ,  1–13 . 
  Fiske ,  S. T ,  Neuberg ,  S. L . ( 1990 ).  A continuum of impression formation, from category-based to 
individuating processes: infl uences of information and motivation on att ention and inter-
pretation.  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology ,  23 ,  1–74 . 
 Gainott i ,  G . ( 2007 ).  Diff erent patt erns of famous person recognition disorders in patients 
with right and left  anterior temporal lesions:  a systematic review.  Neuropsychologia ,  45 , 
 1591–1607 . 
 Gainott i ,  G.  ,   Barbier ,  A.  ,   Marra ,  C  . ( 2003 ).  Slowly progressive defect in recognition of familiar 
people in a patient with right anterior temporal atrophy.  Brain ,  126 ,  792–803 . 
   Gauthier ,  I.  ,   Behrmann ,  M.  ,   Tarr ,  M. J  . ( 1999 ).  Can face recognition really be dissociated from 
object recognition?  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  11 ,  349–370 . 
 Gauthier ,  I. ,  Anderson ,  A. W. ,  Tarr ,  M. J. ,  Skudlarski ,  P. ,  Gore ,  J. C . ( 1997 ).  Levels of categoriza-
tion in visual recognition studied with functional MRI.    Current Biology ,  7 ,  645–651 . 
  Gauthier ,  I. ,  Skudlarski ,  P. ,  Gore ,  J. C. ,  Anderson ,  A. W . ( 2000c ).  Expertise for cars and birds 
recruits brain areas involved in face recognition.  Nature Neuroscience ,  3 ,  191–197 . 
 Gauthier ,  I. ,  Tarr ,  M. J. ,  Mylan ,  J. ,  Anderson ,  A. W. ,  Skudlarski ,  P. ,  Gore ,  J. C . ( 2000a ).  Does 
visual subordinate-level categorization engage the functionally defi ned fusiform face area? 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  17 ,  143–163 . 
 Gauthier ,  I. ,  Tarr ,  M. J. ,  Moylan ,  J. ,  Skudlarski ,  P. ,  Gore ,  J. C.  ,  Anderson ,  A. W. ( 2000b ).  Th e fusi-
form “face area” is part of a network that processes faces at this individual level.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience ,  12 ,  495–504 . 
  Gazzaley ,  A. ,  Cooney ,  J. W. ,  McEvoy ,  K. ,  Knight ,  R. T. ,  D’Esposito ,  M . ( 2005 ).  Top-down 
enhancement and suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience ,  17 ,  507–517 . 
 Gentileschi ,  V. ,  Sperber ,  S. ,  Spinnler ,  H . ( 2001 ).  Crossmodal agnosia for familiar people as a con-
sequence of right infero-polar temporal atrophy.  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  18 : 439–463 . 
 Glosser ,  G. ,  Salvucci ,  A. E. ,  Chiaravalloti ,  N. D. ( 2003 ).  Naming and recognizing famous faces in 
temporal lobe epilepsy.  Neurology,  61 ,  81–86 . 
 Gorno-Tempini ,  M. L ,  Price  J. C . ( 2001 ).  Identifi cation of famous faces and buildings. A func-
tional neuroimaging study of semantically unique items .  Brain 2001 ,  124 : 2087–2097 . 
 Grabowski ,  T. J. ,  Damasio ,  H. ,  Tranel ,  D. ,  Boles Ponto ,  L. L. ,  Hichwa ,  R. D. ,  Damasio ,  A. R  . 
( 2001 ).  A role for left  temporal pole in the retrieval of words for unique entities.    Human 
Brain Mapping ,  13 , 199–212 . 
   Grill-Spector ,  K.  ,   Knouf ,  N.  ,   Kanwisher ,  N  . ( 2004 ).  Th e fusiform face area subserves face percep-
tion, not generic within-category identifi cation.  Nature Neuroscience ,  7 ,  555–562 . 
 Grill-Spector ,  K. ,  Sayres ,  R. ,  Ress ,  D . ( 2006 ).  High-resolution imaging reveal highly selective 
nonface clusters in the fusiform face area.    Nature Neuroscience ,  9 ,  1177–1185 . 

Face Recognition
127
 Haxby ,  J. V. ,  Gobbini ,  M. I. ,  Furey ,  M. L. ,  Ishai ,  A. ,  Schoute ,  J. L. ,  Pietrini ,  P . ( 2001 ).  Distributed 
and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex.  Science ,  293 , 
 2425–2430 . 
  Haxby ,  J. V. ,  Hoff man ,  E. A. ,  Gobbini ,  M. I . ( 2000 ).  Th e distributed human neural system for face 
perception.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,  4 ,  223–233 . 
   Haist ,  F.  ,   Gore ,  J. B.  ,   Mao ,  H  . ( 2001 ).  Consolidation of human memory over decades revealed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging.  Nature Neuroscience ,  4 ,  1139–1145 . 
 Haist ,  F. ,  Lee ,  K. ,  Stiles ,  J . ( 2010 ).  Individuating faces and common objects produces equal 
responses in putative face processing areas in ventral occipitotemporal cortex.  Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience ,  4 ,  181 . doi:10.3389/fnhum.2010.00181. 
 Hanley ,  J. R. ,  Young ,  A. W. ,  Pearson ,  N. A. ( 1989 ).  Defective recognition of familiar people. 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  6 ,  179–210 . 
 Ishai ,  A. ,  Haxby ,  J. V. ,  Ungerleider ,  L. G . ( 2002 ).  Visual imagery of famous faces: eff ects of mem-
ory and att ention revealed by fMRI.    NeuroImage ,  17 ,  1729–1741 . 
 Johnson ,  M. R. ,  Mitchell ,  K. J. ,  Raye ,  C. L. ,  D’Esposito ,  M. ,  Johnson ,  M. K . ( 2007 ).  A brief 
thought can modulate activity in extrastriate visual areas: top-down eff ects of refreshing 
just-seen stimuli.  NeuroImage ,  37 ,  290–299 . 
 Josephs ,  K. A. ,  Whitwell ,  J. L. ,  Vemuri ,  P. ,  Senjem ,  M. L. ,  Boeve.  B. F. ,  Knopman ,  D. S. ,  Smith ,  G. 
E. ,  Ivnik ,  R. J. ,  Petersen ,  R. C. ,  Jack ,  C. R . ( 2008 ).  Th e anatomic correlate of prosopagnosia 
in semantic dementia.  Neurology ,  71 ,  1628–1633 . 
   Joubert ,  S.  ,   Felician ,  O.  ,   Barbeau ,  E.  ,   Ranjeva ,  J-P.  ,   Cristophe ,  M.  ,   Didic ,  M.  ,   Poncet ,  M. ,  Ceccaldi , 
 M . ( 2006 ).  Th e right temporal lobe variant of frontotemporal dementia. Cognitive and neu-
roanatomical profi le of three patients .   Journal of Neurology ,  253 ,  1447–1458 . 
 Kanwisher ,  N . ( 2000 ).  Domain specifi city of face perception.  Nature Neuroscience ,  3 ,  759–763 . 
 Kanwisher ,  N ,  Yovel ,  G. ( 2006 ).  Th e fusiform face area: a cortical region specialized for the per-
ception of faces.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,  361 ,  2109–2128 . 
 Kanwisher ,  N. ,  McDermott  ,  J. ,  Chun ,  M. M . ( 1997 ).  Th e fusiform face area: a module in human 
extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception.  Journal of Neuroscience ,  17 ,  4302–4311 . 
  Kelley ,  W. M. ,  Miezin ,  F. M. ,  McDermott  ,  K. B. , et al. ( 1998 ).  Hemispheric specialization in 
human frontal cortex and medial temporal lobe for verbal and nonverbal memory encoding.  
 Neuron ,  20 ,  927–936 . 
   Klatzky ,  R. L.  ,   Martin ,  G. L.  ,   Kane ,  R. A.  . ( 1982 ).  Semantic interpretation eff ects on memory for 
faces.  Memory & Cognition ,  10 ,  195–206 . 
   Leveroni ,  C. L.  ,   Seidenberg ,  M.  ,   Mayer ,  A. R.  ,   Mead ,  L. A.  ,   Binder ,  J. R.  ,   Rao ,  S. M  . ( 2000 ). 
 Neural systems underlying the recognition of familiar and newly learned faces.    Journal of 
Neuroscience ,  20 ,  878–886 . 
   Light ,  L. L.  ,   Kayra-Stuart ,  F.  ,   Hollander ,  S  . ( 1979 ).  Recognition memory for typical and unusual 
faces.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory ,  5 ,  212–228 . 
 Liu ,  J. ,  Harris ,  A. ,  Kanwisher ,  N . ( 2010 ).  Perception of face parts and face confi gurations: an 
fMRI study.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 22, 203–211. 
   Macrae ,  C. N.  ,   Bodenhausen ,  G. V  . ( 2000 ).  Social cognition: thinking categorically about others.  
 Annual Review of Psychology ,  5 ,  193–120 . 
 Mason ,  M. F. ,  Macrae ,  C. N . ( 2004 ).  Categorizing and individuating others: the neural substrates 
of person perception.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  16 ,  1785–1795 . 
   Maurer ,  D.  ,   Le Grand ,  R.  ,   Mondloch ,  J.   ( 2002 ).  Th e many faces of confi gural processing.  Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences ,  6 ,  255–260 . 
 McClelland ,  J. L. ,  McNaughton ,  B. L. ,  O’Reilly ,  R. C . ( 1995 ).  Why are there complementary 
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures 
of connectionist models of learning and memory.  Psychological Review ,  102 ,  419–457 . 
 McDermott  ,  K. B. ,  Buckner ,  R. L. ,  Petersen ,  S. E. ,  Kelley , W. M. ,  Saunders ,  A. L . ( 1999 ).  Set- and 
code-specifi c activation in the frontal cortex: an fMRI study of encoding and retrieval of 
faces and words.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  11 ,  631–640 . 

128
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Mechelli ,  A. ,  Price ,  C. J. ,  Friston ,  K. J. ,  Ishai ,  A . ( 2004 ).  Where bott om-up meets top-down: neu-
ral interactions during perception and imagery.  Cerebral Cortex ,  14 ,  1256–1265 . 
   Mervis ,  C. B.  ,   Rosch ,  E  . ( 1981 ).  Categorization of natural objects.    Annual Review of Psychology , 
 32 ,  89–115 . 
  Moran ,  M. ,  Seidenberg ,  M. ,  Sabsevitz ,  D. ,  Swanson ,  S. ,  Hermann ,  B. ( 2005 ).  Th e acquisition of 
face and person identity information following anterior temporal lobectomy.  Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society ,  11 ,  237–278 . 
 Moscovitch ,  M. ,  Nadel ,  L. ,  Winocur ,  G. ,  Gilboa ,  A. ,  Rosenbaum.  S. ( 2006 ).  Th e cognitive neuro-
science of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 
 16 ,  179–190 . 
 Moss ,  H. E. ,  Rodd ,  J. M. ,  Stamatakis ,  E. A. ,  Bright ,  P. ,  Tyler.  L. K . ( 2005 ).  Anteromedial temporal 
cortex supports fi ne-grained diff erentiation among objects.  Cerebral Cortex ,  15 ,  616–627 . 
 Nakamura ,  K. ,  Kawashima ,  R. ,  Sugiura ,  M. ,  Kato ,  T. , et al. ( 2001 ).  Neural substrates for recogni-
tion of familiar voices: a PET study.  Neuropsychologia ,  39 ,  1047–1054 . 
 Pannu ,  J. K. ,  Kaszniak ,  A. W ,  Rapcsak ,  S. Z . ( 2005 ).  Metamemory for faces following frontal lobe 
damage.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society ,  11 ,  668–676 . 
   Quinn ,  K. A.  ,   Macrae ,  C. N  . ( 2005 ).  Categorizing others: the dynamics of person construal.  
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  88 ,  467–479 . 
 Ranganath ,  C. ( 2006 ).  Working memory for visual objects: complementary roles of inferior tem-
poral, medial temporal, and prefrontal cortex.  Neuroscience ,  139 ,  277–289 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z . ( 2003 ).  Face memory and its disorders.  Current Neurology and Neuroscience 
Reports ,  3 ,  494–501 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Kaszniak ,  A. W ,  Reminger ,  S. L. ,  Glisky ,  M. L. ,  Glisky ,  E. L. ,  Comer ,  J. F.  ( 1998 ). 
 Dissociation between verbal and autonomic measures of recognition memory following 
frontal lobe damage.  Neurology ,  50 ,  1259–1265 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Nielson ,  M. A. ,  Littrell ,  L. D. ,  Glisky ,  E. L. ,  Kaszniak ,  A. W. ,  Laguna ,  J. F . 
( 2001 ).  Face memory impairments in patients with frontal lobe damage.  Neurology ,  57 , 
 1168–1175 . 
  Rapcsak ,  S. Z ,  Nielsen ,  L .,  Glisky ,  E. L ,  Kaszniak ,  A. W . ( 2002 ). Th e neuropsychology of false 
facial recognition. In  L.  Squire &  D. L.  Schacter (eds.),   Th e Neuropsychology of Memory, 3rd 
Edition  .  New York :  Guilford Press , pp.  130–142 . 
   Rapcsak ,  S. Z.  ,   Polster ,  M. R.  ,   Comer ,  J. F.  ,   Rubens ,  A. B  . ( 1994 ).  False recognition and misidenti-
fi cation of unfamiliar faces following right hemisphere damage.  Cortex ,  30 ,  565–583 . 
   Rapcsak ,  S. Z  ,   Polster ,  M. R.  ,   Glisky ,  M. L.  ,   Comer ,  J. S  . ( 1996 ).  False recognition of unfamiliar 
faces following right hemisphere damage: neuropsychological and anatomical observations. 
 Cortex ,  32 ,  593–611 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Reminger ,  S. L. ,  Glisky ,  E. L. ,  Kaszniak ,  A. W. ,  Comer ,  J. F . ( 1999 ). 
 Neuropsychological mechanisms of false facial recognition following frontal lobe damage. 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology  16 ,  267–292 . 
 Riddoch ,  J. M. ,  Johnston ,  R. A. ,  Bracewell ,  R. M. ,  Boutsen ,  L. ,  Humphreys ,  G. W . ( 2008 ).  Are 
faces special? A case of pure prosopagnosia.    Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  25 ,  3–26 . 
  Rogers ,  T. T. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Garrard ,  P. ,  Bozeat ,  S. , Mc Clelland ,  J. L. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , 
 Patt erson ,  K. ( 2004 ).  Structure and deterioration of semantic memory: a neuropsychologi-
cal and computational investigation.  Psychological Review ,  111 ,  205–235 . 
  Rogers ,  T. T. ,  McClelland ,  J. L. ( 2004 ).  Semantic cognition. A parallel distributed processing 
approach .  Cambridge, MA : MIR Press . 
   Rossion ,  B.  ,   Caldara ,  R.  ,   Seghier ,  M.  ,   Schuller ,  A-M.  ,   Lazeyras.   F.  ,   Mayer ,  E.   ( 2003 ).  A network 
of occipito-temporal face-sensitive area besides the right middle fusiform gyrus is necessary 
for normal face processing.  Brain ,  126 ,  2381–2395 . 
   Rossion ,  B.  ,   Dricot ,  L.  ,   Devolder ,  A.  ,   Bodart ,  J-M.  ,   Crommelinck ,  M.  ,   de Gelder ,  B.  ,   Zoontjes ,  R . 
( 2000 ).  Hemispheric asymmetries for whole-based and part-based face processing in the 
human fusiform gyrus.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,  12 ,  793–802 . 

Face Recognition
129
 Rossion ,  B ,  Schiltz ,  C. ,  Crommerlinck ,  M. ( 2003 ).  Th e functionally defi ned right occipital and fusi-
form “face areas” discriminate novel from visually familiar faces.  NeuroImage ,  19 ,  877–883 . 
 Rossion ,  B. ,  Schiltz ,  C. ,  Robaye ,  L. ,  Pirenne ,  D. ,  Crommelinck ,  M . ( 2001 ).  How does the brain 
discriminate familiar and unfamiliar faces? A  PET study of face categorical perception. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  13 ,  1019–1034 . 
 Rothstein ,  P. ,  Henson ,  R. N. A. ,  Treves ,  A. ,  Driver ,  J. ,  Dolan ,  R. J . ( 2005 ).  Morphing Marilyn 
into Maggie dissociates physical and identity face representations in the brain.    Nature 
Neuroscience ,  8 ,  107–113 . 
   Schiltz ,  C.  ,   Sorger ,  B.  ,   Caldara ,  R.  ,   Ahmed ,  F.  ,   Mayer.   E.  ,   Goebel ,  R.  ,   Rossion ,  B  . ( 2006 ).  Impaired 
face discrimination in acquired prosopagnosia is associated with abnormal response to indi-
vidual faces in the right middle fusiform gyrus.  Cerebral Cortex ,  16 ,  574–586 . 
 Seidenberg ,  M. ,  Griffi  th ,  R. ,  Sabsevitz ,  D. ,  Moran ,  M. ,  Haltiner ,  A. ,  Bell ,  B. ,  Swanson ,  S. ,  Hammeke , 
 T. ,  Hermann ,  B . ( 2002 ).  Recognition and identifi cation of famous faces in patients with uni-
lateral temporal lobe epilepsy.    Neuropsychologia ,  40 ,  446–456 . 
   Sergent ,  J.  ,   MacDonald ,  B.  ,   Zuck ,  E.   ( 1994 ). Structural and functional organization of knowl-
edge about face and proper names:  positron emission tomography study. In  C  Umlita 
and  M  Moscovitch (eds).  Att ention and Performance XV: Conscious and Nonconscious 
Information Processing .  MIT Press , Cambridge MA, pp.  203–228 . 
 Sergent ,  J. ,  Ohta ,  S. ,  MacDonald ,  B . ( 1992 ).  Functional neuroanatomy of face and object process-
ing: a positron emission tomography study.  Brain ,  115 ,  15–36 . 
 Sergent ,  J. ,  Signoret ,  J-L . ( 1992 ).  Varieties of functional defi cits in prosopagnosia.  Cerebral 
Cortex ,  2 ,  375–388 . 
 Snowden ,  J. S. ,  Th ompson ,  J. C.  ,   Neary ,  D  . ( 2004 ).  Knowledge of famous faces and names in 
semantic dementia.  Brain ,  127 ,  860–872 . 
 Sorger ,  B. ,  Goesbel ,  R. ,  Schiltz ,  C. ,  Rossion ,  B . ( 2007 ).  Understanding the functional neuroanat-
omy of acquired prosopagnosia.  NeuroImage ,  35 ,  836–852 . 
 Squire ,  L. ,  Bayley ,  P. J . ( 2007 ).  Th e neuroscience of remote memory.    Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology ,  17 ,  185–196 . 
 Sperling ,  R. A. ,  Bates ,  J. F. ,  Cocchiarella.  A. J. ,  Schacter ,  D. L. ,  Rosen ,  B. R. ,  Albert ,  M. S . ( 2001 ).  Encoding 
novel face-name associations: a functional MRI study.  Human Brain Mapping ,  14 , 129–139 . 
 Sperling, R., Chua, E., Cocchiarella, A., Rand-Giovanett i, E., Poldrack, R., Schacter, D. L., Albert, 
M. ( 2003 ).  Putt ing names to faces: successful encoding and associative memories activate 
the anterior hippocampal formation.    NeuroImage ,  20 ,  1400–1410 . 
   Steeves ,  J. K.  E.  ,   Culham ,  J. C.  ,   Duchaine ,  B. C.  ,   Pratesi ,  C. C.  ,   Valyear ,  K. F.  ,   Schindler ,  I. , 
 Humphrey ,  G. K. ,  Milner ,  D. A. ,  Goodale ,  M. A. . ( 2006 ).  Th e fusiform face area is not suffi  -
cient for face recognition: evidence from a patient with dense prosopagnosia and no occipi-
tal face area.   Neuropsychologia ,  44 ,  594–604 . 
 Sugiura ,  M. ,  Sassa ,  Y. ,  Watanabe ,  J. ,  Akitsuki ,  Y. ,  Maeda ,  Y. ,  Matsue ,  Y. ,  Fukuda ,  H.  ,   Kawashima ,  R.   
( 2006 ).  Cortical mechanisms of person representation: recognition of famous and person-
ally familiar names.  NeuroImage ,  31 ,  853–860 . 
 Tanaka ,  J. W . ( 2001 ).  Th e entry point of face recognition: evidence for face expertise.    Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General ,  130 ,  534–543 . 
 Tarr ,  M. J. ,  Cheng ,  Y. D . ( 2003 ).  Learning to see faces and objects.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 
 7 ,  23–30 . 
 Tarr ,  M. J. , Gauthier ,  I . ( 2000 ).  FFA: a fl exible fusiform area for subordinate-level visual process-
ing automatized by expertise.    Nature Neuroscience,  3 ,  764–769 . 
 Th ompson ,  S. A. ,  Graham ,  K. S. ,  Williams ,  G. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Kapur ,  N. ,  Hodges ,  J. R . ( 2004 ). 
 Dissociating person-specifi c from general semantic knowledge: roles of the left  and right 
temporal lobes.  Neuropsychologia ,  42 ,  359–370 . 
 Th ompson ,  S. A. ,  Shaikan ,  B. J. ,  Graham.  K. S. ,  Patt erson.  K. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. . ( 2002 ).  Is knowl-
edge of famous people disproportionately impaired in patients with early and questionable 
Alzheimer’s disease?  Neuropsychology ,  16 ,  344–358 . 

130
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Tranel ,  D  . ( 2006 ).  Impaired naming of unique landmarks is associated with left  temporal polar 
damage.  Neuropsychology ,  20 ,  1–10 . 
 Tranel ,  D. ,  Damasio ,  A. R. ,  Damasio ,  H . ( 1988 ).  Intact recognition of facial expression, gender, 
and age in patients with impaired recognition of face identity.    Neurology ,  38 ,  690–696 . 
 Tranel ,  D. ,  Damasio ,  H. ,  Damasio ,  A. R . ( 1997 ).  A neural basis of the retrieval of conceptual 
knowledge.  Neuropsychologia ,  10 ,  1319–1327 . 
 Tsao ,  D. Y. ,  Livingstone ,  M. S . ( 2008 ).  Mechanisms of face perception.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience ,  31 ,  411–437 . 
   Tsukiura ,  T.  ,   Fujii ,  T.  ,   Fukatsu ,  R.  , et  al. ( 2002 ).  Neural basis of the retrieval of people’s 
names: evidence from brain damaged patients and fMRI.    Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 14 ,  922–937 . 
  Tsukiura ,  T. ,  Mochizuki-Kawai ,  H. ,  Fujii ,  T. ( 2006 ).  Dissociable roles of the bilateral anterior 
temporal lobe in face-name associations:  an event-related fMRI study.  NeuroImage,  30 , 
 627–626 . 
 Turk ,  D. J. ,  Rosenblum ,  A. C. ,  Gazzaniga ,  M. S. ,  Macrae ,  C. N  . ( 2005 ).  Seeing John Malkovich: the 
neural substrates of person categorization.  NeuroImage,   24 ,  1147–1153 . 
 Tyler ,  L. K. ,  Stamatakis ,  E. A. ,  Bright ,  P. ,  Acres ,  K. ,  Abdallah ,  S. ,  Rodd ,  J. M. ,  Moss ,  H. E. . ( 2004 ). 
 Processing objects at diff erent levels of specifi city.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  16 , 
 351–362 . 
 Valentine ,  T. ,  Bruce ,  V.  ( 1986 ).  Th e eff ects of distinctiveness in recognising and classifying faces.  
 Perception ,  15 ,  525–535 . 
 Viskontas ,  I. V. ,  McAndrews ,  M. P. ,  Moscovitch ,  M . ( 2002 ).  Memory for famous people in 
patients with unilateral temporal lobe epilepsy and excisions.  Neuropsychology ,  16 ,  472–480 . 
 Vokey ,  J. R. ,  Read ,  J. D  . ( 1992 ).  Familiarity, memorability, and the eff ect of typicality on the rec-
ognition of faces.   Memory & Cognition ,  20 ,  291–302 . 
 von Kriegstein ,  K. ,  Giraud ,  A-L . ( 2004 ).  Distinct functional substrates along the right superior 
temporal sulcus for the processing of voices.    NeuroImage ,  22 ,  948–955 . 
 von Kriegstein ,  K. ,  Kleinschmidt ,  A. ,  Sterzer ,  P. ,  Giraud ,  A-L . ( 2005 ).  Interaction of face and 
voice areas during speaker recognition.    Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  17 ,  367–376 . 
 Ward ,  J. ,  Jones ,  L . ( 2003 ).  Inappropriate association of semantics and context to novel stimuli 
can give rise to the false recognition of unfamiliar people.  Neuropsychologia ,  41 ,  538–549 . 
 Ward ,  J. ,  Parkin ,  A. J. ,   Powell ,  G. ,  Squires ,  E. J. ,  Townshend ,  J. ,  Bradley ,  V . ( 1999 ).  False recog-
nition of unfamiliar people: “seeing fi lm stars everywhere. ”  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  16 , 
 293–315 . 
   Werheid ,  K.  ,   Clare   L  . ( 2007 ).  Are faces special in Alzheimer’s disease? Cognitive conceptualiza-
tion, neural correlates, and diagnostic relevance of impaired memory for faces and names. 
 Cortex ,  43 ,  898–906 . 
   Zarate ,  M. A.  ,   Stoever ,  C. J.  ,   MacLin ,  M. K.  ,   Arms-Chavez ,  C. J  . ( 2008 ).  Neurocognitive under-
pinnings of face perception: further evidence of distinct person and group perception pro-
cesses.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  94 ,  108–115 . 
 Zeineh ,  M. M. ,  Engel ,  S. A ,  Th ompson ,  P. M. ,  Bookheimer ,  S. Y . ( 2003 ).  Dynamics of the hippo-
campus during encoding and retrieval of face-name pairs.  Science,  299 ,  577–580 .   

131
 C H A P T E R  7 
 Arousal, Attention, and Perception
  
 Mark  Mennemeier  
 Overview 
 Underlying this chapter is a proposal that symptoms of several diff erent types of 
clinical disorders, including the neglect syndrome (neglect), can be att ributed to 
altered psychophysical processes regulating the perception of stimulus intensity. 
Overestimating the intensity of a stimulus leads to excessive behavioral responses, 
and underestimating its intensity to ineffi  cient behavioral responses. Th is pro-
posal was initially prompted by studies of patients with spatial neglect, but it is 
not limited to neglect or to stimuli with inherent spatial properties. In fact, the 
same alteration might account for symptoms of two diff erent clinical disorders 
in the same patient, such as the failure to recognize weakness in a limb and/or 
symptoms of dysphagia which are both common comorbidities in neglect, and so 
this alteration can be thought of as a trans-disorder process. Th e primary respon-
sibility for the altered psychophysical function observed in these patients is likely 
to be found in changes in cortical arousal following brain injury. Th us, this pro-
posal may link two classical theories of normal perception: the Yerkes-Dodson 
law, relating arousal and sensory discrimination, and the psychophysical power 
law, concerning perception of stimulus intensity. 
 In the examination of neglect in this chapter, the emphasis falls on the relation-
ship between psychophysical processes and quantitative features of performance. 
Examining neglect in this way adds precision to a disorder known for its hetero-
geneity. Additionally, whereas psychophysical concepts add a new and necessary 
theoretical parameter to spatial theories of neglect, altered perception of stimulus 
intensity appears to infl uence behavior independently of spatial att ention, and to 
also manifest as symptoms of other clinical disorders. 
 Th e fi rst section of this chapter presents a general description of neglect and 
observations from patient studies that warrant the integration of psychophysical 

132
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
concepts and neglect theory. Th e second section examines the relationship 
between sensory perception and arousal and describes a brain mechanism that 
integrates arousal and sensory information. Th e fi nal section reviews evidence 
from patient studies bearing on the functional and anatomical architecture 
related to perception of stimulus intensity.  
 Section 1. Perceptual Breakdown 
 N EGL ECT PH ENOM ENOLOG Y  
 Patients suff ering with neglect act as if portions of their world do not exist. Th ey 
oft en fail to acknowledge stimuli directed to the side of their body opposite 
their brain lesion (i.e., contralesional inatt ention), although neglect for the side 
of the body on which the brain injury occurred (i.e., ipsilesional) has also been 
observed. Sensory and motor dysfunction is common in patients with neglect, 
but primary sensory and motor defi cits do not explain inatt ention ( Heilman, 
Watson, & Valenstein, 1985 ). Neglect for the contralesional side of the body oft en 
contrasts sharply with preserved awareness for the ipsilesional side of the body. 
Patients with neglect may eat from only the ipsilesional side of plates or shave or 
apply makeup to only the ipsilateral side of their face. Th ey may be able to identify 
objects in contralesional space when their att ention is drawn to them, but then fail 
to notice the same objects spontaneously or when competing stimuli are present. 
On behavioral tests, they may fail to draw contralesional parts of pictures or to 
detect targets located on the contralesional side of a page. Th ey may bisect a line 
as if they were not aware of the contralesional half of the line. While the separa-
tion of neglected from non-neglected space is not sharp, neglect is almost always 
more severe contralesional to a brain injury. Neglect behavior is heterogeneous, 
both across patients and within patients over time, and it typically coexists with 
other cognitive and behavioral abnormalities. For example, the eyes and head of 
a patient with neglect are oft en turned in an ipsilesional direction; these patients 
are typically slow to respond to stimulation and they may appear sleepy or even 
fail to stay awake during a conversation or a therapy session. Th e neglect syn-
drome; therefore, likely represents a combination of behavioral defi cits, any one 
of which alone would be insuffi  cient to produce it. 
 N EGL ECT A NATOM Y  
 Neglect is more frequent, severe, and persistent when the right rather than the 
left  cerebral hemisphere is injured ( Ringman, Saver, Woolson, Clarke, & Adams, 
2004 ) (for reviews see ( Heilman et al., 1985 ;  Vallar & Perani, 1987 ;  Karnath, 
Ferber, & Himmelbach, 2001 ;  Ogden, 1987 ). Neglect follows damage to a 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
133
cortical system involving heteromodal association areas in the prefrontal, ante-
rior cingulate, inferior parietal, insular and lateral temporal cortices. Neglect also 
ensues when the injury involves subcortical structures, including the thalamus, 
striatum, and mesencephalic reticular formation and white matt er pathways con-
necting cortical structures and subcortical structures ( Watson, Valenstein, & 
Heilman, 1981 ;  Mesulam, 1981 ;  Rizzolatt i & Berti, 1993 ;  Karnath, Himmelbach, 
& Rorden, 2002a ;  Watson, Heilman, Miller, & King, 1974 ). Lesions that aff ect 
cortical structures appear to account for the majority of cases of neglect (greater 
than 50 percent), whereas, lesions restricted to subcortical structures like the 
striatum and thalamus account for relatively fewer cases ( Karnath, Himmelbach, 
& Rorden, 2002b ). Neglect following mesencephalic lesions in humans is rarely 
witnessed because the patients may not survive or be testable. Close anatomical 
interconnections among these diff erent cortical areas and subcortical structures 
refl ect the multifaceted nature of neglect, which includes defi cits of att ention, 
movement (intention), representation, and arousal. 
 Neglect Th eory: Att ention 
 Th e major theories concerning neglect syndrome have att empted to explain how 
neglect is more common and severe aft er right rather than left  hemisphere dam-
age and how left -sided neglect occurs aft er right hemisphere damage. Several 
theories focus on defi cits in spatial att ention. Kinsbourne ( Kinsbourne, 1970 ) 
postulated that each hemisphere generates a vector of spatial att ention toward 
contralateral space; that the two hemispheres were mutually inhibitory of each 
other; and that the left  hemisphere’s att entional vector is normally stronger than 
that of the right. Right hemisphere damage disinhibits the left  hemisphere, result-
ing in a strong vector of att ention to the right side of space that is not mirrored 
when similar damage occurs to the left  hemisphere. Heilman et al. ( Heilman 
et al., 1985 ) proposed a right hemisphere dominance model for spatial att ention, 
in which the right hemisphere directs att ention to both contralateral and ipsilat-
eral hemispaces (defi ned relative to the body midline). Th e left  hemisphere only 
directs att ention to contralateral hemispace. Right hemisphere injury causes inat-
tention to left  hemispace because the intact left  hemisphere cannot direct att en-
tion to left  hemispace. In contrast, neglect is infrequent following left  hemisphere 
injury because the intact right hemisphere directs att ention to both right and left  
hemispaces. Finally, Posner ( Posner & Dehaene, 1994 ) postulated that damage 
to the parietal lobe caused selective disengagement from stimuli in ipsilesional 
space. Neglect is explained as an inability to shift  att ention to contralesional space. 
 Neglect Th eory: Intention 
 Th eories of neglect also postulate defi cits of spatial movement and intention. 
Watson,Valenstein, and Heilman ( Heilman et al., 1985 ;  Watson, Valenstein, & 
Heilman, 1978 ) argued that neglect patients were either disinclined to initiate 

134
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
movements in or toward contralesional hemispace or that they were biased to act 
in ipsilesional hemispace. Intentional disorders include the absence of movement, 
hypometric movement, motor extinction, and motor impersistence. Intentional 
disorders are dissociable from defi cits in spatial att ention, and this suggests that 
they contribute independently to neglect ( Adair, Na, Schwartz, & Heilman, 1998 ; 
 Na et al., 1998 ;  Tegner & Levander, 1991b ;  Bisiach, Geminiani, Berti, & Rusconi, 
1990 ;  Coslett , Bowers, Fitzpatrick, Haws, & Heilman, 1990 ).  
 Neglect Th eory: Representation 
 Bisiach explained neglect behavior as an inability to form mental representa-
tions of contralateral space and of objects in that space ( Bisiach & Luzzatt i, 
1978 ;  Bisiach, 1993 ). Although representational accounts of neglect have been 
viewed as distinct from att entional and intentional theories, each account may be 
valid and aimed at diff erent components or levels of analysis of neglect behavior 
(Chatt erjee &  Mennemeier, 1998 ). 
 Neglect Th eory: Arousal 
 Watson, Valenstein, and Heilman also proposed that att entional and intentional 
aspects of neglect were related to defi cits in arousal ( Heilman & Valenstein, 1972 ; 
 Watson et al., 1981 ;  Watson et al., 1974 ;  Heilman & VanDenable, 1980 ;  Heilman 
et al., 1985 ). Unilateral lesions of the reticular activating system (RA S) may cause 
contralesional inatt ention either by failing to activate the ipsilesional cortex in 
response to sensory stimulation or by reducing sensory transmission to the cortex 
via decreased inhibition of the ipsilesional nucleus reticularis, or by both mecha-
nisms. Additionally, unilateral lesions of heteromodal association areas that proj-
ect to the RA S and to the reticular nucleus of the thalamus may similarly induce 
contralesional inatt ention ( Heilman et al., 1985 ). 
 Arousal involves several physiological systems in both cerebral hemispheres 
that regulate wakefulness, alertness, and conscious perception. Waking states of 
consciousness depend on neural pathways that project from the ascending reticu-
lar activation system (ARA S) to the cerebral cortex and from the cerebral cortex 
to the thalamus and ARA S (reviewed in Section 2). Th ese systems regulate the 
general tone of cortical activation (tonic arousal) and the activation of the cere-
bral cortex in response to a stimulation (phasic arousal). Clinically, focal brain 
injury can disrupt arousal in very diff erent ways ranging from coma to hyper-
vigilance (reviewed in ( Bassett i, 2001 ). Lesions in the same cerebral hemisphere 
can also have diff erent eff ects on arousal. Th alamic, subthalamic, midbrain, 
and upper pontine strokes, where fi bers of the RA S can be aff ected by a single 
lesion, cause the most severe and persisting disturbances of wakefulness. Large 
cortico-subcortical strokes associated with hypersomnia   1 , particularly those with 
vertical and horizontal displacement of the brain secondary to edema, are oft en 
accompanied by ipsilesional gaze and head deviation, contralesional inatt ention 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
135
and sensori-motor impairment, decreased motor and speech production, and 
fl at aff ect. Hypersomnia without signifi cant edema may be more common fol-
lowing anterior than posterior stroke. Some evidence based on observations of 
stroke patients suggested that hypersomnia was more likely aft er left  than right 
hemisphere lesions ( Albert, Silverberg, Reches, & Berman, 1976 ) but a larger, 
controlled study did not fi nd laterality diff erences related to waking and con-
sciousness ( Cucchiara et  al., 2003 ). Additionally, lesions of the right cerebral 
hemisphere are oft en associated with decreased indicators of arousal, such as 
decreased heart rate and galvanic skin response; whereas, those of the left  hemi-
sphere may actually  increase arousal possibly via disinhibition of the intact right 
hemisphere or of the reticular activating system ( Heilman, Blonder, Bowers, & 
Valenstein, 2003 ). 
 Neural systems, particularly those of the right cerebral hemisphere, control 
intensity aspects of att ention i.e., the regulation of arousal by att entional pro-
cesses 2 . Th ese networks are commonly damaged in patients with neglect. Intensity 
aspects of att ention include alertness, both tonic alertness measured by simple 
reaction time and phasic alertness measured by reaction time following a warn-
ing cue, and vigilance and sustained att ention in which arousal and alertness are 
sustained over time (for reviews see ( Posner & Dehaene, 1994 ;  Sturm & Willmes, 
2001 ;  Posner & Boies, 1971 ;  Robertson & Garavan, 2004 ). A dramatic increase in 
simple reaction time is associated with lesions of the right hemisphere ( Posner & 
Rafal, 1987 ;  Ladavas, 1987 ) and in patients with neglect ( Anderson, Mennemeier, 
& Chatt erjee, 2000 ) but reaction time improves in these patients when warning 
cues are provided( Posner & Rafal, 1987 ;  Tartaglione, Bino, Spadavecchia, & 
Favale, 1986 ). Th is suggests that tonic rather than phasic alertness may be criti-
cally altered by right hemisphere lesions. 
 Hypoarousal  is a term used to describe arousal defi cits associated with neglect 
(Heilman , Schwartz, & Watson RT, 1978 ;  Watson et  al., 1981 ). Clinically, 
hypoaroused patients would appear similar to those with hypersomnia, but 
hypoarousal in neglect has not been evaluated systematically in large series of 
stroke patients, so its prevalence, specifi city, and even its operational defi nition is 
not well established. Arousal defi cits have been measured in studies of neglect by 
monitoring changes in (1) galvanic skin response and heart rate ( Heilman et al., 
2003 ;  Morrow, Vrtunski, Kim, & Boller, 1981 ), (2)  pupillary response ( Kim, 
Schwartz, & Heilman, 1999 ), (3) theta- and beta-wave frequency on electroen-
cephalography ( Storrie-Baker, Segalowitz, Black, McLean, & Sullivan, 1997 ), 
(4) behavioral change following manipulations of arousal ( Kerkhoff , 2001 ;  Pierce 
& Buxbaum, 2002 ), and (5)  the ability to perform two tasks simultaneously 
( Coslett , Bowers, & Heilman, 1987 ). In rehabilitation sett ings, hypoaroused 
patients are very dependent on therapists for guidance, and they oft en fail to 
transfer gains made in therapy to other sett ings. Studies using reaction time as 
a measure of tonic alertness suggest that decreased alertness is associated with 

136
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
disability and can persist chronically, even aft er spatial defi cits related to neglect 
have improved ( Robertson, 2001 ;  Samuelsson, Hjelmquist, Jenson, Ekholm, & 
Blomstrand, 1998 ;  Farne et al., 2004 ). 
 COU N T ERCU R R EN TS TO SPAT I A L T H EOR I E S 
OF N EGL ECT  
 In addition to performance defi cits lateralized primarily to one side of space, 
neglect involves defi cits that cause behavioral impairment, but are not necessar-
ily worse on one side of the body midline than on the other (i.e., nonlateralized 
features of neglect) ( Samuelsson et al., 1998 ;  Robertson, 2001 ;  Husain & Rorden, 
2003 ). Examples include increased reaction times for detecting new stimuli, poor 
sustained att ention, impaired spatial working memory ( Robertson, 2001 ;  Husain 
& Rorden, 2003 ), and, as discussed later in this chapter, systematic bias in the 
estimation of the intensity of sensory stimulation. Lateralized and nonlateral-
ized features of neglect appear to be independent of one another and to explain 
diff erent aspects of neglect behavior. Whereas lateralized defi cits typically refer 
to “where” neglect occurs in space, nonlateralized features address performance 
defi ciencies that are oft en referred to as capacity limitations. One such defi ciency 
concerns “how much” of something is neglected or, in some cases, exaggerated. 
 Neglect occurs for stimuli that must be recognized at a conscious level of 
awareness, but information processed below a level of conscious recognition can 
infl uence and even predict neglect behavior. In one study, for example, patients 
with neglect were asked to make same/diff erent judgments about pairs of pic-
tures briefl y presented to the right and left  visual fi elds. Th ey performed above 
chance, but they were no bett er than chance at identifying the picture on the left  
when it diff ered from the one on the right ( Volpe, Ledoux, & Gazzaniga, 1979 ). 
Systematic relationships between the total amount of stimulation presented to 
a patient and the amount neglected by the patient have been observed on bed-
side tests of neglect examining the number of targets presented on cancellation 
tests ( Chatt erjee, Mennemeier, & Heilman, 1992b ;  Chatt erjee, Mennemeier, & 
Heilman, 1992a ;  Mennemeier, Rapcsak, Dillon, & Vezey, 1998 ); the length of 
words in tests of reading ( Chatt erjee, 1995 ); the length of lines in bisection tasks 
( Tegner & Levander, 1991a ;  Chatt erjee, 1995 ;  Mennemeier et al., 2005 ); and even 
the weight of objects in extinction tests ( Chatt erjee, Th ompson, & Ricci, 1998 ). 
In fact, when neglect behavior is expressed as a power function (a log-log plot) of 
the total amount of stimuli presented to a patient, the power function accounts 
for extremely large amounts of variance in neglect performance. Power functions 
appear to uniquely capture the quantitative features of neglect or how much of a 
stimulus was neglected. 
 Power function relationships reveal counterintuitive fi ndings in neglect. 
During cancellation tests, patients are shown a page with target items distributed 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
137
across it and asked to mark out all the items that they see. In the vast majority of 
cases, patients with a right hemisphere lesion and neglect cancel more targets on 
the right side than on the left  side of the page ( Albert, 1973 ). In one study, however, 
a patient with a stable patt ern of left  neglect on cancellation tasks was instructed 
to cancel targets in an alternating fashion, marking out one fi rst on the left  side of 
the page and then one on the right side, until she had fi nished ( Chatt erjee et al., 
1992b ). She cancelled the same number of targets as when performing the task 
during the standard administration of the test, but she neglected targets in the 
middle of the page rather than on the left  side. Her performance could not be 
explained by left ward inatt ention, representation, or movement, but it was well 
accounted for by a power function that related the number of targets cancelled 
to the total number presented ( Chatt erjee et al., 1992a ). Th e power function rela-
tionship revealed a counterintuitive fi nding because her neglect was systemati-
cally tied to the total number of targets presented. Th is observation confi rmed 
that the patient was aware, at an implicit level, of  all  the stimuli presented to her. 
 Power function relationships add another parameter to spatial theories of 
neglect which helped to resolve a paradox known as the crossover eff ect ( Halligan 
& Marshall, 1988 ;  Marshall & Halligan, 1989 ). Crossover describes a patt ern of 
performance on line bisection tasks, in which long lines (e.g., greater than 10 cm) 
are bisected on the ipsilesional side of true center and short lines (e.g., less than 
2 cm) are bisected on the contralesional side. Crossover bisections on short lines 
are paradoxical for theories designed to explain contralesional neglect( Bisiach, 
Rusconi, Perett i, & Vallar, 1994 ) because they look like ipsilesional neglect. Th ree 
fi ndings from patient studies, however, helped resolve this paradox. First, it was 
shown that estimates of line length by patients with neglect were biased, so that 
the length of long lines was underestimated and that of short lines  overestimated . 
Power function relationships help confi rm that crossover bisections on short 
lines relate to perceiving more of the line than was present rather than on per-
ceiving less of the line, as is the case for long lines ( Tegner & Levander, 1991a ; 
 Mennemeier et  al., 2005 ;  Chatt erjee, 1995 ). Second, the crossover eff ect was 
shown to be a normal phenomenon of line bisection that was only exaggerated in 
neglect ( Mennemeier, Vezey, Lamar, & Jewell, 2002 ), so it is not “caused” by defi -
cits in spatial att ention, even though att entional defi cits may strengthen the cross-
over eff ect. Th ird, crossover bisections were shown to stem from two forms of bias 
that are independent of each other ( Mennemeier et al., 2005 ). Th e direction of 
crossover, which is opposite in patients with left  and right hemisphere lesions and 
can be experimentally reversed, is due to bias in spatial orientation that anchors 
att ention to one end of a line. Th is aspect of crossover conforms to spatial theo-
ries of neglect and makes the crossover eff ect robust in patients with neglect. Bias 
in length estimation, underestimation of long lines, and overestimation of short 
lines produce the crossover eff ect. A psychophysical concept known as contextual 
bias (described below) might explain this aspect of crossover. Contextual eff ects 

138
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
are exaggerated in patients with neglect ( Marshall, Lazar, Krakauer, & Sharma, 
1998 ), but like the crossover eff ect, they are not specifi c to neglect and occur nor-
mally ( Hollingworth, 1909 ;  Cross, 1973 ). Other explanations of crossover have 
been proposed, but they are predicated on neglect and do not explain crossover 
in normal subjects (for reviews ( Monaghan & Shillcock, 1998 ;  Mennemeier 
et al., 2005 ). 
 N EGL ECT DISA BI LIT Y A N D COMOR BI DIT Y  
 Neglect is a leading predictor of poor outcome following stroke rehabilitation 
( Mohr & Barnett , 1986 ;  Stone et al., 1991 ); however, neglect rarely occurs in iso-
lation. Comorbid problems such as sensory and motor impairment, altered aware-
ness of defi cit, and dysphagia are common and contribute to morbidity. Sensory 
defi cits aft er stroke include delayed perception, uncertainty of responses, changes 
in sensory thresholds, fatigue, altered time sense for sensory adaptation, sensory 
persistence, and altered nature of sensation ( Hunter & Crome, 2002 ;  Robertson 
& Jones, 1994 ) 3 . Like neglect, sensory perceptual impairment is more com-
mon aft er right (37 percent) than left  hemisphere injury (25 percent) (Sullivan 
& Hedman, 2008) and on the contralesional side of the body, although ipsile-
sional sensory impairment occurs with surprising frequency ( Carey, 1995 ) ( Kent, 
1965 ); it is also associated with poor functional outcome ( Carey, 1995 ;  Rand, 
Gott lieb, & Weiss, 2001 ;  Yekutiel, 2000 ) and with other comorbidities, including 
poor balance, increased vulnerability to falls, regional pain syndromes, anosog-
nosia, hand swelling, shoulder subluxation, burns, and other injuries (Sullivan & 
Hedman, 2008). 
 Disorders of awareness, such as a lack of appropriate concern about limb weak-
ness (anosodiaphoria) or lack of awareness of weakness (anosognosia), are asso-
ciated with neglect and related to complications such as falls ( Vlahov, Myers, 
& Al-Ibrahim, 1990 ;  Nyberg & Gustafson, 1997 ;  Webster et al., 1995 ;  Rapport 
et al., 1993 ). Dysphagia, a defi cit of swallowing, is a major cause of morbidity, 
mortality, and disability ( Barer, 1989 ) aft er stroke that aff ects between 25 percent 
and 50 percent of patients ( Veis & Logemann, 1985 ;  Gordon, Hewer, & Wade, 
1987 ). It is common to see neglect and dysphagia co-occur in clinical sett ings; 
although this observation is not well documented in the literature concerning 
neglect and dysphagia. One study observed neglect and dysphagia in as many as 
10 of 12 patients with right hemisphere injury and in 1 of 12 patients with left  
hemisphere injury ( Andre, Beis, Morin, & Paysant, 2000 ). 
 Th eories of neglect address some of these comorbidities. Sensory extinction 
has been explained as att entional imbalance ( Kinsbourne, 1993 ;  Heilman et al., 
1985 ). Anosodiaphoria and anosognosia are discussed in combination with cer-
tain forms of neglect, like personal neglect, although these disorders appear to 
overlap rather than cause one another, and it is not clear how they relate to neglect 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
139
pathophysiology ( Adair, Schwartz, & Barrett , 2003 ). Dysphagia is rarely viewed 
as related to neglect, but it may be more common in neglect patients than anosog-
nosia ( Andre et al., 2000 ). It is proposed here that altered perception of stimulus 
intensity may be a defi cit that contributes to neglect and to these comorbid prob-
lems. Evidence for this postulate is examined in section 3 aft er some background 
information on arousal and perception. 
 Section 2: Perceptual Order 
 A classical experiment relating arousal and sensory perception was reported by 
Yerkes and Dodson in 1908 ( Yerkes & Dodson, 1908 ). When arousal was manip-
ulated by the delivery of varying degrees of electric shock during a luminance 
discrimination test, mice were observed to perform the easy discrimination tasks 
best during high levels of arousal, and the hard discriminations best during low 
levels of arousal. Th e Yerkes-Dodson law, now extended to the eff ect of stress on 
performance in complex behavioral tests, proposes that an optimal level of arousal 
is required for optimal performance. Increasing or decreasing arousal from this 
level negatively aff ects performance. It stands to reason that any task requiring 
sensory discrimination should be sensitive to changes in arousal and that a large 
fl uctuation in arousal, such as that occurring aft er brain injury, could degrade, 
bias, or fundamentally alter perception. 
 Th is section reviews psychophysical concepts and methods concerning per-
ception of stimulus intensity and the neural processes that regulate arousal. Th is 
background information is a necessary primer for the patient studies presented 
in section 3. Additionally, the method of measuring stimulus intensity, which is 
also described, is consistent with a neural mechanism that promotes conscious 
sensory perception. 
 PERCEP T ION OF ST I M U LUS I N T ENSIT Y: T H E 
PS YCHOPH YSIC A L POW ER L AW   
 Th e psychophysical power law describes a quantitative relationship between 
physical stimulus intensity and sensory experience ( Stevens & Galanter, 1957 ; 
 Stevens, 1971 ), based on a theoretical principle known as ratio scaling 4 (i.e., equal 
stimulus ratios produce equal sensation ratios ( Stevens, 1975b ). An example of 
ratio scaling is that doubling the apparent brightness of a light requires an eight-
fold increase in energy regardless of the original brightness of the light. Ratio 
scaling applies to judgments of  prothetic perceptual continua, 5 those concerning 
amount or intensity, as opposed to judgments of kind, quality, location, and sort, 
which are called  metathetic perceptual continua ( Stevens, 1975a ). Judgments of 
area and loudness are considered to be prothetic because they fi t power functions 

140
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
and correspond to ratio scaling, whereas estimates of spatial location and pitch 
are considered to be metathetic because they fi t linear functions and correspond 
to category scaling. 
 Th e mathematical form for the psychophysical power law is power function (a 
log-log plot) writt en as follows: 
 Ψ = ĸΦ  β  , 
 where  Ψ is the sensation magnitude and  Φ  is the stimulus magnitude. Th e con-
stant ĸ depends on the unit of measurement. Th e exponent β serves as a kind of 
“signature” that oft en diff ers from one sensory continuum to another. When stim-
ulus magnitude is plott ed against sensation magnitude, the fi tt ed line assumes a 
curvature, or growth rate, that can vary for diff erent sensory continua (  Figure 7.1 
top  ). Log transformation of the data also allows observations from diff erent sub-
jects to be averaged by geometric means. An advantageous feature of the power 
function is the form that it assumes when the data are plott ed in logarithmic 
scales on both axes (log-log coordinates). Th e fi tt ed line is straight, its coeffi  cient 
of determination ( r  2  ) value is a measure of variability, its slope is a direct measure 
of the power function exponent, and its  y  intercept is equal to the power func-
tion constant ( Figure 7.1 bott om ). Power function parameters, the exponent, con-
stant and  r  2   values, serve as convenient summary variables for comparison across 
groups and within subjects. 
 M AGN IT U DE E ST I M AT ION  
 Four methods are commonly used to assess ratio scaling ( Stevens, 1975a ). 
Magnitude estimation requires a subject to match stimulus intensity to a num-
ber scale (e.g., between 10 and 99). Magnitude estimation is examined in more 
detail here because it is well suited for work with stroke patients. Other methods 
of ratio scaling, such as cross-modal matching, ratio production, and magnitude 
production ( Gescheider, 1997b ) are not as easy to use with stroke patients; how-
ever, aft er adjustment for procedural diff erences, all methods of ratio scaling can 
be expected to yield similar results ( Stevens, 1975 a). 
 Magnitude estimation requires participants to rate the intensity of a range of 
stimuli. Five to eight intensities are typically required to assess ratio scaling (less 
than fi ve intensities may encourage participants to categorize stimuli rather than 
engage in ratio scaling). Stimulus intensities are presented in random order, and 
each intensity is repeated at least two or three times. A standard stimulus, such as 
a midrange value, can be presented in advance to provide a perceptual anchor for 
subjects, but is not necessary because the data are log-transformed and all stimuli 
are repeated several times during the experiment ( Stevens, 1975a ). 
 Experimental factors, such as stimulus context, broadness of the range of 
stimuli used, and ability of subjects to categorize stimuli, can alter the size of the 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
141
 
80
70
60
electric shock
electric shock
apparent length
apparent length
brightness
brightness
50
40
Psychological magnitude
in arbitrary units
Psychological magnitude
in arbitrary units
30
20
10
0
1 1
2
3
5
10
20 30
50
100
200 300 500
1000
2
3
5
10
30
50
100
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
Stimulus magnitude in arbitrary units
Stimulus magnitude in arbitrary units
60
70
80
90
100
 Figure 7.1   Psychophysical Power Law. (Top) The plotting of stimulus intensity 
against sensation intensity produces a fitted line that assumes a curvature, 
or growth rate, that can vary for different sensory continua. (Bottom) Log 
transformation of the data allows observations from different subjects to be 
averaged by geometric means. When the data are plotted in log-log coordinates 
(logarithmic scales on both axes), the fitted line is straight. The line’s coefficient 
of determination ( r  2  ) value is a measure of variability, its slope is a direct measure 
of the power function exponent, and its  y intercept is equal to the power function 
constant (Stevens, S.S., Psychophysics; Introduction to its perceptual, neural, and 
social prospects,  figures 5 & 6, pages 16 and 17, respectively © 1975 by John Wiley 
& Sons, signatory to STM).  

142
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
power function exponent in normal subjects ( Poulton, 1968 ;  Algom & Marks, 
1990 ;  Cross, 1973 ;  Hollingworth, 1909 ;  Poulton, 1979 ). Contextual eff ects refer 
to an infl uence of the previous stimulus on perception of the current stimulus. 
Contextual bias 6 may restrict the range of perception and lower the power func-
tion exponent. Th e broadness of the range of stimulus intensities presented to a 
subject can dramatically alter the size of the power function exponents in nor-
mal subjects. Narrow ranges produce large exponents (steeper slopes), and broad 
ranges produce small exponents (fl att er slopes). Categorizing stimuli with the use 
of only a few numbers to rate stimulus intensity also lowers the power function 
exponent ( Gescheider, 1997a ). 
 N EU ROPS YCHOLOG Y OF M AGN IT U DE E ST I M AT ION  
 Brain injury, particularly in association with neglect, has a large eff ect on mag-
nitude estimation and the form of power functions relative to normal subjects 
( Chatt erjee et al., 1992a ;  Chatt erjee, 1995 ;  Mennemeier et al., 1998 ;  Chatt erjee 
et al., 1998 ;  Mennemeier et al., 2005 ).  Figure 7.2  illustrates the signifi cance of a 
 lower power function exponent and higher constant in neglect. Two regression lines 
are shown: one for normal subjects having an exponent of 1.0 and a constant of.2, 
and the other for neglect patients having an exponent of.76 and a constant of.38. 
Th e regression line fl att ens as the slope decreases. If the constant is also elevated, 
this means that stimuli at the high end of the magnitude scale are underestimated 
and that magnitude of stimuli at the low end of the scale is actually overestimated. 
 Magnitude estimation might be lateralized preferentially to the right 
hemisphere, but both hemispheres appear to calculate estimates of stimulus 
 
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
RHL+
NCS
 Figure 7.2  Significance of a lower power function exponent and a higher constant 
in neglect syndrome.The regression line for normal subjects has a power function 
exponent of 1.0 and a constant of .2, whereas the regression line for neglect patients 
has an exponent of .76 and a constant of .38. The regression line flattens as its slope 
decreases.  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
143
magnitude. Walsh ( Walsh, 2003 ) proposed that human and animal studies point 
to a common magnitude system (for space, time, and number) localized in the 
inferior parietal cortex of the right hemisphere. However, Pinel et  al. ( Pinel, 
Piazza, Biham, & Dehaene, 2004 ) reported functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing results from human subjects on comparative judgments of size, luminance, 
and number that showed overlap in cerebral activation bilaterally for each type of 
comparison and particularly when performance of one task interfered with that 
of another. Additionally, low frequency, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion delivered over the intraparietal sulcus of the right hemisphere, shown to be 
activated in the Pinel et al study, interfered with magnitude estimates of numeros-
ity ( Cappellett i, Barth, Fregni, Spelke, & Pascual-Leone, 2007 ). Further, patient 
studies indicate that magnitude estimation is disrupted by both right and left  
hemisphere injury ( Woods et al., 2006 ;  Taylor-Cooke et al., 2006 ;  Mennemeier 
et al., 2005 ). Right hemisphere injury appears to have a greater eff ect, consis-
tent with the notion that it is specialized for magnitude estimation, but evidence 
described in section 3 suggests that right and left  hemisphere injury might even 
have opposite eff ects on magnitude estimation. An alternative to hemispheric 
specialization is that each hemisphere may have diff erent sensitivities to factors 
that bias magnitude estimation, such as contextual eff ects that are exaggerated 
in neglect ( Marshall et al., 1998 ) (less is known about the infl uences of range 
broadness and categorization in brain-injured subjects). Alternatively, arousal 
processes may diff er between hemispheres and produce diff erent eff ects on mag-
nitude estimation. 
 A ROUSA L S YST E MS  
 Arousal systems provide a platform on which cognitive systems operate. A nor-
mal intact cerebrum is incapable of functioning in a conscious manner by itself. 
Bilateral damage to neurons of the midbrain reticular formation and fi bers pass-
ing though it results in prolonged coma. Sustaining input from the brainstem 
reticular formation is required for conscious perception ( Nolte, 2009 ). 
 Th e ARA S is a part of the brainstem reticular core that is involved in move-
ment control, sensory transmission (including pain modulation and transmis-
sion), and autonomic regulation. Its patt ern of connectivity is such that a single 
cell may respond to multiple sensory modalities and that functional areas within 
the core can exhibit considerable overlap ( Nolte, 2009 ). Th us, the architecture of 
the reticular formation lends itself to changes in arousal secondary to activity in 
motor, sensory, and autonomic neural systems. 
 Arousal and the cortical desynchrony of wakefulness are mediated by sev-
eral neuronal populations in the ARA S via projections to the thalamus and 
basal forebrain (reviewed in ( Fuller, Gooley, & Saper, 2006 ;  Garcia-Rill, 2009a ). 
Th e RA S is composed of three principal cell groups: the (mainly) cholinergic 

144
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) and laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LTN); 
the (mainly) noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC); and the (mainly) serotonergic 
raphe nucleus (RN). Ascending cholinergic (PPN) and monoaminergic (LC and 
RN) projections from the RA S to the intralaminar thalamus activate cortex via 
nonspecifi c  thalamocortical projections . Th is pathway also collaborates with those 
from a series of wakefulness-promoting monoaminergic cell groups constitut-
ing a massive  ventral projection system that bypasses the thalamus and terminates 
diff usely throughout the cortex to modulate cortical activity. Ventral pathways 
include projections from the noradrenergic LC, dopaminergic neurons of the ven-
tral periaqueductal gray matt er, serotonergic dorsal and median RN, and hista-
minergic neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus. Noradrenergic neurons may 
play a role in phasic changes related to vigilance ( Robertson & Garavan, 2004 ; 
 Nolte, 2009 ) and serotonergic neurons in tonic arousal related to pain control; 
however, in general, these diff erent projection systems act in a coordinated man-
ner to regulate arousal. 
 Neural fi bers which either go to or come from the cerebral cortex form a struc-
ture called the internal capsule ( Carpenter, 1976 ). One part of the internal capsule, 
which borders the lateral caudate nucleus, contains fi bers or thalamic radiations 
which reciprocally connect the thalamus and the cortex. Th alamocortical fi bers 
project from the thalamus to the cortex and corticothalamic fi bers project from 
the cortex to the thalamus. Another part of the internal capsule contains eff er-
ent cortical fi bers that arise from the cerebral cortex and converge and descend 
toward the brain stem (i.e., the corona radiata). Th ese fi bers connect the entire 
cerebral cortex with nuclei in the brain stem, including those in the reticular for-
mation, and in the spinal cord. 
 Oscillatory or “rhythmic” activity is a property of thalamocortical projection 
systems (reviewed in ( Bazhenov & Timofee, 2006 ) and sleep-wake rhythms are 
generated by mesopontine activation of thalamocortical projections ( Garcia-Rill, 
2009b ). Normal thalamocortical rhythms include slow (.3–1 Hz frequency), 
delta (1–4 Hz), sleep spindle (7–14 Hz) and beta-gamma EEG oscillations (15–30 
and 30–80 Hz, respectively). With regard to sleep, oscillations below 10 Hz are 
considered slow wave sleep 7 , oscillations greater than 10 Hz are evident in wak-
ing and REM sleep 8 . ARA S inputs excite thalamocortical projections and they 
inhibit neurons in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus ( Steriade, McCormick, 
& Sejnowski, 1993 ). Th alamocortical projections activate cortical neurons, set-
ting up cortical processes that return descending activity to thalamocortical neu-
rons (Pare  Denis & Llinas, 1995 ). In the absence of ARA S inputs, the reticular 
nucleus of the thalamus, made up of gabaergic neurons, sets up slow oscillations 
in thalamocortical pathways, leading to lower frequencies and sleep ( Steriade, 
Curro, Pare, & Oakson, 1991 ). Synchronous synaptic activity in cortical and 
thalamic neurons is largely absent during slow oscillations. Whereas peripheral 
sensory stimuli might reach the cerebral cortex during sleep; the timing of relay 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
145
cell activity necessary for conscious perception is lost and conscious perception 
is impaired as a result. 
 Th e waking state is characterized by low amplitude, fast EEG oscillations in 
the 15–80 Hz range. Fast rhythms are synchronized between neighboring corti-
cal sites and they are associated with normal conscious states like att entiveness, 
focused arousal, sensory perception, movement and prediction and with “altered” 
consciousness associated with some forms of anesthesia, slow wave and REM 
sleep ( Bazhenov & Timofee, 2006 ). 
 A M ECH A N ISM FOR CONSCIOUS PERCEP T ION OF 
ST I M U LUS I N T ENSIT Y  
 Th e method of magnitude estimation requires repetitive discriminations among 
a range of stimulus intensities that follow one another in random succession. One 
neural mechanism theorized to mediate conscious sensory perception by inte-
grating arousal and sensory information simultaneously may be particularly well 
suited to account for the process of magnitude estimation. 
 Th e ARA S receives input from aff erent sensory systems that conduct informa-
tion about the presence, absence, quality, and intensity of sensory stimulation via 
specifi c sensory thalamocortical projections. Th erefore, two parallel thalamocor-
tical projection systems arise from the ARA S: a  nonspecifi c system  that infl uences 
cortical neuronal responsiveness to further stimulation via projections from the 
intralaminar thalamus, and  specifi c thalamocortical projections that convey sensory 
information via primary sensory relay thalamic nuclei ( Figure 7.3 ). Both projec-
tion systems appear to fi re rhythmically in relation to intrinsic oscillatory proper-
ties of thalamic cells ( Llinas, Ribary, Contreras, & Pedroarena, 1998 ), and cells 
in both of these projection systems have been shown to oscillate at gamma-band 
frequency (between 30–50 Hz; referred to as the “40 Hz rhythm”) and to be capa-
ble of recursive activation 9 . Although the mechanisms of conscious perception 
are uncertain, this recursive action, or resonance, could be a basis for conscious 
perception, such that, for a transient sensory input to be perceived or consciously 
appreciated, it must generate a lasting reverberation or reentrant signaling in thal-
amocortical systems. Th us, the ARA S modulates these oscillations both through 
its ascending projections to the thalamus, and through the more numerous corti-
cothalamic projections, which outnumber the thalamocortical by a factor of 10, 
and may act to amplify these oscillations. 
 Synchronous activation of the specifi c and nonspecifi c thalamic projection 
systems is hypothesized to support conscious perception and to bind disparate 
sensory signals into one percept ( Llinas, 2001 ). Whereas neither circuit alone may 
be capable of producing conscious sensory experience, concurrent summation of 
nonspecifi c and specifi c gamma-band activity (or resonance) may bind the con-
text (nonspecifi c) and content (specifi c) of conscious sensory experience into one 

146
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
percept. Parallel activation of both pathways in the gamma-band range is required 
for optimal perception. Cortical and subcortical strokes that interfere with the 
coherence and resonance frequencies of specifi c and nonspecifi c processes may 
alter magnitude estimation. Increasing reticular input to intralaminar thalamus, 
either via sensory stimulation or medication, to increase arousal may help restore 
coherence and optimal performance( Woods et al., 2012 ;  Meador, Ray, Day, & 
Loring, 2000 ). In fact, both sensory stimulation and arousal-enhancing medica-
tions can improve magnitude estimation and neglect. 10   
 We now turn att ention to studies in patients that inform understanding of the 
functional and anatomical architecture of magnitude estimation in neglect syn-
drome and other disorders. 
 
COINCIDENCE FIRING
LAYER 1
LAYER
IV
V
VI
1
SPECIFIC
NUCLEI
INTRALAMINAR
(NONSPECIFIC NUCLEI)
2
2
1
+
1 + 2
 Figure 7.3  Generation of temporal binding due to coincident 40-Hz bursting 
activity within parallel thalamocortical projection systems arising from the RAS. 
A  nonspecific system  influences the responsiveness of cortical neurons to further 
stimulation via projections from the intralaminar thalamus to cortical layer VI, 
and  specific thalamocortical projections convey sensory information via primary 
sensory relay thalamic nuclei to cortical layer IV. Pyramidal cells in layer V return 
projections to intralaminar nuclei via the reticular nucleus, forming a nonspecific 
thalamocortical loop, and those in layer VI return projections to sensory relay 
nuclei forming specific thalamocortical loops. (Llinás, Rodolfo R.,  I of the Vortex:  
 From Neurons to Self ,  figure 6.2, p. 125, © 2001 Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, by permission of The MIT Press.  )   

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
147
 Section 3. Contribution of Patient Studies to the 
Understanding of Functional and Anatomical 
Architecture of Magnitude Estimation and its 
Signifi cance in Stroke 
 Investigators have known for decades that size perception is altered in patients 
with neglect ( Gainott i & Tiacci, 1971 ;  Milner, Harvey, Roberts, & Forster, 1993 ; 
 Halligan & Marshall, 1991 ;  Bisiach, Bulgarelli, Sterzi, & Vallar, 1983 ). Th is has 
been explained as a magnifying eff ect of focused att ention on size perception and 
as unspecifi ed “perceptual factors” that work to alter size estimation across a hori-
zontal axis of space. 
 Magnitude estimation is at least one, if not the primary, perceptual factor 
accounting for altered size perception in neglect. Although, bias in magnitude 
estimation is exaggerated in neglect, it is not specifi c to patients with neglect or 
dependent on spatial att ention. Both cerebral hemispheres calculate estimates 
of stimulus magnitude; however, factors such as arousal may produce diff erent 
estimates of stimulus intensity that result in diff erent behavioral abnormalities. 
Finally, altered perception of stimulus intensity may be a trans-disorder process 
that can help explain comorbidities in neglect. We now turn to the evidence for 
these statements in studies of stroke patients with neglect. 
    M AGN IT U DE E ST I M AT ION IS A LT ER ED ACROSS SPAT I A L 
A N D NONSPAT I A L PROT H ET IC PERCEP T UA L CON T I N UA 
FOL LOW I NG U N I L AT ER A L ST ROK E  
 Prothetic refers to “how much” of something is perceived. A series of experiments 
in our laboratory examined how unilateral stroke alters estimates of stimulus 
magnitude. Results for several of these studies are summarized here for the fi rst 
time. We reasoned that if magnitude estimation operates independently of spatial 
att ention, representation, or movement, then it should be altered across prothetic 
perceptual continua regardless of whether they have inherent spatial qualities. 
 Magnitude estimates for 12 perceptual continua spanning six sensory 
modalities were examined in four groups of subjects ( Table 7.1 ). Normal con-
trol subjects (NCS) included a total sample of 79 participants stratifi ed by age 
(young = 19–34; middle = 35–65; and older = 65–80 years); however, stroke 
patients were statistically compared only with NCS between the ages of 35 and 
80 (n=39). Aft er screening stroke patients for sensory thresholds and the cogni-
tive ability to perform magnitude estimation tests, the patient sample (n=34) 
included 13 participants with a unilateral right hemisphere lesion (RHL) 
due to stroke who  did not  have neglect (RHL – ) as defi ned by the Behavioral 
Inatt ention Test ( Wilson, Cockburn, & Halligan, 1987 ), nine RHL participants 

148
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 who did have neglect (RHL + ), and 12 participants with a unilateral left  hemi-
sphere lesion (LHL) who did not have neglect. All stroke participants were 
tested at least one month aft er lesion onset. All four comparison groups were 
statistically equivalent with regard to gender, race, handedness, age, and educa-
tion composition. General cognitive function was assessed with standardized 
 Table 7.1    Magnitude Estimate Ranges for 12 Perceptual Continua Spanning 
Six Sensory Domains in Four Groups of Subjects   
 Sensory 
Domain 
 Perceptual 
Continua 
 Stimulus Description 
 Ranges of Stimulus 
Magnitudes 
 Visual 
 Line length 
 Line lengths on a 94- × -
555 cm sheet 
 10, 32, 60, 115, 170, 
280, 390, 500 cm 
 Area 
 Squares on a 240- × -
240 cm sheet 
 100; 299; 605; 1,537; 
2,894; 6,889; 12,589; 
20,000 cm2 
 Numerosity 
 Dots on a 265- × -330 cm 
sheet 
 6, 10, 15, 22, 36, 50, 71, 
90 dots 
 Refl ectance 
 Chips of light refl ectance 
material 75  ×  125 cm 
 84.2, 63.6, 46.8, 33, 
22.19, 13.7, 7.7, 3.8% 
light refl ectance 
 Tactile 
 Pressure (R & L)  Pressure cuff  applied to 
forearm 
 20, 37, 54, 71, 88, 105, 
122, 139 mmHg 
 Von Frei (R & L)  Monofi laments applied to 
forefi nger 
 0.6, 2, 6, 10, 26, 60, 100, 
180 grams of force 
 Roughness 
(R & L) 
 Textures of sand paper 
applied to fi ngertips 
 300; 700; 1,100; 1,280; 
1,350; 1,400; 1,440; 
1,476 grit 
 Proprio-ceptive 
 Finger span 
(R & L) 
 Wooden spacers between 
thumb and forefi nger 
 4, 8, 14, 24, 34, 44, 54, 
63 cm 
 Th ermal 
 Temperature 
(R & L) 
 Heated disk (3.2  ×  3.2 cm) 
presented to forearm 
 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 
50  °  F 
 Auditory 
 Loudness 
(R & L) 
 Tones presented to one 
ear- 1000Hz 
 35, 42, 49, 56, 63, 70, 77, 
84 dB 
 Gustatory 
 Sweetness 
 Sugar concentrations 
diluted in water 
 0.15, 0.30, 0.60, 0.70, 
0.80, 0.90, 1.05, 1.20 M 
 Saltiness 
 Salt concentrations diluted 
in water 
 0.19, 0.25, 0.32, 0.46, 
0.60, 0.74, 0.87, 1.00 M 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
149
tests of IQ ( Axelrod, 2002 ), memory (Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised), lan-
guage (Western Aphasia Batt ery), and executive functions. For each perceptual 
continuum, subjects rated the intensity of eight stimuli presented three times 
in random order, using numbers between 10 and 99 (low and high, respectively) 
without a modulus. Absolute and diff erence thresholds were tested for each con-
tinuum to ensure that subjects could both perceive and distinguish among all 
stimulus intensities presented and data were excluded if subjects did not meet 
criteria for sensory thresholds. Power function exponents, constants, and ( r  2  ) 
values were derived for each subject in each continuum. Data were excluded if 
the r2 value was non-signifi cant; indicating they did not fi t a power function; 
this occurred in only a few subjects. Brain lesions were analyzed using subtrac-
tion techniques and volume analysis (Karnath , Fruhmann Berger, Kuker, & 
Rorden, 2004 ;  Golay, Schnider, & Ptak, 2008 ) with the MRIcro and MRIcron 
soft ware programs.  
 Th e following observations can be made concerning the results of the series 
of experiments involving normal control subjects and unilateral stroke subjects: 
 1.  Power function parameters in normal control subjects (young, middle and 
older age groups) were not altered by age or gender. African American sub-
jects had lower r 2 values (or greater variability in magnitude estimation) than 
non-African Americans. ( Figure 7.4 ). Neither IQ nor education related to the 
size of exponents or constants. In general, lower scores on cognitive tests were 
associated with lower  r  2  values. 
 2.  Power function parameters were signifi cantly diff erent between normal con-
trol subjects and the patient groups. A signifi cant between-group eff ect was 
found for the power function exponent (F(3,69) = 7,  p <.0001). Planned con-
trasts showed that patients with right hemisphere lesions had lower exponents 
than normal control subjects and that the RHL+ group had lower exponents 
than RHL- group. A signifi cant between group eff ect was also found for the 
constant (F(3,69) = 6.4,  p =.01). Patients with right hemisphere lesions had 
signifi cantly higher constants than did normal control subjects; however, 
the RHL+ group did not diff er from the RHL- group. Th ere was no diff er-
ence between the LHL and NCS groups with regard to the exponent and 
constant. Finally, a signifi cant between-group eff ect was found for the  r  2  val-
ues (F(3,69) = 22.1,  p <.0001). Whereas all patient data were determined to 
fi t power functions prior to statistical analyses; all stroke patient groups had 
lower  r  2  values than did the NCS group. Further, the RHL+ group had lower 
r2 values than any other group. ( Figure 7.5 ). 
 3.  Right hemisphere injury altered magnitude estimation across spatial and non-
spatial perceptual continua ( Figure  7.6 ). Interestingly, whereas eff ect sizes 
for visuo-spatial stimuli were small and moderate those for kinesthetic and 
some gustatory stimuli were very large. Large eff ect sizes were also observed 

150
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
for stimuli presented to the ipsilesional as well as the contralesional side of 
the body. 
 4.  Group diff erences in magnitude estimation were not simply due to cognitive 
impairment. Although LHL patients were impaired on tests of verbal IQ , 
executive function, memory, and language, compared to normal control sub-
jects, they had normal power function exponents and constants. Conversely, 
RHL – patients had close to normal cognitive scores, even though their power 
function parameters were altered relative to those of both NCS and LHL 
patients. 
 5.  Lesion volume and subtraction analyses were completed using a total of 17 
MRI and CT images obtained from patients with right hemisphere lesions. 
Lesion volume was approximately 2.5 times greater for the patients with right 
hemisphere lesions and neglect that for those without neglect (t=1.99, df=15, 
P<.06); however, no diff erence in lesion volume was associated with a decreased 
 
2.0
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.8
1.6
1.4
exponent
constant
Young
Middle
Older
Young
Middle
Older
9
8
7
6
5
r2
Young
Middle
Older
1.2
1.0
.8
.6
.4
 Figure 7.4   No alteration of power function parameters in normal control subjects 
by age. Box plots are shown for exponent, constant, and  r  2   values across all 12 
continua for all age groups. Error bars represent the highest and lowest values. 
The three horizontal lines forming the boxes represent the 25th, 50th, and 75th 
percentiles. Median values (dark lines) for exponent, constant, and  r  2  values are 
similar across the age groups.  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
151
 
1.80
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
0.90
0.70
0.50
0.30
1.40
1.00
exponent
constant
R-Squrared
0.60
0.20
Controls
LHL
RHL–
RHL+
Controls
LHL
RHL–
RHL+
Controls
LHL
RHL–
RHL+
 Figure 7.5  Power function parameters are significantly different between subject 
groups. Box plots of power function parameters are shown for each subject group. 
Unilateral stroke patients had lower  r  2  values than controls and RHL + patients had 
lower  r  2  values than any other group. Both RHL + and RHL –  patients had lower 
exponent and higher constant values than normal controls and LHL patients 
who were not different from each other. The RHL+ group had significantly lower 
exponents that the RHL- group. (The details of the box plots are the same as those 
described in  Figure 7.4 .)  
 
1.40
1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
Exponent Parameter for all Continua
area
loudness
sugur
temp, right
temp, left
numerosity
pressure, left
roughness, right
roughness, left
von frei, left
von frei, right
pressure, right
fingerspan, left
salt
reflectance
fingerspan, right
length
Corrected Cohen’s d
Observed Power
 Figure 7.6  Magnitude estimation is altered across spatial and nonspatial perceptual 
continua following right hemisphere injury. Effect sizes (Cohen’s  d corrected 
for sample size ) and the observed experimental power, calculated for the power 
function exponent, to discriminate between patients with right hemisphere lesions 
and normal control subjects is shown for each perceptual continuum. Moderate 
to large effect sizes were observed across a wide variety of kinesthetic, gustatory, 
somatosensory, and visual judgments.  

152
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
exponent (or an increased constant) independent of neglect status. Lesions 
involving Brodmann’s Area (BA) 39 in the posterior parietal and BA 38/21 in 
the anterior temporal cortex and the white matt er pathways beneath BA 6, 4, 
and 3 were more common among patients with neglect than patients without 
neglect. Lesions involving the putamen were more common among patients 
without neglect than those with neglect. ( Figure 7.7 ). With regard to the power 
function exponent, lesions involving the anterior limb of the internal capsule 
and the superior thalamic radiations were more common among patients with 
a decreased power function exponent than those with either a normal or a high 
 
Neglect
Exponent
Constant
A
B
C
D
A
B
A
B
 Figure 7.7    Results of a lesion subtraction analysis for 17 patients with right 
hemisphere lesions. The top row of pictures (Neglect) shows subtraction of RHL- 
from RHL+ scans. Brighter red areas indicate lesions common to RHL+ but not 
RHL-. Brighter blue indicates the opposite. Figure A shows brighter red areas—one 
involving white matter beneath BAs 6, 4 and 3 and another involving BA 38/21 in 
the anterior temporal lobe – and one area of brighter blue centered on the putamen. 
Crosshairs in figure B show the center of these areas, respectively. Figure C shows 
area of red overlap involving BA 39 with corresponding crosshair in Figure D. The 
bottom row of pictures (Exponents) show scans of RHL patients with normal or 
high power function exponents subtracted from those with decreased exponents 
and (Constants) of patients with normal or low constants subtracted from those 
with high constants. Figure A under exponent shows a brighter red area centered 
on the anterior limb of the internal capsule. [Similar involvement of the thalamic 
radiations was observed in higher slices (not shown).] Figure A under constant 
shows a brighter red area centered on the anterior limb and genu of the internal 
capsule (see color insert).  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
153
exponent. For the constant, lesions involving the anterior limb and genu of the 
internal capsule were more common in patients who had an increased constant 
but not in those patients who had either a normal or a decreased constant.            
 In summary, perception of stimulus intensity was altered across multiple percep-
tual systems and on both sides of the body. Whereas left  and right hemisphere 
injury lead to greater variability in magnitude estimation; the power function 
constant was increased and the exponent decreased only in association with right 
hemisphere injury. Neglect was associated with a combination of defi cits including 
an increased power function constant and an exponent that was signifi cantly lower 
than in right hemisphere patients without neglect. Whereas neglect was associated 
with large lesions aff ecting cortical structures and white matt er pathways, altered 
perception of stimulus intensity was associated with damage to fi ber pathways that 
aff ect thalamocortical, corticothalamic, and corticofugal projections.  
 N EGL ECT I N VOLV E S A COM BI NAT ION OF DEF ICITS 
I N PROT H ET IC (NONSPAT I A L) A N D M ETAT H ET IC 
(e.g., SPAT I A L) PERCEP T UA L CON T I N UA   
 Robertson ( Robertson, 1993 ) proposed that chronic unilateral neglect may 
require defi cits in two types of att entional systems: one for spatial orientation and 
another for vigilance. A similar type of proposal can be made with regard to psy-
chophysical judgment. In fact, psychophysical distinctions between judgments 
of “where” (metathetic) versus “how much” (prothetic) reveal conceptual prob-
lems for neuropsychological studies of neglect. Whereas most theories of neglect 
are designed to explain where neglect occurs in space (a metathetic continuum), 
most studies actually measure the amount of stimuli neglected (a prothetic con-
tinuum) as a dependent variable in experiments. Th is issue was addressed by 
Jewell ( Jewell, 2003 ), working in our laboratory, by examining whether neglect 
represents a combination of defi cits in estimating space and stimulus intensity. 
Magnitude estimates and category scales for the pitch and loudness of 1,000 Hz 
tones and for the area and spatial location of visual stimuli were examined in a 
prospective study of 32 subjects: 12 normal control subjects, 7 LHL, 6 RHL – , 
and 7 RHL + . Estimates of spatial location and pitch are considered metathetic 
because they fi t linear functions and correspond to category scaling. In contrast, 
judgments of area and loudness are considered prothetic because they fi t power 
functions and correspond to ratio scaling ( Stevens & Galanter, 1957 ). Results of 
the prospective study indicated that neglect was associated with magnitude esti-
mation defi cits in both metathetic and prothetic continua (space, size, and loud-
ness), whereas right hemisphere injury without neglect (RHL – ) was associated 
only with defi cits in prothetic continua (loudness and size) ( Figure 7.8 ). Eff ect 
sizes (Cohen’s  d ) distinguishing normal control subjects from RHL subjects 

154
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
on the basis of loudness, area, and lateral displacement were .96, 1.25, and 1.6, 
respectively. All subject groups were equally adept at categorizing stimuli. 
Unfortunately, however, no subject group could distinguish pitch. Right hemi-
sphere lesion volume and involvement of heteromodal association cortex were 
positively associated with both neglect and defi cits in magnitude estimation. 
A combination of defi cits in prothetic and metathetic perceptual continua may 
distinguish those with clinical signs of neglect from those without these signs. 
 T H E L EFT CER EBR A L H E M ISPH ER E CON T R I BU T E S 
TO M AGN IT U DE E ST I M AT ION   
 Aphasia prevents many patients with large left  hemisphere lesions from per-
forming magnitude estimation studies. Consequently, it is not possible to create 
 
2.50
Lateral Displacement Left
Lateral Displacement Right
Area Judgment
Loudness Judgment
Slope, lateral left, ratio
Slope, lateral right, ratio
Exponent, area, 10-99
Exponent, loudness, 10-99
2.00
1.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.50
NPC
RHL–
LHL
RHL+
1.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
0.50
2.80
2.40
2.00
1.60
1.20
1.00
Study group
Metathetic
Prothetic
NPC
RHL–
LHL
RHL+
Study group
NPC
RHL–
LHL
RHL+
Study group
NPC
RHL–
LHL
RHL+
Study group
 Figure 7.8  Deficits in both prothetic and metathetic perceptual continua are 
a distinguishing feature of neglect. Results of a prospective study involving 32 
subjects (12 normal control subjects, 7 LHL, 6 RHL – , and 7 RHL + ) indicated 
that neglect was associated magnitude estimation deficits in both metathetic and 
prothetic continua (space, size, and loudness); in contrast, RHL – was associated 
only with deficits in prothetic continua (loudness and size).   

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
155
groups of RHL and LHL subjects who are equated on the basis of lesion location 
and volume. Th is issue was addressed in two case studies of magnitude estimation 
following left  hemisphere injury ( Woods et al., 2006 ). 
 Case 1. Patient B.G. was a 45-year-old, right-handed woman, a former reg-
istered nurse, who had expressive aphasia one year following a large, posterior 
middle cerebral artery infarction ( Figure 7.9 ). She did not have neglect accord-
ing to the Behavioral Inatt ention Test, but her brain lesion was typical of those 
associated with neglect following right hemisphere injury. She completed 7 of 12 
perceptual continua tests by writing her responses. Her  r  2  values fell below the 
95 percent confi dence limits of  r  2  values obtained from normal control subjects 
(from the above mentioned study) in six of the seven continua that she completed. 
Additionally, values for her power function exponents fell below those of controls 
on four of the seven continua and exceeded these values on two of the seven. Sizes 
of the power function constants fell below those for controls on three of the seven 
continua and also exceeded these sizes on three of the seven.        
 Case 2. Patient J.W. was a 39-year-old, right-handed man with 13 years of edu-
cation who had neglect acutely, without aphasia, following a following a putam-
inal hemorrhage of the left  hemisphere. ( Figure 7.10 ). His  r  2  values were lower 
than those of normal control subjects in 11 of 12 perceptual continua tests. Sizes 
of his power function exponents fell below those of controls in 7 of 12 continua 
but exceeded 95 percent confi dence limits on 2 of 12 continua. Power function 
 
 Figure 7.9  A large, posterior middle cerebral artery infarction in a 45-year-old, 
right-handed woman with expressive aphasia 1 year post-infarction.   

156
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
constant sizes were lower than the 95 percent confi dence limits for 6 of 12 conti-
nua and exceeded those of controls on one continuum.        
 Th ese case studies are the fi rst, to our knowledge, to show that left  hemisphere 
injury can alter magnitude estimation in a manner similar, but not identical, 
to that observed following right hemisphere injury. In particular, values of the 
power function exponents were both increased and decreased following LHL, 
rather than decreasing, which is more typical following RHL. A similar patt ern of 
results was observed in a group study of right and left  hemisphere stroke patients 
that examined the relationship between perception of strength and stimulus 
intensity ( Taylor-Cooke et al., 2006 ) (see next section). 
 M AGN IT U DE E ST I M AT E S A R E OPPOSIT E FOL LOW I NG 
L EFT A N D R IGHT H E M ISPH ER E I N J U R I E S  
 Falls by patients with neglect are commonly att ributed to decreased awareness of 
weakness and to impulsivity ( Webster et al., 1995 ;  Rapport et al., 1993 ); however, 
the problem of altered strength perception aft er stroke has not been systemati-
cally studied. To examine this problem, we tested 13 patients with unilateral right 
hemisphere lesions and 6 with left  hemisphere lesions while undergoing stroke 
rehabilitation. Only two patients in the RHL group had neglect; no patient had 
anosognosia. From these studies, we derived an index score of strength estimation 
accuracy (SEA) by comparing patients’ ratings of contralesional limb strength to 
those of a physician and correlating them with power function exponents derived 
 
 Figure 7.10  A hemorrhagic LHL in a 39-year-old, right-handed man who had 
neglect acutely, without aphasia.  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
157
for length estimation on a bisection task. Line bisection was chosen because of 
previous experience with the test in stroke patients ( Mennemeier et al., 2005 ). 
Strength perception of the contralateral limb was highly correlated with mag-
nitude estimation for line length in both patient groups. Additionally, a subset 
of patients in the RHL group who had  decreased power function exponents for 
length estimation  overestimated  contralateral limb strength, whereas a subset 
of patients in the LHL group who had  increased exponents  underestimated limb 
strength ( Figure 7.11 ). 
 Th e results of this study suggest that altered strength perception may be quite 
common aft er a stroke, even in patients without frank neglect and anosognosia. 
Further, perception of strength and stimulus magnitude may be governed by a 
common neural mechanism. Finally, altered perception of strength aft er a stroke 
might help explain the abnormal reactions that patients sometimes have to stroke, 
such as a lack of concern shown by some patients with right hemisphere lesions 
( Starkstein, Federoff , Price, Leiguarda, & Robinson, 1992 ) and an over-concern 
or an extreme emotional response shown by some patients with left  hemisphere 
lesions ( Starkstein, Federoff , Price, Leiguarda, & Robinson, 1993 ). Together with 
functional imaging studies ( Pinel, Piazza, LeBihan, & Dehaene, 2004 ), these 
patient studies indicate that both cerebral hemispheres generate magnitude esti-
mates of stimulus intensity; however, lateralized brain injury may disrupt magni-
tude estimation in diff erent ways. For example, left  and right hemisphere lesions 
can have diff erent aff ects on arousal ( Heilman et al., 2003 ) which could alter 
magnitude estimation diff erently.  
 
1.2
1.1
Power Function Exponent
1.0
0.9
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Strength Estimation Accuracy Scores
1.2
1.1
Power Function Exponent
1.0
0.9
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Strength Estimation Accuracy Scores
 Figure 7.11  Strength estimation accuracy (SEA) scoring. A negative SEA score 
corresponded to underestimation of contralateral limb strength, and a positive 
score to overestimation, with a score of 0 indicating agreement between the 
estimations of patients and physician. The SEA score increased as the power 
function exponent for patients with right hemisphere stroke decreased (graph 
on  left ); in contrast, the SEA score decreased as the power function exponent 
increased in patients with left hemisphere stroke (graph on  right : from 
Taylor-Cooke, et al 2006,  figures 1 & 2, pages 1445 & 1446 respectively.  

158
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 A ROUSA L PROCE SSE S I N F LU ENCE M AGN IT U DE 
E ST I M AT ION   
 Manipulations of arousal in patients with neglect, as described in the following 
case studies, demonstrates that arousal processes aff ect both stroke patients’ 
estimation of the magnitude of stimulus intensity and behavioral symptoms of 
neglect. 
 Case 2 (Continued). In addition to defi cits in magnitude estimation, patient 
J.W. was oft en drowsy during the day and even fell asleep during therapy when 
stimulation was minimal. He was given the psychostimulant modafi nil (Provigil), 
200 mg each morning, to increase arousal and alertness. Modafi nil, with a 
half-life of 14–15 hours, is approved for the treatment of narcolepsy ( McClellan & 
Spencer, 1998 ) and has been used experimentally to treat arousal defi cits related 
to stroke ( Sugden & Bourgeois, 2004 ;  Smith, 2003 ). Both J.W.’s family and the 
rehabilitation staff  reported a noticeable improvement in his alertness aft er he 
took modafi nil. He was retested on tests of neglect and magnitude estimation 48 
hours aft er taking his fi rst dose ( Woods et al., 2006 ).  Figure 7.12 illustrates the 
positive eff ects of the drug on J.W.’s neglect on the cancellation test. His perfor-
mance also normalized on all tests of magnitude estimation. Th ese results suggest 
that medications designed to enhance arousal can improve neglect and related 
defi cits in magnitude estimation. 
 Arousal can also be enhanced by nonpharmacological means. Irrigating the 
ear canal with either cold or warm water creates a temperature gradient across 
the tympanic membrane, precipitating caloric vestibular stimulation (CVS). CVS 
increases blood fl ow to heteromodal association areas, activates the striatum, 
thalamus, and midbrain (Chatt erjee &  Mennemeier, 1998 ), and thus can tem-
porarily ameliorate neglect ( Cappa, Sterzi, Vallar, & Bisiach, 1987 ;  Storrie-Baker 
 
 Figure 7.12  Effect of the psychostimulant modafinil on neglect in cancellation 
tests.  Left , Before the start of modafinil therapy, patient J.W. neglected to cancel 
the circled lines. He performed normally on only 3 of 12 perceptual continua 
tests.  Right , Forty-eight hours after taking his first dose, his performance on the 
cancellation text, as well as on 12 of 12 tests of magnitude estimation, normalized.  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
159
et al., 1997 ;  Rubens, 1985 ). Although CVS is commonly thought to infl uence 
neglect via vestibular-mediated changes in spatial att ention( Rubens, 1985 ), cold 
pressor stimulation (CPS) achieved by immersing a neglect patient’s foot in ice 
water for 50 seconds can have the same ameliorating eff ect on magnitude esti-
mation, neglect, alertness, and arousal. Both CVS and CPS may thus work by 
increasing arousal. 
 Case 3. Patient X was a 63-year-old woman with chronic left  neglect 4 months 
aft er ischemic infarction of the frontotemporoparietal cortices of the right hemi-
sphere (Woods et al. 2012). Magnitude estimation testing involved judgments of 
visual area and fi nger span of the right hand (see  Table 7.1 ); a clock drawing test 
sought evidence for neglect, and a simple reaction time test examined alertness 
( Dinges, 1985 ). Th e amplitude of the P50 auditory evoked potential, a midla-
tency evoked response to a click sound recorded at the vertex ( Robbins & Everitt , 
1995 ;  Kevanishivili & von Specht, 1979 ;  Erwin & Buchwald, 1986b; Erwin & 
Buchwald, 1986a ) was used to determine arousal. Th e amplitude is a measure of 
initial activation of reticular activating system (RA S) output. 11 
 At baseline, exponents and constants of the power functions for visual area 
and fi nger span were altered on both tests of magnitude estimation; neglect was 
evident on the clock drawing test (  Figure 7.13  ); and the patient’s P50 amplitude 
was absent, and her reaction time slow (349 msec) ( Figure 7.14 ). Immediately 
following CPS (immersion of her right foot in ice water for 50 sec), her P50 ampli-
tude value normalized to 1.72  μ V; her reaction time improved by 30 msec; her 
clock drawing became normal; and the power function parameters for fi nger span 
normalized: exponent, .38 vs. .64 (pre- vs. post-CPS; normal range, .69– .74); and 
constant, 5.88 vs. 3.5 (pre- vs. post-CPS; normal range, 3.3–4.3). Area judgment 
 
Baseline
CPT
Figure 15
 Figure 7.13  Clock drawing tests of patient X.  Left , Neglect was evident at baseline. 
 Right , A notable improvement followed the cold pressor stimulation (labeled 
CPT for cold pressor test) (from Woods, et al 2012, Figure 1, 5 th page, reprinted 
by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandf.co.uk/
journals).  

160
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
did not improve, possibly because this was the last test completed and the eff ect of 
CPS was waning. Twenty minutes aft er CPS, the P50 amplitude value was again 
below normal (.63  μ V), and her reaction time increased by 100 msec over baseline 
(450 msec). Her fastest reaction time following CPS improved by only 4 percent 
from baseline, but the standard deviation improved 76 percent from baseline, 
indicating greater consistency. Variability is a signifi cant contributor to the slow 
reaction times observed in patients with neglect ( Anderson et al., 2000 ). Th ese 
data converge to show improvement in neglect and magnitude estimation with 
improvement in arousal and alertness prompted by CPS. CPS also infl uences the 
P50 amplitude of normal subjects (  Figure 7.15  ). Increasing arousal generally with 
CPS may “optimize” the P50 amplitude. 
  A LT ER ED PERCEP T ION OF ST I M U LUS I N T ENSIT Y IS A 
T R A NS-DISOR DER PROCE SS   
 Clinical studies show that neglect evident on the line bisection task predicts hos-
pital falls during rehabilitation ( Vlahov et al., 1990 ;  Nyberg & Gustafson, 1997 ). 
Th e study of strength perception described above suggests a strong relationship 
between estimates of line length and strength perception. Further, patt erns of 
length estimation that were opposite between patients with right and left  hemi-
sphere stroke were correlated with patt erns of strength perception that were also 
opposite between patients with right and left  hemisphere stroke. Defi cits in mag-
nitude estimation, therefore, may represent defi cits common to both types of per-
ception, but length estimation can manifest as a sign of neglect, whereas strength 
perception manifests as anosodiaphoria or anosognosia. 
 Symptoms of dysphagia may also be similar to those of neglect. For example, 
hemineglect in the pericutaneous buccal space (i.e., the mouth) has been described 
 
Patient 2
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Pre
CPT
Post
Amplitude (uV)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
RT (msec)
P50 Amplitude
Reaction Time
 Figure 7.14  Arousal and alertness testing in patient X. The P50 amplitude was 
absent at baseline, and the patient’s reaction time was slow (349 msec). Immediately 
following CPT, her P50 amplitude value normalized to a value of 1.72  μ V, and her 
reaction time (RT) improved by 30 msec.  

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
161
in monkeys following a contralateral lesions of area 6 corresponding to the post-
arcuate cortex ( Rizzolatt i, Matelli, & Pavesi, 1983 ). Buccal hemineglect is also 
observed in humans in combination with the neglect syndrome, anosognosia, and 
parietal lesions ( Andre et al., 2000 ), and is more common aft er right than left  hemi-
sphere injury. Clinical signs include impaired swallowing; failure to detect saliva or 
food in the hemibuccal cavity (usually the left ); diminished taste sensation for salty, 
sweet, and acid tastes, with left -sided taste extinction; and impaired representation 
of the buccal cavity in drawings. In general, patients with right hemisphere stroke 
may have swallowing problems linked to a prolonged duration-of-stage transition 
(DST) ( Robbins & Levine, 1998 ;  John et al., 1998 ). One type of treatment, tactile 
thermal application (TT A), involves caloric stimulation, in which an ice stick or iced 
laryngeal mirror is rubbed on the anterior faucial pillars, to improve the onset of 
the pharyngeal swallow and temporarily reduce DST ( Rosenbek, Roecker, Wood, 
& Robbins, 1996 ). TT A is similar to CVS, which temporarily improves neglect 
and magnitude estimation. Further, in a study of buccal hemineglect ( Andre et al., 
2000 ), CVS temporarily abolished all signs of buccal neglect in four subjects. 
Dysphagia, like altered perception of strength, is a common comorbidity of neglect. 
Altered perception of stimulus intensity in the buccal cavity may account for quan-
titative features of dysphagia, such as matching of the timing and strength of stage 
transitions to the volume of liquid and solid boluses in the buccal cavity, similarly to 
how it accounts for quantitative aspects of neglect.   
 
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
pre CPT
CPT
post CPT
Mean Amplitude (uV)
High initial P50 (n=8)
Low intial P50 (n=5)
 Figure 7.15  Effects of CPS on P50 amplitude in normal subjects. P50 amplitude 
and reaction times were obtained healthy, normal subjects, 10 men and 3 women, 
ranging in age from 20 to 28 years. The baseline range of P50 amplitude values was 
1.0–3.5  μ V, with a mean of 1.5  μ V. Subjects were divided into two subsets according 
to whether their baseline P50 amplitude decreased or increased following CPS. 
Although one subgroup started with a high initial P50 amplitude and the other with 
a low initial amplitude, both groups exhibited the same P50 amplitude (1.6  μ V) 
immediately following CPS. Twenty minutes after CPS, the P50 amplitude returned 
to its baseline level.  

162
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Conclusions 
 Altered psychophysical function can manifest behaviorally as clinical symptoms 
of neglect, strength perception, and dysphagia. Th e strongest evidence for this 
conclusion can be found in patient studies of neglect. Whereas spatial theories are 
designed to explain where neglect occurs; altered psychophysical function can 
account for how much of something is neglected. Both explanations are necessary 
to account for the full range of neglect behavior. Th e psychophysical element of 
neglect has been emphasized in this chapter because it is not widely recognized as 
contributing to neglect behavior. 
 It is, admitt edly, a peculiar proposal to ask readers to accept that altered psy-
chophysical function can explain critical elements of neglect, and to then say, that 
this defi cit is not specifi c to neglect, that it operates in parallel to spatial att ention, 
representation and movement, and that the same defi cit can manifest as elements 
of other clinical disorders which are commonly viewed as diff erent from neglect. 
Where is the common ground? One basis for common ground is that perception 
of stimulus intensity explains quantitative elements of these other conditions as 
well as neglect. Another basis for common ground is that perception of stimu-
lus intensity may be linked to changes in arousal following brain injury rather 
than to a specifi c clinical disorder. Arousal is a platform function that supports 
virtually all cognitive systems, so perceptual defi cits related to fl uctuations in 
arousal can conceivably infl uence behaviors as diverse as neglect on cancellation 
tests, swallowing and strength perception and perhaps many other functions. 
Consistent with this interpretation, we observed that psychophysical function 
is altered by stroke across multiple perceptual domains and in diff erent clini-
cal syndromes. Additionally, procedures designed to infl uence arousal can have 
ameliorative eff ects across multiple perceptual domains and behaviors including 
neglect, magnitude estimation and swallowing. One criticism of an explanation 
predicated on arousal is that it is not specifi c—increasing or optimizing arousal 
should improve cognitive function generally, and so, how can improvement in 
behaviors like neglect be att ributed specifi cally to improvement in psychophysi-
cal function? No simple argument will dispel this criticism; rather, experiments 
are required to address the issue. Th e same criticism; however, can be made of the 
Yerkes-Dodson function that relates arousal and performance, yet somehow this 
criticism misses the point. It is probably more important to ask how fl uctuations 
in arousal alter perception and how arousal defi cits could be treated to improve 
neglect and related disorders. 
 Brain lesions that impair “arousal” presumably do so by disturbing the fre-
quency, timing, or distribution of thalamocortical rhythms that facilitate con-
scious perception. Representations of sensory events formed under these abnormal 
circumstances may be more susceptible to bias, like contextual eff ects, which are 
normally present, but may alter the rate at which change in physical stimulus 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
163
intensity is perceived. Th is change would alter the growth rate of power functions 
and presumably lead to behavioral abnormalities like under- or over-responding 
to stimulation. It is assumed here that perception of stimulus intensity is infl u-
enced by arousal in accordance with the Yerkes-Dodson function. Lateralized 
brain injury may have opposite eff ects on arousal, at least in some patients, that 
could alter perception of stimulus intensity in diff erent ways and result in diff er-
ent behavioral abnormalities. So far, we have learned that lesions which aff ect the 
right cerebral hemisphere and cause hypoarousal are associated with a restricted 
range of perception such that greater stimulus intensities are underestimated and 
lesser intensities are overestimated. Th is patt ern of bias is signaled by a decreased 
power function exponent and an increased constant and the associated behavioral 
manifestation is evident, for example, in the crossover eff ect on line bisection. In 
contrast, lesions of the left  hemisphere might induce an opposite form of bias in 
some patients characterized by increased arousal and power function exponents 
that are elevated relative to normal. Th e behavior associated with this patt ern of 
bias was underestimating limb strength. Finally, understanding the relationship 
between arousal, perception, and behavior may infl uence treatment. Caloric stim-
ulation and arousal-enhancing medication, for example, can improve perception 
of stimulus intensity in hypoaroused patients. Caloric stimulation may impose fast 
oscillations on thalamocortical pathways via the peripheral sensory system that 
improves neglect, magnitude estimation, and dysphagia temporarily. Medications 
like modafanil might enhance thalamocortical activity chronically via intracorti-
cal mechanisms such as increasing gap junctions between cortical interneurons.  
 Notes 
 
 1 .  Hypersomnia is marked by excessive daytime sleepiness, inability to stay awake, and/or 
prolonged nightt ime sleep due to decreased wakefulness, enhanced sleep mechanisms, 
or both. 
 
 2 .  Th e anterior cingulate gyrus may infl uence arousal systems in anticipation and prepa-
ration of responses; the dorsolateral frontal cortex may maintain and regulate cortical 
arousal over time by activating noradrenergic nuclei in the brainstem via the reticular 
nucleus of the thalamus; and the inferior parietal cortex may modulate arousal in response 
to stimulus processing via projections to the reticular nucleus( Sturm & Willmes, 2001 ).   
  
 3  .  Sensory perceptual defi cits are most commonly evaluated for proprioception (with up 
to 52 percent of patients estimated to be aff ected), vibration (44 percent aff ected), light 
touch (37 percent aff ected), and loss of pinprick sensation (35 percent aff ected) (Hunter 
& Crome, 2002Th ese defi cits are as common, persistent, and debilitating ( Fasoli & 
McKenna, 2007 ;  Sullivan & Hedman, 208 ) as is motor impairment, with prevalence rates 
among stroke patients as high as 60 percent to 85 percent ( Fasoli & McKenna, 2007 ) 
( Yekutiel, 2000 ) ( Moskowitz, Lightbody F.E., & Freitag, 1972 ) ( Kent, 1965 ) ( Kim & 
Choi-Kwon, 1996 ). 
 
 4 .  In practice, it is debated whether the conditions for ratio scaling are ever satisfactorily 
achieved, so the term  magnitude estimation will be used instead of ratio scaling aft er this 
introduction. 

164
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 
 5 .  Th e term  perceptual continua  merely refers to the types of sensation under study, such as 
length, brightness, roughness, saltiness, etc.   
   
 6 .  Because lesser stimuli in the range of intensities, on average, are preceded by stimuli with 
higher intensities, and vice versa, contextual bias causes lesser stimuli to be overesti-
mated and greater stimuli be underestimated ( Cross, 1973 ). 
 
  7 .  Slow oscillations, which may have an intracortical origin, are present during sleep and 
anesthesia. Delta oscillations are slow rhythms which have cortical and thalamic origins 
and are believed to play a role in memory consolidation. Sleep spindles are slow rhythms 
which occur in intervals that may originate from an interaction between thalamic reticu-
lar and relay cells. Spindle oscillations are observed in association with early stage sleep 
and slow oscillations and play a role in memory formation.   
     
  8  .  Beta-gamma oscillations may have both extracortical origins, imposed by fast oscilla-
tions originating in peripheral motor and sensory systems, and intracortical mechanisms 
including intrinsic properties of fast rhythmic bursting neurons, activities of inhibitory 
interneurons, and gap junctions between axons of pyramidal cells. 
 
 9 .  Th e mechanism behind the 40 Hz rhythm appears to include layer IV cortical inhibi-
tory interneurons which exhibit a sequential activation of a persistent low threshold 
sodium current followed by a subsequent potassium conductance. Th ese cells can trans-
mit the 40 Hz rhythm onto thalamic cells, allowing the entrainment of thalamocortical 
resonance.   
 
 10 .  Neglect is responsive to vestibular stimulation ( Rubens, 1985 ), visual cues, and vibrotac-
tile, optokinetic, and rotational stimulation( Pierce & Buxbaum, 2002 ). Amphetamine, 
methylphenidate, and bromocriptine have been used to improve arousal in neglect 
( Chatt erjee & Mennemeier, 1998 ;  Pierce & Buxbaum, 2002 ). 
 
 11 .  Th e P50 potential diminishes and disappears with progressively deeper stages of 
slow-wave sleep and is blocked by scopolamine. Its reappearance during REM sleep sug-
gests that one generator is functionally related to states of arousal and modulated by cho-
linergic mesopontine cell groups ( Buchwald, Rubenstein, Schwafel, & Strandburg, 1991 ; 
 Erwin & Buchwald, 1986b ;  Garcia-Rill, 1997 ). 
 References 
 Adair ,  J. C. ,  Na ,  D. L. ,  Schwartz ,  R. L. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1998 ).  Analysis of primary and second-
ary infl uences on spatial neglect.  Brain and Cognition ,  37 ,  351–367 . 
 Adair ,  J. C. ,  Schwartz ,  R. L. , &  Barrett  ,  A. M. ( 2003 ). Anosognosia. In  K. M.  Heilman &  E. 
 Valenstein (eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  (4th ed., pp.  185–214 ).  New  York :   Oxford 
University Press . 
 Albert ,  M. L. ( 1973 ).  A simple test of visual neglect.  Neurology ,  23 ,  658–664 . 
  Albert ,  M. L. ,  Silverberg ,  R. ,  Reches ,  A. , &  Berman ,  M. ( 1976 ).  Cerebral Dominance for 
Consciousness.  Archives of Neurology ,  33 ,  453–454 . 
   Algom ,  D.,   &   Marks ,  L. E.   ( 1990 ).  Range and regression, loudness scales, and loudness process-
ing. Toward a context-bound psychophysics.    Journal of Experimental Psychology Human 
Perception and Performance ,  16 ,  706–727 . 
  Anderson ,  B. ,  Mennemeier ,  M. , &  Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2000 ).  Variability not ability: another basis for 
performance decrements in neglect.    Neuropsychologia ,  38 ,  785–796 . 
 Andre ,  J. M. ,  Beis ,  J. M. ,  Morin ,  N. , &  Paysant ,  J. ( 2000 ).  Buccal Hemineglect.  Archives of 
Neurology ,  57 ,  1734–1741 . 
 Axelrod ,  B. N.   ( 2002 ).  Validity of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence and Other Very 
Short Forms of Estimating Intellectual Functioning.  Assessment ,  9 ,  17–23 . 
 Barer ,  D. H. ( 1989 ).  Th e natural history and functional consequences of dysphagia aft er hemi-
spheric stroke.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgy, & Psychiatry ,  52 ,  236–241 . 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
165
 Bassett i ,  C. ( 2001 ). Disturbances of consciousness and sleep-wake functions. In  J.  Bogousslavsky 
&  L. R.  Caplan (eds.),   Stroke Syndromes  (pp.  192–210 ).  Cambridge :  University Press . 
 Bazhenov ,  M., &  Timofee ,  I. ( 2006 ).  Th alamocortical oscillations.  Scholarpedia, 1 (6), 1319 
[On-line at  htt p://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Th alamocortical_oscillations , retrieved 
9-24-2009]. 
 Bisiach ,  E. ( 1993 ).  Mental representation in unilateral neglect and related disorders: Th e twenti-
eth Barlett  Memorial Lecture.  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology ,  46A ,  435–461 . 
 Bisiach ,  E. ,  Bulgarelli ,  C. ,  Sterzi ,  R.  , &  Vallar ,  G. ( 1983 ).  Line bisection and cognitive plasticity of 
unilateral neglect of space.  Brain and Cognition ,  2 ,  32–38 . 
   Bisiach ,  E.  ,   Geminiani ,  G.  ,   Berti ,  A.  , &   Rusconi ,  M. L.   ( 1990 ).  Perceptual and premotor factors of 
unilateral neglect.    Neurology ,  40 ,  1278 . 
 Bisiach ,  E., &  Luzzatt i ,  C. ( 1978 ).  Unilateral neglect of representational space.  Cortex ,  14 , 
 129–133 . 
 Bisiach ,  E. ,  Rusconi ,  M. L. ,  Perett i ,  V. A. , &  Vallar ,  G. ( 1994 ).  Challenging current accounts of 
unilateral neglect.    Neuropsychologia ,  32 ,  1431–1434 . 
 Buchwald ,  J. S. ,  Rubenstein ,  E. H. ,  Schwafel ,  J. , &  Strandburg ,  R. J. ( 1991 ).  Midlatency audi-
tory evoked responses:  Diff erential eff ects of a cholinergic agonist and antagonist. 
 Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology ,  80 ,  303–309 . 
   Cappa ,  S.  ,   Sterzi ,  R.  ,   Vallar ,  G.  , &   Bisiach ,  E.   ( 1987 ).  Remission of hemineglect and anosognosia 
during vestibular stimulation.  Neuropsychologia ,  25 ,  775–782 . 
 Cappellett i ,  M. ,  Barth ,  H. ,  Fregni ,  F. ,  Spelke ,  E. , & Pascual- Leone ,  A. ( 2007 ).  rTMS over the intra-
parietal sulcus disrupts numerosity processing.  Experimental Brain Research ,  179 ,  631–642 . 
 Carey ,  L. ( 1995 ).  Somatosensory loss aft er stroke.  Critical Reviews in Physical and Rehabilitation 
Medicine ,  7 ,  51–91 . 
 Carpenter ,  M. B. ( 1976 ).   Human Neuroanatomy  . (7th ed.)  Baltimore :  Waverly Press . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 1995 ).  Cross-over, completion and confabulation in unilateral spatial neglect.  
 Brain ,  118 ,  455–465 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A., &  Mennemeier ,  M. ( 1998 ). Diagnosis and treatment of spatial neglect. In  R. B. 
 Lazar (ed.),   Principles of neurologic rehabilitation  (pp.  597–612 ).  New York :  McGraw-Hill . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Mennemeier ,  M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1992a ).  A stimulus-response relationship in 
unilateral negelct: the power function.  Neuropsychologia ,  30 ,  1101–1108 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Mennemeier ,  M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1992b ).  Search patt erns and neglect: a case 
study.  Neuropsychologia ,  30 ,  657–672 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Th ompson ,  K. A. , &  Ricci ,  R. ( 1998 ).  Weigh(t)ing for awareness.  Brain and 
Cognition ,  37 ,  477–409 . 
 Coslett  ,  H. B. ,  Bowers ,  D. ,  Fitzpatrick ,  E. ,  Haws ,  B. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1990 ).  Directional hypo-
kinesia and hemispatial inatt ention in neglect.  Brain ,  113 ,  475–486 . 
 Coslett  ,  H. B. ,  Bowers ,  D. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1987 ).  Reduction in cerebral activation aft er right 
hemisphere stroke.  Neurology ,  37 ,  957–962 . 
 Cross ,  D. V. ( 1973 ).  Sequential dependencies and regression in psychophysical judgments. 
 Perception and Psychophysics ,  14 ,  547–552 . 
 Cucchiara ,  B. ,  Kasner ,  S. E. ,  Wolk ,  D. A. ,  Lyden ,  P. D. ,  Knappertz ,  V. A. ,  Ashwood ,  T. et al. ( 2003 ). 
 Lack of hemispheric dominance for consciousness in acute ischaemic stroke.    Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  74 ,  889–892 . 
 Dinges ,  P. ( 1985 ).  Microcomputer analyses of performance on a portable, simple visual RT task 
during sustained operations.    Behavior Research Methods ,  17 ,  652–655 . 
 Erwin ,  R. J., &  Buchwald ,  J. S. ( 1986a ).  Midlatency auditory evoked responses: diff erential eff ects 
of sleep in the human.    Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology ,  65 ,  383–392 . 
 Erwin ,  R. J., &  Buchwald ,  J. S. ( 1986b ).  Midlatency auditory evoked responses: Diff erential recov-
ery cycle characteristics.  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology ,  64 ,  417–423 . 
 Farne ,  A. ,  Buxbaum ,  L. J. ,  Ferraro ,  M. ,  Frassinett i ,  F. ,  Whyte ,  J. ,  Veramonti ,  T. et al. ( 2004 ).  Patt erns 
of spontaneous recovery of neglect and associated disorders in acute right brain-damaged 
patients.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  75 ,  1401–1410 . 

166
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
  Fasoli ,  D. S., &  McKenna ,  K. T. ( 2007 ).  Interventions for sensory impairment in the upper limb 
aft er stroke (protocol).  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  1–8 . 
  Fuller ,  P. M. ,  Gooley ,  J. J. , &  Saper ,  C. B. ( 2006 ).  Neurobiology of the Sleep-Wake Cycle: Sleep 
Architecture, Circadian Regulation, and Regulatory Feedback.  Journal of Biological Rhythms , 
 21 ,  482–493 . 
 Gainott i ,  G., &  Tiacci ,  C. ( 1971 ).  Th e relationships between disorders of visual perception and 
unilateral spatial neglect.    Neuropsychologia ,  9 ,  451–458 . 
 Garcia-Rill ,  E. ( 1997 ).  Disorders of the reticular activating system.  Med Hypoth ,  49 ,  379–387 . 
 Garcia-Rill ,  E. ( 2009a ). Reticular Activating System. In  L. R.  Squire (ed.),   Encyclopedia of 
Neuroscience   (pp.  137–143 ).  Oxford :  Academic Press . 
 Garcia-Rill ,  E. ( 2009b ). Sleep and arousal states:  reticular activating system. In  L. R.  Squire , 
 F. E.  Bloom ,  N.  Spitzer ,  F.  Gage , &  Albright,  T . (eds.),   New Encyclopedia of Neuroscience  
(pp.  137–143 ).  Oxford :  Elsevier . 
  Gescheider ,  G. A. ( 1997a ). Psychophysical ratio scaling. In  G. A .  Gescheider (ed.), 
  Psychophysics:  the fundamentals  (3 ed., pp.  231–263 ).  Mahwah :   Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates . 
 Gescheider ,  G. A. ( 1997b ).   Psychophysics:  the fundamentals  .  London :   Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates . 
  Golay ,  L. ,  Schnider ,  A. , &  Ptak ,  R. ( 2008 ).  Cortical and subcortical anatomy of chronic spatial 
neglect following vascular damage.  Behavioral and Brain Functions  ,   4 ,  43 . 
  Gordon ,  C. ,  Hewer ,  R. L. , &  Wade ,  D. T. ( 1987 ).  Dysphagia in acute stroke.  British Medical Jounral 
(Clinical Research Edition) .,  295 ,  411–414 . 
  Halligan ,  P. W., &  Marshall ,  J. C. ( 1991 ).  Figural modulation of visuo-spatial neglect: a case study. 
 Neuropsychologia ,  29 ,  619–628 . 
   Halligan ,  P. W.,   &   Marshall ,  J. C.   ( 1988 ).  How long is a piece of string? A study of line bisection 
in a case of visual neglect.    Cortex ,  24 ,  321–328 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Blonder ,  L. X. ,  Bowers ,  D. , &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 2003 ). Emotional disorders 
associated with neurological diseases. In  K. M .  Heilman &  E.  Valenstein (eds.),  Clinical 
Neuropsychology (4 ed., pp.  447–478 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
  Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Schwartz ,  H. D. , &  Watson  RT ( 1978 ).  Hypoarousal in patients with the neglect 
syndrome and emotional indiff erence .   Neurology ,  28 ,  229–232 . 
   Heilman ,  K. M.,   &   Valenstein ,  E.   ( 1972 ).  Frontal lobe negelect in man.    Neurology ,  22 ,  660–664 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M., &  Van Den Able ,  T. ( 1980 ).  Right hemisphere dominance for atten-
tion:  the mechanism underlying hemispheric asymmetries of inattention.    Neurology , 
 30 ,  327–330 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Watson ,  R. T. , &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 1985 ). Neglect and related disorders. In  K. 
M.   Heilman   &   E.   Valenstein   (eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology (2 ed., pp.  243–293 ). 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Hollingworth ,  H. L. ( 1909 ). Th e indiff erence point. In  H. L .  Hollingworth (ed.),  Th e inaccuracy 
of movement (pp.  21–39 ).  New York :  Th e Science Press . 
 Hunter ,  S. M., &  Crome ,  P. ( 2002 ).  Hand function and stroke.  Reviews in Clinical Gerontology , 
 12 ,  66–81 . 
 Husain ,  M., &  Rorden ,  C. ( 2003 ).  Non-spatially lateralized mechanisms in hemispatial neglect . 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience ,  4 ,  26–36 . 
 Jewell ,  G. ( 2003 ).   Psychophysical scaling of prothetic and metathetic continua in lateralized brain 
injury and neglect: where and how much?  Dissertation for the  Doctor of Philosophy Degree 
in the Department of Psychology University of Alabama at Birmingham . Graduate School, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham. 
 Rosenbek, J. C., Robbins, J., Willford, W. O., Kirk, G., Schiltz, A., Sowell, T. W., . . . , Hansen, 
J. E. ( 1998 ).  Comparing Treatment Intensities of Tactile-Th ermal Application.  Dysphagia , 
 13 ,  1–9 . 
  Karnath ,  H. O. ,  Ferber ,  S. , &  Himmelbach ,  M. ( 2001 ).  Spatial awareness is a function of the tem-
poral not the posterior parietal lobe.  Nature , 411 (6840),  950–953 . 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
167
 Karnath ,  H. O. ,  Fruhmann Berger ,  M. ,  Kuker ,  W. , &  Rorden ,  C. ( 2004 ).  Th e anatomy of spatial 
neglect based on voxelwise statistical analysis: A study of 140 patients.  Cerebral Cortex ,  14 , 
 1164–1172 . 
   Karnath ,  H. O.  ,   Himmelbach ,  M.  , &   Rorden ,  M.   ( 2002a ).  Th e subcortical anatomy of human 
spatial neglect; putamen, caudate nucleus and pulvinar.    Brain ,  125 ,  350–360 . 
 Karnath ,  H. O. ,  Himmelbach ,  M. , &  Rorden ,  C. ( 2002b ).  Th e subcortical anatomy of human 
spatial neglect: putamen, caudate nucleus and pulvinar.    Brain ,  125 ,  350–360 . 
 Kent ,  B. ( 1965 ).  Sensory-motor testing: the upper limb of adult patients with hemiplegia.  Physical 
Th erapy ,  45 ,  550–561 . 
 Kerkhoff  ,  G. ( 2001 ).  Spatial hemineglect.  Progress in Neurobiology ,  63 ,  1–27 . 
 Kevanishivili ,  Z., &  von Specht ,  H. ( 1979 ).  Human auditory evoked potentials during natural and 
drug-induced sleep.  Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysioly ,  47 ,  280–288 . 
 Kim ,  J. S., &  Choi-Kwon ,  S. ( 1996 ).  Discriminative sensory dysfunction aft er unilateral stroke. 
 Stroke ,  27 ,  677–682 . 
   Kim ,  M.  ,   Schwartz ,  R. L.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1999 ).  Pupillographic fi ndings in neglect.    Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  67 ,  82–85 . 
   Kinsbourne ,  M.   ( 1970 ).  Th e cerebral basis of lateral asymmetries in att ention.  Acta Psychologica , 
 33 ,  193–201 . 
 Kinsbourne ,  M. ( 1993 ). Orientation bias model of unilateral neglect: evidence from att entional 
gradients within hemispace. In  I. H .  Robertson &  J. C .  Marshal (eds.),   Unilateral neglect: clin-
cal and experimental studies.  (pp.  63–86 ).  UK :  Hove . 
 Ladavas ,  E. ( 1987 ).  Is the hemispatial defi cit produced by right parietal lobe damage associated 
with retinal or gravitational co-ordinates?  Brain ,  110 ,  167–180 . 
 Llinas ,  R. ( 2001 ).   Th e I of the vortex, fr om neurons to self  .  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Llinas ,  R. ,  Ribary ,  U. ,  Contreras ,  D. , &  Pedroarena ,  C. ( 1998 ).  Th e neuronal basis for conscious-
ness.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London ,  1841–1849 . 
 Marshall ,  J. C., &  Halligan ,  P. W. ( 1989 ).  When right goes left : an investigation of line bisection 
in a case of visual neglect.    Cortex ,  25 ,  503–515 . 
 Marshall ,  R. S. ,  Lazar ,  R. M. ,  Krakauer ,  J. W. , &  Sharma ,  R. ( 1998 ).  Stimulus contex in hemine-
glect.  Brain ,  121 ,  2003–2010 . 
 McClellan ,  K. C., &  Spencer ,  C. M. ( 1998 ).  Modafi nil: a review of its pharmacology and clinical 
effi  cacy in the management of narcolepsy.  CNS Drugs ,  9,  311–324 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Ray ,  P. G. ,  Day ,  L. J. , &  Loring ,  D. W. ( 2000 ).  Train Duration Eff ects on 
Perception:  Sensory Defi cit, Neglect, and Cerebral Lateralization.    Journal of Clinical 
Neurophysiology ,  17 , 406–413. 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Pierce ,  C. A. ,  Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Anderson ,  B. ,  Jewell ,  G. ,  Dowler ,  R. et al. ( 2005 ). 
 Bias in att entional orientation and magnitude estimation explain crossover: neglect is a dis-
order of both.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  17 ,  1194–1211 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Dillon ,  M. , &  Vezey ,  E. ( 1998 ).  A search for the optimal stimu-
lus.  Brain and Cognition ,  37 ,  439–459 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Vezey ,  E. ,  Lamar ,  M. , &  Jewell ,  G. ( 2002 ).  Crossover is not a consequence of 
neglect.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society ,  8 ,  107–114 . 
   Mesulam ,  M.   ( 1981 ).  A cortical network for directed att ention and unilateral neglect.  Annals of 
Neurology ,  10 ,  309–325 . 
   Milner ,  A. D.  ,   Harvey ,  M.  ,   Roberts ,  R. C.  , &   Forster ,  S. V.   ( 1993 ).  Line bisection errors in visual 
neglect: misguided action or size distortion?  Neuropsychologia ,  31 ,  39–49 . 
 Mohr ,  J. P., &  Barnett  ,  J. M. ( 1986 ). Classifi cation of ischemic strokes. In   H. J. M .  Barnett  ,  J. P. 
 Mohr ,  B. M .  Stein , &  F. M .  Yatsu (eds.),   Stroke, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management  
(pp.  281–291 ).  New York :  Churchill Livingstone . 
   Monaghan ,  P.,   &   Shillcock ,  R.   ( 1998 ).  Th e cross-over eff ect in unilateral neglect. Modelling 
detailed data in the line-bisection task.    Brain ,  121 ,  907–921 . 
 Morrow ,  L. ,  Vrtunski ,  K. ,  Kim ,  Y. , &  Boller ,  F. ( 1981 ).  Arousal responses to emotional stimuli and 
laterality of lesion.    Neuropsychologia ,  19 ,  65–71 . 

168
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
  Moskowitz ,  E. ,  Lightbody,  F. E. , &  Freitag ,  N. S. ( 1972 ).  Long-term follow-up of the poststroke 
patient.  Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  53 ,  167–172 . 
 Na ,  D. L. ,  Adair ,  J. C. ,  Williamson ,  D. J. G. ,  Schwartz ,  R. L. ,  Haws ,  B. , &  Heilman ,  K. M.  ( 1998 ). 
 Dissociation of sensory-att entional from motor-intentional neglect.  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  64 ,  331–338 . 
 Nolte ,  J. ( 2009 ).   Th e Human Brain:  an introduction to its functional anatomy  . (6th ed.) 
 Philadelphia :  Mosby Elsevier . 
 Nyberg ,  L., &  Gustafson ,  Y. ( 1997 ).  Fall Prediction Index for Patients in Stroke Rehabilitation. 
 Stroke ,  28 ,  716–721 . 
 Ogden ,  J. A. ( 1987 ).  Th e neglected left  hemisphere and its contribution to visuo-spatial neglect. 
In  M .  Jeannerod (ed.),  Neurophysiological and neuropsychological aspects of spatial neglect (1st 
ed., pp.  215–234 ).  Amsterdam :  North-Holland . 
 Pare  Denis &  Llinas ,  R. ( 1995 ).  Conscious and pre-conscious processes as seen from the stand-
point of sleep-waking cycle neurophysiology.  Neuropsychologia ,  33 ,  1155–1168 . 
 Pierce ,  S. R., &  Buxbaum ,  L. J. ( 2002 ).  Treatments of unilateral neglect: a review.  Archives of 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  83 ,  256–268 . 
  Pinel ,  P. ,  Piazza ,  M. ,  Biham ,  D. L. , &  Dehaene ,  S. ( 2004 ).  Distributed and overlapping cerebral 
representations of number, size and luminance during comparative judgments.  Neuron ,  41 , 
 983–993 . 
 Pinel ,  P. ,  Piazza ,  M. ,  LeBihan ,  D. L. , &  Dehaene ,  S. ( 2004 ).  Distributed and overlapping cerebral 
representations of number, size and luminance during comparative judgments.  Neuron ,  41 , 
 983–993 . 
  Posner ,  M. I., &  Boies ,  S. J. ( 1971 ).  Components of att ention.  Psychological Review ,  78 ,  391–408 . 
 Posner ,  M. I., &  Dehaene ,  S. ( 1994 ).  Att entional networks.  Trends in Neuroscience ,  17 ,  75–79 . 
   Posner ,  M. I.,   &   Rafal ,  R. D.   ( 1987 ). Cognitive theories of att ention and the rehabilitation of 
att entional defi cits. In  M. J .  Meier ,  A. L .  Benton , &  L.  Diller (eds.),   Neuropsychological 
Rehabilitation  (pp.  182–201 ).  Edinburgh :  Churchhill Livingstone . 
  Poulton ,  E. C. ( 1979 ).  Models for biases in judging sensory magnitude.  Psychological Bulletin ,  86 , 
 777–803 . 
 Poulton ,  E. C. ( 1968 ).  Th e new psychophysics: six models for magnitude estimation.  Psychological 
Bulletin ,  69 ,  1–19 . 
 Rand ,  D. ,  Gott lieb ,  D. , &  Weiss ,  P. ( 2001 ).  Recovery of patients with a combined motor and 
proprioception defi cit during the fi rst six weeks of post stroke rehabilitation.    Physical and 
Occupational Th erapy in Geriatrics ,  18 ,  69–87 . 
 Rapport ,  L. J. ,  Webster ,  J. S. ,  Flemming ,  K. L. ,  Lindberg ,  J. W. ,  Godlewski ,  M. C. ,  Brees ,  J. E. et al. 
( 1993 ).  Predictors of falls among right-hemisphere stroke patients in the rehabilitation set-
ting.  Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  74 ,  621–626 . 
 Ringman ,  J. M. ,  Saver ,  J. L. ,  Woolson ,  R. F. ,  Clarke ,  W. R. , &  Adams ,  H. P. ( 2004 ).  Frequency, risk 
factors, anatomy, and course of unilateral neglect in an acute stroke cohort.  Neurology ,  63 , 
 468–474 . 
 Rizzolatt i ,  G., &  Berti ,  A. ( 1993 ). Neural mechanisms of spatial neglect. In  I. H .  Robertson &  J. C. 
 Marshal (eds.),   Unilateral neglect: clinical and experimental studies  (1 ed.,  Hove-UK :  Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates . 
 Rizzolatt i, G., Matelli, M., & Pavesi, G. (1983). Defi cits in Att ention and Movement Following 
the Removal of Postarcuate (Area 6) And Prearcuate (Area 8) Cortex in Macaque Monkeys. 
 Brain ,  106 ,  655–673 . 
 Robbins ,  J. A., &  Levine ,  R. L. ( 1998 ).  Swallowing aft er unilateral stroke of the cerebral cor-
tex: preliminary experience.  Dysphagia ,  3 ,  11–17 . 
 Robbins ,  T. W., &  Everitt  ,  B. J. ( 1995 ). Arousal systems and att ention. In  M .  Gazzaniga (ed.),   Th e 
cognitive neurosciences  (pp.  703–720 ).  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Robertson ,  I. H. ( 1993 ). Th e relationship between lateralized and non-lateralized att entional def-
icits in unilateral neglect. In  I. H .  Robertson &  J. C .  Marshall (eds.),   Unilateral neglect: clini-
cal and experimental studies  . (pp.  257–275 ).  Hove :  Lawrence Erlbaum . 

Arousal, Att ention, and Perception
169
 Robertson ,  I. H. ( 2001 ).  Do we need the “lateral” in unilateral neglect? Spatially nonselective 
att ention defi cits in unilateral negelct and their implications for rehabilitation.    Neuroimage , 
 14 ,  S85–S90 . 
 Robertson ,  I. H., &  Garavan ,  H. ( 2004 ). Vigilant Att ention. In  M. S .  Gazzaniga (ed.),   Th e Cognitive 
Neurosciences III  (3 ed., pp.  631–640 ).  Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
   Robertson ,  S. L.,   &   Jones ,  L. A.   ( 1994 ).  Tactile sensory impairment and prehensile func-
tion in subjects with left  hemisphere cerebral lesions.  Archives of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation ,  75 ,  1108–1117 . 
 Rosenbek ,  J. C. ,  Roecker ,  E. B. ,  Wood ,  J. L. , &  Robbins ,  J. ( 1996 ).  Th ermal application reduces 
the duration of stage transition in dysphagia aft er stroke.    Dysphagia ,  11 ,  225–233 . 
 Rubens ,  A. B. ( 1985 ).  Caloric stimulation and unilateral visual neglect.  Neurology ,  35 ,  1019–1024 . 
 Samuelsson ,  H. ,  Hjelmquist ,  E. K. ,  Jenson ,  C. ,  Ekholm ,  S. , &  Blomstrand ,  C. ( 1998 ). 
 Nonlateralized att ention defi cits; an important component behind persisting visuospatial 
neglect.  Journal of Clinical & Experimental Neuropsychology ,  20 ,  73–88 . 
 Smith ,  B. ( 2003 ).  Modafi nil for treatment of cognitive side eff ects of antiepileptic drugs in a 
patient with seizures and stroke.  Eplilepsy & Behavior ,  4 ,  352–353 . 
 Starkstein ,  S. E. ,  Federoff  ,  J. P. ,  Price ,  T. R. ,  Leiguarda ,  R. , &  Robinson ,  R. G. ( 1992 ).  Anosogosia 
in patients with cerebrovascular lesions. A study of causative factors.    Stroke ,  23 ,  1446–1453 . 
 Starkstein ,  S. E. ,  Federoff  ,  J. P. ,  Price ,  T. R. ,  Leiguarda ,  R.  , &  Robinson ,  R. G. ( 1993 ).  Catastrophic 
reaction aft er cerebrovascular lesions: frequency, correlates, and validation of a scale.    Journal 
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences ,  5 ,  189–194 . 
 Steriade ,  M. ,  Curro ,  D. R. ,  Pare ,  D. , &  Oakson ,  G. ( 1991 ).  Fast oscillations (20–40 Hz) in thala-
mocortical systems and their potentiation by mesopontine cholingergic nuclei in the cat. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U S A ,  88 ,  4396–4400 . 
 Steriade ,  M. , Mc Cormick ,  D. A. , &  Sejnowski ,  T. J. ( 1993 ).  Th alamocortical oscillations in the 
sleeping and aroused brain.  Science ,  262 ,  679–685 . 
 Stevens ,  S. S. ( 1971 ).  Issues in psychophysical measurement.  Psychological Review ,  78 ,  426–450 . 
 Stevens ,  S. S. ( 1975a ).   Psychophysics:  introduction to its perceptual, neural, and social prospects  . 
 New York :  John Wiley & Sons . 
   Stevens ,  S. S.   ( 1975b ). Th e psychophysical law. In  G .  Stevens (Ed.),   Psychophysics: introduction to 
its perceptual neural and social prospects  (pp.  1–36 ).  Toronto :  John Wiley & Sons . 
 Stevens ,  S. S., &  Galanter ,  E. H. ( 1957 ).  Ratio scales and category scales for a dozen perceptual 
continua.    Journal of Experimental Psychology ,  54 ,  377–411 . 
 Stone ,  S. P. ,  Wilson ,  B. ,  Wroot ,  A. ,  Halligan ,  P. W. ,  Lange ,  L. S. ,  Marshall ,  J. C. et al. ( 1991 ).  Th e 
assessment of visuo-spatial neglect aft er acute stroke.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and 
Psychiatry ,  54 ,  345–350 . 
 Storrie-Baker ,  H. J. ,  Segalowitz ,  S. J. ,  Black ,  S. E. ,  McLean ,  J. A. , &  Sullivan ,  N. ( 1997 ). 
 Improvement of hemispatial neglect with cold-water calorics: an electrophysiological test 
of the arousal hypothesis of neglect.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Soc iety, 
 3 ,  394–402 . 
   Sturm ,  W.,   &   Willmes ,  K.   ( 2001 ).  On the Functional Neuroanatomy of Intrinsic and Phasic 
Alertness.  NeuroImage ,  14 ,  S76–S84 . 
 Sugden ,  S. G., &  Bourgeois ,  J. A. ( 2004 ).  Modafi nil Monotherapy in Poststroke Depression. 
 Psychosomatics ,  45 ,  80–81 . 
 Sullivan ,  J. E., &  Hedman ,  L. D. ( 2008 ).  Sensory dysfunction following stroke: incidence, signifi -
cance, examination, and intervention.  Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation ,  15 ,  200–217 . 
 Tartaglione ,  G. ,  Bino ,  L. ,  Spadavecchia ,  L. , &  Favale ,  E. ( 1986 ).  Simple reaction time changes in 
patients with unilateral brain injury.  Neuropsychologia ,  24 ,  649–658 . 
   Taylor-Cooke ,  P. A.  ,   Ricci ,  R.  ,   Banos ,  J. H.  ,   Zhou ,  X.  ,   Woods ,  A. J.  , &   Mennemeier ,  M. S.   ( 2006 ). 
 Perception of motor strength and stimulus magnitude are correlated in stroke patients.  
 Neurology ,  66 ,  1444–1456 . 
 Tegner ,  R., &  Levander ,  M. ( 1991a ).  Th e infl uence of stimulus properties on visual neglect.  
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  54 ,  882–886 . 

170
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Tegner ,  R., &  Levander ,  M. ( 1991b ).  Th rough the looking glass. A new technique to demonstrate 
directional hypokinesia in unilateral neglect .  Brain ,  114 ,  1943–1951 . 
 Vallar ,  G., &  Perani ,  D. ( 1987 ). Th e anatomy of spatial neglect in humans. In  M .  Jeannerod (ed.), 
  Neurophysiological and neuropsychological aspects of spatial neglect  (pp.  235–258 ).  North 
Holland :  Elsevier . 
 Veis ,  S. L., &  Logemann ,  J. A. ( 1985 ).  Swallowing disorders in persons with cerebrovascular acci-
dent.  Archive of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  66 ,  372–375 . 
 Vlahov ,  D. ,  Myers ,  A. H. , &  Al-Ibrahim ,  M. S. ( 1990 ).  Epidemiology of falls among patients in a 
rehabilitation hospital.  Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  71 ,  8–12 . 
 Volpe ,  B. T. ,  Ledoux ,  J. E. , &  Gazzaniga ,  M. S. ( 1979 ).  Information processing of visual stimuli in 
an “extinguished” fi eld.    Nature ,  282 ,  722–724 . 
   Walsh ,  V.   ( 2003 ).  A theory of magnitude; common cortical metrics of time, space and quantity.  
 Trends in Cognitive Neuroscience ,  7 ,  483–488 . 
  Watson ,  R. T. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Miller ,  B. D. , &  King ,  F. A. ( 1974 ).  Neglect aft er mesencephalic 
reticular formation lesions.  Neurology ,  24 ,  294–298 . 
  Watson ,  R. T. ,  Valenstein ,  E. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1978 ).  Nonsensory neglect.  Annals of Neurology , 
 3 ,  505–508 . 
 Watson ,  R. T. ,  Valenstein ,  E. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1981 ).  Th alamic neglect. Possible role of the 
medial thalamus and nucleus reticularis in behavior .  Archives of Neurology ,  38 ,  501–506 . 
   Webster ,  J. S.  ,   Roades ,  L. A.  ,   Morrill ,  B.  ,   Rapport ,  L. J.  ,   Abadee ,  P. S.  ,   Sowa ,  M. V.   et al. ( 1995 ). 
 Rightward orienting bias, wheelchair maneuvering, and fall risk.  Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation ,  76 ,  924–928 . 
 Wilson ,  B. ,  Cockburn ,  J. , &  Halligan ,  P. W. ( 1987 ).  Behavioral Inatt ention Test.  Titchfi eld, Tants, 
Th ames Valley Test Co . 
 Woods, A., Mennemeier, M., Garcia-Rill, E., Huitt , T., Chelett e, K. C., McCullough, G., Munn, T., 
Brown, G., & Kiser, T. S. (2012). Improvement in arousal, visual neglect, and perception of 
stimulus intensity following cold pressor stimulation.  Neurocase, 18 (2), 115–122. 
   Woods ,  A. J.  ,   Mennemeier ,  M.  ,   Garcia-Rill ,  E.  ,   Meythaler ,  J.  ,   Mark ,  V. W.  ,   Jewel ,  G. R.,   et al. 
( 2006 ).  Bias in magnitude estimation following left  hemisphere injury.  Neuropsychologia , 
 44 ,  1406–1412 . 
 Yekutiel ,  M. ( 2000 ).   Sensory re-education of the hand aft er stroke  .  Philadelphia :  Whurr . 
 Yerkes ,  R. M., &  Dodson ,  J. D. ( 1908). Th e relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-
formation.  Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology ,  18 ,  459–482 .  

171
 C H A P T E R  8 
 Perceptual-Attentional “Where” and 
Motor-Intentional “Aiming” Spatial 
Systems
  
 A.M.  Barrett  
 Introduction 
 Dedicated brain-behavior networks continuously compute the relationships 
between our bodies and the world around us:  when we are at rest, when we 
move, and when both we and the environment are in motion. Th ese  spatial cog-
nitive  systems are akin to, but not synonymous with, visual cognitive systems. 
Patient-based work has strong theoretical relevance, and is also  translational , in 
that it directly informs the distinction between spatial and visual cognition. In 
this chapter, I will suggest that patient-based studies provide an essential basis 
to understand spatial information processing in human and also animal models. 
 Spatial cognitive systems in patients who have neurological conditions or 
brain injury can be studied using precise experimental psychological methods. 
Since brain-injured subjects can have diffi  culty responding reliably in rigidly 
timed protocols; may only be able to complete relatively few task trials; may be 
heterogeneous with respect to physical health, the researcher needs to use imagi-
native methods to obtain reliability and internal validity of these experiments. 
 Th e reward of performing spatial cognitive experiments in brain-injured peo-
ple lies in the very large magnitude eff ects which patient-centered research may 
yield, eloquently demonstrated in experiments by Kenneth Heilman, Edward 
Valenstein, Robert Watson, and their collaborators. Certainly, their magnitude 
far exceeds that of confounding infl uences we work so hard to avoid inducing in 
the experimental psychology laboratory when we test healthy young subjects. 
Th ere is a second surprise from this work: dissociated eff ects demonstrated in 

172
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
these patients are not consistent with the visual cognitive, perceptual psychologi-
cal approaches we are used to using to explain spatial behavior. 
 Th e distinctive behavioral dissociations observed in spatial dysfunction 
produce strong evidence to separate spatial and visual thinking. Th ey suggest 
spatial cognition is distinct from processing in the dorsal visual stream in at 
least three ways. Dedicated spatial cognitive networks may include informa-
tion processing beyond initial att entional, and perceptual stages. Patients with 
spatial disorders show problems with asymmetrically disorganized, degraded, 
or distorted body and environmental  knowledge , or  representations . Further, 
perceptual and representational stages of spatial processing are convincingly 
demonstrated in patient-based experiments to be  multimodal . Th ese stages inte-
grate spatial properties of tactile and auditory perceptual processing; they also 
integrate spatial visual, auditory, and somesthetic representations, maps, or 
imagery. 
 Perhaps most interesting, patient-based research extends the spatial cognitive 
model beyond traditional perceptual, integrative, and representative processing 
stages. Patient-based studies suggest that spatial cognition may involve processes 
previously associated with motor planning, control, and learning. A spatial cogni-
tive model with perceptual, representational, and motor-intentional components 
can be investigated by patient-based studies conducted in parallel with experi-
ments investigating similar systems and processes in the healthy brain, resulting 
in converging information of exceptional internal validity. 
 In summary, we will discuss translational, patient-based data in this chap-
ter that is consistent with animal spatial literature. Th ese systematic, “n  =  1” 
single-case analyses, prospective case series, or larger group designs, may bring us 
to understand spatial cognition as an embodied function, having not only percep-
tual att entional capacity, but both representational and motor-execution “aim-
ing” stages, function and ability. 
 General Description 
 W H Y IS SPAT I A L PROCE SSI NG COGN IT I V E?  
 We will discuss an information processing model for spatial function, stressing 
three processing stages: dedicated perceptual-att entional, representational, and 
motor-intentional operations. Th is kind of an engineering input-output compo-
nents model is part of what defi nes a mental function as  cognitive . 1 
 Spatial cognitive representations are also multimodal. Th ey can reference the 
body from an inherently invisible perspective—that of the person living within 
(body schema). 2 However, internal reference systems (spatial maps or profi les) 
are not only referenced by visual parameters but also reference auditory or ves-
tibular parameters. 3,4 

Spatial Systems
173
 Th irdly, spatial neglect, as one of the few  class  -  common mammalian cogni-
tive disorders, apparently employs specialized output information processing. 
Early reports of spatial neglect in animals 5,6 clearly associated this syndrome 
with asymmetric movements (e.g. rotatory behaviors), and head/eye/postural 
turning. Although cortical ablation leads to spatial neglect in rodents, cats, dogs 
and monkeys, 7-10  subcortical dopamine depletion with 6-hydroxydopamine 
is a well-known paradigm for spatial neglect induction. 11  In these animals, 
body-centered biases accompanied systematic changes in response to contrale-
sional tactile/somesthetic and visual stimulation, and symptoms were pharmaco-
logically manipulable. Th us, a paradigm designed to study a movement disorder 
(“hemi-parkinsonism”), in fact produces a model of spatial cognitive dysfunction. 
Th e animal and human spatial neglect literature suggests that spatial  movement 
could be cognitive. 
 Th e idea of visual systems dedicated to movement-related processing is not 
new. In a classic chapter, Ungerleider and Mishkin 12  suggested visual input pro-
cessing determining “where” stimuli (a dorsal visual stream) is topologically 
segregated from cortical object recognition, which determines “what” stimuli 
are being processed (a ventral visual stream). However, the dorsal visual stream 
is a distinct system from that dedicated to spatial cognitive processing in at 
least two ways. First, dorsal systems may process many kinds of action- and 
movement-related information, and not exclusively spatial information (for 
example, images of grasping hands 13 ). Dorsal visual stream, or streams 14,15 also 
inherently focus on input and representation stages of information process-
ing. In contrast, an information processing spatial cognitive model describ-
ing a continuum of input, representational, and  also  output function 16-18 was 
proposed by Heilman, Valenstein,Watson and their colleagues starting in the 
1970s. In this system, dedicated spatial att ention directs spatial perceptual, 
representational, and eventually spatial motor-intentional “aiming” response 
execution.  
 MODU L A R SPAT I A L COGN IT ION A S E X PL A I N ED BY 
H EI L M A N A N D COL L E AGU E S  
 In three manuscripts exploring spatial defi cits in humans and monkeys, 16-18 three 
subsequent monkey studies, 19,25, 26  and several chapters, 20-22 Heilman, Watson, 
Valenstein and their colleagues described the behavioral and neuroanatomic 
basis for input and output information processing modules dedicated to spatial 
cognition. Critically, these studies allowed for fractionation of potential input, 
representational and output spatial cognitive information processing stages by 
using novel training and performance testing. 
 Th e investigators designed a stimulus-response method of testing mon-
keys, 16 allowing them to separate perceptual-att entional “where” input-related 

174
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
response failure from motor-intentional “aiming” output-related response fail-
ures. Monkeys were trained to respond to a tactile stimulus (a brush touching 
one of their legs, out of view) by using one arm to open a door. Th e investigators 
cleverly designed a paradigm in which the monkeys responded with the  opposite 
arm to a leg being touched (left  leg brushed by experimenter  →  use right arm to 
open a door on the right side, and vice versa). In this way, they dissociated the 
body-referenced space of the stimulus (left  leg, right leg) and the response (left  
arm, right arm). Aft er the monkeys were trained, the investigators ablated fron-
tal cortical and subcortical reticular formation regions in the intralaminar region 
of the thalamus and bordering the dorsal reticular formation. Five animals were 
trained, operated, and tested post-ablation. Th e experimenters observed that, 
although none of the monkeys had a weak arm (no motor defi cits), all failed to 
open the contralesional door aft er stimulation of the ipsilesional leg. Impaired 
perceptual-att entional “where” input should not have occurred on the ipsilesional 
side of the body aft er the induced brain lesion—this should only occur on the 
contralesional side of the body. Because sensory input on the ipsilesional leg 
should have been correctly att ended and perceived, and because monkeys appar-
ently consistently reacted appropriately to contralesional leg stimulation, open-
ing the ipsilesional door, the authors concluded that there was no major defi cit 
of spatial-related perceptual-att entional processing. Rather, they concluded that 
the responsible defi cit was at the stage of spatial-related action. Spatial input was 
being processed from the contralesional leg, but the contralesional arm action 
system was not prepared to respond (see the portion of the fl owchart in   Figure 8.1   
labeled “Movement”). Postmortem examination of the lesions the examiners 
 
“Where” Awareness,
perception, attention
Sensation
Movement
“Where”  representations,
imagery or maps
Motor-intentional
“aiming”
 Figure 8.1   A schematic drawing of processes involved in the translation of sensory 
input to action.  

Spatial Systems
175
made in the animals’ brains revealed, of six lesions, that two aff ected the frontal 
arcuate gyrus, three aff ected the intralaminar nucleus of the thalamus, and two 
appeared to aff ect the dorsal reticular formation. 
 Initially, 16, 17 the authors labeled this phenomenon anatomically as “fron-
tal neglect.” Th ey also labeled the syndrome based on unaff ected primary sen-
sory and perceptual stages of information processing:  “nonsensory neglect”. 
However, in subsequent studies, the authors clarifi ed their construct by defi n-
ing the aff ected and abnormal spatial cognitive processing stages, which were 
deemed motor output-related. 18-20 Th eir reports specifi ed abnormal aspects of 
motor preparatory functions that they observed, such as unilateral hypokine-
sia (decreased movement specifi c to one side of the body, not due to weakness) 
and motor extinction (inability to activate the aff ected body side, but only when 
motor-activation resources must be allocated to both sides of the body simultane-
ously). 18 Th ey directly compared this phenomenon to previous reports of “motor” 
output-related spatial dysfunction.  23, 24 Th ey further demonstrated that dysfunc-
tion aff ecting specifi c spatial cognitive processing stages is not synonymous with 
dysfunction aff ecting a specifi c brain anatomic region, as they reported that 
“aiming” motor-intentional dysfunction could occur aft er both anterior cortical 
lesions and posterior association cortex lesion in monkeys.  25,26 
  Relevant Experimental Work  
 In this section, I will review selected reports of spatial cognitive disorders in humans. 
Th ese manuscripts suggested that input spatial cognitive information processing 
stages may be dissociable and distinct from output spatial cognitive information 
processing stages, because they may be independently impaired. We will consider 
in the following sections 1) spatial perceptual-att entional awareness, 2) spatial rep-
resentations or internal images and 3) spatial motor-intentional action. 
 SPAT I A L COGN IT ION: “ W H ER E” PERCEP T UA L 
ATT EN T ION  
  Multimodal perception.  Spatial perception mandates a continuous computation 
not required by visual att entional or visual perceptual processing: the “where” 
inter-relationship between the body and space, in which both are assigned 
three-dimensional coordinates. Because spatial perceptual att ention provides 
information dedicated to systems representing both the body and the external 
environment, it triages multimodal inputs, and is highly specialized to make pre-
dictions about 3-D stimulus-response associations. Th is system also provides 
inputs which are representationally integrated (see next section), so as to project 
the impact of self-movement on body position and thus on the body-environment 

176
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
spatial coordinate system. Spatial stimulus detection and perception of the exter-
nal world thus may require tactile-somesthetic, haptic, vestibular, and motor 
eff erent input as well as visual information. 
 Heilman and Valenstein  27, 28  provided some of the fi rst information about 
stimulus unawareness in the auditory modality. In nine of their patients con-
sistently able to identify ipsilesional auditory stimuli but unable to identify 
the contralesional stimulus with bilateral presentation (auditory neglect), who 
also had brain scans (technicium-99 uptake studies), the responsible lesion 
was in the inferior parietal lobe; one patient in their series had a frontal lobe 
lesion. 27 Th is fi nding was consistent with earlier work in monkeys, in which 
auditory inatt ention (unawareness), accompanied by visual and somesthetic 
inatt ention, was produced by lesions to caudal inferior parietal lobe and causal 
superior temporal sulcus, but not to temporal cortex. 29 Interestingly, another 
study demonstrated that patients with temporal lobe dysfunction (who had 
either undergone anterior temporal lobectomy for intractable seizures, or had 
EEG-confi rmed seizure foci in the temporal lobe) had auditory discrimination 
defi cits in the contralateral ear (although hearing threshold was unaff ected). 
 30 Spatial neglect was not reported in association with this phenomenon, and 
patients with both left  and right temporal surgery were among the 18 subjects 
tested. However, the “selective hearing” advantage on the ipsilesional side 
might represent a perceptual-att entional “where” bias selective to the auditory 
modality. 
  Visual unawareness.  Kooistra and Heilman 31  and Nadeau and Heilman 32 
pointed out that unlike a primary visual disorder (hemianopsia), unawareness 
of contralesional visual stimuli is relatively sensitive to the body space in which 
the relevant stimulus appears. Th is means that a stimulus which falls at the same 
place on the retina (and thus in the visual fi eld) may be perceived when it falls to 
the right of the body midline (with rightward gaze), but may fail to be processed 
and perceived when it falls to the left  of body midline, with left ward gaze. Th is 
may occur because the problem with stimulus detection is a  spatial processing 
problem rather than a  visual processing problem—spatial systems overweight the 
body reference system (egocentric system) relative to the retinotopic reference 
system. 
 Th eir patient’s defi cit is consistent with spatial perceptual-att entional neglect, 
because he manifested an isolated failure to detect left -sided visual stimuli when 
he looked straight ahead with his head in midposition facing forward. Th e phe-
nomenon was demonstrated to be body-space dependent (consistent with spatial 
processing) rather than retinal hemifi eld-dependent (consistent with hemianop-
sia). Unawareness of left -sided stimuli worsened with his head turned into left  
(contralesional) space, even though stimuli maintained the same retinotopic 
position. Th e phenomenon also improved when the head was turned into right 
(ipsilesional) space. 

Spatial Systems
177
 Abnormalities of Habituation and Distraction  
 An important ability of the visual perceptual-att entional system is to manage 
bott om-up (stimulus-driven) and top-down (goal-driven) processing. “Visual 
persistence” allows us to focus and orient to visual stimuli without intrinsic envi-
ronmental relevance, which are important to a top-down cognitive goal. Healthy 
subjects experience the Troxler eff ect, fading of a peripheral visual stimulus when 
one fi xates centrally. 33 In a study of six patients with cortical lesions, Mennemeier 
and colleagues 34 observed that peripheral stimuli faded faster, in particular those 
lesions involving Brodmann’s area 19, and peripheral moving stimuli, which did not 
fade in healthy controls, faded abnormally in these patients. Interestingly, absence 
of contralesional Troxler fading (abnormal persistence of a stationery visual periph-
eral stimulus) was associated with frontal lobe lesions. In one patient with both a 
parietal and frontal lesion, on opposite sides of the brain, abnormal fading occurred 
opposite the parietal lesion, and abnormal persistence, opposite the frontal lesion. 
 A triage system allows for novel or potentially environmentally relevant stim-
uli to be processed even when orienting to these stimuli would interfere with 
top-down, goal-driven stimulus processing. Conversely, novel stimuli without 
survival or ecological importance are rapidly triaged out of processing, such that 
aft er a certain amount of time, or a certain stimulus persistence, these stimuli no 
longer prompt orientation. Barrett  and colleagues 35 reported that aft er an antero-
medial thalamic stroke, a patient veered uncontrollably toward peripheral stimuli 
in far space while driving, on one occasion running off  the road. Th ey demon-
strated that this patient erred signifi cantly contralesionally when bisecting lines 
in far space in the presence of a contralesional distractor; she was not distracted in 
near space, nor did she make errors in the presence of an ipsilesional distractor. Th e 
authors interpreted this as potential evidence of an inhibitory-avoidance network 
in which dorsolateral frontal cortex, anterior thalamus, and retrosplenial cortex 
participate, since Heilman et al.  36  had previously reported veering while driv-
ing occurred in a man with a retrosplenial lesion. Such an inhibitory-avoidance 
network may modulate approach-orienting behaviors mediated by the superior 
colliculus and parietal lobe. 
 Other Problems: Avoidance 
 Just as perceptual-att entional “where” systems may abnormally engage to stimuli 
in a neglected spatial region (distraction), these systems might abnormally fail to 
engage to, or engage away from stimuli in a neglected spatial region (avoidance). 
Kodsi and Heilman  37 demonstrated that a single subject made more rightward 
errors in a workspace when she viewed her hand in left  space on a video appara-
tus. Th ey pointed out that this disorder was not likely to be related to asymmet-
ric motor-intention based on results when they used a digital editor to rotate the 
axis of horizontal lines so that they appeared vertical. Under these testing condi-
tions, the subject made mean left ward, contralesional direction in the workspace 

178
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
(apparently, not signifi cantly diff erent from accurate performance), rather than 
making rightward errors in the workspace, as would be expected with a pure 
directional hypokinesia. Since the direction of the subjects’ errors was away 
from her viewed hand on the screen, the investigators suggested that seeing her 
hand on the video screen in contralateral space might provoke rightward avoid-
ance errors. However, because the investigators did not compare an avoidance 
response to her own viewed hand, with avoidance that might be provoked by 
other kinds of stimuli that might increase the salience of the left , neglected space, 
it was unclear whether avoidance in this case was hand-specifi c. Indeed, if other 
stimuli in left  space such as the left  side of a line to be bisected had also provoked 
an avoidance response, secondary contralesional “where” perceptual-att entional 
errors reported by others using similar video technique  38-40 might be mechanis-
tically related to an avoidance phenomenon.  
 SPAT I A L COGN IT ION: I N T ER NA L “ W H ER E” 
R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
  Multimodal internal representations and internal reference fr ames.  Heilman 
et al.  41  presented eight patients with spatial neglect aft er right stroke with ran-
dom auditory lett er strings (auditory consonant trigrams) to one ear. Although 
participants’ repetition was comparable when lett ers were presented to their right 
versus left  ear, subjects repeated more lett ers presented to the non-neglected ear 
aft er a delay. Th is was interpreted as evidence of asymmetric auditory internal 
representations, or memory, since the asymmetry was present only aft er a delay. 
Heilman et al. 42 also reported that right brain stroke survivors with left  neglect 
performed diff erently from left  stroke survivors without neglect when they were 
asked to point to an imaginary point directly in front of them, corresponding to 
the midline of their chest. On average, the patients with right brain stroke and 
neglect pointed to the right of midline (8.8 cm rightward); patients with left  brain 
stroke, aphasia and no neglect performed similarly to healthy controls (left  brain 
stroke survivors: 1.2 cm to the left ; controls: 1.1 cm to the left ). Patients did not 
process any visual input during this task, and thus results support a bias related 
either to multimodal internal representations of the body (vestibular /tactile/ 
proprioceptive), or to biased motor-intentional “aiming” based upon those rep-
resentations (hemispatial or directional akinesia). Both defi cits could also have 
been present in the subjects reported. 
 Vestibular and somatic input may alter internal spatial representations based 
on the critical role of this input on the egocentric, body-centered reference. People 
with neglect may preferably report the body-centered right side of an imagined 
scene. 43  However, Meador and colleagues 44  replicated that study and, further, 
demonstrated that shift ing the eyes and head into right body space increased 
access to left -sided environmental memories in one subject by 26 percent. 

Spatial Systems
179
 Other Representational Defi cits: Spatial Syntactic Defi cit 
 A complete review of defi cits aff ecting spatial representational processing, which 
include body representations and magnitude estimation (working with a mental 
number line, estimating size, extent, weight, or other parameters; see   Table 1 ), is 
beyond the scope of this chapter. Th ese topics are taken up elsewhere 20,21,70 and in 
this volume (Mennemeier, Chapter 7; Coslett , Chapter 10). However, Heilman 
and his colleagues 45, 46  also reported an unusual defi cit aff ecting spatial represen-
tations relevant to syntactic thematic expression. In these studies, the authors 
demonstrated that a fundamental or primitive syntactic representation of agent 
and action, versus object, may be critically supported by the right hemisphere. 
Healthy controls may be biased to place the actor or agent of a sentence on the 
left  side of a piece of paper, or left ward, when drawing the action of a sentence. 
Th is left ward spatial-syntactic bias can be dysfunctionally lost in association with 
spatial neglect aft er right hemisphere injury. 
 SPAT I A L COGN IT ION: MOTOR-I N T EN T IONA L “A I M I NG”  
 Diff erent Motor-Intentional Activities 
 Types of spatial motor response errors demonstrated in patient-based experiments 
are summarized in Table 1. Perceptual-att entional or representational systems 
may defi ne the three-dimensional spatial trajectory of a movement. However, 
“when” to move and “when” to stop moving—which complete the defi nition of 
 Table 8.1   Types of Spatial Dysfunction, by Spatial Processing Stages, as 
Described in Articles by Heilman and Colleagues. See text for full details. 
 Perceptual-att entional  
 “where” 
 Representational  “where” 
 Motor-intentional 
 “aiming” 
 Asymmetric unawareness  Asymmetrically degraded 
internally-stored information 
(asymmetrically reduced 
spatial magnitude) 
 Asymmetric hypokinesia, 
bradykinesia or 
hypometria (may be 
directional, hemispatial, or 
aff ect only left /right body) 
 Asymmetrically abnormal 
habituation 
 Asymmetrically activated 
internally-stored information  Asymmetric perseveration 
 Asymmetric decreased 
vigilance 
 Abnormally asymmetric 
mental manipulation of a 
number line 
 Asymmetric (or hemispatial) 
motor impersistence 
 Asymmetric distraction 
(Avoidance?) 
 Abnormal spatial-syntactic 
asymmetry 
 Asymmetric abnormal motor 
response inhibition 

180
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
a movement by adding its parameters over time—may be primarily managed by 
“”motor-intentional systems “” 21, 47 . If the threshold for “when” to move into one 
body space, in one direction, or with one side of the body is too high, the organism 
manifests asymmetric hypokinesia /akinesia. If the threshold for “when” to move 
is too low, the organism manifests asymmetric disinhibited motor responses. 
Movement components also need to be timed: their start, speed, and termina-
tion, including repetitions. If timing of motor responses is too strictly limited, 
asymmetric hypometria or bradykinesia may occur. If the speed, gain, or number 
of motor responses is excessive, we may observe asymmetric perseveration. 
 Asymmetric Kinesis 
 Heilman and colleagues  48-50, 38  demonstrated directional and hemispatial abnor-
malities of kinesis in several clever patient studies. A common theme in these 
experiments was an eff ort to ensure that patients demonstrated evidence that 
they were aware of and att ended to left ward space, left  space, or left  body, but 
still responded asymmetrically. Asymmetric performance was then att ributed to 
spatial motor processing bias. A lesser capacity for contralesional, left ward move-
ment, especially in left  space,  20 a greater delay initiating contralesional movements 
than those in an ipsilesional direction, 48 slower movements in contralesional than 
in ipsilesional body space 49 and failure to move left ward when the hemispace of 
movement and action are dissociated 50,38 all support a spatial neglect-associated 
movement abnormality. Th e bias pertains for both continuously-monitored and 
rapid, ballistic movements. For example, as above, a systematic rightward bias in 
pointing to a spot opposite the body center, associated with spatial neglect  42 , may 
have been related directional hypokinesia—a failure to move left ward. In all of 
these experiments, spatially asymmetric movements may be analogous to circling 
behavior in animal neglect models.  51 
 Although dopamine-depletion models referred to “sensory neglect” in ani-
mals such as rats, some investigators used a crossed-response paradigm similar 
to those used by Watson, Valenstein, Heilman and colleagues.  17, 19, 26 Rats were 
conditioned to respond to sensory stimulation by turning to the side  opposite the 
stimulus, instead of turning toward the stimulus. In these animals, lateral hypo-
thalamic ablation produced no abnormality of ipsilesional turning to contrale-
sional stimulation; rather, the rats manifested inability to turn contralesionally 
when stimulated on the good side.  53 
 Other Problems 
 Stroke survivors may manifest defective inhibition of motor responses toward 
the neglected space. 53-55 Th is is comparable to the “allokinesia” and “disinhibi-
tion hyperkinesias” Heilman and colleagues 19  observed in monkeys with spatial 
neglect, whose contralesional limb made many errors of commission. 

Spatial Systems
181
 Motor output abnormalities can occur in both the neglected and the “normal” 
hemispace. Mizuno et al. 56 demonstrated progressive hypometria in eleven right 
hemisphere-damaged patients with spatial neglect who drew successive horizon-
tal lines, end-to-end. Although left ward hypokinesia might have contributed to 
this phenomenon (shorter lines were drawn left ward and the workspace shift ed 
progressively rightward), lines drawn rightward and in right space also became 
progressively smaller in gain. 
 Relevance to Functional and Anatomic Th eory 
  Distinction between dorsal visual processing and spatial processing  . Some mod-
ern cognitive neuroscience theorists treat spatial cognitive networks as greatly 
overlapping with dorsal visual cognitive networks.  57 However, as summarized 
above, the dorsal visual processing model is spatially incomplete. It does not 
include the integrative,  multimodal  nature of spatial cognition at input and output 
processing stages. Specifying the underlying system as spatial allows for a more 
parsimonious unifi ed, multimodal spatial reference system instead of multiple, 
integrated auditory, haptic, tactile, somesthetic, and vestibular as well as dorsal 
visual maps. It is logical that this reference system may be critically supported by 
the tertiary sensory association cortex, but subcortical regions may also partici-
pate  58, 59 , and more work is needed to defi ne how primate cortical systems con-
tribute to and support multimodal sensory and sensorimotor spatial mapping. 
 Th e dorsal perceptual system also has non-spatial functions, such as process-
ing emotional facial movements. 60  Lastly, Heilman  21,47 points out that a major 
strength of including motor output in the spatial cognitive model is that this 
allows it to include both abnormal motor cortical system activation and “uncov-
ered” primitive motor response. Although the superior colliculus plays an impor-
tant role in the dorsal visual system, the lateral hypothalamus and striatum, to 
which the midbrain projects dopaminergic output, are not critical to the dorsal 
visual stream. 51,67 
  Bidirectional networks  . A  conceptual challenge of the spatial cogni-
tive information processing model is that methodological fractionation of 
“where” perceptual-att ention and “aiming” motor-intention may be incom-
plete. For example, experimental tasks may dissociate one task primarily reli-
ant on perceptual-att ention (viewing a line), from another primarily reliant on 
motor-intention (moving in one direction). 38 However, the dissociation may not 
be pure: viewing a line is accompanied by motor-intentional eye movements, even 
when the head is fi xed or exposure time very limited. Similarly, interventions 
primarily aff ecting one information processing stage (e.g. prism adaptation pri-
marily altering directional hypokinesia 61 and hemispatial motor learning 62 ) may 
also aff ect other stages of spatial information processing 63 . Lastly, neuroanatomic 

182
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
regions primarily associated input or output spatial processing. For example, 
injury to parietal association cortex supporting “where” perceptual-att entional 
processing may still adversely aff ect “aiming” motor-intention 64 . 
 We might consider that spatial cognitive information processing can pro-
ceed bidirectionally. Motor-intention may “back-activate” representations 
and perceptual-att ention. Th is is intuitively appealing:  ecologically, “where” 
perceptual-att ention and “aiming” motor-intention should be intimately coordi-
nated and diffi  cult to separate. 
 Back-activation could still be systematic. Its organization could thus be inquired 
in future research. For example, “aiming” motor-intention may primarily register 
on body-centered reference frames (multimodal internal spatial representations). 
Th us, spatial representations facilitated by motor-intentional “aiming” processing 
might primarily be those relevant to the body (i.e., tactile-somesthetic). 
 Heilman 65 proposed “substreams” within the spatial cognitive process-
ing model, with preferential communication and correspondence between 
some perceptual-att entional and motor-intentional processes. For example, 
perceptual-att entional systems supporting inhibition-avoidance of att ention to 
distractors may communicate closely with motor-intentional systems supporting 
inhibition of inappropriate motor responses. 
 Opportunities for Translation 
 Lastly, dissociated information processing in the spatial cognitive model pro-
posed by Heilman, Watson, Valenstein and their collaborators is translationally 
important. First, it allows for theoretical stratifi cation of between-subject het-
erogeneity in group studies of patients with spatial neglect—diff erent subjects, 
with impairments aff ecting diff erent stages of processing, would be expected to 
respond diff erently to interventions 20-22 . Th is is highly relevant to how we inter-
pret intervention studies performed using linear regression-based analytic tech-
niques. Such approaches underestimate treatment eff ects when data collected 
from the same subject (nested data) is highly inter-correlated, and subgroup dif-
ferences are not analyzed. Th us, subgroups of patients with defi cits primarily at 
one information processing stage (e.g. “where” perceptual att ention) may experi-
ence robust treatment benefi t. However, if the treatment does not aff ect patients 
with defi cits at later processing stages, or adversely aff ects defi cits at “aiming” pro-
cessing stages 66 , a group treatment eff ect may be lost. 
 Th e spatial cognitive model also allows the scholar to consider animal litera-
ture on subcortical-cortical interactions. Separating perceptual-att entional and 
representational “where” spatial processing and motor-intentional “aiming” 
allows us to consider the relevance of several “motor” primitive systems to spa-
tial behavior, especially in the midbrain. Th ese include, as above, the substantia 
nigra  67 , the superior colliculi, and the midbrain reticular activating system 69 
(which neurons may overlap with the deep motor colliculus). Interhemispheric 

Spatial Systems
183
interaction relevant to spatial cognition 70 and other high-order functions 71 may 
critically involve relay and modulation via these subcortical systems. Spatial 
cognitive behaviors are, like communicative behaviors, very complex. Th us, the 
modular theory of spatial cognition proposed by Heilman and colleagues may not 
only benefi t our understanding of human-environmental interaction: this model 
may also improve the validity of our hypotheses of interactions between cogni-
tive systems, whether localized in the same or diff erent cerebral hemispheres. 
 References 
 Adair,  J.C. ,  Na,  D.L. ,  Schwartz,  R.L ., &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1998 ).  Analysis of primary and secondary 
infl uences on spatial neglect.  Brain and Cognition  37 ( 3 ),  351–367 . 
 Barrett ,  A. M. &  Burkholder,  S. ( 2006 ).  Monocular patching in subjects with right hemisphere 
stroke aff ects perceptual-att entional bias.  Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development 
 43 ( 3 ),  337–346 . 
 Barrett  ,  A. M. ,  Schwartz ,  R. L. ,  Crucian ,  G. P. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1999 ).  Adverse Eff ect of 
Dopamine Agonist Th erapy in a Patient With Motor-Intentional Neglect.  Archives of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation  80 ,  600–603 . 
 Barrett ,  A.M. ,  Crucian,  G.P. ,  Kim,  M.H., and  Heilman,  K.M. ( 2000 ).  Att entional grasp in far 
extrapersonal space aft er thalamic infarction.  Neuropsychologia  38 ,  778–784 . 
 Barrett ,  A.M. ,  Kim,  M.H. , &  Heilman,  K.M . (2002a)  Spatial bias in Korean right-left , vertical 
readers .  Neuropsychologia  40 ,  1003–1012 . 
 Berthoz,  A. ,  Israël,  I. ,  Georges-François,  P. ,  Grasso,  R. , &  Tsuzuku,  T. ( 1995 )  Spatial memory of 
body linear displacement: what is being stored?  Science  269 ,  95–98 . 
 Bianchi ,  L. ( 1895 ).  Th e function of the frontal lobes .  Brain  18 ,  497–522 . 
 Bisiach,  E. &  Luzzatt i,  C. ( 1978 ).  Unilateral neglect of representational space.  Cortex  14 ,  129–133 . 
 Brown,  V.J. ( 2002 ). Th e neurobehavioral analysis of visuospatial att ention in the rat. In: (Eds. 
 Karnath ,  H-O. ,  Milner ,  D. , &  Vallar ,  G. )   Th e Cognitive and Neural Basis of Spatial Neglect  (pp. 
 233–242).  New York, NY :  Oxford University Press . 
 Burnett ,  L.R. ,  Stein,  B.E. ,  Chaponis,  D. , &  Wallace,  M.T.  ( 2004 ).  Superior colliculus lesions pref-
erentially disrupt multisensory orientation.  Neuroscience  124 ( 3 ),  535–547 . 
 Butt er ,  C.M. ,  Rapcsak ,  S.Z. ,  Watson ,  R.T. , &  Heilman ,  K.M. ( 1988 ).  Changes in sensory inatt en-
tion, direction hypokinesia, and release of the fi xation refl ex following a unilateral frontal 
lesion: a case report.  Neuropsychologia  26 ,  533–545 . 
 Castaigne,  P. ,  Laplane,  D. , &  Degos,  J-D .(1972).  Trois cas de negligence motrice par Ibion fron-
tale pre-rolandique .  Revue Neurologique (Paris)  126 ,  5–15 . 
 Chatt erjee,  A. ,  Maher,  L.M , &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1995 ).  Spatial characteristics of thematic role 
representation.  Neuropsychologia  33 ( 5 ), 643–648 . 
 Coslett ,  H.B. ,  Bowers,  D. ,  Fitzpatrick,  E. ,  Haws,  B. , &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1990 ).  Directional hypoki-
nesia and hemispatial inatt ention in neglect.  Brain  113 ,  475–486 . 
 Critchley,  M : (1969).   Th e Parietal Lobes  .  New York :  Hafner , p.  227 . 
     Fortis ,  P.  ,   Kornitzer ,  J.  ,   Goedert ,  K.M.  , &   Barrett  ,  A.M. ( 2009 , April).  Eff ect of prism adaptation 
on “aiming” spatial bias and functional abilities [abstract].  Neurology ,  72 , 11(S1) ,  A332 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ( 1979 ). Neglect and related disorders. In: Eds.  Heilman,  K.M. &  Valenstein,  E. , 
  Clinical Neuropsychology  (pp. 269–307).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
     Heilman,   K.M.   ( 2004 ).  Intentional neglect.    Frontiers in Bioscience  9 ,  694–705 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. &  Valenstein,  E. ( 1972 ).  Auditory Neglect in Man .  Archives of Neurology 
 26 ( 1 ),  32–35 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. &  Valenstein,  E. ( 1972 ).  Frontal lobe neglect in man .  Neurology  22 ,  660–664 . 

184
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
     Heilman,   K.M.   and   Watson,   R.T  .(1991) Intentional motor disorders. In:  Eds.   Levin,   H.S.  , 
 Eisenberg,  H.M. , &  Benton,  A.L. ,   Frontal lobe function and dysfunction  (pp.  199–213) . 
 New York :  Oxford University Press.  
 Heilman,  K.M . (2003)  Motor neglect . Neurology Department Grand Rounds Lecture, Penn 
State College of Medicine.  
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Bowers,  D., &  Watson,  R.T. ( 1983 ).  Performance on hemispatial pointing task by 
patients with neglect syndrome.  Neurology  33 ,  661–664 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Bowers,  D. ,  Coslett ,  H.B. ,  Whelan,  H., &  Watson,  R.T. ( 1985 ).  Directional hypo-
kinesia: prolonged reaction times for left ward movements in patients with right hemisphere 
lesions and neglect.  Neurology  35 ,  855–860 . 
     Heilman,   K.M.  ,   Bowers,   D.  ,   Watson,   R.T.  ,   Day,   A.  ,   Valenstein,   E.  ,   Hammon,   E.  , &   Duara,  R.R 
( 1990 ).  Frontal hypermetabolism and thalamic hypometabolism in a patient with abnormal 
orienting and retrosplenial amnesia.    Neuropsychologia  28 ,  161–169 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Hammer,  L.C. , and  Wilder,  B.J. ( 1973 ). An audiometric defect in temporal lobe 
dysfunction.  Neurology  23 ,  384–386 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Pandya,  D.N. , &  Geschwind,  N. ( 1970 ).  Trimodal inatt ention following parietal 
lobe ablations.    Transactions of the American Neurological Association  95 ,  259–261 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Pandya,  D.N. ,  Karol,  E.A. , &  Geschwind,  N. ( 1971 ).  Auditory Inatt ention . 
 Archives of Neurology  24 ( 4 ),  323–325 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Valenstein,  E. ,  Day ,  A. &  Watson,  R.T. ( 1995 ).  Frontal lobe neglect in monkeys . 
 Neurology  45 ,  1205–1210 . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Watson,  R.T. & Valenstein,  E. ( 2002 ). Spatial neglect. In: Eds.  Karnath,  H-O. , 
 Milner,  D. , &  Vallar,  G. ).   Th e Cognitive and Neural Bases of Spatial Neglect  (pp.  3–30). 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Heilman,  K.M. ,  Watson,  R.T.,  &  Schulman,  H,M .  A unilateral memory defect .  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry  37 ( 7 ):  790–793 . 
 Hoyman,  L. ,  Weese,  G.D. ,  Frommer,  G.P. ( 1979 ).  Tactile discrimination performance defi cits 
following neglect-producing unilateral lateral hypothalamic lesions in the rat.  Physiology and 
Behavior  22 ,  139–147 .  
 Jacquin-Courtois ,  S. ,  Rode ,  G. , Pavani ,  F. , O’Shea ,  J. , Giard ,  M. H. , Boisson ,  D. ,&  Rossett i ,  Y. ( 2010 ). 
 Eff ect of prism adaptation on left  dichotic listening defi cit in neglect patients: glasses to hear 
bett er?  Brain  133 ( 3 ),  895–908 . 
     Kayser,   C.  ,   Petkov,   C.  ,   Lippert,   M., &     Logothetis,   M.K.   ( 2005 ).  Mechanisms for allocating audi-
tory att ention: an auditory saliency map .  Current Biology  15 ( 21 ),  1943–1947 . 
 Kodsi,  M.H. &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 2002 ).  Th e contribution of an avoidance response to contralat-
eral neglect.    Neurology  58 ( 11 ), 1692–1694 . 
     Kooistra,   C.A.   &   Heilman,   K.M.   ( 1989 ).  Hemispatial visual inatt ention masquerading as hemi-
anopsia.    Neurology  39 ,  1125–1127 . 
 Kosslyn , S.M,  Koenig,  O. ,  Barrett ,  A. ,  Cave,  C.B. ,  Tang,  J. &  Gabrieli ,  J.D.E. ( 1989 ).  Evidence for 
two types of spatial representations: hemispheric specialization for categorical and coor-
dinate relations .   Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance  15 , 
 723–735 . 
 Kwon,   S.E.  &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1991 ).  Ipsilateral neglect in a patient following a unilateral frontal 
lesion .  Neurology  41 ,  2001–2004  . 
  Lunenburger,  L. ,  Kleiser,  R. ,  Stuphorn,  V. ,  Miller,  L.E. &  Hoff mann,  K.P . ( 2001 )  A possible role 
of the superior colliculus in eye-hand coordination .  Progress in Brain Research 134 ,  109–125 . 
  Marshall ,  J. F. ( 1979 ).  Somatosensory inatt ention aft er dopamine depleting intracerebral 
6-OHDA injections:  spontaneous recovery and pharmacological control .  Brain Research 
 177 ,  311–324 . 
 Marshall,  J.F.,  Richardson,  J.S, &  Teitelbaum,  P. ( 1971 ).  Sensory neglect produced by lateral 
hypothalamic damage.  Science  174 ,  523–525 . 
 Meador,  K .,  Watson  R. T. ,  Bowers,  D. , &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1986 ).  Hypometria with hemispatial 
and limb motor neglect.    Brain  109 ,  293–305  . 

Spatial Systems
185
 Meador,  K.J. ,  Loring,  D.W. , &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1987 ).  Remote memory and neglect syndrome. 
 Neurology  37 ( 3 ),  522–526 . 
 Mennemeier,  M.S. ,  Chatt erjee,   A.  ,   Watson,   R.T.  ,   Wertman,   E.  ,   Carter,   L.P.   &   Heilman,   K.M  . 
( 1994 ).  Contributions of the parietal and frontal lobes to sustained att ention and habitua-
tion.  Neuropsychologia  32 ( 6 ),  703–716 . 
 Mizuno,  T. ,  Crucian,  G.P. ,  Finney,  G.R. ,  Jeong,  Y. ,  Drago,   V. ,&  Heilman,  K.M. ( 2006 ).  Incremental 
limb hypometria.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry  77 ( 6 ),  793–795 . 
 Na,  D. L. ,  Adair,  J. C. ,  Williamson,  D. J. ,  Schwartz,  R. L. ,  Haws,  B. ,  Heilman,  K. M. ( 1998 ). 
 Dissociation of sensory-att entional from motor-intentional neglect.  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurger y ,  and Psychiatry  64 ,  331–338 . 
     Nadeau,   S.E.   &   Heilman,   K.M.   ( 1991 ).  Gaze-dependent hemianopia without hemispatial neglect.  
 Neurology  41 ,  1244–1250 . 
 Neisser , U. Th e Cognitive Approach. In:   Cognitive Psychology  . (p. 3).  New York, NY :  Prentice Hall . 
 Parkinson ,  R. B. ,  Raymer ,  A. , Chang ,  Y.-L. ,  FitzGerald ,  D. B. , &  Crosson ,  B. ( 2009 ).  Lesion char-
acteristics related to treatment improvement in object and action naming for patients with 
chronic aphasia.  Brain and Language , 110 ,  75–84 . 
 Payne,  B.R. &  Rushmore,  R.J. ( 2003 ).  Animal models of cerebral neglect and its cancellation .  Th e 
Neuroscientist  9 ( 6 ),  446–454 . 
 Payne,  B.R. &  Rushmore,  R.J. ( 2003 ).  Animal models of cerebral neglect and its cancellation. 
 Neuroscientist  9 ( 6 ),  446–454 . 
 Pisella,  L. ,  Binkofski,  F. ,  Lasek,  K. ,  Toni,  I. &  Rossett i,  Y. ( 2006 ).  No double-dissociation between 
optic ataxia and visual agnosia: Multiple sub-streams for multiple visuo-manual integra-
tions .  Neuropsychologia  44 ( 13 ),  2734–2748 . 
 Rode ,  G. ,  Rossett i ,  Y. ,  Farnè ,  A. ,  Boisson ,  D. &  Bisiach ,  E. ( 2000 ). Th e motor control of a move-
ment sequence ending to the left  is altered in unilateral neglect. European Conference on 
Cognitive and Neural Bases of Spatial Neglect.  Cuomo ,  Italy ; Sept. 2000. 
 Schwarting ,  R. K. &  Huston ,  J.P. ( 1996 ).  Th e unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesion model in 
behavioral brain research. Analysis of functional defi cits, recovery and treatments .   Progress 
in Neurobiology  50 ( 2–3 ),  275–331 . 
 Schwartz ,  R. L. ,  Barrett  ,  A. M. ,  Crucian ,  G. &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1998 ).  Dissociation of Gesture 
and Object Recognition.    Neurology ,  50 ( 4) ,  1186–1188 . 
 Schwoebel,  J. &  Coslett ,   H.B.   ( 2007 ).  Evidence for multiple, distinct representations of the 
human body .  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  17 ( 4 ),  543–553 . 
 Shmuelof,  L. &  Zohary,  E. ( 2005 ).  Dissociation between ventral and dorsal fMRI activation dur-
ing object and action recognition .  Neuron  47 ( 3 ),  457–470 . 
     Sprague ,  J. M.   ( 1966 ).  Interaction of cortex and superior colliculus in mediation of visually 
guided behavior in the cat .  Science  153 ,  1544–1547 . 
     Stein ,  B.E.   ( 1998 ).  Neural mechanisms for synthesizing sensory information and producing 
adaptive behaviors.    Experimental Brain Research  123 ,  124–135 . 
 Striemer,  C.L. &  Danckert,  J.A. ( 2010 ).Th rough a prism darkly: re-evaluating prisms and neglect. 
 Trends in Cognitive Science  14 ( 7 ),  308–316 . 
 Triggs,  W.J. ,  Gold,  M. ,  Gerstle,  G. ,  Adair,  J. &  Heilman,   K.M. ( 1994 ).  Motor neglect associated 
with a discrete parietal lesion.  Neurology ,  44 ,  1164–1166 . 
 Troxler, D.  ( 1804 ). Ueber das Verschwindern gegebener Gegenstaende innerhalb unsers 
Gesichtskreises. In: Eds.  Himly,  K &  Schmidt,  J.A.  Ophtalmologisches Bibliothek 2,  51–53 .  
 Ungerleider,  L.G. &  Mishkin.  M. ( 1982 ). Two cortical visual systems. In:  Eds.  Ingle,  D.J. , 
 Goodale,  M.A. , &  Mansfi eld,  R.J.W .   Analysis of visual behavior  (pp.  263–299).  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press . 
     Ungerstedt,   U.   ( 1973 ). Sensory neglect following removal of the nigrostriatal DA system. In: (Eds.) 
 Ehrenrpreis,  S. &  Kopin,  I.   Neuroscience Research  , vol. 5.  Orlando, FL :  Academic Press .  
 Ungerstedt ,  U. ( 1976 ).  6-hydroxydopamine-induced degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopa-
mine pathway: the turning syndrome .  Pharmacology and Th erapeutics: Part B—General and 
Systematic Pharmacology  2 ( 1 ):  37–40 . 

186
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Valenstein,  E. &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1981 ).  Unilateral hypokinesia and motor extinction .  Neurology 
 31 :  445–448 . 
  Valenstein,  E. ,  Heilman,  K.M. ,  Watson,  R.T. , & Van Den Abell,  T. ( 1982 ).  Nonsensory neglect 
from parietotemporal lesions in monkeys .  Neurology  32 ,  1198–1201 . 
 Verfaellie,  M. ,  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1987 ).  Response preparation and response inhibition aft er lesions 
of the medial frontal lobe.  Archives of Neurology  44 ,  1265–1271 . 
 Watson ,  R. T. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Miller ,  B. D. , &  King ,  F. A.  Neglect Aft er Mesencephalic Reticular 
Formation Lesions .  Neurology  24 ,  294–298 . 
 Watson,  R.T. ,  Miller,  B.D. , &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1978 ).  Nonsensory neglect .  Annals of Neurology  3 , 
505–508 . 
 Watson,  R.T. ,  Valenstein,  E. ,  Day,  A. &  Heilman,  K.M. ( 1986 ).  Normal tactile threshold in mon-
keys with neglect .  Neurology  36 ( 5 ):  636–640 .  

187
 C H A P T E R  9 
 Limb Apraxia: A Disorder 
of Goal-Directed Actions
  
 Anne L .  Foundas   
 Apraxia is a disturbance in goal-directed behavior defi ned as a cognitive-motor dis-
order specifi c to learned skilled movements (e.g., tool use). Goal-directed behaviors, 
like the ability to use a toothbrush, require the acquisition of the knowledge and the 
motor representations to perform the purposeful skilled movements associated with 
an action. Apraxia (dyspraxia) is found in many acquired and developmental brain 
disorders, and is oft en diagnosed based on diffi  culty in pantomiming tool-gestures to 
command. Th e disordered movement can manifest as the imprecise orientation (spa-
tial disturbance) of the object (e.g., toothbrush not oriented correctly to the teeth) or 
as the incorrect sequencing (temporal disturbance) of an action at a proximal rather 
than a distal limb joint (e.g., rotating at the shoulder rather than moving at the wrist 
to brush your teeth). Th is is an operational defi nition based on behavioral observa-
tions consistent with the fact that limb apraxia, which is the topic of this chapter, is a 
clinical diagnosis that requires the direct observation of a patient performing a vari-
ety of upper limb movements. In this chapter, several cognitive-process models of 
limb apraxia will be discussed including a brief reference to Liepmann’s early model 
(presented in detail in the “History of Cognitive Neurology” chapter); Geschwind’s 
disconnection model; De Renzi’s multi-modal model; and the Heilman-Rothi 
dual-component model of limb apraxia. Lesion localization studies and converging 
evidence from functional imaging studies will be reviewed to present an updated 
anatomical model of limb praxis with an emphasis on the praxis production system.
 Cognitive-Process Models of Limb Apraxia 
 Th e term apraxia is commonly ascribed to Gogol (1873), although Steinthal used 
the term in 1871 and is credited with the original defi nition that included “the 

188
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
movement of the limb is restricted, particularly the relation of the movement 
to the object to be handled; the relation of the movement to the purpose is dis-
turbed.” Hugo Karl Liepmann (1863–1925) is credited with the fi rst description 
of the neuropsychological mechanisms that mediate learned, skilled movements 
( Figure 9.1 ). 
 Liepmann ( Liepmann, 1920 ) described three types of apraxia:  (1)  limb 
kinetic apraxia, (2) ideokinetic (ideomotor) apraxia, and (3) ideational (concep-
tual) apraxia. Th e regions that Liepmann considered to be especially important 
for the acquisition of these “movement formulae” included the: (1) left  parietal 
lobe, (2) precentral gyrus, (3) parieto-occipital region, and (4) corpus callosum. 
Liepmann’s original concept was that the right precentral gyrus was not subject 
to the person’s will without guidance through the left  precentral gyrus. Liepmann 
viewed the supramarginal gyrus (SMG) as the region that integrates sensory 
impulses necessary for the formulation of the movement representation. Th ese 
movement formulae must then pass through this area to the physiological center 
for hand movement. Th us, a lesion to the SMG interrupts these impulses that are 
on the way to the frontal motor regions for the planning and production of the 
movement sequence. For this reason, Liepmann speculated that a lesion near the 
SMG would cause ideomotor apraxia in both hands. Consistent with this model, 
 
Motor
Response
Action Output
Lexicon
Action
Semantics
Gestural
Buffer
Action Input
Lexicon
Sensory
Input 
Visual
Analysis
Visuo-motor
Conversion
Verbal, Gestural,
Tactile/Object
Movement Formulae
(Inferior Parietal)
Intraparietal Sulcus
Innervatory Patterns
(Supplementary Motor
Area-SMA)
Corticospinal System
LEFT
RIGHT
 Figure 9.1  Liepmann’s Praxis Process Model. This modified “box diagram” depicts 
Liepmann’s model that supports the idea that the left hemisphere controls the 
movement formulae and kinematic representations for learned skilled movements.  

Limb Apraxia
189
Liepmann also proposed that a lesion to the dominant left  precentral gyrus would 
cause ideomotor apraxia of both sides. Liepmann also postulated that a more 
general cortical dysfunction was necessary to disrupt the ideation of motor func-
tion that would produce ideational (conceptual) apraxia. Limb kinetic apraxia, in 
contrast, was defi ned as a defi cit in the deft ness of a limb movement rather than 
a higher-order problem associated with cognitive-motor aspects of goal directed 
movements. Th us, in contrast to ideomotor or ideational apraxia, Liepmann 
thought that limb kinetic apraxia was more directly linked to elemental motor 
systems associated with a paralysis or problem with deft ness of the hand or arm 
movement. 
 GE SCH W I N D’S DISCON N ECT ION MODEL OF A PR A X I A  
 Geschwind, like Liepmann, believed that the left  hemisphere was specialized 
for the performance of learned skilled movements. Geschwind elaborated on 
Liepmann’s model by defi ning a neural network aligned with Wernicke’s model 
of speech ( Geschwind, 1965 ). He postulated that the stored movement repre-
sentations are localized to the left  parietal cortex and the gesture production 
components are located in frontal motor regions interconnected by white mat-
ter pathways specifi c to this neural network. He used a disconnection model 
of apraxia to reconcile the observations of  Liepmann & Maas (1907)  with the 
additional observations seen in a patient that he evaluated with Edith Kaplan 
( Geschwind & Kaplan, 1962 ). 
  Liepmann & Mass (1907) reported on a patient with a right hemiplegia who 
performed poorly when gesturing-to-command and to imitation with the left  
hand. Th is patient also had diffi  culty manipulating actual tools. On postmor-
tem examination, one small lesion was found in the left  basis pontis that prob-
ably accounted for the contralateral hemiparesis. Another lesion was found in the 
anterior and mid-corpus callosum. Th e authors postulated that the disordered 
behavior in this patient resulted from the inability of the right hemisphere to gain 
access to the time-space-form picture of the movement located in the left  hemi-
sphere ( Liepmann & Mass, 1907 ).  Liepmann (1920) used this case to support 
his idea that the left  hemisphere contains the “movement formulae” that control 
purposeful skilled movements ( Figure 9.1 ). 
 Th e patient reported by  Geschwind & Kaplan (1962) was examined following 
a left -hemisphere tumor resection and a post-operative anterior cerebral artery 
stroke with a residual lesion to the anterior two-thirds of the corpus callosum. 
Th is patient had diffi  culty performing gestures to command with the left  hand. 
Unlike the patient described by Liepmann, he was able to perform gestures to 
imitation, and to manipulate and use tools with his left  hand. Th is patient was 
able to gesture and write with his right hand, but he was not able to write or type 
with his left  hand. Geschwind and Kaplan explained this patt ern of behavior 

190
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
as a  disconnection of motor representations from the language representations 
stored in the left  hemisphere. Th is case and the case reported by  Liepmann & 
Mass (1907)  had common lesions to the anterior corpus callosum, although the 
extent of the lesion and other brain injury diff ered in these two patients. Th us, 
lesion localization diff erences and compensatory mechanisms may contribute 
to performance diff erences in these two cases of patients who were examined 
many months following initial brain injury. It may be that the patient described 
by  Geschwind & Kaplan (1962) had language lateralized to the left  with bilateral 
praxis representations. 
 Geschwind postulated that left  brain damage to parietal and frontal motor 
regions or to the interconnecting pathways induces limb apraxia because the left  
hemisphere that comprehends the verbal command is disconnected from the right 
premotor and motor areas which control the left  hand ( Geschwind, 1965 ). He 
stressed that apraxia is common, especially following acute lesions to the left  fron-
tal association areas. Geschwind also noted that many neurologists fail to diag-
nose apraxia because a large number of apraxic patients can actually manipulate 
and use familiar objects in their environment, but fail with more specifi c testing. 
He recognized four sett ings in which apraxia could be demonstrated: (1) failure 
to produce a correct movement in response to a verbal command; (2) failure to 
produce a correct response to imitation; (3) failure to produce a movement in 
response to seeing the actual object; and (4) failure to handle and use an object 
correctly. Geschwind emphasized the importance of examining gestures in all of 
these sett ings.  
 M U LT I-MODA L MODEL OF A PR A X I A : GOODGL A SS/
K A PL A N A N D DE R ENZI   
 In 1963, Goodglass and Kaplan found some important behavioral associations 
and dissociations in patients with left  hemisphere damage (LHD) that they 
believed supported Liepmann’s movement representation model rather than a 
competing model that postulated that apraxia and aphasia share a central prob-
lem of symbols (asymbolia) ( Goodglass & Kaplan, 1963 ). Th ey tested patients 
with and without apraxia performing simple and complex gestures and found 
that the apraxic patients were impaired on tasks of motor skill relative to non-
apraxic patients. Th e apraxic aphasic patients had more diffi  culty with gesture 
imitation compared to the nonapraxic aphasic patients. Both groups could use 
actual tools, and there was no relationship between severity of aphasia and 
apraxia. Others have found a close association between apraxia and aphasia 
( Dee, Benton, & Van Allen, 1970 ;  Kertesz & Hooper, 1982 ); although there are 
instances of apraxia without aphasia. Perhaps the most compelling support for 
the idea that language and praxis representations are independent came from 

Limb Apraxia
191
Liepmann’s original observation that only 14 of 20 patients with apraxia also had 
aphasia. Liepmann, however, believed that apraxic patients were clumsy with 
actual tools. Th e behavioral dissociation of apraxia and aphasia supports the cur-
rent prevailing view that these two neural systems are anatomically and func-
tionally distinct, although specifi c brain regions critical to these independent 
neural systems may be located in close proximity and, therefore, may be included 
in a common cortical lesion associated with acute vascular injury in post-stroke 
patients. Th is general view, however, is also subject to the idea that some com-
mon neurons may link specifi c features of behavior suggesting that indeed there 
may be areas of overlap in specifi c neural systems that share a common substrate. 
 De Renzi and colleagues (1980 ; 1985; 1988) provided additional empiric evi-
dence to support the view that apraxia and aphasia are separable neural systems. 
De Renzi developed a 24-item test of apraxia to qualitatively examine gestures 
performed to imitation ( De Renzi, Mott i, & Nichelli, 1980 ). On the basis of scores 
from 100 healthy controls, De Renzi and colleagues found that 50 percent of LHD 
patients and 20 percent of the right hemisphere damaged (RHD) patients met the 
clinical criteria of apraxia. Th ey found that the RHD patients had a less severe 
form compared to the LHD patients who oft en had severe apraxia and were nearly 
always aphasic. De Renzi and colleagues speculated that the two symptoms were 
likely co-occurring in individual patients because of the contiguity of the under-
lying neuroanatomical substrates rather than a common defect at the level of 
processing. Th ey distinguished between two levels of gestural processing includ-
ing: (1)  action semantics , which refer to the long-term conceptual representations 
of gesture; and (2)  motor control , which includes action execution ( De Renzi, 
1985 ;  De Renzi & Lucchelli, 1988 ). Based on this approach, De Renzi proposed 
that a defi cit in the conceptual representation would result in impaired classifi -
cation of gestures and defi cits to command but not to imitation. In contrast, he 
postulated that a defi cit in motor control would induce errors on both command 
 and  imitation. In order to evaluate conceptual aspects of the praxis system, De 
Renzi and Lucchelli (1988) examined 20 LHD patients with a multiple object 
use test and a single object use test. Both of these subtests require the ability to 
demonstrate how the objects are used. Th ese tests were designed to assess ide-
ational apraxia defi ned as the inability to demonstrate the use of objects. Neither 
of these tests of conceptual knowledge correlated with the De Renzi test of ges-
tures to imitation which evaluates ideomotor apraxia. Th ere was also a reported 
relationship to lesion location with ideational apraxia frequently, but not exclu-
sively, associated with a lesion to the left  temporo-parietal junction. Th erefore, 
they concluded that ideational apraxia is an autonomous syndrome that occurs 
independent of ideomotor apraxia. Th ey postulated that the localization of the 
predominant lesion site is associated with semantic memory disorders more than 
defective motor control. 

192
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 H EI L M A N-ROT H I DUA L COM PON EN T MODEL 
OF LI M B A PR A X I A  
 Liepmann’s theory of gesture production distinguished between the formulation 
of a motor program and the implementation of the spatial-temporal sequence. 
 Heilman, Rothi, & Valenstein (1982) directly examined this idea in 20 patients 
with unilateral left  hemisphere stroke using a gesture to command and a gesture 
discrimination task. Patients with lesions to the left  parietal cortex were impaired 
in both gesture production and gesture discrimination, whereas patients with 
frontal lesions were impaired in gesture production but not gesture discrimi-
nation. Based on this relationship between task and lesion location (i.e., dou-
ble dissociation), they posited that there are at least two mechanisms that can 
account for performance defi cits in limb apraxia: (1) a  praxis production system 
and (2) a  praxis reception system  ( Heilman, Rothi, & Valenstein, 1982 ). Based on 
their model, variance in the expression of apraxia is related to destruction of the 
movement representations themselves, via damage to the inferior parietal lob-
ule (SMG), or to disconnection of the inferior parietal lobule from other critical 
modules of the praxis system. Although the studies of Liepmann and others cited 
above were the critical initial steps toward the development of a model of praxis 
systems, Rothi, Ochipa, and Heilman developed a more comprehensive cognitive 
neuropsychological model of praxis based on a model of language production and 
comprehension, designed to account for dissociations within the praxis system 
( Rothi, Ochipa, & Heilman, 1991 ). 
 Th e Heilman-Rothi praxis model is a dual-component model for the orga-
nization of action including an  action production system and a  conceptual sys-
tem  ( Heilman, 1979 ;  Heilman & Gonzalez Rothi, 2003 ;  Heilman, et al., 1982 ; 
 Ochipa, Rothi, & Heilman, 1989 ;  Rothi, et al., 1991 ). Th is model accounts for 
modality specifi c input diff erences with a further distinction between dysfunc-
tion caused by destruction of the parietal areas that store the spatial-temporal 
representations and the defi cit resulting from the disruption of the frontal motor 
areas. Because learned skilled movements are also dependent on the conceptual 
knowledge of tools, objects and actions, there is some interaction between action 
semantics and the action lexicon. 
 Two other models warrant comment. Th ese models include the models devel-
oped by Roy and colleagues ( Roy, 1985 ;  Roy, Clark, Aigbogun, & Square-Storer, 
1992 ;  Roy et al., 2000 ;  Roy, Square-Storer, Hogg, & Adams, 1991 ;  Stamenova, Roy, 
& Black, 2009 ) and the Cubelli-Della Sala model ( Cubelli, Marchett i, Boscolo, 
& Della Sala, 2000 ). Roy and colleagues originally thought that apraxia could 
result from disruption of the conceptual system and/or the production system 
( Roy, 1985 ). Based on this model Roy and colleagues made specifi c predictions 
and examined patients performing a variety of tasks in order to test their hypoth-
eses ( Roy, 1985 ;  Roy, et al., 2000 ;  Roy, et al., 1991 ). Most recently, they presented 

Limb Apraxia
193
a model-based approach to understand apraxia in corticobasal degeneration 
( Stamenova, et al., 2009 ). Cubelli et al developed a model that is an extension of 
the Heilman-Rothi dual-component model. Th is model proposes a separate visuo-
motor conversion mechanism while maintaining modality-specifi c input systems 
and the secondary level of modality-specifi c analysis before action semantic pro-
cessing ( Cubelli, et  al., 2000 ). A  modifi ed Heilman-Rothi-Roy-Cubelli model 
of the praxis system is shown in   Figure 9.2  . Based on this model, four diff erent 
apraxia subtypes can be identifi ed (refer to   Table 9.1 ). Th ese subtypes are theo-
retically based and can be classifi ed in patients based on performance on apraxia 
subtests. Th ere continues to be some lack of clarity between cognitive and ana-
tomical categories within the model; thus, specifi c cognitive-motor apraxia types 
may not be completely dissociated by lesion location ( Barrett  & Foundas, 2004 ; 
 Heilman & Gonzalez Rothi, 2003 ;  Petreska, Adriani, Blanke, & Billard, 2007 ; 
 Watson, Fleet, Gonzalez-Rothi, & Heilman, 1986 ). 
 K I N E M AT ICS A N D MOTOR CON T ROL I N A PR A X I A  
 Fisk and Goodale were the fi rst to use kinematic methods to examine visually 
guided limb movements ( Fisk & Goodale, 1988 ). Th ey studied 17 LHD and 11 
RHD patients performing a task with the ipsilesional limb compared to controls 
performing the tasks with each limb in order to contrast right- and left -hand per-
formance in each brain damaged group. Participants were instructed to point to 
a target while sitt ing in front of a monitor with the head stabilized. At the begin-
ning of each trial, participants were instructed to fi xate on a central point and 
then point to a series of targets at various angles from the point of fi xation. LHD 
patients did not show any gross disruption in the morphology of the velocity 
wave form as the expected bell-shaped acceleration and deceleration phases were 
seen. Th is result suggested that there was relative preservation of the global ele-
ments of the movement representation. However, there was a prolonged phase of 
low-velocity movement at the end of the pointing task. Th is fi nal movement was 
att ributed to one of two potential mechanisms. Either the LHD patients had diffi  -
culty monitoring and adjusting the motor program online or had diffi  culty utiliz-
ing sensory feedback to monitor the limb movement. Both explanations support 
the idea that the movement abnormality was associated with a closed-loop pro-
cessing defect. However, the LHD group also att ained a lower peak velocity at the 
end of the acceleration phase. Th is movement anomaly may be associated with a 
diff erent type of “movement formula” or “innervatory patt ern” refl ecting a prob-
lem with open-loop processing. 
 In order to evaluate these competing hypotheses, Haaland and Harrington 
conducted a series of experiments to study the kinematics of movement trajectory 
during a simple aiming task ( Harrington & Haaland, 1997 ). Th e task involved the 
use of a vertical stylus initially centered inside a start circle. One or two seconds 

194
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
later, a target circle appeared at varying distances from the start circle. Th e par-
ticipant was instructed to move the stylus as quickly and accurately as possible to 
the target. Participants sat in front of a monitor to perform the task while reaction 
time, velocity and the initial and secondary components of the movement were 
recorded. Eleven LHD and 14 RHD stroke patients participated in this study. 
Th e RHD subjects were able to perform this simple aiming task without any dis-
turbance in the movement trajectory. In contrast, the LHD subjects were slower 
to initiate the movement, and showed defi cits in the initial but not the second-
ary movement component. Th ese results support the idea that the left  hemisphere 
regulates some aspects of open-loop processing. Visual feedback was not manipu-
lated in this study; therefore, it was unclear whether some of these eff ects could 
be infl uenced by specifi c visual feedback conditions. Unfortunately, because of 
the small sample size, participants were not divided into apraxic and nonapraxic 
groups. Th ese results suggest that LHD patients with paresis have ipsilateral 
dynamic defi cits in trajectory control based on impaired modulation of torque 
amplitude as response amplitude increases. 
 Table 9.1  Cognitive-Motor Apraxia Types 
 Type 1: Impaired gesture-to-command, gesture-imitation preserved : Impairments 
to command refl ect a disruption in the motor representation and may be associated with 
an inability to access the representation from memory. Defi cits can exist in the lexical 
and/or nonlexical route. Lesions may be small in size and disconnect posterior from 
anterior regions within left  frontal-parietal circuits. Lexical and nonlexical routes may be 
impaired in lesions that extend to callosal fi bers that disconnect the right hemisphere. 
 Type 2: Impaired gesture-to-command and gesture-imitation:  Impairments on 
gesture-imitation may refl ect an inability to implement, execute, or control learned 
skilled movements. Defi cits on gesture-imitation may be associated with degraded 
nonrepresentational movements, and then the patient may have a more basic disorder of 
motor programming. Defi cits can exist in the lexical and/or nonlexical route. 
 Type 3: Impaired gesture-to-command, impaired gesture 
recognition-discrimination: Lesions are more likely to be large middle cerebral 
artery (MCA) territory and posterior in location including the inferior parietal lobe 
(Brodmann’s area—BA 39, 40) with extension to periventricular white matt er (PVWM) 
and/or to ventral temporal regions. Th ere may be dissociations with lexical and 
nonlexical defi cits seen with lesions to both of these regions whereas lesions restricted to 
areas 39/40 may aff ect the lexical but spare the nonlexical route. 
 Type 4: Impaired gesture-to-command, intact gesture recognition-discrimination: 
Lesions will be more likely to involve anterior frontal sites within the MCA territory 
(peri-rolandic). 

Limb Apraxia
195
 Th e specifi c nature of these ipsilateral motor defi cits was directly examined in 
a study that evaluated several aspects of motor control in LHD and RHD stroke 
patients ( Schaefer, Haaland, & Sainburg, 2007 ). Healthy controls, LHD and 
RHD patients were observed producing targeted single-joint elbow movements 
of diff erent amplitude in ipsilesional space. LHD, but not RHD, patients had 
reduced acceleration amplitude. RHD, but not LHD, patients made errors at the 
end of the movement with reduced amplitude. Th ese results support the idea that 
the right and left  hemisphere contribute diff erent types of actions to the move-
ment trajectory. Specifi cally, LHD patients had more diffi  culty with the initiation 
of movements, and RHD patients had more diffi  culty with the fi nal movement 
position. In another study, Haaland and colleagues examined ipsilesional trajec-
tory control in LHD patients with and without hemiparesis and in a group of con-
trols in order to evaluate the lateralized contribution of the left  hemisphere to this 
aspect of motor control ( Schaefer, Haaland, & Sainburg, 2009 ). Only the paretic 
 
LEFT HEMISPHERE
VISUAL-
GESTURAL
INPUT
AUDITORY
-VERBAL
INPUT
ACTION
INPUT
LEXICON
ACTION
SEMANTICS
ACTION
OUTPUT
LEXICON
VISUAL-
TACTILE
OBJECT
VISUAL
ANALYSIS
AUDITORY
ANALYSIS
VISUAL-
TACTILE
ANALYSIS
KNOWLEDGE OF
ACTION
KNOWLEDGE OF
TOOL/OBJECT
FUNCTION
WORKING
MEMORY
INNERVATORY
PATTERNS
RESPONSE
SELECTION 
MOTOR OUTPUT
SYSTEM
Motor Control
MOTOR OUTPUT
SYSTEM
Motor Control
RIGHT HAND
GESTURE
PRODUCTION   
LEFT HAND
GESTURE
PRODUCTION   
Sensory-
Perceptual
System (s)
Conceptual
System
Production
System
Gestural
Buffer
 Figure 9.2  Praxis Cognitive-Process Model. This figure is presented to show 
a current “box diagram” that depicts the praxis system based on a modified 
Heilman-Rothi-Roy-Cubelli model.  

196
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
group showed dynamic defi cits of movement characterized by reduced modula-
tion of the peak torque. Th ese results could not be att ributed to lesion volume or 
to peak velocity as these variables did not diff er between the groups. Lesion loca-
tion diff ered with the paretic group having involvement of motor cortical areas. In 
summary, these studies have shown that limb apraxia may induce a defi cit in the 
ability to parse serial movements within a hierarchical structure. Specifi c aspects 
of motor programming may be associated with disorders of learned skilled move-
ments in individuals with LHD with and without apraxia. Ipsilesional motor defi -
cits may diff er by hemisphere and may explain the ipsilesional defi cits in motor 
control post-stroke ( Haaland, 2006 ). Th ese hemispheric diff erences may also 
be manifested by the diff erent types of errors seen during gesture production in 
LHD versus RHD stroke patients. 
 Kinematic studies also show some diff erences in motor control and motor 
programming during learned skilled movements. In order to evaluate movement 
trajectories, Clark and colleagues examined the kinematics of limb movements 
with the production of a “slicing” movement required to cut a loaf of bread into 
slices ( Clark, et al., 1994 ). Th e spatiotemporal features of the movements were 
examined in a series of conditions in which contextual cues were introduced in 
a graded fashion. Th ree patients with limb apraxia associated with left  parietal 
stroke and four healthy controls were studied. Th e apraxic patients, who per-
formed the task with the ipsilesional limb, had a decoupling of the spatiotemporal 
relationships across cue conditions. Th ese patients showed some improvement 
in movement amplitude and speed with the addition of the object being acted 
upon, but did not show as much benefi t with the addition of the actual tool. Th ese 
results are interesting and important to reconcile with the motor control studies 
of Haaland and colleagues that show diff erent amplitude and movement trajec-
tory impairments in movements performed with the ipsilesional limb. In another 
study, Poizner and colleagues analyzed joint-coordination defi cits in these same 
apraxic patients ( Poizner, et al., 1995 ). Th is study showed that these patients had 
defi cits in the spatial plan of the movement and had diffi  culty translating these 
action plans into the angular motions at the joint even when physically manipu-
lating the actual tool/object. 
 In a recent study,  Jacobs and colleagues (2009)  investigated object manipula-
tion by examining the relationship between the ability to integrate an object into 
a coordinated movement, and then related this performance directly to tool use. 
LHD patients with and without apraxia were studied. Participants were asked to 
point to targets located at various distances using either their fi nger (body-part 
as tool) or using one of two sticks (i.e., tools) of diff erent lengths (23 and 53 cm). 
Movement kinematics were analyzed with an emphasis on the position of the 
tool/fi nger in relation to the target, defi ned as the working point of the action. 
Th e LHD patients without apraxia produced similar kinematic movement char-
acteristics across all conditions and they were slightly less accurate with the stick 

Limb Apraxia
197
relative to the fi nger. In contrast, the performance of the LHD patients with 
apraxia was more variable. Th ey concluded that this impairment may be related 
to disruption of dynamic body representation ( Jacobs, Bussel, Combeaud, & 
Roby-Brami, 2009 ). It may be that this type of performance indicates a problem 
with extra-corporal space and the trajectory. Indeed, this movement type may be 
characteristic of a body-part-as tool problem with the internal confi guration and 
movement of the limb in relation to the object being acted upon. An alternative 
explanation could be that action execution (motor control) and action observa-
tion (visual transcoding of the movement representation to the motor plan) may 
be partially mediated by mirror neurons that link action observation to action 
execution ( Agnew, Brownsett , Woodhead, & de Boissezon, 2008 ;  de Jong, van 
der Graaf, & Paans, 2001 ;  Freund, 2001 ;  Pazzaglia, Pizzamiglio, Pes, & Aglioti, 
2008 ;  Rothi, Heilman, & Watson, 1985 ). 
 Th e Heilman-Rothi praxis model att empts to reconcile conceptual and prepa-
ratory aspects of the motor program with perceptual and kinematic features, and 
is designed to account for abstract concepts such as praxis imagery and object 
imagery. A study of a patient with selective defi cits in praxis imagery illustrates 
how visual object imagery may be independent of the ability to visualize the kine-
matics of a movement sequence required to produce a goal-directed movement 
( Ochipa, et al., 1997 ). Imagery for learned skilled movement (praxis imagery) 
was studied in a patient with severe limb apraxia. Th is patient, who made pre-
dominantly spatial and movement errors when performing transitive (tool) limb 
movements to command, was also impaired in her ability to answer imagery ques-
tions about joint movement or the spatial position of the hands during an action. 
Visual object imagery was spared. Th e fi nding of these parallel praxis production 
and praxis imagery defi cits supports the idea that the same representations used 
for gesture production are activated during imagery of motor acts. Functional 
imaging studies have supported this view ( de Jong, et al., 2001 ;  Freund, 2001 ). 
Th ese fi ndings also suggest that certain aspects of motor imagery may be disso-
ciable from general object imagery ( Ochipa, et al., 1997 ).   
 Apraxia Assessment 
 One of the earliest observations about apraxia was that impairments can be seen 
under some performance conditions and not others (for review,  Heilman, 1979 ). 
Th ere are patients that can perform gestures-to-imitation but not to command. 
Other patients may not have defi cits when performing gestures-to-command, 
but may have impaired gesture-recognition discrimination. Each of these types 
of defi cits can be examined with tasks that probe specifi c cognitive and motor 
operations within a praxis model. Th us, diff erent gesture types elicited under a 
variety of performance conditions should be administered when conducting 

198
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
a comprehensive assessment of a patient with limb apraxia.  Table 9.2 includes 
a list of some common examples of gestures elicited to command and to imita-
tion in patients with limb apraxia. In the research sett ing, these tasks are video-
taped for later scoring by trained raters. Th e approach may vary in the clinical 
sett ing where limb apraxia is most commonly examined by having a patient 
pantomime-to-command a series of tool-gestures. For example, the clinician 
would ask the patient to “show me how you would use a hammer to hammer a 
nail into the wall.” As the patient is performing the gesture, the clinician observes 
the performance of this gesture-to-command and scores the limb movement as 
apraxic or not apraxic. Th is type of gesture-to-command task is considered the 
most sensitive test of ideomotor apraxia, as many apraxic patients improve when 
gesturing to imitation, and improve further when performing gestures with the 
actual tool ( Heilman, 1979 ). 
 LI M B A PR A X I A SU BT E STS A N D ER ROR T Y PE S  
 Th ere is considerable inconsistency in the literature with respect to the methods 
used to assess apraxia. In most studies, the predominant focus has been on the 
assessment of gesture production, elicited with tests of gesture-to-command and/
or gesture imitation. While this method is essential to the evaluation, it does not 
challenge the full range of functional elements that comprise the cognitive praxis 
model. A  more comprehensive approach will permit a more detailed analysis 
of discrete defi cits that may be tied to specifi c components of the praxis neural 
system (refer to  Table 9.1  ). For example, some praxis assessment methods evalu-
ate a combination of representational and/or nonrepresentational movements. 
Representational gestures can be subdivided into  transitive gestures that involve 
the manipulation of an object, oft en a tool (e.g., showing the examiner how to use 
a hammer, how to use a key to unlock a door), and  intransitive gestures that do not 
require the use of an object, but are more abstract representational or emblematic 
movements (e.g., showing the examiner how to salute, how to wave good-bye). 
Nonrepresentational movements can include single static hand-limb postures 
and movement sequences. Examination of these aspects of functioning is impor-
tant for an understanding of the subject’s ability to produce specifi c motor move-
ments independent of lexical processing, which may be disrupted following LHD 
( Rothi, Raymer, & Heilman, 1997 ). Another important consideration in praxis 
testing relates to the limb evaluated. In unilateral stroke patients, it is critical that 
the unaff ected, ipsilesional limb is used when assessing praxis performance. Th is 
instruction is important, especially when examining unilateral stroke patients, in 
order to control for potential confounds of weakness, sensory loss, or movement 
disorder. Th e operational defi nition of apraxia requires the exclusion of these 
neurological defi cits in the limb that is being examined for apraxia. Th e exam-
iner may focus on an examination of the dominant hand-limb or may evaluate 

Limb Apraxia
199
 Table 9.2   Examples of Stimuli Used in Apraxia Assessment 
 Transitive Limb Movements—Gestures that require a tool or implement 
 •  Show me how you would use a hammer to pound a nail into the wall. 
 •  Show me how you would use a saw to cut a piece of wood. 
 •  Show me how you would use a glass to drink some water. 
 •  Show me how you would use a spoon to stir a cup of coff ee on the table. 
 •  Show me how you would use a comb to fi x your hair. 
 •  Show me how you would use a toothbrush to clean your teeth. 
 Intransitive Limb Movements—Gestures that do not require a tool or implement 
  •    Show me how you would wave good-bye. 
 •  Show me come here. 
 •  Show me stop. 
 •  Show me be quiet. 
 Action Schema—Gesture Action Sequences for Complex Movements 
 •  Write and post a lett er (paper, pen, envelope, stamp) 
 1. Write the lett er. 
 2. Sign the lett er. 
 3. Fold the piece of paper. 
 4. Put the paper in the envelope. 
 5. Seal the envelope. 
 6. Write the address on the envelope. 
 7. Lick the stamp. 
 8. Put the stamp on the envelope. 
 •  Make toast (bread, toaster, plate, butt er, jelly, knife) 
 1. Get a slice of bread. 
 2. Put the piece of bread in the toaster. 
 3. Press the toaster on (push the lever). 
 4. Wait for the bread to toast. 
 5. Put the toast on to the plate. 
 6. Put butt er on the bread. 
 7. Put jelly on the bread. 

200
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
both limbs in patients without sensorimotor defi cits (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease). 
Th e patient must be able to comprehend the task. It is essential that patients with 
apraxia are evaluated clinically. including a neurological examination of cranial 
nerves, sensorimotor function, coordination and balance, gait, and refl exes. In 
some instances, a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation is necessary in 
patients with limb apraxia and related disorders of movement action and plan-
ning. Th is examination should assess att ention and memory, language, visuospa-
tial and executive functions, and motor dexterity and skill. 
 An additional dimension of analysis concerns the evaluation of error types in 
apraxia. Several scoring systems have been developed. One of the most system-
atic of the available scoring systems is that developed by Rothi and colleagues 
( Rothi, Mack, Verfaellie, Brown, & Heilman, 1988 ). Th is scoring system is based 
on American Sign Language with gestures analyzed qualitatively within four 
general domains:  spatial, temporal, content,  and  other . A list of the error types and 
operational defi nitions as described by  Rothi and colleagues (1988) is depicted in 
 Table 9.3 . Some of these error types are more common than others. For example, 
 Goodglass & Kaplan (1963) found that when pantomiming to command, many 
patients with LHD produced errors in which they used a body part as if it were the 
tool (body-part-as-tool, BPT). Th ese authors suggested that this error type may 
be pathognomonic of limb apraxia. Raymer and colleagues examined BPT ges-
tures in LHD and healthy control subjects ( Raymer, Maher, Foundas, Heilman, 
& Rothi, 1997 ). Two performance conditions were examined. In one of the condi-
tions the subject was “reinstructed” to modify the inappropriate BPT error and in 
the other condition no instructions were given when BPT errors were made. Th e 
results of this study showed that patients with more severe apraxia were less likely 
to improve with prompting in contrast to the less severely impaired patients and 
controls who did use this instruction to self-correct. Th ese results support the 
hypothesis that BPT errors may be associated with a more severe form of limb 
apraxia (although not pathognomnic), and that many patients who self-correct 
with reinstruction may not have a clinical diagnosis of limb apraxia. 
 STA N DA R DI Z ED A PR A X I A BAT T ER I E S  
 Th ere are only a few standardized apraxia scales commercially available. Two of 
these, the Test of Oral and Limb Apraxia (TOL A) ( Helm-Estabrooks, 1998 ) and 
the Kertesz apraxia subtest provided with the Western Aphasia Batt ery ( Kertesz, 
2006 ) have been widely used by clinicians and researchers. However, these tests 
do not cover all domains and semantic features of gesture production. In addi-
tion, these tests include both limb and buccofacial movements when deriving an 
overall apraxia score. Th is practice of collapsing across gesture types can limit the 
utility of the test score. Th e De Renzi tests of ideomotor and ideational apraxia are 
also widely used to evaluate apraxia ( De Renzi, et al., 1980 ;  De Renzi, Pieczuro, 

Limb Apraxia
201
 Table 9.3  Limb Apraxia: Error Types and Operational Defi nitions 
 I. Content 
 P 
 perseverative 
 A response that includes all or part of a previously 
produced pantomime 
 RC 
 related content 
 Accurately produced pantomime associated in 
content to the target. For example, the subject might 
pantomime playing a trombone for a target of a bugle. 
 NC  non-related 
content 
 Accurately produced pantomime not associated in 
content to the target. For example, the subject might 
pantomime playing a trombone for a target of shaving.   
 II. Temporal  S 
 sequence 
 Some pantomimes require multiple positioning 
of joints performed in a characteristic sequence. 
Sequencing errors involve any perturbation of this 
sequence including addition, deletion, or transposition 
of movements with the overall movement structure 
recognizable. 
 T 
 time 
 Alterations fr om the typical timing or speed of a 
pantomime and may include an abnormally increased, 
decreased, or irregular rate of production.  
 O 
 occurrence 
 A response that includes single (i.e., unlocking a door 
with a key) or repetitive (i.e., screwing in a screw with 
a screwdriver) movement cycles. Th is error refl ects 
any multiplication of single cycles or reduction of a 
repetitive cycle to a single event. 
 III. Spatial 
 A 
 amplitude 
 Any amplifi cation, reduction, or irregularity of the 
characteristic amplitude of a target pantomime.   
 IC 
 internal 
confi guration 
 When pantomiming, the fi ngers/hand must be in a 
specifi c spatial relation to one another to accommodate 
the imagined tool. Th is error type refl ects any 
abnormality of the required fi nger/hand posture and 
its relationship to the target tool. For example, when 
asked to pretend to brush teeth, the subject’s hand may 
be fi sted with no space for the imagined toothbrush 
handle. 
 BPT  body-part-as tool  Th e subject uses his/her fi nger/hand/arm as the 
imagined tool. For example, when asked to smoke a 
cigarett e, the subject might puff  on his index fi nger.   
(continued)

202
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
& Vignolo, 1968 ). One potential limitation is that gesture scoring is not segre-
gated into command and imitation subtests, but these instructions are included 
as sequential probes depending on task performance. Th is scoring system can 
mask potentially important diff erences across these types of gesture production 
and may overestimate praxis severity. 
 Two comprehensive limb apraxia scales have recently been described and vali-
dated. One is a revision of the Rothi-Heilman comprehensive Florida Apraxia 
Batt ery ( Power, Code, Croot, Sheard, & Gonzalez Rothi, 2009 ), and the other 
is a short-version designed to examine upper limb apraxia ( Vanbellingen, et al., 
2009 ). Th is newly developed test of upper limb ideomotor apraxia (TULIA) was 
administered to a sample of 50 healthy adults, 84 LHD and 49 RHD patients. 
Th e test is comprehensive, but still short to administer. Th e TULIA consists of 
48 items including imitation and pantomime domains of non-symbolic (mean-
ingless), intransitive (communicative) and transitive (tool-related) gestures 
corresponding to 6 subtests. A 6-point scoring method (0–5) was used (score 
 ECO  external 
confi guration 
orientation 
 When pantomiming, the fi ngers/hand/arm and the 
imagined tool must be in a specifi c relationship to the 
“object” receiving the action. Errors include diffi  culties 
orienting to the “object” or in placing the “object” in 
space. For example, the subject might pantomime 
brushing teeth by holding his hand next to his mouth 
without refl ecting the distance needed to accommodate 
a toothbrush. 
 M 
 movement 
 When acting on an object with a tool, a movement 
characteristic of the action and necessary to achieve the 
goal is required. A movement error is any disturbance 
of the characteristic movement. When pantomiming 
a screwdriver, a subject may orient the imagined tool 
correctly relative to the imagined screw, but instead of 
stabilizing the shoulder-wrist and twisting at the elbow, 
the subject stabilizes the elbow and twists at the wrist 
or shoulder. 
 IV. Other 
 NR 
 no response 
 No response is elicited. 
 UR 
 unrecognizable 
response 
 A response is not recognizable and shares no temporal 
or spatial features of the target. 
 Source : Modifi ed from  Rothi et al. (1988). 
Table 9.3 (Continued)

Limb Apraxia
203
range 0–240) to score videotaped performances of these subjects. Th e raters 
were blinded and had mostly good-to-excellent internal consistency, inter- and 
intra-rater (test-retest) reliability, both at the level of the six subtests and at the 
individual item level. Construct validity was demonstrated by a high correlation 
with the De Renzi apraxia test. Th e second comprehensive batt ery was developed 
by Rothi and colleagues ( Power, et al., 2009 ). Th is batt ery extends and is a revi-
sion of the experimental Florida Apraxia Batt ery ( Rothi, et al., 1992 ). Th is theo-
retically motivated comprehensive clinical assessment of limb apraxia includes 
subtests designed to distinguish components of the praxis system based on the 
Rothi-Heilman cognitive model of apraxia. It includes subtests that examine 
gesture-to-command and to imitation. Gesture recognition and discrimination 
are evaluated. Transitive and intransitive limb movements are evaluated and 
scored separately and together to yield a total apraxia score. Conceptual aspects 
of apraxia are evaluated and gesture naming is also tested. Responses are scored 
as correct or incorrect (i.e., apraxic) and an error analysis is used to examine spe-
cifi c error types and error domains as listed earlier in  Table 9.3 . 
 Many clinicians and researchers have speculated about age, education, and 
sex-related diff erences in praxis performance. Because apraxia is left -lateralized in 
most individuals, it is also important and interesting to evaluate potential factors 
that may modify these systems and/or that may be associated with atypical praxis 
laterality (i.e., bilateral or rightward). Some studies have evaluated praxis perfor-
mance in left -handers and in women. Women may have an advantage in the ability 
to rapidly and accurately learn gesture sequences compared to men ( Chipman & 
Hampson, 2006 ), however, another study did not fi nd any performance diff er-
ences when healthy men and women were compared on a praxis test ( Rodrigues 
Cavalcante & Caramelli, 2009 ). Th is study also evaluated the eff ects of age and 
education. Ninety-six individuals were divided into two age groups (60–74 and 
75–88 years). Each group included equal numbers of men and women. Individuals 
were asked to carry out tasks on verbal command and to imitation. Th ere were 
no diff erences between the performance of men and women. Older individuals, 
however, performed more poorly than their younger counterparts. As far as edu-
cational level, three major groups emerged with performance diff erences across 
the education groups defi ned as follows: illiterate, individuals with 1–7 years of 
education, and those with 8 or more years of education. Th ese results suggest 
that age and education signifi cantly infl uenced the performance of individuals in 
limb praxis tests. Diff erences in lateralization of motor and praxis representations 
may be more common in non-right-handers. Th erefore, it is important to evaluate 
hand preference and hand skill in individuals with limb apraxia. 
 In summary, limb apraxia is classifi ed by accuracy and the nature of the errors 
made by the patient and the means by which these errors are elicited, but there 
is no widely used  standardized test for limb apraxia. In the ideal situation, the 
apraxia examination would challenge all modules of functioning proposed by 

204
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
the cognitive model: gesture reception, gesture conceptualization and gesture 
production:  (1)  gesture-to-command; (2)  gesture-imitation; and (3)  gesture 
recognition-discrimination. Further division of representational gestures into 
transitive and intransitive categories allows for more refi ned hypotheses regard-
ing lesion localization (hemispheric, cortical-subcortical). 
 Localization of Apraxia 
 Although estimates vary across studies (i.e., 40–70 percent of unilateral LHD 
patients have limb apraxia), there is considerable evidence that praxis systems 
are lateralized to the left  cerebral hemisphere in most right-handers ( Haaland 
& Flaherty, 1984 ;  Haaland & Harrington, 1996 ;  Hanna-Pladdy, Daniels, et al., 
2001 ;  Poizner, Mack, Verfaellie, Rothi, & Heilman, 1990 ;  Poizner, et al., 1998 ; 
 Rapcsak, Ochipa, Beeson, & Rubens, 1993 ;  Roy, et  al., 2000 ). Diff erences in 
these estimates relate to criteria for establishing apraxia, mode of gesture elici-
tation, the duration post-stroke, and other factors (e.g., atypical cerebral lateral-
ity). In general, the left  hemisphere appears to be dominant for transitive limb 
movements, and for the imitation of complex limb movements ( Rapcsak, et al., 
1993 ;  Schnider, Hanlon, Alexander, & Benson, 1997 ). Th ere is confl icting evi-
dence regarding the contributions of the right hemisphere in mediating move-
ment sequences, especially intransitive movements ( Foundas, Henchey, Gilmore, 
Fennell, & Heilman, 1995 ;  Hanna-Pladdy, Daniels, et al., 2001 ). Some have sug-
gested that the left -hemisphere is dominant for preparing and programming of 
movements ( Haaland, Harrington, & Knight, 2000 ), and for learning to select 
the limb movement associated with the action of a specifi c object ( Rushworth, 
Nixon, Wade, Renowden, & Passingham, 1998 ). 
 PR A X IS N ET WOR K S A N D H E M ISPH ER IC DI F FER ENCE S  
 Th e regions important in the praxis network are depicted in  Figure 9.3 based 
on a left -lateralized praxis system. Th e critical regions include the inferior 
parietal lobe (SMG), inter-hemispheric white matt er connections (including 
cortical-cortical and cortical-subcortical pathways), and premotor regions 
with a special role for the supplementary motor area (SMA). In order to exam-
ine lesion diff erences in unilateral LHD and RHD stroke patients, Haaland, 
Harrington, and Knight compared areas of lesion overlap in patients with and 
without limb apraxia (based on a gesture imitation task). Th ose with limb 
apraxia were found to have damage to a left  hemispheric network involving 
the middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and the anterior bank of the intra-parietal 
sulcus region within the SMG. Th e SMA was not a common lesion site in their 
patients with apraxia. Because these patients were examined many months 

Limb Apraxia
205
post-stroke, it may be that other systems may take over the role of this region, 
or the SMA may be more important in mediating gestures-to-command 
( Watson, et al., 1986 ) than to imitation. Given the role of the MFG in working 
memory, the authors posited that this region may maintain the gesture repre-
sentation while the motor program is being accessed. Functional neuroimag-
ing and transcranial magnetic stimulation methods have provided converging 
evidence that these frontal-parietal circuits are critical for the mediation of 
learned skilled limb movements ( Fadiga, Fogassi, Pavesi, & Rizzolatt i, 1995 ; 
 Gerloff , Uenishi, & Hallett , 1998 ;  Rizzolatt i, Fadiga, Gallese, & Fogassi, 1996 ) 
with the left -hemisphere dominant for the production of complex ( Jancke, 
Kleinschmidt, Mirzazade, Shah, & Freund, 2001 ;  Moll, et al., 2000 ) and sim-
ple ( Kim, et al., 1993 ) movement sequences.  
 
RIGHT
(a)
(b)
LEFT
Neural systems implicated in right limb  movements depicted in:
(a) lateral view of the left hemisphere
(b) axial view in the left hemisphere
4
5
6
2
1
3
1
2
3
4
4a
5
 Figure 9.3  Anatomy of Limb Apraxia. Th is fi gure shows the anatomy of limb 
apraxia localized to a left  hemisphere network. Th e critical cortical and subcortical 
neuroanatomical areas and the white matt er pathways involved in limb movements are 
listed by number. Brodmann’s areas (BA) are also provided for each of these regions 
 1 = Auditory representations  
(BA 41, 42, 22) – Temporal cortex  
2 = Visual representations 
(BA 17, 18, 19, 37) – Occipital cortex  
3 = Cross-modal associations  
(BA 39, 40) – Inferior Parietal Lobule
  4 = White matter (WM) connections Inter- & Intra-hemispheric WM, PVWM  
5 = Motor-Frontal representation 
(BA 6, SMA, 9, 46) – Premotor/Motor planning 
6 = Primary motor cortex 
(BA 4) – Motor homunculus/Hand-Arm area 
When the praxis representations are lateralized to the left cerebral hemisphere, the 
information must pass from the left hemisphere via the corpus callosum (4a) to the 
right hemisphere motor regions (BA 6, 4, SMA), to produce the movements with the 
left hand. Frontal regions (BA 9, 46) are also implicated in this action schema.  

206
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 A number of studies have att empted to disentangle the role of the right hemi-
sphere in learned skilled movement.  Rapcsak and colleagues (1993) reported 
observations on a strongly right-handed man who had a massive left  hemi-
spheric stroke that resulted in almost complete destruction of that hemisphere. 
Th erefore, his examination may refl ect the abilities that were preserved in the 
right cerebral hemisphere and those functions destroyed in the left  hemisphere or 
some compensation following the brain injury. Th is patient was severely impaired 
in his ability to perform transitive limb movements to command, although he 
could perform intransitive movements and he was able to manipulate and use 
real objects. Gesture recognition and discrimination were relatively preserved. 
Whole body types of axial commands were also preserved. Based on these obser-
vations, Rapcsak and colleagues postulated that the right hemisphere is critically 
dependent on the left  hemisphere for the transcallosal transfer of stored represen-
tations of the motor program and for the abstract production of learned skilled 
movements. Context-dependent movements, however, were relatively preserved 
especially in over-learned movements like the manipulation of common tools 
suggesting that the right hemisphere may play a role in these specifi c conditions. 
Th is study also supported the idea that the right hemisphere may play an impor-
tant role in gesture recognition/discrimination in some individuals. 
 In another study, error types were compared in a control group and in a 
sample of LHD and RHD stroke patients evaluated within 10 days post-stroke 
( Hanna-Pladdy, Daniels, et  al., 2001 ). Overall, the LHD patients made sig-
nifi cantly more apraxic errors compared to the RHD patients and controls on 
both transitive and intransitive limb movements. Th e LHD group made more 
body-part as object and spatial errors, including diffi  culty orienting the hand to 
the tool (internal confi guration error), and in orienting the tool to the object 
being acted upon. RHD patients made more timing errors than controls. Th e 
fi nding that body-part as object and internal confi guration errors were associ-
ated with LHD supports the contention that postural representations are stored 
in the left  hemisphere. In contrast, alterations in the timing or speed of limb 
movements were the best predictors of RHD. Th ese fi ndings support the pos-
tulate that the left  hemisphere stores the spatiotemporal and conceptual repre-
sentations of learned skilled movements, although several components of action 
programs, such as limb orientation and timing, may have bilateral hemispheric 
representations. 
 To further examine the laterality of action programs, the production of 
learned skilled movement was documented in a study of nine patients perform-
ing gestures-to-command with the contralateral limb during selective right- and 
left -hemispheric anesthesia ( Foundas, Henchey, et  al., 1995 ). Results showed 
that praxis networks were lateralized to the left  hemisphere in 7 of the 9 patients 
(78 percent), and were bilaterally represented in the other 2 (22 percent) par-
ticipants. Th e full-range of spatial-temporal movement errors were elicited with 

Limb Apraxia
207
left  hemisphere injection. Amplitude and timing errors were uncommon overall 
but were found proportionally more oft en following right hemisphere injection. 
All participants were right-handed and had language lateralized to the left  hemi-
sphere. Th ese results have been replicated ( Meador, et al., 1999 ), and support the 
hypothesis that praxis networks are left -lateralized in most right-handed adults 
with some movement types specifi c to left -hemisphere networks while other 
components of action planning may require input from the right hemisphere 
( Heilman, 1997 ). 
 SU BCORT IC A L BR A I N ST RUCT U R E S I N LI M B A PR A X I A  
 Th ere is controversy regarding the importance of subcortical gray matt er struc-
tures and cortical-subcortical white matt er connections in the formulation of 
learned skilled movement. In a study of 699 LHD patients, Papagno and col-
leagues found that apraxia was mild to moderate in patients with subcortical 
lesions, and more severe in the cases with cortical lesions ( Papagno, Della Sala, & 
Basso, 1993 ). Two other studies found that lesions to subcortical pathways were 
more common in patients without apraxia ( Basso, Luzzatt i, & Spinnler, 1980 ; 
 Haaland et al, 2000 ). In a review of 82 cases of “subcortical” apraxia, Pramstaller 
and Marsden found that large left -hemisphere lesions with subcortical extension 
were more likely to induce apraxia than purely subcortical lesions of the putamen, 
thalamus. or lenticular nuclei ( Pramstaller & Marsden, 1996 ). 
 In another study of patients with LHD cortical stroke, patients were evalu-
ated on gesture-to-command, gesture-imitation, and gesture-discrimination 
tasks. Task performance was compared to a group of patients with purely 
subcortical left  hemispheric lesions examined within 6  months post-stroke 
( Hanna-Pladdy, Heilman, & Foundas, 2001 ). Th e cortical stroke patients were 
impaired on all three tasks. In contrast, subcortical stroke patients had mild 
production-execution defi cits with transitive limb movements, but normal per-
formance of gestures to imitation and with gesture discrimination. Both groups 
made spatial and temporal errors, whereas only the subcortical group made pos-
tural and sequencing errors, and produced some unrecognizable gestures. In a 
study of 50 patients with CT scan-demonstrated LHD stroke, seven patients with 
lesions limited to the basal ganglia and/or thalamus were found to have ideomo-
tor apraxia on gesture-to-command and to imitation, but performed normally 
with the actual object ( Agostoni, Colett i, Orlando, & Tredici, 1983 ). Based on 
these results, it may be hypothesized that postural movements are mediated by 
frontal-subcortical networks, whereas visuo-motor transformations for reaching 
and the internal representation of the action plan are mediated by a left  lateralized 
frontal-parietal network. 
 Lesion size and location was examined in unilateral LHD stroke patients 
with apraxia examined on oral and limb gestures-to-command ( Kertesz & 

208
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Ferro, 1984 ). As predicted, lesion size and apraxia severity were positively cor-
related at 1 and 3 months post-stroke, although lesion size accounted for only 
25 percent of the variance in apraxia. Th e authors found that some patients 
with small lesions had severe apraxia, and some patients with large lesions were 
not apraxic. Anterior portions of the periventricular white matt er (PVWM) 
pathways were the most common lesion site in the apraxic patients with small 
lesions. Other investigators have also found that apraxia can occur in patients 
with small lesions of the PVWM without cortical involvement ( Alexander, 
Baker, Naeser, Kaplan, & Palumbo, 1992 ;  Kertesz & Ferro, 1984 ;  Roy, Black, 
Blair, & Dimeck, 1998 ); ( Freund, 2001 ;  Freund & Hummelsheim, 1985 ; 
 Kroliczak & Frey, 2009 ;  Leiguarda, 2001 ). Taken together, results from these 
studies off er support for the postulate that lesions to white matt er pathways, 
including small lesions at cortical and subcortical convergence points within 
the praxis network, can induce severe and persistent apraxia ( Kertesz & Ferro, 
1984 ). Th e lesions of the deep parietal, occipitofrontal and anterior callosal 
fi bers seem to be particularly crucial in the manifestation of limb apraxia. Th e 
Geschwind and Kertesz “disconnection” models of apraxia support the pos-
tulate that some small lesions of white matt er pathways are associated with 
apraxia. Th e proposed mechanism is that discrete lesions to these white matt er 
pathways induce cortical hypoperfusion of critical sites, although this hypoth-
esis has not been directly tested. 
 Our group has found diff erences in cortical (anterior, posterior) versus subcor-
tical lesion location and apraxia severity ( Foundas, et al., 2002 ). In this study, 23 
LHD ischemic stroke patients and 23 healthy, matched controls were examined 
performing a series of gestures-to-command with no overlap between the LHD 
stroke patients and the controls on the gesture performance. Th e LHD stroke 
patients were then categorized as having mild (9 patients), moderate (8 patients) 
or severe (6 patients) apraxia. Th e severely apraxic patients were more likely to 
have lesions of the inferior parietal lobe (BA 39, 40) with extension to adjacent 
PVWM pathways compared to the moderate and mildly apraxic patients who 
did not have lesions that extended into these sites. In contrast, the moderately 
apraxic patients were more likely to have lesions to the somatosensory cortex 
compared to the other two groups, whereas the mildly apraxic patients were most 
likely to have purely subcortical lesions. We also found that the severely apraxic 
patients had lesions involving ventral temporal and visual pathways (areas 37, 18, 
19) ( Figure 9.4 a,b). Th ese results support current anatomic models of apraxia, 
and provide evidence that there may be a  caudal-rostral  (posterior-anterior) and 
 cortical-subcortical gradient of lesion site and praxis severity ( Figure 9.5 ). Based 
on the fi nding that lesions to visual association and ventral temporal cortex 
resulted in severely degraded gesture production, we postulate that patients with 
this lesion profi le may have lost the ability of the motor programs to access the 
visual representations of the movements. It is still unclear whether these lesion 

Limb Apraxia
209
sites are associated with persistent apraxia, as the patients were examined at 2 to 
7 weeks post-stroke. 
 CONCEP T UA L A PR A X I A A N D TOOL K NOW L EDGE  
 Cognitive models and behavioral studies of apraxia have shown that the 
praxis production, reception, and conceptual systems are partially disso-
ciable. One study examined conceptual apraxia in unilateral stroke patients 
( Heilman, Maher, Greenwald, & Rothi, 1997 ). Four groups were examined 
including:  LHD patients with apraxia, LHD without apraxia, RHD stroke 
patients, and controls. Praxis conceptual systems were examined by assessing 
tool-action and tool-object relationships, and mechanical-tool knowledge. Th e 
 
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
Subcortical
Anterior
Posterior
Lesion Location
Proportional Frequency
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Mild Apraxia
(55-70% correct)
(a)
(b)
Moderate Apraxia
(33-55% correct)
Severe Apraxia
(<33%correct)
Posterior>Anterior
Posterior>Anterior 
Ant.erior>Posterior 
 Figure 9.4  Lesion location varied in patients defined as having mild, moderate, 
and severe limb apraxia. Overlapping lesion sites are depicted in Figure 9.4(a) by 
severity subgroup (mild, moderate, severe apraxia) and the proportional frequency 
by lesion location is shown in Figure 9.4(b). (a) lesion mapping of lhd stroke 
patients with mild, moderate and severe (b) lesion localization in lhd stroke patients 
with apraxia.  

210
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
LHD group with apraxia was more impaired on the tasks compared to all the 
other groups, but within the left  hemisphere specifi c lesion sites were not asso-
ciated with conceptual apraxia. Th e results also showed that tool knowledge 
(action semantics) was independent of the movement representations and ver-
bal semantics. A functional MRI adaptation paradigm was used to test for brain 
regions that exhibit action-specifi c activity in order to evaluate brain regions 
that may be specifi c to action recognition ( Kable & Chatt erjee, 2006 ). Subjects 
watched a series of diff erent types of action sequences. Th e results of this study 
showed that the representations stored in the superior temporal sulcus, human 
motion-sensitive cortex (middle to superior temporal), and extrastriate body 
area abstract actions from agents involved in the action. Th ese brain regions 
also distinguished between diff erent actions. 
 Th e ability to access tool-use-knowledge and to integrate this information into 
a movement plan is frequently disrupted in patients with limb apraxia. A recent 
study was designed to examine potential diff erences between these types of 
tasks ( Randerath, Li, Goldenberg, & Hermsdorfer, 2009 ). Twenty controls, 17 
LHD, and 10 RHD patients were evaluated performing gestures with the tool 
presented with the handle oriented away from the participant, and with the tool 
in the correct orientation. Participants were asked to grasp the tool and to dem-
onstrate its typical “use” or to “transport” the tool into a container. Task con-
tent infl uenced the way the object was grasped. Nearly all participants, except 
for a few LHD subjects, produced a functional grasp during all of the “use”-task 
 
Severe
Apraxia
Moderate
Apraxia
Mild
Apraxia
Cortical
Subcortical
PVWM
Rostral
Caudal
 Figure 9.5  Rostral-Caudal and Vertical Gradient of Apraxia Severity. Differences 
in lesion location by apraxia severity suggest that there may be a severity gradient 
as depicted in Figure 9.5. Our data suggest that patients with large posterior lesions 
with subcortical extension would have a more severe type of limb apraxia compared 
to patients with small purely subcortical anterior lesions who would be expected to 
have a milder type of apraxia. It is important to note, however, that small lesions to 
convergence zones have been associated with moderate to severe limb apraxia.     

Limb Apraxia
211
conditions. Non-functional grasping was always followed by apraxic tool use. 
Th ese results suggest that grasping a tool is task specifi c. Selection of the grasp 
seemed to be infl uenced by several factors, including knowledge about the func-
tion of the object, structural tool characteristics, biomechanical cost of the move-
ment, and prior experience. Perception and integration of tool structure plus 
specifi c tool-related functional knowledge are necessary for accurate or func-
tional goal-directed movements and may need to be processed synchronously. 
Th ese results support the idea that lesions to visual association and ventral tempo-
ral cortex may be associated with severely degraded gesture production because 
of the inability of the motor programs to access the visual representation of the 
movement. 
 Conceptual apraxia was studied in 32 patients with probable Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) and 32 matched controls by testing tool knowledge includ-
ing:  tool-action relationships, tool-object associations, and mechanical tool 
knowledge ( Ochipa, Rothi, & Heilman, 1992 ). Th e AD patients were subdivided 
into four groups based on the presence or absence of ideomotor apraxia and the 
presence or absence of a lexical-semantic defi cit. Results indicated that  each of the 
four AD subgroups diff ered from controls on at least one measure of conceptual 
apraxia. Some AD patients had conceptual apraxia without ideomotor apraxia, 
but there were no patients with the opposite fi nding. Based on these results, the 
authors postulated that conceptual apraxia may be an early marker of AD, and 
may occur before the development of limb apraxia. Th ese results suggest that 
lexical-semantic functions may be at least partially dissociable from the praxis 
conceptual system. 
 MODA LIT Y-SPECI F IC A N D SU PR A-MODA L 
M ECH A N ISMS OF A PR A X I A   
 Th e unity between perception and action continues to be an important concept 
that may be infl uenced by the capacity to transform sensory information con-
cerning the object to be grasped into an accurate hand position, and the ability to 
generate independent fi nger movements. Th us, exploratory information is tightly 
coupled to tactile perception, independent fi nger movement, and the hand-object 
interaction. As discussed above, higher-order object knowledge produces patt erns 
of manual exploratory movements that lead to haptically driven object represen-
tations.  Klein (1931) introduced the term “tactile apraxia” to describe patients 
with disturbed transitive exploratory hand movements and preserved intran-
sitive expressive and symbolic movements ( Klein, 1931 ). Some patients with 
apraxia have diffi  culty recognizing their own hand movements ( Sirigu, Daprati, 
Pradat-Diehl, Franck, & Jeannerod, 1999 ). Unimodal disorders of tactile object 
exploration have been reported in patients with parietal lobe lesions ( Binkofski, 
Kunesch, Classen, Seitz, & Freund, 2001 ). In this study, eff ective grasping and 

212
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
object manipulation were evaluated in healthy controls and in a series of patients 
with focal lesions of the parietal, anterior frontal, and motor cortex. Th e patients 
with parietal lesions could produce rapid alternating fi nger movements even 
though they had sensory defi cits including astereognosia. Anterior versus pos-
terior parietal lesions showed somewhat diff erent behaviors. Th ose with poste-
rior parietal lesions had less spatial exploration behavior, whereas the anterior 
parietal lesion patients had a marked increase in the exploration of space. Both 
of these parietal lesion subgroups had diffi  culty with frequency and regularity 
of manipulative movements. In contrast, patients with frontal lesions were very 
impaired in the performance of contralesional manipulation and rapid alternat-
ing movements. Th e authors concluded that tactile apraxia represents a defi cit in 
the programming of exploratory movements mediated by the parietal lobe. It is 
interesting that the posterior parietal group was also identifi ed as having apraxia. 
 Other modality specifi c inputs may be essential to the performance of accu-
rate, skilled, purposeful movements. Studies in nonhuman and human primates 
have shown that sound-producing actions are mapped on the same mirror circuits 
that are activated during the visual recognition and execution of actions ( Galati, 
et  al., 2008 ;  Kohler, et  al., 2002 ;  Lahav, Saltzman, & Schlaug, 2007 ;  Lewis, 
Brefczynski, Phinney, Janik, & DeYoe, 2005 ;  Pizzamiglio, et al., 2005 ). However, 
no putative link between auditory recognition and execution of actions has been 
shown. A recent study examined the recognition of sounds specifi cally linked 
to human actions ( Pazzaglia, et  al., 2008 ). Th ey evaluated twenty-eight LHD 
patients with or without limb and/or buccofacial apraxia and seven RHD patients 
with no apraxia. Participants were asked to match sounds evoking human-related 
actions or nonhuman action sounds with specifi c visual pictures. Hand and 
mouth action-related sound recognition were specifi cally impaired in limb and 
buccofacial apraxia patients, respectively. Lesion mapping showed that the left  
frontal-parietal cortex was crucial for recognizing the sound of limb movements. 
In contrast, the left  inferior frontal gyrus and adjacent insular cortex were associ-
ated with the recognition of buccofacial-related action sounds. Th ese behavioral 
and neuroanatomical double dissociations indicate that a left -lateralized multi-
modal mirror network may be actively involved in the body-part-specifi c motor 
mapping of limb and mouth action-related sounds, and in turn may infl uence the 
execution of the very same actions. 
 Patients with apraxia may have defi cits at the level of motor planning or sen-
sorimotor integration ( Beauchamp & Martin, 2007 ). Th is aspect was examined 
in a functional MRI study with a repetition suppression task for hand gestures 
using a rapid event related design with pseudo-random stimulus order ( Hamilton 
& Graft on, 2009 ). Brain areas associated with action retrieval were identifi ed 
by comparing trials where an action was repeated to trials that involved a new 
action. Performance of a novel action, collapsed across individual actions, showed 
greater left  hemisphere activation within a predominant frontal-parietal circuit 

Limb Apraxia
213
involving inferior frontal gyrus and the inferior parietal cortex (SMG). Because 
of this study design and because the study participants were all normal adults, 
these eff ects cannot be ascribed to kinematic diff erences, simple action related 
activity, or diff erences of cognitive set. In summary, there is a general consen-
sus that a necessary condition for persistent and severe apraxia is a cortical lesion 
to a critical frontal-parietal region with extension to adjacent white matt er path-
ways. Isolated cortical lesions or purely subcortical lesions are less likely to be 
associated with severe and persistent apraxia. Modality-specifi c and supra-modal 
aspects of goal directed behaviors are important to consider when constructing a 
cognitive-behavioral-anatomical model of action/praxis.   
 Real World Eff ects of Limb Apraxia   
 Since many patients with apraxia use tools without diffi  culty, some investigators 
have postulated that apraxia is not problematic within natural contexts ( De Renzi, 
1985 ). Others have found that patients with apraxia are impaired in natural situa-
tions ( Schwartz, 1995 ;  Schwartz, et al., 1995 ). Action defi cits in the natural envi-
ronment have been observed in traumatic brain injury and in stroke patients with 
apraxia. Many patients with limb apraxia have diffi  culty eating a meal or making 
a cup of coff ee ( Foundas, Macauley, Raymer, Maher, Heilman, & Gonzalez Rothi, 
1995 ;  Schwartz, 1995 ). Even simple tasks of daily living such as shaving or brush-
ing teeth can be poorly performed or may be dangerous if the incorrect tool is 
selected ( Schwartz & Buxbaum, 1997 ). For example, stroke patients have been 
observed to incorrectly select a comb instead of a toothbrush when intending to 
brush teeth ( Ochipa, et al., 1989 ). 
 Spatiotemporal characteristics of gestural movements of apraxic patients, like 
slicing bread or carving a turkey, have shown alterations in the plane of motion, 
decoupling of hand speed and the trajectory curvature, changes in the wrist tra-
jectory, and loss of inter-joint coordination (Poizner , et al., 1990 ;  Poizner, et al., 
1998 ). Th ese fi ndings, as well as analysis of action errors observed while LHD 
stroke subjects with apraxia were eating, suggest that limb apraxia may adversely 
infl uence activities of daily living ( Foundas, Macauley, Raymer, Maher, Heilman, 
& Gonzalez Rothi, 1995 ). Th is view is also supported by the fi ndings of Sundet 
and colleagues ( Sundet, Finset, & Reinvang, 1988 ), who investigated the rela-
tionship between neuropsychological defi cits of brain-damaged patients and 
their need for supervision in everyday life. Th ey found that among LHD patients, 
apraxia scores correlated signifi cantly with the level of dependence defi ned as an 
increase in caregiver burden. 
 In a study of ten unilateral LHD stroke patients, eight of whom were apraxic, 
disturbances in tool use and disruption of the infrastructure of mealtime activi-
ties were noted when they were compared to healthy matched controls ( Foundas, 

214
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Macauley, Raymer, Maher, Heilman, & Gonzalez Rothi, 1995 ). Furthermore, a 
relationship was found between mealtime action errors and the severity of the 
apraxia suggesting that limb apraxia may adversely infl uence activities of daily 
living. Although these results demonstrated that ideomotor apraxia can have 
real-world eff ects, the patients studied were successful in completing the over-
all action goal and caregivers did not report diffi  culty in the natural context. 
Furthermore, previous investigations have not eliminated alternative explana-
tions for defi cits in activities of daily living such as associated motor and cognitive 
impairment. Consequently, whether the spatiotemporal motor defi cits associated 
with apraxia result in dependency in activities of daily living which require reme-
diation, remains largely unanswered. 
 In another study, the relationship between limb apraxia and dependency, in 
terms of increased caregiver assistance in the performance of physical activities of 
daily living, was assessed while controlling for elementary motor defi cits, extent 
of cognitive impairment, post-stroke depression, lesion size, and stroke-test 
interval ( Hanna-Pladdy, Heilman, & Foundas, 2003 ). Th e relationship between 
apraxia severity, based on scores from a verbal gesture-to-command task and the 
dependency score as defi ned by increased caregiver assistance on the Physical 
Self-Maintenance Scale (PSMS), was evaluated in 10 unilateral LHD stroke 
patients and 10 matched controls. Th ere was a signifi cant relationship between 
apraxia severity and dependency in PSMS score. Impairment on the PSMS in 
the apraxic patients could not be accounted for on the basis of overall cognitive 
impairment, post-stroke depression, elementary motor impairment, lesion size, 
or stroke-test interval. Analysis of categories comprising the PSMS revealed that 
the patients with apraxia had increased dependency in grooming, bathing, and 
toileting relative to age matched controls. One of the secondary goals of this study 
was to eliminate alternative explanations such as depression, and motor dysfunc-
tion as an explanation for the real world defi cits. Th erefore, patients meeting 
diagnostic criteria for depression were excluded. Elementary motor function was 
measured by a test of speed requiring independent fi nger movements. Th ese defi -
cits did not account for the severity of defi cits in learned skilled movements. It is 
also interesting that there was no relationship between apraxia and dependence in 
either ambulating or dressing, two major rehabilitation targets for stroke patients. 
It may be that the ability to dress independently is related to perceptual defi cits 
instead of defi cits in skilled movements, as suggested by others ( Baum & Hall, 
1981 ;  Warren, 1981 ;  Williams, 1967 ). 
 Th e relationship between apraxia severity and dependency across a number 
of physical activities of daily living emphasizes the ecological implications of 
apraxia. Th is relationship suggests that rehabilitation strategies are needed to 
improve the execution and effi  ciency of coordinated skilled movements in LHD 
stroke patients. Th ere is some evidence that higher order motor defi cits like 
apraxia increase caregiver burden more than hemiparesis ( Bjorneby & Reinvang, 

Limb Apraxia
215
1985 ;  Sundet, et  al., 1988 ). Apraxia is also associated with impaired gestural 
communication ( Barrett , Dore, Hansell, & Heilman, 2002 ;  Borod, Fitzpatrick, 
Helm-Estabrooks, & Goodglass, 1989 ;  Foundas, Macauley, Raymer, Maher, 
Heilman, & Rothi, 1995 ). Limb apraxia is common in stroke patients with esti-
mates that 70 percent of LHD and 30 percent of RHD patients make errors when 
performing learned skilled movements ( Donkervoort, Dekker, van den Ende, 
Stehmann-Saris, & Deelman, 2000 ). Apraxia is also common in neurodegenera-
tive disorders like Alzheimer’s disease, corticobasal degereration, and Parkinson’s 
disease ( Cummings, 2004 ;  Gross & Grossman, 2008 ;  Stamenova, et al., 2009 ; 
 Zadikoff  & Lang, 2005 ). Future investigations directly measuring the perfor-
mance of learned skilled movements in the natural context are needed to more 
specifi cally determine targets for treatment planning ( Buxbaum, et al., 2008 ). 
 References 
 Agnew ,  Z. K. ,  Brownsett  ,  S. ,  Woodhead ,  Z. , &  de Boissezon ,  X. ( 2008 ).  A step forward for mirror 
neurons? Investigating the functional link between action execution and action observation 
in limb apraxia .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  28 ( 31 ),  7726–7727 . 
 Agostoni ,  E. ,  Colett i ,  A. ,  Orlando ,  G. , &  Tredici ,  G. ( 1983 ).  Apraxia in deep cerebral lesions . 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  46 ( 9 ),  804–808 . 
 Alexander ,  M. P. ,  Baker ,  E. ,  Naeser ,  M. A. ,  Kaplan ,  E. , &  Palumbo ,  C. ( 1992 ).  Neuropsychological 
and neuroanatomical dimensions of ideomotor apraxia .  Brain ,  115  Pt 1 ,  87–107 . 
 Barrett  ,  A. M. ,  Dore ,  L. S. ,  Hansell ,  K. A. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 2002 ).  Speaking while gesturing: the 
relationship between speech and limb praxis .   Neurology ,  58 ( 3 ),  499–500 . 
 Barrett  ,  A. M. , &  Foundas ,  A. L. ( 2004 ). Apraxia. In  M.  Rizzo &  P.  Eslinger (eds.),   Principles 
and Practice of Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology  (pp.  409–422 ).  Philadelphia :  W.B. 
Saunders Co . 
 Basso ,  A. ,  Luzzatt i ,  C. , &  Spinnler ,  H. ( 1980 ).  Is ideomotor apraxia the outcome of damage to 
well-defi ned regions of the left  hemisphere? Neuropsychological study of CAT correlation. 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  43 ( 2 ),  118–126 . 
 Baum ,  B. , &  Hall ,  K. M. ( 1981 ).  Relationship between constructional praxis and dressing in the 
head-injured adult.    American Journal of Occupational Th erapy ,  35 ( 7 ),  438–442 . 
 Beauchamp ,  M. S. , &  Martin ,  A. ( 2007 ).  Grounding object concepts in perception and action: evi-
dence from fMRI studies of tools.  Cortex ,  43 ( 3 ),  461–468 . 
   Binkofski ,  F.  ,   Kunesch ,  E.  ,   Classen ,  J.  ,   Seitz ,  R. J.  , &   Freund ,  H. J.   ( 2001 ).  Tactile apraxia: uni-
modal apractic disorder of tactile object exploration associated with parietal lobe lesions. 
 Brain ,  124 ( Pt 1 ),  132–144 . 
 Bjorneby ,  E. R. , &  Reinvang ,  I. R. ( 1985 ).  Acquiring and maintaining self-care skills aft er 
stroke. Th e predictive value of apraxia.  Scandinavian Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine , 
 17 ( 2 ),  75–80 . 
 Borod ,  J. C. ,  Fitzpatrick ,  P. M. , Helm- Estabrooks ,  N. , &  Goodglass ,  H. ( 1989 ).  Th e relationship 
between limb apraxia and the spontaneous use of communicative gesture in aphasia.  Brain 
and Cognition ,  10 ( 1 ),  121–131 . 
 Buxbaum ,  L. J. ,  Haaland ,  K. Y. ,  Hallett  ,  M. ,  Wheaton ,  L. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Rodriguez ,  A. , et al. 
( 2008 ).  Treatment of limb apraxia: moving forward to improved action.    American Journal of 
Physical Medicine & Rehabil itation  87 ( 2 ),  149-161 . 
 Chipman ,  K. , &  Hampson ,  E. ( 2006 ).  A female advantage in the serial production of 
non-representational learned gestures.  Neuropsychologia ,  44 ( 12 ),  2315–2329 . 

216
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Clark ,  M. A.  ,   Merians ,  A. S.  ,   Kothari ,  A.  ,   Poizner ,  H.  ,   Macauley ,  B.  , Gonzalez   Rothi ,  L. J.  , et al. 
( 1994 ).  Spatial planning defi cits in limb apraxia.  Brain ,  117 ( Pt 5) ,  1093–1106 . 
 Cubelli ,  R. ,  Marchett i ,  C. ,  Boscolo ,  G. , &  Della Sala ,  S. ( 2000 ).  Cognition in action: testing a 
model of limb apraxia.  Brain and Cognition ,  44 ( 2 ),  144–165 . 
 Cummings ,  J. L. ( 2004 ).  Drug Th erapy: Alzheimer’s disease.  New England Journal of Medicine , 
 351 ( 1 ),  56–67 . 
 de Jong ,  B. M. ,  van der Graaf ,  F. H. , &  Paans ,  A. M. ( 2001 ).  Brain activation related to the rep-
resentations of external space and body scheme in visuomotor control.  Neuroimage ,  14 ( 5 ), 
 1128–1135 . 
   De Renzi ,  E.   ( 1985 ). Methods of limb apraxia examination and their bearing on the interpre-
tation of the disorder. In  E. A.  Roy (ed.),   Neuropsychological studies of apraxia and related 
disorders  (pp.  45–64 ).  Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers. 
 De Renzi ,  E. , &  Lucchelli ,  F. ( 1988 ).  Ideational apraxia.  Brain ,  111 ( Pt 5) ,  1173–1185 . 
 De Renzi ,  E. ,  Mott i ,  F.  , &   Nichelli ,  P.   ( 1980 ).  Imitating gestures. A quantitative approach to ideo-
motor apraxia.  Archives of Neurology ,  37 ( 1 ),  6–10 . 
 De Renzi ,  E. ,  Pieczuro ,  O. , &  Vignolo ,  L. A. ( 1968 ).  Ideational apraxia: A quantitative study. 
 Neuropsychologia ,  6 ,  41–52 . 
  Dee ,  H. L. ,  Benton ,  A. L. , &  Van Allen ,  M. W. ( 1970 ).  Apraxia in relation to hemispheric locus 
of lesion and aphasia.  Transactions of the American Neurological Association ,  95 ,  147–150 . 
 Donkervoort ,  M. ,  Dekker ,  J. ,  van den Ende ,  E. ,  Stehmann-Saris ,  J. C. , &  Deelman ,  B. G. ( 2000 ). 
 Prevalence of apraxia among patients with a fi rst left  hemisphere stroke in rehabilitation 
centres and nursing homes.  Clinical Rehabilitation ,  14 ( 2 ),  130–136 . 
 Fadiga ,  L. ,  Fogassi ,  L. ,  Pavesi ,  G. , &  Rizzolatt i ,  G. ( 1995 ).  Motor facilitation during action obser-
vation: a magnetic stimulation study.  Journal of Neurophysiology ,  73 ( 6 ),  2608–2611 . 
 Fisk ,  J. D. , &  Goodale ,  M. A. ( 1988 ).  Th e eff ects of unilateral brain damage on visually guided 
reaching: hemispheric diff erences in the nature of the defi cit.  Experimental Brain Research , 
 72 ( 2 ),  425–435 . 
 Foundas ,  A. L. ,  Daniels ,  S. K. ,  Maher ,  L. M. ,  Raymer ,  A. M. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. , &  Heilman ,  K. M.  ( 2002 ). 
 Lesion localization in ideomotor limb apraxia: A relationship to praxis.    Neurology ,  58 . 
 Foundas ,  A. L. ,  Henchey ,  R. ,  Gilmore ,  R. L. ,  Fennell ,  E. B. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1995 ).  Apraxia 
during Wada testing.  Neurology ,  45 ( 7 ),  1379–1383 . 
   Foundas ,  A. L.  ,   Macauley ,  B. L.  ,   Raymer ,  A. M.  ,   Maher ,  L. M.  ,   Heilman ,  K. M.  , & Gonzalez   Rothi , 
 L. J. ( 1995 ).  Ecological implications of limb apraxia: evidence from mealtime behavior. 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society ,  1 ( 1 ),  62-66 . 
   Foundas ,  A. L.  ,   Macauley ,  B. L.  ,   Raymer ,  A. M.  ,   Maher ,  L. M.  ,   Heilman ,  K. M.  , &   Rothi ,  L. J. 
( 1995 ).  Gesture laterality in aphasic and apraxic stroke patients.  Brain and Cognition ,  29 ( 2 ), 
 204–213 . 
   Freund ,  H. J.   ( 2001 ).  Th e parietal lobe as a sensorimotor interface: a perspective from clinical and 
neuroimaging data.  Neuroimage ,  14 ( 1 Pt 2 ),  S142–146 . 
 Freund ,  H. J. , &  Hummelsheim ,  H. ( 1985 ).  Lesions of premotor cortex in man.  Brain ,  108 ( Pt 
3) ,  697–733 . 
 Galati ,  G. ,  Committ eri ,  G. ,  Spitoni ,  G. ,  Aprile ,  T. , Di  Russo ,  F. ,  Pitzalis ,  S. , et al. ( 2008 ).  A selec-
tive representation of the meaning of actions in the auditory mirror system.  Neuroimage , 
 40 ( 3 ),  1274–1286 . 
 Gerloff  ,  C. ,  Uenishi ,  N. , &  Hallett  ,  M. ( 1998 ).  Cortical activation during fast repetitive fi nger 
movements in humans: dipole sources of steady-state movement-related cortical potentials. 
 Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology ,  15 ( 6 ),  502–513 . 
 Geschwind ,  N. ( 1965 ).  Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man .  Brain ,  88 ( 2 ),  237–294 . 
   Geschwind ,  N.  , &   Kaplan ,  E.   ( 1962 ).  A human cerebral deconnection syndrome. A preliminary 
report.  Neurology ,  12 ,  675–685 . 
 Gogol ,  N . ( 1873 ).   Ein Beitrag zur lehre von der Aphasie  .  Breslau ,  Inaugural Dissertation . 
 Goodglass ,  H. , &  Kaplan ,  E. ( 1963 ).  Disturbance of Gesture and Pantomime in Aphasia.  Brain , 
 86 ,  703–720 . 

Limb Apraxia
217
 Gross ,  R. G. , &  Grossman ,  M. ( 2008 ).  Update on apraxia.  Current Neurology and Neuroscience 
Reports ,  8 ( 6 ),  490–496 . 
   Haaland ,  K. Y.   ( 2006 ).  Left  hemisphere dominance for movement.   Clinical Neuropsychology , 
 20 ( 4 ),  609–622 . 
 Haaland ,  K. Y. , &  Flaherty ,  D. ( 1984 ).  Th e diff erent types of limb apraxia errors made by patients 
with left  vs. right hemisphere damage.  Brain and Cognition ,  3 ( 4 ),  370–384 . 
 Haaland ,  K. Y. , &  Harrington ,  D. L. ( 1996 ).  Hemispheric asymmetry of movement.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology ,  6 ( 6 ),  796–800 . 
 Haaland ,  K. Y. ,  Harrington ,  D. L. , &  Knight ,  R. T. ( 2000 ).  Neural representations of skilled move-
ment.  Brain ,  123 ( Pt 11) ,  2306–2313 . 
 Hamilton ,  A. F. , &  Graft on ,  S. T. ( 2009 ).  Repetition suppression for performed hand gestures 
revealed by fMRI.    Human Brain Mapping ,  30 ( 9 ),  2898–2906 . 
 Hanna-Pladdy ,  B. ,  Daniels ,  S. K. ,  Fieselman ,  M. A. ,  Th ompson ,  K.  ,   Vasterling ,  J. J.  ,   Heilman ,  K. 
M. , et al. ( 2001 ).  Praxis lateralization: errors in right and left  hemisphere stroke.  Cortex , 
 37 ( 2 ),  219–230 . 
 Hanna-Pladdy ,  B. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. , &  Foundas ,  A. L. ( 2001 ).  Cortical and subcortical contribu-
tions to ideomotor apraxia: analysis of task demands and error types.    Brain ,  124 ( Pt 12 ), 
 2513–2527 . 
 Hanna-Pladdy ,  B. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. , &  Foundas ,  A. L. ( 2003 ).  Ecological implications of ideomo-
tor apraxia: evidence from physical activities of daily living.  Neurology ,  60 ( 3 ),  487–490 . 
 Harrington ,  D. L. , &  Haaland ,  K. Y. ( 1997 ). Representations of actions in ideomotor 
limb apraxia:  Clues from motor programming and control. In   L. J.   Rothi   &   K. M.  
 Heilman (eds.),   Apraxia:  The Neuropsychology of Action  (pp.  111–147 ).  East Sussex 
UK :  Psychology Press . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1979 ). Apraxia. In  K. M.  Heilman &  E.  Valenstein (eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  
(pp.  159–185 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1997 ). Handedness. In   L. J.   Rothi   &   K. M.   Heilman   (Eds.),   Apraxia: Th e neuro-
psychology of action  (pp.  19–28 ).  East Sussex :  Psychology Press . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. , &  Gonzalez Rothi ,  L. J. ( 2003 ). Apraxia. In  K. M.  Heilman &  E.  Valenstein 
(eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  (4th ed., pp.  215–235 ).  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
   Heilman ,  K. M.  ,   Maher ,  L. M.  ,   Greenwald ,  M. L.  , &   Rothi ,  L. J.   ( 1997 ).  Conceptual apraxia from 
lateralized lesions.  Neurology ,  49 ( 2 ),  457–464 . 
   Heilman ,  K. M.  ,   Rothi ,  L. J.  , &   Valenstein ,  E.   ( 1982 ).  Two forms of ideomotor apraxia.    Neurology , 
 32 ( 4 ),  342–346 . 
 Helm-Estabrooks ,  N. ( 1998 ).  Test of Oral and Limb Apraxia (TOLA) .  Austin :  PRO-ED . 
 Jacobs ,  S. ,  Bussel ,  B. ,  Combeaud ,  M. , & Roby- Brami ,  A. ( 2009 ).  Th e use of a tool requires its 
incorporation into the movement: evidence from stick-pointing in apraxia.  Cortex ,  45 ( 4 ), 
 444–455 . 
   Jancke ,  L.  ,   Kleinschmidt ,  A.  ,   Mirzazade ,  S.  ,   Shah ,  N. J.  , &   Freund ,  H. J.   ( 2001 ).  Th e role of the 
inferior parietal cortex in linking the tactile perception and manual construction of object 
shapes.  Cereb Cortex ,  11 (2),  114–121 . 
 Kable ,  J. W. , &  Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2006 ).  Specifi city of action representations in the lateral occipito-
temporal cortex.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  18 ( 9 ),  1498–1517 . 
 Kertesz ,  A. ( 2006 ).  Western Aphasia Batt ery—Revised (WAB-R) .  San Antonio :  Psychological 
Corporation . 
 Kertesz ,  A. , &  Ferro ,  J. M. ( 1984 ).  Lesion size and location in ideomotor apraxia.  Brain ,  107  (Pt 
3) ,  921–933 . 
 Kertesz ,  A. , &  Hooper ,  P. ( 1982 ).  Praxis and language: the extent and variety of apraxia in apha-
sia.  Neuropsychologia ,  20 ( 3 ),  275–286 . 
 Kim ,  S. G. ,  Ashe ,  J. ,  Hendrich ,  K. ,  Ellermann ,  J. M. ,  Merkle ,  H. ,  Ugurbil ,  K. , et  al. ( 1993 ). 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of motor cortex:  hemispheric asymmetry and 
handedness.  Science ,  261 ( 5121 ),  615–617 . 

218
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Klein ,  R. ( 1931 ).  Zur symptomatologie des parietallappens.  Zeitschrift  fur gesamte neurologie und 
psychiatrie ,  135 ,  589–608 . 
 Kohler ,  E. ,  Keysers ,  C. ,  Umilta ,  M. A. ,  Fogassi ,  L. ,  Gallese ,  V. , &  Rizzolatt i ,  G. ( 2002 ).  Hearing 
sounds, understanding actions: action representation in mirror neurons.  Science ,  297 ( 5582 ), 
 846–848 . 
   Kroliczak ,  G.  , &   Frey ,  S. H.   ( 2009 ).  A common network in the left  cerebral hemisphere represents 
planning of tool use pantomimes and familiar intransitive gestures at the hand-independent 
level.  Cerebral Cortex ,  19 ( 10 ),  2396–2410 . 
 Lahav ,  A. ,  Saltzman ,  E. , &  Schlaug ,  G. ( 2007 ).  Action representation of sound: audiomotor rec-
ognition network while listening to newly acquired actions.    Journal of Neuroscience ,  27 ( 2 ), 
 308–314 . 
   Leiguarda ,  R.   ( 2001 ).  Limb apraxia: cortical or subcortical.    Neuroimage ,  14 ( 1 Pt 2 ), S 137–141 . 
 Lewis ,  J. W.  ,   Brefczynski ,  J. A. ,  Phinney ,  R. E. ,  Janik ,  J. J. , &  DeYoe ,  E. A. ( 2005 ).  Distinct cor-
tical pathways for processing tool versus animal sounds.  Journal of Neuroscience ,  25 ( 21 ), 
 5148–5158 . 
  Liepmann ,  H. ( 1920 ).  Apraxie.  Ergebnisse der Gesamten Medzin ,  1 ,  516–543 . 
 Liepmann ,  H. , &  Mass ,  O. ( 1907 ).  Fall von linksseitiger Agraphie und Apraxie bei rechsseitiger 
Lahmung.  Zeitschrift  fur Psychologie und Neurologie ,  10 ,  214–227 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Lee ,  K. ,  Hughes ,  M. ,  Lee ,  G. ,   Nichols ,  M. , et al. ( 1999 ).  Cerebral 
lateralization: relationship of language and ideomotor praxis.  Neurology ,  53 ( 9 ),  2028–2031 . 
  Moll ,  J. ,  de Oliveira-Souza ,  R. ,  Passman ,  L. J. ,  Cunha ,  F. C. , Souza- Lima ,  F. , &  Andreiuolo ,  P. A. 
( 2000 ).  Functional MRI correlates of real and imagined tool-use pantomimes.  Neurology , 
 54 ( 6 ),  1331–1336 . 
   Ochipa ,  C.  ,   Rapcsak ,  S. Z.  ,   Maher ,  L. M.  ,   Rothi ,  L. J.  ,   Bowers ,  D.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1997 ). 
 Selective defi cit of praxis imagery in ideomotor apraxia.  Neurology ,  49 ( 2 ),  474–480 . 
 Ochipa ,  C. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1989 ).  Ideational apraxia: a defi cit in tool selection 
and use.  Annals of Neurology ,  25 ( 2 ),  190–193 . 
   Ochipa ,  C.  ,   Rothi ,  L. J.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1992 ).  Conceptual apraxia in Alzheimer’s disease.  
 Brain ,  115  (Pt 4) ,  1061–1071 . 
 Papagno ,  C. ,  Della Sala ,  S. , &  Basso ,  A. ( 1993 ).  Ideomotor apraxia without aphasia and apha-
sia without apraxia: the anatomical support for a double dissociation.  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery & Psychiatry ,  56 ( 3 ),  286–289 . 
 Pazzaglia ,  M.  ,   Pizzamiglio ,  L. ,  Pes ,  E. , &  Aglioti ,  S. M. ( 2008 ).  Th e sound of actions in apraxia. 
 Current Biology ,  18 ( 22 ),  1766–1772 . 
  Petreska ,  B. ,  Adriani ,  M. ,  Blanke ,  O. , &  Billard ,  A. G. ( 2007 ).  Apraxia: a review.  Progress in Brain 
Research ,  164 ,  61–83 . 
 Pizzamiglio ,  L. ,  Aprile ,  T. ,  Spitoni ,  G. ,  Pitzalis ,  S. ,  Bates ,  E. ,  D’Amico ,  S. , et al. ( 2005 ).  Separate 
neural systems for processing action- or non-action-related sounds.    Neuroimage ,  24 ( 3 ), 
 852–861 . 
 Poizner ,  H. ,  Clark ,  M. A. ,  Merians ,  A. S. ,  Macauley ,  B. ,  Gonzalez Rothi ,  L. J. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. 
( 1995 ).  Joint coordination defi cits in limb apraxia.  Brain ,  118  (Pt 1) ,  227–242 . 
 Poizner ,  H. ,  Mack ,  L.  ,  Verfaellie ,  M. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1990 ).  Th ree-dimensional 
computergraphic analysis of apraxia. Neural representations of learned movement.  Brain , 
 113 ( Pt 1) ,  85–101 . 
 Poizner ,  H. ,  Merians ,  A. S. ,  Clark ,  M. A. ,  Macauley ,  B. ,  Rothi ,  L. J. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1998 ). 
 Left  hemispheric specialization for learned, skilled, and purposeful action.  Neuropsychology , 
 12 ( 2 ),  163–182 . 
   Power ,  E.  ,   Code ,  C.  ,   Croot ,  K.  ,   Sheard ,  C.  , & Gonzalez   Rothi ,  L. J.   ( 2010 ).  Florida Apraxia 
Batt ery-Extended and Revised Sydney (FABERS): Design, description, and a healthy con-
trol sample.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology ,  32(1) ,  1–18 . 
 Pramstaller ,  P. P. , &  Marsden ,  C. D. ( 1996 ).  Th e basal ganglia and apraxia.    Brain ,  119  (Pt 1) , 
 319–340 . 

Limb Apraxia
219
 Randerath ,  J. ,  Li ,  Y. ,  Goldenberg ,  G. , &  Hermsdorfer ,  J. ( 2009 ).  Grasping tools: eff ects of task and 
apraxia.  Neuropsychologia ,  47 ( 2 ),  497–505 . 
   Rapcsak ,  S. Z.  ,   Ochipa ,  C.  ,   Beeson ,  P. M.  , &   Rubens ,  A. B.   ( 1993 ).  Praxis and the right hemi-
sphere.  Brain and Cognition ,  23 ( 2 ),  181–202 . 
   Raymer ,  A. M.  ,   Maher ,  L. M.  ,   Foundas ,  A. L.  ,   Heilman ,  K. M.  , &   Rothi ,  L. J.   ( 1997 ).  Th e signifi -
cance of body part as tool errors in limb apraxia.    Brain and Cognition ,  34 ( 2 ),  287–292 . 
 Rizzolatt i ,  G. ,  Fadiga ,  L. ,  Gallese ,  V. , &  Fogassi ,  L. ( 1996 ).  Premotor cortex and the recognition of 
motor actions.  Brain Research Cognitive Brain Research ,  3 ( 2 ),  131–141 . 
 Rodrigues Cavalcante ,  K. , &  Caramelli ,  P. ( 2009 ).  Evaluation of the performance of normal 
elderly in a limb praxis protocol: infl uence of age, gender, and education.  Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society ,  15 ( 4 ),  618–622 . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. ,  Heilman ,  K. M. , &  Watson ,  R. T. ( 1985 ).  Pantomime comprehension and ideomotor 
apraxia.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry ,  48 ( 3 ),  207–210 . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. ,  Mack ,  L. ,  Verfaellie ,  M. ,  Brown ,  P. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1988 ).  Ideomotor apraxia: error 
patt ern analysis.  Aphasiology ,  2 ,  381–388 . 
   Rothi ,  L. J.  ,   Ochipa ,  C.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1991 ).  A cognitive neuropsychological model of limb 
praxis.  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  8 ,  443–458 . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. ,  Raymer ,  A. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1997 ). Limb praxis assessment. In  L. J.  Rothi 
&   K. M.  Heilman (eds.),   Apraxia: Th e Neuropsychology of Action   (pp.  61–73 ).  East Sussex 
UK :  Psychology Press . 
 Rothi ,  L. J. ,  Raymer ,  A. M. ,  Ochipa ,  C. ,  Maher ,  L. M. ,  Greenwald ,  M. L. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. 
( 1992 ).  Florida Apraxia Batt ery, Experimental Edition . 
 Roy ,  E. A. ( 1985 ).   Neuropsychological studies of apraxia and related disorders  .  New York :  Elsevier 
Science . 
 Roy ,  E. A. ,  Black ,  S. E. ,  Blair ,  N. , &  Dimeck ,  P. T. ( 1998 ).  Analyses of defi cits in gestural panto-
mime.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology ,  20 ( 5 ),  628–643 . 
 Roy ,  E. A. ,  Clark ,  P. ,  Aigbogun ,  S. , & Square- Storer ,  P. A.  ( 1992 ).  Ipsilesional disruptions to recip-
rocal fi nger tapping.  Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology ,  7 ( 3 ),  213–219 . 
  Roy ,  E. A. ,  Heath ,  M. ,  Westwood ,  D. ,  Schweizer ,  T. A. ,  Dixon ,  M. J. ,  Black ,  S. E. , et al. ( 2000 ).  Task 
demands and limb apraxia in stroke.  Brain and Cognition ,  44 ( 2 ),  253–279 . 
 Roy ,  E. A. ,  Square-Storer ,  P. ,  Hogg ,  S. , &  Adams ,  S. ( 1991 ).  Analysis of task demands in apraxia. 
 International Journal of Neuroscience ,  56 ( 1–4 ),  177–186 . 
   Rushworth ,  M. F.  ,   Nixon ,  P. D.  ,   Wade ,  D. T.  ,   Renowden ,  S.  , &   Passingham ,  R. E.   ( 1998 ).  Th e left  
hemisphere and the selection of learned actions.  Neuropsychologia ,  36 ( 1 ),  11–24 . 
 Schaefer ,  S. Y. ,  Haaland ,  K. Y. , &  Sainburg ,  R. L. ( 2007 ).  Ipsilesional motor defi cits follow-
ing stroke refl ect hemispheric specializations for movement control.  Brain ,  130 ( Pt 8 ), 
 2146–2158 . 
   Schaefer ,  S. Y.  ,   Haaland ,  K. Y.  , &   Sainburg ,  R. L.   ( 2009 ).  Hemispheric specialization and functional 
impact of ipsilesional defi cits in movement coordination and accuracy.    Neuropsychologia , 
 47 ( 13 ),  2953–2966 . 
 Schnider ,  A. ,  Hanlon ,  R. E. ,  Alexander ,  D. N. , &  Benson ,  D. F. ( 1997 ).  Ideomotor apraxia: behav-
ioral dimensions and neuroanatomical basis.  Brain and Language ,  58 ( 1 ),  125–136 . 
   Schwartz ,  M. F.  ( 1995 ).  Re-examining the role of executive functions in routine action produc-
tion.    Annals of the New York Academy of Science ,  769 ,  321–335 . 
 Schwartz ,  M. F. , &  Buxbaum ,  L. J. ( 1997 ). Naturalistic Action. In   L. J.  Rothi &   K. M. 
 Heilman (eds.),   Apraxia:  The Neuropsychology of Action  (pp.  269–289 ).  East Sussex 
UK :  Psychology Press . 
 Schwartz ,  M. F. ,  Montgomery ,  M. W. ,  Fitzpatrick-DeSalme ,  E. J. ,  Ochipa ,  C. ,  Coslett  ,  H. B. , & 
 Mayer ,  N. H. ( 1995 ).  Analysis of a disorder of everyday action.  Cognitive Neuropsychology , 
 12 ,  863–892 . 
   Sirigu ,  A.  ,   Daprati ,  E.  ,   Pradat-Diehl ,  P.  ,   Franck ,  N.  , &   Jeannerod ,  M.   ( 1999 ).  Perception of 
self-generated movement following left  parietal lesion.  Brain ,  122  (Pt 10) ,  1867–1874 . 

220
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Stamenova ,  V.  ,   Roy ,  E. A.  , &   Black ,  S. E.   ( 2009 ).  A model-based approach to understanding 
apraxia in Corticobasal Syndrome.    Neuropsychologyl Review ,  19 ( 1 ),  47–63 . 
 Sundet ,  K. ,  Finset ,  A. , &  Reinvang ,  I. ( 1988 ).  Neuropsychological predictors in stroke rehabilita-
tion.   Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology ,  10 (4),  363–379 . 
 Vanbellingen ,  T. ,  Kersten ,  B. ,  Van Hemelrijk ,  B. ,  Van de Winckel ,  A. ,  Bertschi ,  M. ,  Muri ,  R. , et al. 
( 2009 ).  Comprehensive assessment of gesture production: a new test of upper limb apraxia 
(TULIA).  European Journal of Neurology,  17 ( 1 ),  59–66 . 
 Warren ,  M. ( 1981 ).  Relationship of constructional apraxia and body scheme disorders in dress-
ing performance in adult CVA.  American Journal of Occupational Th erapy ,  35 ( 7 ),  431–437 . 
   Watson ,  R. T.  ,   Fleet ,  W. S.  ,   Gonzalez-Rothi ,  L.  , &   Heilman ,  K. M.   ( 1986 ).  Apraxia and the supple-
mentary motor area.  Archives of Neurology ,  43 ( 8 ),  787–792 . 
 Williams ,  N.   ( 1967 ).  Correlation between copying ability and dressing activities in hemiplegia. 
 American Journal of Physical Medicine ,  46 ( 4 ),  1332–1340 . 
 Zadikoff  ,  C. , &  Lang ,  A. E. ( 2005 ).  Apraxia in movement disorders.  Brain ,  128 ( Pt 7 ),  1480–1497 . 

221
 C H A P T E R  10 
 Body Representations: Updating 
a Classic Concept
  
 H. Branch Coslett  
 Introduction 
 An internal representation of the human body is crucial for a wide range of activi-
ties such as planning action, registering the location of sensory input, and mak-
ing judgments about whether one could fi t into a particularly appealing item of 
clothing. Given the central role of body representations in these and many other 
behaviors, it is not surprising that the issue was addressed by a number of inves-
tigators in the early part of the 20th century (e.g., Pick, 1922;  Head & Holmes, 
1911 –1912). In this chapter, I fi rst review evidence supporting the existence of 
multiple discrete, but interacting, representations of the human body. In the sec-
ond section of the chapter, I will elaborate on the “body schema,” a representa-
tion of particular relevance for sensory-motor processing as it mediates between 
perception and action. As will become clear, the accounts developed are heavily 
infl uenced by the work of neurologists and psychiatrists from the 19th and early 
part of the 20th centuries—the original cognitive neuroscientists.  
    Evidence for Multiple, Dissociable Body Representations   
 Following in the tradition of  Head and Holmes (1911– 12) and Pick (1922) and 
drawing on the contributions of  Sirigu et al. (1991) , we have argued for at least 
three distinct types of body representations:  the  body schema ,  body structural 
description, and  body image . (See  Table 10.1 ) We fi rst introduce these constructs 
and provide evidence from investigations of patients with brain lesions for the 
distinctions between these putative representations. We then review data from 

222
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
a group study that supports the tripartite distinction. Finally, we review recent 
work suggesting that the body schema or on-line sensory-motor representation 
may be further fractionated. 
 It should be noted that this domain of research has and continues to be plagued 
by confusing and inconsistent terminology. For example, the terms “body 
schema” and “body image,” which we use to refer to quite diff erent representa-
tions, have been taken to be interchangeable by some investigators; rather than 
create a diff erent nosology, we employ traditional terminology, but att empt to 
introduce a principled distinction between the “body schema,” “body image,” and 
“body structural description.” 
 BODY SCH E M A : ON-LI N E SENSOR I MOTOR 
R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
 Following  Head and Holmes (1911– 1912) among others, we take the  body schema to 
be a dynamic, on-line representation of the relative positions of body parts derived 
from multiple sensory and motor inputs (e.g., proprioceptive, vestibular, tactile, 
visual, eff erence copy) that interacts with motor systems in the genesis of action 
(e.g.,  Schwoebel, Boronat, & Coslett , 2002 ). A compelling demonstration of the 
“body schema” is provided by the “Pinocchio Illusion” reported by  Lackner (1988 ). 
Vibrating a static muscle produces the illusion that the muscle is being stretched; 
the application of 80 Hz vibration to the triceps of a blindfolded person, for exam-
ple, is associated with a feeling that one’s arm is being extended at the elbow. Th e 
Pinocchio illusion arises when a subject is touching their nose and a vibrator is 
placed in touch with their triceps. Th e resulting sensation of extension of the arm is 
associated with the feeling that one’s nose is elongating in concert with arm exten-
sion. As forcefully argued by  Lackner (1988 ), the demonstration that manipulating 
the apparent position of the arm infl uences the perceived dimensions of the nose 
requires a representation of the body that is malleable and updated in real-time. 
 We suggest that a number of clinical disorders such as phantom limb, somato-
paraphrenia, and supernumerary limbs are characterized by a disruption of the 
 Table 10.1  Putative Body Representations 
 A.  Body Structural Description: topological map of the human body 
 B.   Body Image: semantic and lexical information about the body 
 C.  Body Schema: on-line representation of the body in space 
 1.  Primary somatosensory representation 
 2.  Body form representation 
 3.  Body postural representation 

Body Representations
223
body schema. We have demonstrated that the body schema may be disrupted in 
patients with neglect ( Coslett , 1998 ). In this study, subjects with neglect were asked 
to judge the laterality of a visually presented picture of a hand shown with the wrist 
toward the subject—that is, in an anatomically plausible position. Parsons and oth-
ers have argued that the body schema underlies simulated movements of the body 
as well ( Schwoebel, Boronat, et al., 2002 ;  Schwoebel, Coslett , Bradt, Freidman, & 
Dileo, 2002 ;  Schwoebel, Friedman, Duda, & Coslett , 2001 ;  Coslett , 1998 ;  Parsons, 
1987, 1994 ). Data from a series of experiments examining the time required for sub-
jects to determine the laterality of pictured hands suggest that participants confi rm 
laterality judgments by imagining their hand moving from its current position into 
the orientation of a stimulus hand. Th us, response times depend on whether a par-
ticipant’s own hand is palm-up or palm-down and its degree of angular disparity 
from the stimulus hand. Furthermore, the response times for such imagined move-
ments refl ect the human body’s biomechanical constraints on movement and are 
highly correlated with actual movement times. Th ese fi ndings suggest that the sim-
ulated hand movements rely on a dynamic internal representation of hand position, 
which may be derived from proprioceptive input as well as eff erence copy informa-
tion (i.e., body schema). We found that subjects with neglect, but not subjects with 
right hemisphere lesions without neglect or subjects with left  hemisphere lesions, 
exhibited a selective defi cit in identifying the left  hand. We ( Coslett , 1998 ) inter-
preted these data as evidence that the body schema was disrupted in neglect in that 
the representation of the left  hand was either absent or inaccessible. 
 We suggest that the body schema also provides an on-line representation of 
sensory input that articulates with spatial systems that permits one to localize 
stimuli both with respect to the body surface and peripersonal space. Support 
for this assertion comes from a number of sources. For example, we ( Schwoebel 
et  al., 2001 ;  Coslett  et  al., 2008 ) reported a 77-year-old woman with a left  
temporal-parietal-occipital junction infarct who was not able to compute a repre-
sentation of the body surface. Although she reliably detected tactile stimuli deliv-
ered to any location on her body, she was unable to localize the stimuli on her 
body surface. For example, when touched twice in succession and asked to deter-
mine if she had been touched in the same or diff erent places, her performance was 
infl uenced not by distinctions between body parts (e.g., thigh versus forearm) 
but strictly by the distance between the touched locations; that is, unlike nor-
mal controls who show sensitivity to distinctions between body parts, she was 
as likely to report that successive touches were in the same location if one was 
on her thigh and the other on her forearm as compared to trials on which both 
touches were on her thigh. Strikingly, her performance in pointing to locations 
on her body surface that were touched by the examiner with her eyes closed was 
dramatically aff ected by the size and familiarity of the room in which she was 
tested: she performed signifi cantly bett er in her small, familiar bedroom than in 
a large, less familiar room. Th ese and other data are consistent with the claim that 

224
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
she compensated for a disrupted body surface representation by employing a rela-
tively preserved spatial representation. 
 One fi nal issue regarding this patient (Shoebill, Coslett , &  Boxhaul, 2001 ) 
bears comment. Visual and proprioceptive information are oft en assumed to be 
crucial for reaching. Th e patient, however, exhibited profound tactile and pro-
prioception defi cits, yet reached to targets accurately without vision of her hand. 
One possible explanation for this fi nding is that a “forward model” derived from 
eff erence copy predicts the consequences of action, thereby providing informa-
tion about the anticipated location of the arm during and aft er movement. To 
test the hypothesis that the “forward model” provides information that updates a 
representation of arm position, the patient performed a double-start task. In one 
condition she reached from a starting position to the tip of her nose and then to 
a remembered target; in a second condition, her hand was passively moved from 
the same initial starting position to the tip of her nose and she then reached to the 
remembered target. She was dramatically impaired in the second condition, oft en 
groping blindly for the target (see  Coslett  et al., 2008 for detail). Th ese data sug-
gest that the forward model can provide at least relatively accurate information 
about the on-line position of the hand. 
 We have recently reported evidence suggesting a relationship between the rep-
resentations underlying performance on the hand laterality task and the ability 
to produce spatially and temporally accurate movements ( Schwoebel, Boxhaul, 
& Coslett , 2004 ). In a group of 55 unilateral left  hemisphere stroke patients, mul-
tiple regression analyses demonstrated that performance on the hand laterality 
task was a signifi cant predictor of performance on tasks requiring the produc-
tion of meaningful gestures to command and imitation, as well as tasks requir-
ing the imitation of meaningless movements. Th is suggests that components 
of the body schema (i.e., representations derived from eff erence copy) may, in 
part, underlie performance on tasks requiring both imagined and real actions. 
Functional neuroimaging fi ndings further suggest that the performance of hand 
laterality judgments as well as explicit motor imagery are associated with activa-
tion in inferior and superior parietal areas as well as motor and premotor areas 
(e.g.,  Parsons et al., 1995 ) and that these brain regions overlap substantially with 
the areas activated during actual movements (e.g., Grazes & Decay, 2001;  Jeanne 
rod, 2001 ;  Parsons & Fox, 1998 ; Gerard in et al., 1996). Consistent with these 
fi ndings,  Sirigu et al. (1995, 1996) have noted that although strong correlations 
between the times required to imagine and execute sequential fi nger movements 
are observed in normal subjects and patients with motor cortex damage, patients 
with parietal damage exhibit poor correlations, suggesting an impaired ability 
to accurately simulate action. Taken together, these fi ndings suggest that both 
actual and mentally simulated movements may depend on the body schema and 
that the posterior parietal cortex may serve as an integral component of the neural 
substrate underlying body schema representations.  

Body Representations
225
 BODY I M AGE: SE M A N T IC A N D L E X IC A L 
R EPR E SEN TAT IONS OF T H E BODY  
 We postulate that a second distinct representation, the “body image,” encodes 
conceptual, propositional knowledge about the human body as well as the emo-
tional att itude towards and beliefs about one body. Th e latt er is one aspect of what 
is commonly called one’s “self-image”. We believe that the body image is linked to 
the verbal system and is accessible to consciousness. It includes information about 
the role and function of body parts. Th e body image may be interrogated by lan-
guage tasks such as naming body parts and comprehending names of body parts. 
 Evidence for a distinct propositional, conscious representation of the body that 
is accessible to consciousness comes from studies of patients with brain lesions. 
Several disorders are consistent with the hypothesis that the body image may be 
selectively impaired. Th e Eastman syndrome, for example, is characterized by an 
inability to point to or name fi ngers (and, typically, other body parts) sometimes 
in the absence of a signifi cant impairment in sensation and action.  Dennis et al., 
(1976) reported a patient who could reach to touched body parts, but could not 
name or point to named body parts. 
 Th ere is also evidence that knowledge of the body is a distinct semantic domain. 
 Suzuki et al. (1997) reported a patient with Boca’s aphasia and left -hemisphere 
infarctions, which included the frontal operculum, who exhibited impaired body 
part name comprehension despite preserved comprehension of words from other 
semantic categories and a preserved ability to point to visually identifi ed body 
parts on himself (i.e., he was not autotopagnosic). For example, when asked to 
point to a named picture among distracters from the same category, he correctly 
identifi ed 2 of 10 body parts, but identifi ed at least 8 of 10 stimuli in all ten addi-
tional semantic categories tested. In contrast,  Shelton et al. (1998) and  Coslett  
et al. (2002) reported patients with selective preservation of body knowledge. 
Th e patient reported by  Coslett  et al. (2002) , who exhibited semantic dementia 
( Hodges et  al., 1992 ) was signifi cantly bett er in comprehending, reading and 
writing names for body parts as compared to stimuli matched for frequency and 
imageability. For example, when asked to point to named pictures of body parts 
and non-body part stimuli that were matched for frequency and familiarity, the 
patient correctly identifi ed 12 of 12 body parts and 4 of 8 stimuli from other cat-
egories. A similar patt ern of performance was also observed on comprehension 
and oral reading tasks (see also  Shelton, Fouch, & Caramazza, 1998 ). 
 BODY ST RUCT U R A L DE SCR I P T ION: A TOPOLOGIC A L 
M A P OF T H E BODY  
 Th e third putative representation, the  body structural description , is a topological 
map of the human body derived primarily from visual input that defi nes body part 
boundaries and proximity relationships (e.g.,  Boxhaul & Coslett , 2001 ;  Sirigu 

226
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
et al., 1991 ). Support for the existence of the body structural description comes 
from clinical syndromes such as autotopagnosia, a disorder in which patients 
may be unable to point to named human body parts (Pick, 1922;  Ogden, 1985 ; 
 Boxhaul & Coslett , 2001 ). Consistent with Pick’s (1922) original account of the 
syndrome, recent fi ndings suggest that autotopagnosia may be att ributable to a 
selectively impaired representation of the structure of the human body. In con-
trast to the body schema, which appears to be derived from multiple sensory and 
motor inputs, the body structural description is postulated to be derived primar-
ily from visual input ( Boxhaul & Coslett , 2001 ;  Sirigu et al., 1991 ). We ( Boxhaul & 
Coslett , 2001 ) reported an autotopagnosic patient (G.L.) with a left  parietal hem-
orrhagic contusion who was impaired relative to controls when asked to point to 
named or visually identifi ed body parts on himself or others; he was also impaired 
in matching pictures of body parts across view shift s but exhibited no diffi  culty 
with objects; for example, when shown a the sole of a foot, he could not match this 
to a picture of a foot, yet when shown the bott om of a coff ee cup, he recognized 
the relationship of the stimulus to a cup presented in a canonical orientation. Th e 
impairment in pointing to body parts was specifi c to the human body; although 
unable to point an ear on a mannequin or the examiner, he correctly pointed to 
the ear of horse (cf.  Ogden, 1985 ). Th ese fi ndings suggest that G.L.’s ability to 
access structural descriptions of human body parts may be selectively disrupted. 
G.L. also performed fl awlessly when asked to point to the part of the body asso-
ciated with objects; that is, when touched on his wrist and asked to point to the 
corresponding body part on the examiner he was signifi cantly impaired; he was 
perfect, however, in pointing to the examiner’s wrist when asked to demonstrate 
where a watch would be worn. 
 GROU P ST U DY OF BODY R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
 In the preceding discussion, we argued that classical accounts of neurologic syn-
dromes as well as detailed investigations of single subjects with brain dysfunction 
support the view that three distinct types of knowledge of the human body may 
be identifi ed. In this section, we describe results from a group study that support 
this conclusion. We examined the performance of 70 patients with single hemi-
sphere stroke and 18 age-matched normal controls on a batt ery of tasks developed 
to assess the body schema, body structural description, and body image. 
 Th e batt ery included 7 tasks, none of which required a verbal response, 
designed to assess the putative distinct body representations. Th e  body schema 
was assessed by two tasks. On the “Matching Body Parts by Function” test sub-
jects were shown a target body part and three additional body parts and asked to 
indicate which one of 3 depicted body parts was most similar with respect to func-
tion or “things that they do.” For example, on one trial, the target was an elbow; 
response options included a knee (the correct choice), a forearm, and a nose. 

Body Representations
227
Th e second task required subjects to match body parts to clothing and objects. 
On each of 20 trials, an item of clothing was displayed along with 4 body parts. 
Subjects were asked to point to the picture of the body part with which the item 
of clothing or accessory was most closely associated. Foils included conceptually 
related, unrelated, and contiguous body parts. For example, for watch, the associ-
ated stimuli would include pictures of a wrist, elbow, ankle, and ear. 
 Th e  body structural description was assessed with three tasks. On one task, pic-
tures of 24 individual body parts were presented and subjects were asked to point 
to the same part of their own body. On a second task, a suprathreshold tactile 
stimulus was presented to the subject’s body, and the subject was asked to point 
on a mannequin to the location that had been touched on their own body. Finally, 
in the third task, a target body part was visually presented and subjects were asked 
to point to one of three pictured body parts that was closest on the body surface 
to the target body part. Stimuli for this task were the same as those used in the 
matching body part by function task described above. 
 Th e  body schema was assessed with two mental motor imagery tasks. Th e hand 
lateralization task of Parson (1987) described above was employed. Subjects were 
shown a picture of a hand and asked to indicate if the stimulus is the right or left  
hand. Pictures of hands were presented in the palm-up or palm-down condition, 
and in one of four orientations: fi ngers pointing away, fi ngers pointing toward the 
subject, fi ngers pointing to the left , and fi ngers pointing to the right. Th ere were 
64 trials; subjects responded by moving the appropriate hand or, if hemiplegic, 
by pointing to the contralesional hand when appropriate. Th e second task was 
adapted from  Sirigu et al. (1996) . In this task, four movements ranging in diffi  -
culty from repetitive touching of the index and thumb to the independent exten-
sion of the index and litt le fi ngers were included. Subjects were tested with both 
hands independently in each of two conditions; hemiplegic subjects were tested 
with the ipsilesional hand only. In one condition, subjects were asked to imagine 
making a specifi ed movement 5 times, as quickly and as accurately as possible; in 
the second condition, subjects were asked to execute the same movement 5 times. 
Th e examiner gave a verbal signal to initiate each trial and movement times were 
recorded with a stopwatch; for imagined movements, subjects indicated when 
they had completed the movement. Each imagined and executed movement was 
tested twice. For those subjects unable to produce the more diffi  cult movements, 
easier movements were substituted so that all subjects were tested 8 times in both 
conditions with each hand. For both the ipsilesional and contralesional hands, the 
ratio of imagined to executed movement was calculated. 
 Several diff erent analyses were performed. First, a principal components 
analysis was performed. We reasoned that tasks designed to assess a particular 
body representation would be strongly correlated with one another rather than 
with tasks designed to assess a diff erent representation (i.e., the tasks would 
form a factor). Th e factor analysis strongly supported the claim that discrete and 

228
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
dissociable body representations may be identifi ed. For example, support for the 
claim that the body structural description represents a distinct representation 
comes from the fact that the three tasks assessing the body structural description 
exhibited substantial internal consistency; the fi rst factor (sum of squared load-
ings, or SSLs = 2.49) was primarily defi ned by the three body structural descrip-
tion tasks. Additionally, the two tasks assessing the body image comprised factor 
4 (SSL = 1.73). Contrary to our expectations, the tasks designed to assess the 
body schema (hand laterality and hand imagery/action tasks with both the right 
and left  hands) did not load onto the same factor. Th e hand laterality judgment 
with the contralesional and ipsilesional hands constituted the second compo-
nent (SSL = 1.75), whereas the hand imagery/action task with the contralesional 
and ipsilesional hands constituted the third component (SSL = 1.75). Indeed, a 
striking double dissociation between the two body schema tasks was observed. 
Twenty-six subjects performed abnormally (i.e., below the range of scores for nor-
mal controls) on either the hand laterality or hand imagery/action task; nine could 
not perform the hand imagery/action task with the contralesional hand because 
of hemiplegia. Of the 17 subjects for whom data on both tasks is available, only 
one performed abnormally on both tasks. Eight of 16 patients performed abnor-
mally on the hand laterality task, but normally on the hand imagery/action task, 
(t (7) = 3.03, p <.02) and 8 of 16 performed abnormally on the hand imagery/
action task, but normally on the hand laterality task, (t (7) = 8.62, p < .001). 
 A second analysis was performed in which we examined whether there were 
selective defi cits on the tasks assessing the three putative body representations. 
To this end, the performance of each of the 70 patients was compared to con-
trol means. First, mean scores were calculated for the body structural description 
(3 tasks) and body image (2 tasks) measures; these measures, along with perfor-
mance on the hand laterality (ipsi- and contralesional hands) and hand imagery/
action tasks (ipsi- and contralesional hand) were then compared with control per-
formance. Patient scores that fell below the range of scores for the normal controls 
were considered impaired. Several interesting observations emerged from this 
comparison. First, the analysis of the performance of individual subjects suggests 
that the body schema, body structural description, and body image are dissocia-
ble representations. Seven subjects exhibited impairment on the hand imagery/
action task but performed normally on all other body representation measures. 
Similarly, 6 subjects performed abnormally on only the hand laterality task and 
two subjects abnormally only on the body structural description measure. Finally, 
three subjects were impaired only on the body image measure. Consistent with 
the hypothesis that the body schema, body image, and body structural descrip-
tion are distinct representations, subjects with selective impairment of all three 
putative representations were identifi ed. 
 Neuroimaging was available for 54 subjects with stroke. We used these 
data to explore the anatomic bases of body representations. Th ere were several 

Body Representations
229
interesting fi ndings. First, disorders of the body structural description and body 
image were strongly associated with left  hemisphere lesions; for example, 16/18 
subjects with abnormal performance on body structural description and 15/16 
subjects with disorders of the body schema had left  hemisphere lesions. Although 
not signifi cant, we found that defi cits on the hand action/imagery task were likely 
to be associated with left  hemisphere lesions (7/9 subjects); there was no ten-
dency for defi cits on the hand lateralization task to be associated with lesions of 
the left  hemisphere. Although quantitative analyses using new techniques such 
as Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping could not be performed because of the 
lack of high-resolution imaging, there was a clear tendency for impairment of 
the body structural description and body image to be associated with lesions of 
the temporal lobe; in contrast, impairment in the measures of body schema were 
associated with lesions in sensory-motor cortices. In summary, both the principal 
components analysis as well as the comparison of individual subjects to the con-
trol group provided support for the claim that at least three distinct body repre-
sentations could be identifi ed.  
 CU R R EN T ACCOU N T OF BODY R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
 Th e data described above provide support for the distinction between informa-
tion regarding knowledge of the body, the form of the human body, and an on-line, 
oft en unconscious representation of the body that mediates between perception 
and action. Of these representations, the body schema is of greatest relevance 
with respect to understanding and potentially remediating clinical disorders. 
In the following section, we describe recent work that has att empted to unpack 
the body schema. More specifi cally, we provide a brief account of the multiple 
representations that we take to comprise the “body schema.” Our account of the 
body schema (see  Medina & Coslett , 2010 ) incorporates three distinct but highly 
interactive components: primary somatosensory, body form, and body postural 
representations. 
 PR I M A RY SOM ATOSENSORY R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
 Tactile and proprioceptive stimuli are fi rst processed at the cortical level in the 
post-central gyrus (BA 3b, 3a, 2, 1). As in BA4, there is clear evidence of somato-
topic organization with areas that have a greater sensory acuity (e.g., fi ngertips 
and face) having disproportionately large cortical representations. A substantial 
amount of work during the last decades has demonstrated that the architecture 
of somatosensory cortices is experience-dependent. From relatively early work 
with monkeys ( Merzenich et  al., 1983, 1984 ; see  Calford, 2002  for a review) 
to more recent work with humans, multiple studies have demonstrated that 
the somatosensory cortex remaps in response to both peripheral ( Gandevia & 

230
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Phegan, 1999 ) and central lesions ( Ramachandran et al., 1992 ;  Medina & Rapp, 
2008 ). Furthermore, changes in somatosensory cortical organization in humans 
may be induced by motor (e.g.,  Braun et al., 2001 ) and sensory (Schaefer  et al., 
2008) activity. Finally, although the primary somatosensory cortex had long been 
regarded as unimodal, neurons responding to multiple sensory inputs have been 
described in this region (see Ghazanfar  & Schroeder, 2006). 
 BODY FOR M R EPR E SEN TAT ION  
 Despite the striking diff erences in cortical representations between “sensitive” 
regions such as the fi ngertip or face and less “sensitive” regions such as the back, 
subjects are at least relatively good at judging the size of stimuli or the distance 
between two points for stimuli presented at both locations. Taylor-Clarke  et al. 
 (2004) presented two tactile stimuli to points on the skin surface with high (fi n-
gertips) and low (forearm and back) cortical representations. Although normal 
subjects consistently judged the distance to be greater on the regions with high 
cortical representation, the diff erences were substantially less than would have 
been predicted by the diff erences in cortical magnifi cation. On the basis of these 
fi ndings, the investigators argued that, just as the visual system scales inputs from 
the fovea and periphery to achieve size constancy, information from primary 
somatosensory representations must be rescaled to a second, higher-order body 
representation; we term this the  body form representation . Th is representation is 
assumed to be multisensory in nature (see also  Medina & Coslett , 2010 ;  Longo, 
Azanon, & Haggard, 2010 ). 
 A striking demonstration of the body form representation is provided by the 
Pinocchio illusion ( Lackner, 1988 ) briefl y described above. Vibrating a muscle 
tendon stimulates muscle spindles, causing the sensation that the body has moved 
to a diff erent position. When the biceps tendon is vibrated in blindfolded subjects 
who are touching their nose, the subjects not only report the arm extending, but 
also feel their nose extending. Th is illusion demonstrates a fundamental point. 
First, the eff ect demonstrates the necessity of a representation of the body form; 
the illusory extension of the nose cannot be att ributed to alterations in primary 
somatosensory cortex as tactile input did not change. 
 Alterations in the perception of the body that may represent a distortion of 
the body form are observed in clinical populations (e.g., microsomatagno-
sia; phantom limb) as well as aft er nerve block or anesthesia (e.g.,  Gandevia & 
Phegan, 1999 ). 
 Th e neural correlate of the body form representation is unclear, perhaps 
because studies of persistent distortions of the body form are relatively uncom-
mon.  Ehrsson et al. (2005) performed an fMRI study in which subjects experi-
enced a vibration-induced illusion that caused them to perceive their arm moving 
and, in some conditions, their waist shrinking. Th ey found that the sensation of 

Body Representations
231
waist shrinking was associated with activity at the junction of the post-central 
gyrus and the intraparietal sulcus. Diff erent regions were active for illusory arm 
movements without illusory shrinking of the waist, suggesting separable func-
tional subcomponents for body form versus body posture representation. We 
have recently completed a study involving Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in 
normal subjects that suggests that the anterior intraparietal sulcus is important 
for this representation (see below). 
 BODY POST U R A L R EPR E SEN TAT ION  
 As described above, the body form representation makes explicit the shape, size, 
texture, and location of stimuli on the surface of the body. Whereas such a rep-
resentation is crucial, it is not suffi  cient. As noted by Pick (1922) and  Head and 
Holmes (1911– 12), an on-line representation of the position of the body in real 
time is essential to account for the performance of routine motor acts such as 
reaching to a coff ee cup while reading the newspaper; the fact that such move-
ments may be performed quickly, accurately, and eff ortlessly without att ending to 
the initial position of the torso, arm, or hand suggests that a representation of the 
body in space is computed and maintained on-line and is incorporated into motor 
control systems directly (that is, without conscious planning of the motor act). 
We term this the body postural representation. 
 Th is representation is generated from several diff erent types of inputs. 
Proprioceptive feedback is crucial as witnessed, for example, by the devastat-
ing consequences of its loss. Cole and  Paillard (1995) , for example, reported two 
patients who were deprived of sensory input (including proprioception) from 
the extremities as a consequence of a severe sensory neuropathy; although not 
weak, these patients experienced profound impairments on routine motor tasks 
including walking and reaching to objects in the environment. Such acts could be 
performed only with considerable eff ort and the use of visual monitoring of the 
movements. Indeed, sitt ing in a chair without falling required constant vigilance 
(see also  Medina, Jax, & Coslett , 2009 ). Even in normal subjects, proprioception 
is not suffi  cient as, over time and with inactivity, body position defi ned by pro-
prioception may “drift ” ( Wann & Ibrahim, 1992 ). 
 At least three other types of input inform the body postural representation. 
First, in most real world situations visual information is crucial to the representa-
tion of the body in space. Although the relative contributions of vision and proprio-
ception may vary depending on the task at hand ( van Beers, Wolpert, & Haggard, 
2002 ;  Shenton, Schwoebel, & Coslett , 2004 ), in many contexts, visual informa-
tion overrides proprioceptive information ( Graziano et al., 2000 ). Indeed, visual 
“dominance” over proprioception is evident in a number of phenomena to be con-
sidered below, such as the “rubber hand” ( Botvinick & Cohen, 1998 ;  Tsakiris & 
Haggard, 2005 ) and “mirror box” illusions ( Ramachandran & Altschuler, 2009 ). 

232
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 We suggest that BA 5 is a crucial element in the neural instantiation of the 
body postural representation. Th is region receives direct, robust input from 
primary as well as secondary sensory cortices. Furthermore, electrophysiologic 
work in monkeys has demonstrated neurons that would appear to be well-suited 
to this task. For example, neurons in BA5 respond to both vision as well as 
somatosensory input, respond to touch only when in a certain position in space 
( Macaluso & Maravita, 2010 ) and fi re when a visualized and realistically (but 
not implausibly) positioned fake limb is stimulated ( Rizzolatt i, Fogassi, & 
Gallese, 2002 ).  Wolpert, Goodbody & Husain (1998) reported a subject with a 
large left  superior parietal cyst who was unable to maintain a stable representa-
tion of limb location, suggesting its involvement in maintaining a representa-
tion of body posture. 
 We have recently completed a study involving Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimuluation (TMS) that also speaks to the anatomic underpinnings of the 
body structural description and the body form representation. Yamamoto and 
Kitazawa (2001a; see also 2001b) performed a temporal order judgment task in 
which suprathreshold tactile stimuli were presented to each hand at varying tem-
poral intervals and subjects were asked to judge the order of the stimuli (right 
versus left  hand). With the arms uncrossed, the just noticeable diff erence (JND) 
between stimuli was as low as 70 msec. However, when the arms were crossed, 
the JND was much longer (up to 1 sec); additionally, some subjects consistently 
inverted the correct temporal order on trials with small temporal discrepancies 
between the stimuli. Th e authors concluded that initial processing of hand loca-
tion does not take into account limb position (and relies strictly on the initial, 
somatotopic representation), and then subsequently takes into account limb posi-
tion in external space (i.e., the body postural representation, see also  Ehrsson 
et al., 2005 ;  Makin et al., 2007 ). 
 We recently repeated this experiment in 12 normal subjects before and aft er 
20 minutes of 1 Hz TMS at 90 percent motor threshold delivered to either the BA 
5 (anterior superior parietal lobule), the putative substrate for the body postural 
description, or the anterior intraparietal sulcus, the putative substrate for the body 
form representation. Consistent with the claim that the body postural representa-
tion integrates proprioceptive and tactile information to generate a representa-
tion of the body in space, TMS to BA 5 signifi cantly impaired performance on 
the hands crossed, but not hands uncrossed condition. Additionally, TMS to the 
anterior intraparietal sulcus impaired performance in both conditions as would 
be expected if it interfered with the registration of tactile information. Th ese data 
support the claim that the body form and body postural representations serve 
diff erent roles in the genesis of the integrated body schema; furthermore, the 
lesion approach, here instantiated in a TMS paradigm, provides novel informa-
tion regarding the anatomic bases of these putative body representations that has 
not been available from imaging studies. 

Body Representations
233
 R EL AT IONSH I P TO OT H ER ACCOU N TS OF BODY 
R EPR E SEN TAT IONS  
 We have argued for the principled distinction between three putative body 
representations. As one would expect (and hope), however, a number of alter-
native accounts of body knowledge have been developed. Perhaps the most 
infl uential account of body representations proposes a fundamental distinction 
between representations computed in the service of action as opposed to percep-
tion ( Paillard, 1999 ;  Dijkerman & DeHaan, 2007 ). Modeled on the infl uential 
account of visual processing that postulates a fundamental distinction between 
the ventral “what” and dorsal “where” ( Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982 ) or “how to” 
( Milner & Goodale, 1995 ) systems, the Dijkerman and DeHaan account distin-
guishes between a conscious “body image” that provides information regarding 
object identity and a typically unconscious “body schema” that represents body 
location. 
 Although there are clear similarities in our account and that of  Dijkerman 
and DeHaan (2007) , important diff erences may be identifi ed. In contrast to the 
perception/action account, we propose that primary somatosensory informa-
tion maps onto representations of the body form that encodes location relative 
to the body (not external space) and, in parallel, onto the body postural repre-
sentation that encodes body position in external space. On our view, both the 
body form and postural representations may be accessible to both perception and 
action systems; similarly, both may operate without awareness or, depending on 
task demands, be accessible to consciousness. Additional investigations will be 
needed to adjudicate between these accounts. 
 In conclusion, we have argued that multiple distinct representations of 
one’s body are computed, each of which provides information relevant to dif-
ferent goals and behaviors. Under normal circumstances these representations 
appear to interact seamlessly. We suggest that, as in many other cognitive and 
behavioral domains, brain dysfunction has unearthed the fault lines in the 
system, thereby permitt ing the modularity of the representations to be recog-
nized. Future investigations, including theoretically motivated explorations of 
patients with brain lesions, will be required to fully characterize these repre-
sentations and explore their implications for accounts of brain function and 
rehabilitation.  
 References 
 Botvinick,  M. , &  Cohen,  J. ( 1998 ).  Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see .  Nature ,  391 ,  756 . 
 Braun,  C. ,  Heinz,  U. ,  Schweizer,  R. ,  Wiech,  K. ,  Birbaumer,  N. , &  Topka,  H. ( 2001 ).  Dynamic 
organization of the somatosensory cortex induced by motor activity .  Brain,  124 ,  2259–2267 . 
 Buxbaum,  L. , &  Coslett ,   H.   ( 2001 ).  Specialized structural descriptions for human body parts: evi-
dence from Autotopagnosia .   Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  18 ,  289–306 . 

234
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Calford ,  M. B. (2002). Dynamic Representational Plasticity in Sensory Cortex.  Neuroscience , 4, 
709–738.   
 Cole,  J ., &  Paillard,  J. ( 1995 ). Living without touch and peripheral information about body posi-
tion and movement: Studies with deaff erented subjects. In  J. L.  Bermudez ,  A.  Marcel &  N. 
 Eilan (eds.),   Th e Body and the Self  (pp.  245–266 ).  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Coslett  ,  H. ( 1998 ).  Evidence for a disturbance of the body schema in neglect.  Brain and Cognition , 
 37 ( 3 ),  527–544 . 
 Coslett  ,  H. ,  Buxbaum ,  L. , &  Shoebill ,  J. ( 2008 ).  Accurate Reaching aft er Active but not Passive 
Movements of the Hand:  Evidence for Forward Modeling.    Behavioral Neurology ,  19 ( 3 ), 
 117–125 . 
 Coslett  ,  H. B. ,  Saff ran ,  E. M. , &  Shoebill ,  J. ( 2002 ).  Knowledge of the human body: a distinct 
semantic domain.  Neurology ,  59 ( 3 ),  357–363 . 
 Dennis ,  M. ( 1976 ).  Dissociated naming and locating of body parts aft er left  anterior temporal 
lobe resection: an experimental case study.  Brain and Language ,  3 ( 2 ),  147–163 . 
 Dijkerman ,  H. , &  de Haan ,  E. ( 2007 ).  Somatosensory processes subserving perception and 
action.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,  30 ( 2 ),  189–201 . 
 Ehrsson ,  H. H. ,  Kito ,  T. ,  Sadato ,  N. ,  Passingham ,  R. E. , &  Naito ,  E. ( 2005 ).  Neural substrate of 
body size: Illusory feeling of shrinking of the waist .   PLOS Biology ,  3 ( 12 ),  2200–2207 . 
 Gandevia ,  S. C. , &  Phegan ,  C. M. L. ( 1999 ).  Perceptual distortions of the human body image pro-
duced by local anaesthesia, pain and cutaneous stimulation.  Journal of Physiology—London , 
 514 ( 2 ),  609–616 . 
   Ghazanfar ,  A. A.  , &   Schroeder ,  C. E.   ( 2006 ).  Is neocortex essentially multisensory?    Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences ,  10 ( 6 ),  278–285 . 
 Graziano ,  M. S. A. ,  Cooke ,  D. F. , &  Taylor ,  C. S. R. ( 2000 ).  Coding the location of the arm by 
sight.  Science ,  290 ( 5497 ),  1782–1786 . 
   Head,   H.,   &   Holmes,   G.   ( 1911 ).   Sensory Disturbances fr om Cerebral Lesions. Brain ,  34 ,  103–254 . 
   Gerardin ,  E.  ,   Sirigu ,  A.  ,   Lehéricy ,  S.  ,   Poline ,  J. B.  ,   Gaymard ,  B.  ,   Marsault ,  C.  ,   Agid ,  Y.  , et al. ( 1996 ). 
 Partially overlapping neural networks for real and imagined hand movements.  Cerebral 
Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991) ,  10 ( 11 ),  1093–1104 . 
 Grèzes ,  J. , &  Decety ,  J. ( 2001 ).  Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation, observation, 
and verb generation of actions: a meta-analysis.  Human Brain Mapping ,  12 (1),  1–19 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Oxbury ,  S. , &  Funnell ,  E. ( 1992 ).  Semantic dementia. Progressive fl u-
ent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy .  Brain: a journal of neurology ,  115 ( Pt 6 ) ,  1783–1806 . 
   Jeannerod ,  M.   ( 2001 ).  Neural simulation of action: a unifying mechanism for motor cognition.  
 NeuroImage ,  14 ( 1 Pt 2 ),  S103–109 . 
  Lackner ,  J.  R. ( 1988 ).  Some Proprioceptive Infl uences on the Perceptual Representation of Body 
Shape and Orientation.  Brain ,  111 ,  281–297 . 
  Longo ,  M. R. ,  Azanon ,  E. , &  Haggard ,  P. ( 2010 ).  More than skin deep: Body representation 
beyond primary somatosensory cortex.  Neuropsychologia ,  48 ( 3 ),  655–668 . 
 Macaluso ,  E. , &  Maravita ,  A. ( 2010 ).  Th e representation of space near the body through touch 
and vision.    Neuropsychologia ,  48 ( 3 ),  782–795 . 
 Makin ,  T. ,  Holmes ,  N. , &  Zohary ,  E. ( 2007 ).  Is that near my hand? Multisensory representation 
of peripersonal space in human intraparietal sulcus.  Journal of Neuroscience ,  27 ( 4 ),  731–740 . 
 Medina ,  J. ,  Jax ,  S. A. , &  Coslett  ,  H. B. ( 2009 ).  Two-component models of reaching: Evidence 
from deaff erentation in a Fitt s’ law task.  Neuroscience Lett ers ,  451 ,  222–226 . 
 Medina ,  J., &  Rapp,  B. ( 2008 ).  Phantom Tactile Sensations Modulated by Body Position.  Current 
Biology , 18 ( 24 ):  1937–1942 . 
 Merzenich ,  M. M. ,  Kaas ,  J. H. ,  Wall ,  J. T. ,  Sur ,  M. ,  Nelson ,  R. J. , &  Felleman ,  D. J. ( 1983 ). 
 Progression of change following median nerve section in the cortical representation of the 
hand in areas 3b and 1 in adult owl and squirrel monkeys.  Neuroscience ,  10 ( 3 ),  639–665 . 
 Merzenich ,  M. M. ,  Nelson ,  R. J. ,  Stryker ,  M. P. ,  Cynader ,  M. S. ,  Schoppmann ,  A. , &  Zook ,  J. 
M. ( 1984 ).  Somatosensory Cortical Map Changes Following Digit Amputation in Adult 
Monkeys.  Journal of Comparative Neurology ,  224 ( 4 ),  591–605 . 

Body Representations
235
 Milner ,  A. D ., &  Goodale ,  M. A. ( 1995 ).  Th e Visual Brain in Action . New  York:   Oxford 
University Press . 
 Mishkin ,  M. , &  Ungerleider ,  L. G. ( 1982 ).  Contribution of striate inputs to the visuospa-
tial functions of parieto-preoccipital cortex in monkeys.  Behavioural Brain Research , 
 6 ( 1 ),  57–77 . 
 Ogden ,  J. A. ( 1985 ).  Autotopagnosia. Occurrence in a patient without nominal aphasia and with 
an intact ability to point to parts of animals and objects.    Brain: a journal of neurology ,  108 
( Pt 4 ) ,  1009–1022 . 
 Paillard ,  J. ( 1999 ). Body schema and body image—A double dissociation in deaff erented patients. 
In  G. N.  Gantchev ,  S.  Mori , and  J.  Massion , (eds.),   Motor Control, Today and Tomorrow 
  (pp.  197–214) .  Akademicno Izdatelstvo :  Sofi a . 
 Parsons ,  L. M. ( 1987 ).  Imagined spatial transformation of one’s body.  Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. General ,  116 ( 2 ),  172–191 . 
 Parsons ,  L. M. ( 1994 ).  Temporal and kinematic properties of motor behavior refl ected in men-
tally simulated action.  Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human perception and performance , 
 20 ( 4 ),  709–730 . 
 Parsons ,  L. M. , &  Fox ,  P. T. ( 1998 ).  Th e neural basis of implicit movements used in recognizing 
hand shape.  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  15 ,  583–615 . 
 Parsons ,  L. M. ,  Fox ,  P. T. ,  Downs ,  J. H. ,  Glass ,  T. ,  Hirsch ,  T. B. ,  Martin ,  C. C. ,  Jerabek ,  P. A. , et al. 
( 1995 ).  Use of implicit motor imagery for visual shape discrimination as revealed by PET. 
 Nature ,  375 ( 6526 ),  54–58 . 
 Pick,  A. ( 1922 ).  Storung der Orientierung am Eigenen Korper.  Psychologische Forschung ,  2 , 
 303–318 . 
 Ramachandran ,  V. , &  Altschuler ,  E. ( 2009 ).  Th e use of visual feedback, in particular mirror visual 
feedback, in restoring brain function.  Brain ,  132 ,  1693–1710 . 
 Ramachandran ,  V. ,  Stewart ,  M. , &  Rogers-Ramachandran ,  D. ( 1992 ).  Perceptual correlates of 
massive cortical reorganization.  Neuroreport ,  3 ( 7 ),  583–586 . 
 Rizzolatt i ,  G. ,  Fogassi ,  L. , &  Gallese ,  V. ( 2002 ).  Motor and cognitive functions of the ventral pre-
motor cortex.    Current Opinion in Neurobiology ,  12 ( 2 ),  149–154 . 
   Schaefer ,  M.  ,   Heinze ,  H. J.  , &   Rott e ,  M.   ( 2008 ).  Observing the touched body magnifi ed alters 
somatosensory homunculus.  Neuroreport ,  19 ( 9 ),  901–905 . 
   Schwoebel ,  J.  ,   Boronat ,  C.,   &   Coslett  ,  H. ( 2002 ).  Th e man who executed “imagined” move-
ments:  Evidence for dissociable components of the body schema.  Brain and Cognition , 
 50 ( 1 ),  1–16 . 
 Schwoebel ,  J. ,  Buxbaum ,  L. J. , &  Coslett ,  H. B. ( 2004 ).  Representations of the human body 
in the production and imitation of complex movements.    Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  21 , 
 285–298 . 
 Schwoebel ,  J. ,  Coslett  ,  H. B. ,  Bradt ,  J. ,  Friedman ,  R. , &  Dileo ,  C. ( 2002 ).  Pain and the body 
schema: Eff ects of pain severity on mental representations of movement.  Neurology ,  59 ( 5 ), 
 775–777 . 
 Schwoebel ,  J. ,  Coslett  ,  H., &  Buxbaum ,  L. ( 2001 ).  Compensatory coding of body part location in 
autotopagnosia: Evidence for extrinsic egocentric coding.  Cognitive Neuropsychology ,  18 ( 4 ), 
 363–381 . 
 Schwoebel ,  J. ,  Friedman ,  R. ,  Duda ,  N. , &  Coslett  ,  H. B. ( 2001 ).  Pain and the body schema—
Evidence for peripheral eff ects on mental representations of movement.  Brain ,  124 , 
 2098–2104 . 
   Shelton ,  J. R.  ,   Fouch ,  E.  , &   Caramazza ,  A.   ( 1998 ).  Th e Selective Sparing of Body Part 
Knowledge: A Case Study.    Neurocase ,  4 ( 4–5 ),  339–351 . 
 Shenton ,  J. T. ,  Schwoebel ,  J. , &  Coslett  ,  H. B.   ( 2004 ).  Mental motor imagery and the body 
schema: evidence for proprioceptive dominance.  Neuroscience Lett ers ,  370 ( 1 ),  19–24 . 
 Sirigu ,  A. ,  Duhamel ,  J. R. ,  Cohen ,  L. ,  Pillon ,  B. ,  Dubois ,  B. , &  Agid ,  Y. ( 1996 ).  Th e mental rep-
resentation of hand movements aft er parietal cortex damage.    Science (New  York, N.Y.) , 
 273 ( 5281 ),  1564–1568 . 

236
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Sirigum  A. ,  Grafman,  J. ,  Bressler,  K. , & Sunderland,  T. ( 1991 ).  Multiple Representations 
Contribute to Body Knowledge Processing: Evidence from a case of Autopagnosia .  Brain 
 114 :  629–642 . 
 Suzuki ,  K. ,  Okuda ,  J. ,  Nakasato ,  N. ,  Kanno ,  A. ,  Hatanaka ,  K. ,  Yamadori ,  A. ,  Fujii ,  T.  , et al. ( 1997 ). 
 Auditory evoked magnetic fi elds in patients with right hemisphere language dominance. 
 Neuroreport ,  8 ( 15 ),  3363–3366 . 
 Taylor-Clarke , M. ,  Jacobsen ,  P. , &  Haggard ,  P. ( 2004 ).  Keeping the world a constant size: object 
constancy in human touch.  Nature Neuroscience ,  7 ( 3 ),  219–220 . 
   Tsakiris,   M.,   &   Haggard,   P.   ( 2005 ).  Th e rubber hand illusion revisited: Visuotactile integration 
and self-att ribution .  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance , 
 31 ,  80–91 . 
 van Beers ,  R. J. ,  Wolpert ,  D. M. , &  Haggard ,  P. ( 2002 ).  When feeling is more important than see-
ing in sensorimotor adaptation.  Current Biology: CB ,  12 ( 10 ),  834–837 . 
 Wann ,  J. P. , &  Ibrahim ,  S. F. ( 1992 ).  Does limb proprioception drift ?  Experimental Brain Research. 
Experimentelle Hirnforschung. Expérimentation cérébrale ,  91 ( 1 ),  162–166 . 
   Wolpert ,  D. M.  ,   Goodbody ,  S. J.  , &   Husain ,  M.   ( 1998 ).  Maintaining internal representations the 
role of the human superior parietal lobe.  Nature Neuroscience ,  1 ( 6 ),  529–533 . 
  Yamamoto ,  S. , &  Kitazawa ,  S. ( 2001a ).  Reversal of subjective temporal order due to arm crossing. 
 Nature ,  4 ( 7 ),  759–765 . 
 Yamamoto ,  S. , &  Kitazawa ,  S. ( 2001b ).  Sensation at the tips of invisible tools.  Nature Neuroscience , 
 4 ( 10 ),  979–980 .  

237
 C H A P T E R  11 
 Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
  
 Todd E.  Feinberg  
 Th e  neuropathologies of the self (NPS;  Table 11.1 ;  Feinberg, 2001 ;  2009a; 2010; 
2011 ) include disorders of the  bodily self in which there is a transformation in the 
person’s sense of their physical being; disorders of the  relational self  where the 
individual has a disturbance in the personal and autobiographical signifi cance of 
the self in relation to the world; and pathologies of the  narrative self that impact 
how the individual thinks about and describes personal past and present circum-
stances. I describe here several of the more common NPS and present a synopsis 
of a theory of their causation and mechanism. For additional clinical descrip-
tion of individual cases, see  Feinberg, 2009a ; 2010 For the relationship of these 
clinical disorders to a general model of the neurobiology of the self, see  Feinberg, 
2009a ; 2011. 
 Disorders of the Bodily Self: Anosognosia for Hemiplegia 
(AHP), Asomatognosia and Somatoparaphrenia 
 Anosognosia, literally “lack of knowledge of the existence of disease,” occurs in 
a wide variety of neuropsychiatric conditions ( Feinberg & Roane, 2003 ) but 
anosognosia for hemiplegia (AHP) is the most common and best known form 
(for some recent reviews and studies of AHP, see  Fotopoulou, Tsakiris, Haggard, 
Vagopoulou, Rudd, & Kopelman, 2008 ;  Marcel, Tegnér, & Nimmo-Smith, 
2004 ;  Orfei, Robinson, Bria, Caltagirone, & Spallett a, 2008 ;  Orfei, Robinson, 
Prigatano, Starkstein, Rüsch, Bria, Caltagirone, & Spallett a, 2007 ;  Vallar & 
Ronchi, 2009 ;  Vuilleumier, 2004 ). In the typical AHP patient, there is an acute 
lesion, most commonly a stroke in the non-dominant hemisphere that leads to left  
hemiplegia and hemispatial neglect. Th e diagnosis of AHP requires only a simple 
 unawareness of hemiplegia  ( Levine, 1990  ;  Levine, Calvanio, & Rinn, 1991 ), but 

238
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
AHP may include a wide range of behaviors. Some patients when pressed may 
agree that the limb is immobile, or att ribute this failure to trivial causes such as 
lack of eff ort, while others may claim that the limb indeed has moved (illusory 
or confabulatory limb movements) while they can see that it is in reality lying 
motionless at their side ( Feinberg, Roane, & Ali, 2000 ). Even when the paralysis 
is repeatedly demonstrated, the patient may adamantly deny weakness, and here 
it is appropriate to characterize the belief as a delusion (see below, and  Coltheart, 
2007 ;  Critchley, 1953 ;  Davies, Aimola Davies, & Coltheart, 2005 ;  Feinberg & 
 Table 11.1    Some of the most widely reported neuropathologies of the self 
(NPS). Th e most delusional forms of these disorders are clinical end points on 
a multifactorial continuum that includes both negative and positive factors 
(see   Figure 11.1  ). A subset of these conditions, most specifi cally related to 
 delusional misidentifi cation syndromes (DMS), have also been referred to or 
overlap with  reduplicative paramnesia or delusions ( Pick, 1903 ;  Alexander et al., 
1979 ;  Weinstein & Burnham, 1991 )  delusional paramnesic misidentifi cation 
(e.g.,  Burgess et al., 1996 ),  content-specifi c delusions (e.g.,  Malloy & 
Richardson, 1994 ), or  monothematic delusions (e.g.,  Davies et al., 2001 ). Th e 
confabulations associated with NPS are most commonly of the  fantastic 
( Bonhoeff er, 1901 ;  Schnider, 2008 ) or  personal  ( Feinberg, 1997 ;  Feinberg & 
Roane, 1997 ;  Feinberg, 2009b ) subtypes (modifi ed from  Feinberg, 2011 ). 
 Syndrome 
 Clinical features 
 Delusional anosognosia  
 Delusional denial of paralysis, oft en accompanied 
by confabulation 
 Somatoparaphrenia 
 Delusional misidentifi cation of the arm, oft en 
accompanied by confabulation 
 Delusional Misidentifi cation 
Syndrome (DMS) 
 Persistent delusional under or over-related 
misidentifi cation of a person, place, or thing 
 Capgras syndrome  
 Under-related DMS 
 syndrome 
 Over-related DMS 
 DMS for the mirror image 
 Under-related DMS for the mirror image 
 Phantom Boarder Syndrome 
 Th e delusional belief that a person (s) is living in the 
residence or close by to the patient 
 Nurturing Syndrome 
 Th e delusional belief that a deceased loved one 
(typically a spouse) is alive and the patient interacts 
with him or her 
 Delusional companion syndrome 
 Th e patient adopts a soft  toy such as a teddy bear 
and treats it like a close companion or child 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
239
Roane, 1997 ;  Feinberg & Roane, 2003 ;  Gerstmann, 1942 ;  McKay, Langdon, & 
Coltheart, 2005 ). A number of perceptual and neurocognitive defi cits may facili-
tate AHP, including proprioceptive loss, hemispatial neglect, generalized confu-
sion, and a host of others factors (  Figure 11.1 ; for some of these see  Critchley, 
1953 ;  Feinberg & Roane, 2003 ;  Gerstmann, 1942 ;  Heilman, 1991 ;  Heilman, 
Barrett , & Adair, 1998 ;  Levine et al., 1991 ;  Marcel, Tegner, & Nimmo-Smith, 
2004 ;  Orfei et al., 2007 ;  Orfei et al., 2008 ;  Vallar & Ronchi, 2009 ;  Vuilleumier, 
2004 ). Th ere remain, however, some unanswered questions regarding AHP. For 
instance, while the presence of hemispatial neglect is a common contributing fac-
tor, one can temporarily reverse the neglect in some anosognosic patients, yet the 
anosognosia itself improves only in some cases ( Cappa, Sterzi, Vallar, & Bisiach, 
1987 ;  Bisiach, Rusconi, & Vallar, 1991 ), and patients with and without AHP may 
have similar lesions and degrees of hemispatial neglect (see  Bisiach & Geminiani, 
1991 and  Feinberg & Roane, 2003  for reviews). Finally, there is a wide continuum 
of degrees and types of AHP. For these and other reasons, it is becoming increas-
ingly evident that no single factor or mechanism can account for AHP ( Feinberg 
& Roane, 1997 ;  Marcel, Tegnér, & Nimmo-Smith, 2004 ;  McKay, Langdon, & 
Coltheart, 2005 ;  Orfei et al., 2007 ). 
 T  Asomatognosia  and somatoparaphrenia most commonly occur in the set-
ting of right hemisphere damage, left  hemiplegia, hemisensory defi cits, and 
hemi-spatial neglect ( Baier & Karnath, 2008 ;  Critchley, 1953 ;  1955 ;  Feinberg, 
2009a ;  Feinberg, Haber, & Leeds, 1990 ;  Feinberg, Venneri, Simone, Fan, & 
Northoff , 2010 ;  Gerstmann, 1942 ;  Halligan, Marshall, & Wade, 1995 ;  Meador, 
Loring, Feinberg, Lee, & Nichols, 2000 ;  Vallar, & Ronchi, 2009 ). As in anosogno-
sia, there is considerable heterogeneity in the asomatognosic response ( Feinberg 
et al., 2010 ).  Critchley (1953)  introduced the term  asomatognosia to describe the 
more general feature of a “loss of awareness of one body-half” without other delu-
sional features, and  Gerstmann (1942) referred to  somatoparaphrenia that was 
notable for the presence of prominent delusional and confabulatory features. 
 Disorders of the Relational Self: Delusional 
Misidentifi cation Syndromes and Delusions and 
Fantasies about Imaginary Persons   
 Th e NPS overlap with several other syndromes, especially the  delusional mis-
identifi cation syndromes (DMS;  Alexander, Stuss, & Benson, 1979 ;  Capgras & 
Reboul-Lachaux, 1923 ;  Christodoulou, 1976; 1977, 1986 ;  Feinberg & Roane, 
2003; 2005 ;  Fleminger & Burns, 1993 ;  Vie´, 1930; 1944 ) and  monothematic (delu-
sions on a single theme;  Coltheart, 2007 ;  Critchley, 1953 ;  Davies, Aimola Davies, 
& Coltheart, 2005 ;  McKay, Langdon, & Coltheart, 2005 ) or  content specifi c 
( Malloy & Richardson, 1994 )  delusions. One commonly reported form of DMS 

240
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
in neurological patients is the Capgras syndrome ( Capgras & Reboul-Lachaux, 
1923 ), in which the individual claims that persons, places, or objects have been 
replaced by nearly identical “doubles.” In the Frégoli syndrome, ( Courbon & Fail, 
1927 ) the patient claims that a known person is taking on the appearance of a 
stranger. Capgras syndrome represents an  under-personalized and Frégoli syn-
drome an  over-personalized misidentifi cation ( Feinberg & Roane, 1997; 2003; 
2005 ). Somatoparaphrenia has been interpreted as a variant of Capgras syn-
drome for their arm in which patients misidentifi es in a delusional and confabu-
latory fashion a part of their body ( Vie´, 1930; 1944 ;  Feinberg & Roane, 1997; 
2003; 2005 ). 
 We described patient S.P. (“Susan”) with  delusional misidentifi cation of the self 
in the mirror (mirror-image DMS;  Gluckman, 1968 ;  Feinberg & Shapiro, 1989 ; 
 Spangenberg, Wagner, & Bachman, 1998 ). She was a woman in her 60s who was 
hearing impaired since the age of fi ve and communicated by speaking, lip read-
ing, and sign language ( Feinberg &Shapiro, 1989; 2009a ) who used sign language 
in the mirror with another “S.P.” who was nearly identical to her in appearance, 
age, and background. MRI of the brain revealed right temporoparietal atrophy 
and neuropsychological testing revealed evidence of right hemisphere dysfunc-
tion. S.P.’s misidentifi cation could not be solely due to a perceptual problem, as 
she readily acknowledged that she was looking in a mirror; she had no spatial con-
fusion with mirrors (i.e., she did not display “mirror agnosia”;  Ramachandran, 
Altschuler, & Hillyer; 1997 ) and she had no diffi  culty identifying any other per-
sons in the mirror at the same time that she claimed her refl ection belonged to 
“the other S.P.” Th erefore, the misidentifi cation of her refl ection could not be due 
to problem with mirrors per se, or a defi cit in emotional relatedness per se but 
represented a selective disorder of relatedness restricted to her own mirror image. 
I will argue that S.P.’s mirror image is in nearly every respect akin to an  imaginary 
companion  as occurs in childhood. 
 In some NPS, also grouped within the DMS ( Rubin, 1988 ;  Hwang, Yang, 
& Tsai, 2003 ), individuals claim the existence of an imaginary person, oft en an 
imaginary child ( Weinstein, Kahn, & Morris, 1956 ). A  self-referential aspect 
of these delusions is that these patients oft en att ributed to the “phantom child” 
the same illness or disability that the patient had. In another NPS,  Shanks and 
Venneri (2002)  described patients with  delusional companions  who claimed that 
an inanimate object was alive and they interacted with the object in a fashion 
commensurate with these beliefs. Th ey described three patients, all women, with 
predominantly right hemisphere dysfunction who treated teddy bears, cloth toys, 
or dolls as persons. In light of the theory I will present later on, I point out the 
wishful nature of the beliefs, and that the delusional companions were a source 
of emotional comfort and companionship. Finally, Venneri and co-workers have 
also described a similar disorder they call  nurturing syndrome ( Venneri, Shanks, 
Staff , & Della Sala, 2000 ). Th ey described two cases—also both women—who 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
241
were in the early stages of dementia. SPECT scans in both patients demonstrated 
frontal dysfunction, right greater than left . Aft er the deaths of their husbands, 
these women claimed that they were still alive. Both women tried to feed photo-
graphs of their husbands. 
 Disorders of the Narrative Self: Symbolic 
Representations of Personal Experiences 
 In some patients with  personal confabulation  ( Feinberg & Roane, 1997 ;  Feinberg, 
2009b ), while the narrative is obstensively about veridical personal events, it may 
also be an expression of the individual’s feelings about the self.  Feinberg, DeLuca, 
Giacino, Roane, & Solms (2005)  described patient L.A., who had a ruptured arte-
riovenous malformation resulting in a right frontal intracranial hemorrhage ho 
adamantly denied his neurological defi cits. 
 LA: 
 A couple of days ago people been telling me the things that happened 
to me and its possible that something happened to me. . . . People been 
telling me that they think there was a big explosion in one place I was at 
and that destroyed my mind. And that is one of the reasons I’m having 
now. . . . What do you call a person that is sleeping and starts to walk? 
 TEF:   Sleep walking. 
 LA:  
 Yeah I started to do that. . . . and that is causing all the disturbances in 
my mind. . . . .People are saying, somebody said I was in a room like next 
door, a big explosion in there and I was in there, and that was going 
to destroy my mind, my personality. Th at might be what it is. . . . .Th ey 
said also that I was going to be sleeping and I was going to awake. But 
I didn’t wake up and I started to walk [starts to cry]  I never had it 
before. . . . Th e doctor said I was going to be sleeping and start walking 
in my sleep, and I don’t understand because I never had it. 
 TEF:   Are you sleep walking now? 
 LA: 
 Not according to my parents and not according to me. 
 TEF:  How is your actual walking? 
 LA:  
 My actual walking is good. 
 TEF:  Fine? So you can run and dance and jump? 
 LA: 
 No problem. . . . 
Although L.A. claims he is in good health and denies his gait impairment, he refers 
to his problems with “sleepwalking,” and although he appears unaware of any of 
his cognitive problems or personality issues, he describes how the therapists have 
told him that an explosion had “destroyed his mind.” In this way, the narrative 
appears to function on both an explicit and an implicit level with reference to the 
patient’s self-awareness. 

242
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Explaining the Neuropathologies of the Self: Th e Ego 
Disequilibrium Th eory 
 Th e NPS are distinguished from purely cognitive conditions in that these lat-
ter disorders are  neutral with reference to the patient’s self and personal related-
ness, in contrast to the NPS which are specifi cally related to and oft en confi ned 
to something of  personal signifi cance to the individual ( Feinberg & Roane, 1997 ). 
Th e confabulations in NPS also diff er from the confabulations in purely amnes-
tic confabulations in that in NPS the confabulations tend to be  less ad hoc, more 
personally idiosyncratic and motivated, less tied to a specifi c domain of neurological 
impairment (multimodal), and more enduring, resistant to correction, repeatable, and 
delusional;  Feinberg, 2010 ). Th e confabulations in NPS are related to or share 
particular features with  fantastic ( Bonhoeff er, 1901 ) or  motivated ( Conway & 
Tacchi, 1996 )  confabulation . Th e confabulations and delusions that I have posited 
are typical of the NPS could also be considered  fantastic, personal or motivated 
confabulations ,  delusional misidentifi cations ,  reduplicative paramnesia or delusions , 
 monothematic delusions ,  content-specifi c delusions,  or simply  delusions ( Table 11.1 ). 
Regardless of how they are classifi ed, the four essential features that distinguish 
the confabulations in NPS from errors based solely upon neurological and cogni-
tive impairments are that they are simultaneously  multimodal ,  selective ,  personally 
signifi cant , and  delusional ( Feinberg, 2010; 2011 ). 
 Th e  negative features ( Jackson, 1884 ) that accompany many of the NPS cannot 
fully explain these syndromes (see for example  Goldstein, 1939 ). For example, 
why are  the misbeliefs and misidentifi cations in DMS and NPS generally multimodal 
and selective ? Some patients with Capgras syndrome may have preserved overt 
facial recognition that permits accurate facial recognition, but an impairment in 
covert (emotional) responses to faces—a negative factor—leads them to deny 
that the individual is the one that they are normally related to ( Ellis & Young, 
1990 ;  Ellis, et al., 1997 ;  Ellis, 1998 ). While this fi nding could account for some 
aspects of the syndrome, it does not explain certain critical issues ( Feinberg, 
2010 ): 1) Capgras syndrome is a multimodal disorder and cannot be accounted 
for by dysfunction in a single sense modality (vision) or perceptual class (faces); 
2) patients with the Capgras syndrome do not utilize readily available extra-facial 
visual and other non-visual information such as hair, clothing, voice, etc.—that 
also carry emotional value—to correct the error; 3) why is the misidentifi cation 
typically confi ned to a single person or a few persons among the many emotion-
ally signifi cant persons in the patient’s life? ( Feinberg et al., 2005 ; although this 
may not be the case among some patients with primary psychiatric diagnoses; 
see for example  Ellis, Young, Quayle, & DePauw, 1997 ); 4) this account may 
only be applied to under-personalized misidentifi cation, as occurs in Capgras 
syndrome, but leaves unexplained over-personalized misidentifi cation as occurs 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
243
in the Frégoli syndrome or in some cases of NPS or DMS in which there is no 
misidentifi cation at all; and 5) it is frequently noted that the confabulations and 
delusional misidentifi cations in these cases may be  wish-fulfi lling ( Conway & 
Tacchi, 1996 ;  Feinberg & Roane, 1997, 2003 ;  Feinberg, DeLuca, Giacino, Roane, 
& Solms, 2005 ;  Fotopoulou, Solms, & Turnbull, 2004 ; Fotopoulou, Conway, & 
Solms, 2007). A unifi ed theory must also account for the role played by positive 
and motivational factors as well. 
 I have proposed a hypothesis called the  ego dysequilibrium theory ( Feinberg 
et. al., 2005 ;  Feinberg, 2009 a & b) that att empts to satisfy these multiple con-
straints and unify the negative and positive factors in the origin of these condi-
tions. According to this theory, the unique features of the adult neuropathologies 
of the self result from 1) a  neurologically derived alteration in the self-boundaries 
2) a  regression to a developmentally earlier, hierarchically lower, or more primi-
tive stage of psychological functioning and 3) a  recrudescence of the patt erns of 
thought and psychological defense typical of these earlier periods. Th e primitive 
defensive patt erns in question include but are not limited to  denial, projection, 
splitt ing, fantasy, and  paranoia, functions that were dormant in the normal adult 
brain, but are now activated by the neurological lesion ( Feinberg, 2009a ; 2010). 
 Th e theory accepts the hypothesis that there is a hierarchy of defensive func-
tions (see for example  Vaillant, 1977, 1992, 1993 ), with denial, delusional pro-
jection (including delusional paranoia), and distortion the most primitive and 
hierarchically lowest defenses, followed by  projection and  fantasy that make their 
appearance somewhat later in child development ( Cramer (1991; 2006 ).  Cramer 
(1991; 2006 ) further points out that  denial through fantasy is a coping strategy 
for the child, and ( Taylor, 1999 ) describes how the fantasy of an  imaginary com-
panions serves important adaptive functions for the child, including alleviating 
loneliness, coping with trauma, and conquering fears, all motivational factors that 
are relevant to the adult NPS cases. Finally, it has been proposed that the psycho-
logical defense of  splitt ing  is another primitive defense relevant to the creation of 
imaginary companions in children ( Taylor, 1999 ) and is also associated with the 
adult neuropathology cases ( Berson, 1983 ). 
 A Four-tiered Hierarchical Model of the 
Neuropathologies of the Self 
 In  Figure 11.1 I present a roughly hierarchical four-tiered model that can serve as 
a fl owchart or template for the analysis of these syndromes (for a more detailed 
analysis, see  Feinberg, 2010; 2011 ). 
  Level 1: Cognitive defi cits  are negative cognitive factors, the presence of which 
will vary depending upon the syndrome and case. In asomatognosia and somato-
paraphrenia, sensory loss and neglect have been posited to play an essential role 

244
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 
Level 4: Syndromes
Level 3: Defense/Adaptation/Motivation
Top down
factors
Bottom up
factors
Level 2: Self-related Deficits
Level 1: Cognitive Deficits
Denial
Projection
Paranoia
“Unawareness” of hemiplegia1
Loss of bodily relatedness4
Loss of personal identity
Self awareness defect5
Disturbed ego boundaries6
Autobiographical memory loss
“Reality monitoring” deficit7
“Anomaly detector” deficit8
“Belief evaluation” deficit9
Limbic disconnection10
Spatial disorientation
Visuoperceptual disturbances
Hemispatial neglect
Sensory loss
Retro and anterograde amnesia
Temporal context confusion
Executive dysfunction
Generalized confusion1
Feedforward dysfunction2
Verbal disconnection3
Splitting
Fantasy
Restitution of identify
Wish fulfillment
Dissociation11
Delusional anosognosia
Somatoparaphrenia
Delusional misidentification
Delusional forms of confabulation
Delusional companion syndrome
Phantom boarder/child/others
Nurturing syndrome
 Figure 11.1  A hierarchical four-tiered model of representative factors contributing 
to the neuropathologies of the self. Specific cognitive deficits may only be relevant 
to certain conditions, while self-related deficits and positive features may be 
applied to all syndromes. Top-down and bottom-up factors contribute to the 
neuropathologies of the self. A temporal dimension emerges as syndromes evolve 
from the interaction of multiple lower-level negative and higher-level positive 
factors.  
 1 Levine, 1990 ;  Levine et al., 1991 ;  2 Heilman, 1991 ; Heilman et al., 1998.  3 With reference 
to anosognosia and asomatognosia see  Geschwind, 1965 ;  Gazzaniga, 2000 ;  4 For the neural 
representation of body ownership see  Feinberg et al., 1990 ;  Vallar & Ronchi, 2009 ; Tsakiris, 2009 ; 
 5 Stuss, 1991 ;  6  Feinberg et al., 2005 ;  Feinberg, 2009a ; 2009b;  Feinberg et al., 2010 ;  7 Johnson, 1991 ; 
 8 Ramachandran, 1995 ;  9  Coltheart, 2007 ;  Davies et al., 2005 ;  McKay et al., 2005 ;  10 With reference 
to Capgras syndrome see Alexander et al., 1979;  Ellis & Young, 1990 ;  11 With reference to DMS see 
 Christodoulou, 1976 ;1977;1986. 
( Vallar & Ronchi, 2009 ), while in confabulation and misidentifi cation, memory 
disorders, executive dysfunction, and anatomical disconnection are noted to be 
contributing factors (see for example  Alexander, Stuss, & Benson, 1979 ).   Level 
2: Self-related defi cits  are also negative factors, but are specifi cally  self-related. 
Since these are negative factors, with reference to anosognosia for hemiplegia and 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
245
asomatognosia, for example, I characterize this level of impairment as  unaware-
ness of hemiplegia and  loss of bodily relatedness  (i.e., negative factors, including per-
sonal neglect) as opposed to  delusional denial of hemiplegia and  delusional denial 
of ownership  (delusional AHP and somatoparaphrenia at the top of the hierarchy, 
 Figure 11.1 ). While right temporoparietal regions are central to the establishment 
of normal self-relatedness to the body (for a review see  Tsakiris, 2009 ), and dam-
age to this region is an essential negative factor in the creation of asomatogno-
sia and somatoparaphrenia ( Feinberg et al., 1990 ;  Feinberg et al., 2010 ;  Vallar & 
Ronchi, 2009 ), additional factors must be operative when this negative unaware-
ness evolves into delusional misidentifi cation of the body as occurs in somato-
paraphrenia. Negative factors cited in case of DMS and confabulation include the 
dysexecutive syndrome aft er frontal damage (Stuss & Benson, 1985;  Stuss, 1991 ; 
 Stuss, Picton, & Alexander, 2001 ;  Stuss, Rosenbaum, Malcolm, Christianna, & 
Keenan, 2005 ) a “reality monitoring defect” in confabulation ( Johnson, 1991 ), an 
“anomaly detector” defect in anosognosia for hemiplegia ( Ramachandran, 1995 ), 
or a defi cit in a hypothetical “belief evaluation system” ( Davies et  al., 2005 ), 
Coltheart, 2005; 2007) and  McKay et al., 2005 ) in anosognosia and DMS. An 
additional negative factor in the development of these disorders is that bilateral or 
right, especially frontal, pathology causes a  permeability of the ego boundaries that 
results in an  ego dysequilibrium that produces a  two-way disturbance between the 
self and the environment, specifi cally with regard to personal relatedness. Th is 
could potentially lead to disorders of  both  under (e.g., Capgras syndrome) and 
over (e.g., Frégoli syndrome,  Feinberg, Eaton, Roane, & Giacino, 1999 ) related-
ness between the self and the world ( Feinberg et al., 2005 ;  Feinberg & Keenan, 
2005 ,  Feinberg, 2009a, 2010 ). 
  Level 3: Defense, adaptation, and motivation  represent the way the dam-
aged brain adapts—in a positive fashion—to the various cognitive and psy-
chological defi cits, but it does so in a regressed fashion. Th ese primitive 
mechanisms according to  Cramer (1991)  are largely unconscious and auto-
matic when compared to the mature defenses, which are held to be more 
conscious and voluntary. Th e developmental progression from primitive and 
immature to mature defenses may result from brain maturation and increasing 
cognitive skills ( Cramer, 1991, 2006 ;  Elkind, 1976 ; Laughlin, 1970). Another 
variable is the relationship between primitive and immature defenses and ego 
boundaries ( Feinberg, 2009a ; 2010; 2011). Immature or hierarchically lower 
order defenses are more likely to violate the boundary between self and non-self 
( Cramer, 1991 ), and the manifestations of both denial and projection involve 
treating that which actually pertains to the self as if it were only relevant to the 
external world ( Breznitz, 1983 ). 
  Level 4: Th e syndromes  are the result of numerous positive and negative factors 
and the lines of development for any given disorder of the self can be traced from 
lower to higher levels. For example, moving from bott om to top, asomatognosia 

246
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
may result from a large number of “cognitive defi cits,” such as sensory loss, neglect, 
and anatomical disconnection, and specifi c “self-related defi cits,” such as dis-
turbed ego boundaries, self-monitoring defects, and loss of relatedness to a part 
of the body. To these negative defects are positive contributing factors such as the 
mobilization of immature defenses and adaptations (denial, projection, fantasy, 
splitt ing, etc.) If a suffi  cient number of these interacting factors are operative, 
the entire picture results in the full clinical syndrome of somatoparaphrenia, in 
which the patient not only misidentifi es the arm, but it may be reduplicated or 
the subject of fantastic fantasy and confabulation ( Feinberg et al., 2010 ). With 
regard to DMS,  Staton, Brumback, & Wilson (1982) and  Bouvier-Peyrou, Landis 
& Annoni (2000) reported single cases of young men with traumatic brain inju-
ries and bifrontal damage and delusional misidentifi cation of the self. In line with 
 Figure 11.1 , both Staton et al. and Bouvier-Peyrou et al. proposed that combined 
executive and memory impairments (level 1) resulted in a failure to integrate cur-
rent experience with their past sense of who they were, a mechanism similar to 
the explanation of  Alexander et al. (1979), who posited a temporo-limbic-frontal 
disconnection in their case of Capgras syndrome. Th is disconnect between “past” 
and “present” selves created a loss of personal identity (level 2), and the response 
and adaptation to this in the presence of the neurologically derived permeability 
in ego boundaries is the emergence of the primitive defenses of  dissociation (“Th is 
must be a dream”)  denial (“this can’t be really happening”)  projection (“it’s the 
world that isn’t real”; “it’s my parents who are fake, not me”) and  fantasy (“another 
version of me will wake up from this nightmare and I’ll be well” (level 3). Th e 
ultimate syndromes we call delusional misidentifi cation, including Capgras syn-
drome, delusional reduplication, and delusional confabulation. 
 Ego Boundaries and Neuroanatomy 
 Th e NPS are associated with frontal, especially right hemisphere pathology 
( Alexander et al., 1979 ;  Burgess, Baxter, Martyn, & Alderman, 1996 ;  Feinberg 
& Shapiro, 1989 ;  Fleminger & Burns, 1993 ;  Förstl, Burns, Jacoby, & Levy, 1991 ; 
 Malloy Cimino, & Westlake, 1992 ;  Spangenberg, Wagner, & Bachman, 1998 ). 
 Burgess et  al. (1996) reviewed 41 cases of confabulation, paramnesias, and 
various DMS and found the highest percentage of cases had right frontal hemi-
sphere (44 percent) or bilateral frontal (39 percent) lesions while only 9.7 per-
cent had left  frontal lesions.  Feinberg et al., (2005), in a series of published 
cases of DMS or reduplication, found 15 (51.72 percent) had left  hemisphere 
damage, but right frontal damage was present in 28 out of 29 cases (96.6 per-
cent).  Feinberg et al. (2010) analyzed cases of simple asomatognosia (errors 
regarding the ownership of the limb) and somatoparaphrenia (denial of arm 
ownership, delusions, and confabulations) in patients with right hemisphere 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
247
strokes and left  hemiplegia. When compared with right hemisphere control 
patients without asomatognosia or somatoparaphrenia, patients with asomato-
gnosia and somatoparaphrenia had more medial frontal damage, indicating a 
role for medial frontal damage in the development of all forms of asomatogno-
sia, but the somatoparaphrenia cases also had greater orbitofrontal damage, 
suggesting an additional role for an orbitofrontal lesion that could be due to 
the role that orbitofrontal damage plays in the development of confabulation 
( Deluca & Diamond, 1995 ;  Ptak & Schnider, 1999 ). Th ese results taken collec-
tively support the role that the frontal lobes, especially medial zones ( Feinberg, 
2009a ;  Feinberg et al, 2010 ;  Northoff  & Bermpohl, 2004 ;  Northoff , Heinzel, de 
Greck, Bermpohl, Dobrowolny, & Panksepp, 2006; Northoff  et al., 2009 ) play 
more generally in a host of self-related functions ( Stuss, 1991 ;  Stuss, Picton, & 
Alexander, 2001 ;  Stuss, Rosenbaum, Malcolm, Christianna, & Keenan, 2005 ).  
 Conclusions: Th e Right Hemisphere and Ego 
Disequilibrium 
 Th e  neuropathologies of the self are a group of syndromes in which brain dysfunc-
tion causes a signifi cant alteration in the individual’s sense of self. Th e neuro-
pathology particularly involves the frontal lobes, especially within the right 
hemisphere, and damage to these sectors results in a disorder of ego boundar-
ies and ego functions ( ego disequilibrium ) that facilitates the emergence of devel-
opmentally immature styles of thought and ego functioning. Th is accounts for 
the striking resemblance between some of the patt erns of behavior we see in the 
adult NPS cases to behaviors that are common in the normal child. Given that 
the primitive defenses are largely verbally expressed— what people say to them-
selves and others about themselves and the world —in the NPS cases it is possible 
that the preservation and activation of the primitive defenses (including denial, 
projection, splitt ing, and fantasy) could be due to the relatively intact left  verbal 
hemisphere, and that the neural basis of the mature defenses may be lateralized to 
the non-dominant hemisphere. 
 References 
    Alexander ,  M. P.  ,   Stuss ,  D. T.  , &   Benson ,  D. F.   ( 1979 ).  Capgras syndrome: A reduplicative phe-
nomenon.  Neurology ,  29 ,  334–339 . 
   Baier ,  B.,   &   Karnath ,  H-0.   ( 2008 ).  Tight link between our sense of limb ownership and 
self-awareness of actions.  Stroke ,  39 ,  486–488 . 
   Berson ,  R. J.   ( 1983 ).  Capgras’ syndrome.    American Journal of Psychiatry ,  140 ,  969–978 . 

248
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Bisiach ,  E.  , &   Geminiani ,  G   ( 1991 ). Anosognosia related to hemiplegia and hemianopia. In 
 G. P.  Prigatano &  D. L.  Schacter (Eds.),   Awareness of defi cit aft er brain injury  (pp.  17–39 ). 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
   Bisiach ,  E.  ,   Rusconi ,  M. L.  , &   Vallar ,  G.   ( 1991 ).  Remission of somatoparaphrenic delusion 
through vestibular stimulation.  Neuropsychologia ,  29 ,  1029–1031 . 
 Bonhoeff er ,  K. ( 1901 ).   Die akuten Geisteskrankheiten der Gewohnheitstrinker  .  Gustav Fischer ,  Jena . 
 Bouvier-Peyrou ,  M ,  Landis ,  T., &  Annoni ,  J-M. ( 2000 ).  Self-duplication shift ed in time: A par-
ticular form of delusional misidentifi cation syndrome.  Neurocase ,  6 ,  57–63 . 
 Breznitz ,  S. ( 1983 ).   Th e Denial of Stress  .  New York :  International Universities Press . 
 Burgess ,  P. W. ,  Baxter ,  D. ,  Martyn ,  R. , &  Alderman ,  N. ( 1996 ). Delusional paramnesic misiden-
tifi cation. In  P. W.  Halligan &  J. C.  Marshall (Eds.),   Method in Madness: Case Studies in 
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry  (pp. 51–78 ).  East Sussex, UK :  Psychology Press . 
 Capgras ,  J. , &  Reboul-Lachaux ,  J. ( 1923 ).  L’illusion des “sosies”dans un delire systematize  Bulletin 
de Société Clinique de Médicine Mentale ,  11 ,  6–16 . 
   Cappa ,  S.  ,   Sterzi ,  R.  ,   Vallar ,  G.  , &   Bisiach ,  E.   ( 1987 ).  Remission of hemineglect and anosognosia 
during vestibular stimulation.  Neuropsychologia ,  25 ,  775–782 . 
 Christodoulou ,  G. N. ( 1976 ).  Delusional hyper-identifi cations of the Fregoli type  Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica ,  54 ,  305–314 . 
 Christodoulou ,  G. N. ( 1977 ).  Th e syndrome of Capgras.    British Journal of Psychiatry ,  130 ,  556–564 . 
 Christodoulou ,  G. N. ( 1986 ).  Role of depersonalization-derealization phenomena in the delu-
sional misidentifi cation syndromes.  Bibliotheca Psychiatrica ,  164 ,  99–104 . 
 Coltheart ,  M. ( 2005 ).  Delusional belief.  Australian Journal of Psychology ,  57 ,  72–76 . 
 Coltheart ,  M. ( 2007 ).  Th e 33rd Bartlett  Lecture:  Cognitive neuropsychiatry and delusional 
belief.  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology ,  60 ,  1041–1062 . 
   Conway ,  M. A.  , &   Tacchi ,  P. C.   ( 1996 ).  Motivated confabulation.    Neurocase,  2 ,  325–339 . 
   Courbon ,  P.  , &   Fail ,  G.   ( 1927 ).  Syndrome d’illusion de Frégoli et schizophrénie.    Bulletin de 
Société Clinique de Médicine Mentale ,  15 ,  121–124 . 
 Cramer ,  P. ( 1991 ).   Th e Development of Defense Mechanisms:  Th eory, Research, and Assessment  . 
 New York :  Springer-Verlag . 
 Cramer ,  P. ( 2006 ).   Protecting the Self: Defense Mechanisms in Action  .  New York :  Th e Guilford Press . 
 Critchley ,  M. ( 1953 ).   Th e Parietal Lobes  .  New York :  Hafner Press . 
 Critchley ,  M. ( 1955 ).  Personifi cation of paralyzed limbs in hemiplegics.  British Medical Journal , 
 30 ,  284–287 . 
 Davies ,  M. ,  Coltheart ,  M. ,  Langdon ,  R. , &  Breen ,  N. ( 2001 ).  Monothematic delusions: Towards 
a two-factor account.  Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psychology ,  8 ,  133–158 . 
  Davies ,  M. ,  Aimola Davies ,  A. , &  Coltheart ,  M. ( 2005 ).  Anosognosia and the two-factor theory 
of delusion.  Mind and Language ,  20 ,  209–236 . 
 Deluca ,  J. , &  Diamond ,  B. J.  ( 1995 ).  Aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery: A review 
of the neuroanatomical and neuropsychological sequelae.    Clinical and Experimental 
Neuropsychology ,  17 ,  100–121 . 
 Elkind ,  D. ( 1976 ). Cognitive development and psychopathology:  observations on egocen-
trism and ego defense. In   E.   Schopler   &   R. J.   Reichler   (Eds.),   Psychopathology and Child 
Development. Research and Treatment  (pp.  167–183 ).  New York :  Plenum . 
 Ellis ,  H. D. ( 1998 ).  Cognitive neuropsychiatry and delusional misidentifi cation syndromes: An 
exemplary vindication of the new discipline  Cognitive Neuropsychiatry ,  3 ,  81–90 . 
 Ellis ,  H. D. , &  Young ,  A. W. ( 1990 ).  Accounting for delusional misidentifi cations.  British Journal 
of Psychiatry ,  157  ,  239–248 . 
   Ellis ,  H. D.  ,   Young ,  A. W.  ,   Quayle ,  A. H.  , &   de Pauw ,  K. W.   ( 1997 ).  Reduced autonomic responses 
to faces in Capgras delusion.  Proceedings of the Royal Society of London: Biological Sciences , 
 B264 ,  1085–1092 . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ( 1997 ). Anosognosia and confabulation. In  T. E.  Feinberg and  M. J.  Farah (Eds.), 
  Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology  , (1st ed., pp.  369–390 ).  New York :  McGraw Hill . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ( 2001 ).   Altered Egos: How the Brain Creates the Self  .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
249
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ( 2009a ).   From Axons to Identity: Neurological Explorations of the Nature of the Self  . 
 New York :  W.W. Norton . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ( 2009b ). Confabulation, the self, and ego functions: Th e “Ego Dysequilibrium 
Th eory.” In  W.  Hirstein (Ed.),   Confabulation: Views fr om Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Philosophy  (pp.  91–107 ).  New York :  Oxford . 
 Feinberg, T.  E. (2011). Neuropathologies of the self:  Clinical and anatomical features. 
 Consciousness and Cognition, 20 , 75–81. 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. (2010).  Neuropathologies of the self: a general theory.    Neuropsychoanalysis , 2, 
133–158. 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ,  DeLuca ,  J. ,  Giacino ,  J. T. ,  Roane ,  D. M. , &  Solms ,  M. ( 2005 ). Right hemisphere 
pathology and the self: Delusional Misidentifi cation and Reduplication. In  T. E.  Feinberg 
&  J. P.  Keenan (Eds.),   Th e lost self:  Pathologies of the brain and identity  (pp.  100–130 ). 
 New York :  Oxford . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ,  Eaton ,  L. A. ,  Roane ,  D. M., &  Giacino ,  J. T.  ( 1999 ).  Multiple Fregoli delusions 
aft er traumatic brain injury.  Cortex ,  35 ,  373–387 . 
   Feinberg ,  T. E.  ,   Haber ,  L. D.  , &   Leeds ,  N. E.   ( 1990 ).  Verbal asomatognosia.    Neurology ,  40 , 
 1391–1394 . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E., &  Keenan ,  J. P. ( 2005 ).  Where in the brain is the self?  Consciousness and Cognition , 
 14 ,  661–678 . 
   Feinberg ,  T. E.,   &   Roane ,  D. M.   ( 1997 ).  Anosognosia, completion and confabulation:  Th e 
neutral-personal dichotomy.  Neurocase ,  3 ,  73–85 . 
   Feinberg ,  T. E.,   &   Roane ,  D. M.   ( 2003 ). Anosognosia. In   T. E.   Feinberg   &   M. J.   Farah   (Eds.), 
  Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology  (2nd ed., pp.  345–362 ).  New York :  McGraw-Hill . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E., &  Roane ,  D. M. ( 2005 ).  Delusional misidentifi cation syndromes.  Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America ,  28,  665–683 . 
   Feinberg ,  T. E.  ,   Roane ,  D. M.,   &   Ali ,  J.   ( 2000 ).  Illusory limb movements in anosognosia for hemi-
plegia.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  68 ,  511–513 . 
   Feinberg ,  T. E.,   &   Shapiro ,  R. M.   ( 1989 ).  Misidentifi cation reduplication and the right hemi-
sphere.  Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology ,  2 ,  39–48 . 
 Feinberg ,  T. E. ,  Venneri ,  A. ,  Simone ,  A. M. ,  Fan ,  Y. , &   Northoff  ,  G. ( 2010 ).  Th e neuroanatomy 
of asomatognosia and somatoparaphrenia.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry , 
 81 ,  276–81 . 
 Fleminger ,  S., &  Burns ,  A. ( 1993 ).  Th e delusional misidentifi cation syndromes in patients with 
and without evidence of organic cerebral disorder:  A  structured review of case reports.  
 Biological Psychiatry  33 ,  22–32 . 
 Förstl ,  H ,  Burns ,  A ,  Jacoby ,  R , &  Levy ,  R. ( 1991 ).  Neuroanatomical correlates of clinical misiden-
tifi cation and misperception in senile dementia of the Alzheimer’s type.    Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry ,  52 ,  268–271 . 
 Fotopoulou, A, Conway, M.  A., & Solms, M.  (2007). Confabulation:  Motivated Reality 
Monitoring. Neuropsychologia, 45, 2180–2190. 
 Fotopoulou ,  A.  Tsakiris ,  M. ,  Haggard ,  P. ,  Vagopoulou ,  A. ,  Rudd ,  A., &  Kopelman ,  M. ( 2008 ). 
 Th e role of motor intention in motor awareness: An experimental study on anosognosia for 
hemiplegia ,  Brain ,  131 ,  3432–3442 . 
 Gazzaniga ,  M. S. ( 2000 ).  Cerebral specialization and interhemispheric communication: Does the 
corpus callosum enable the human condition?  Brain ,  123 ,  1293–1326 . 
 Gerstmann ,  J. ( 1942 ).  Problem of imperception of disease and of impaired body territories with 
organic lesions.  Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry ,  48 ,  890–913 . 
 Geschwind ,  N. ( 1965 ).  Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man.  Brain ,  88 ,  585–644 . 
   Gluckman ,  L. K.   ( 1968 ).  A case of Capgras syndrome.    Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry ,  2 ,  39–43 . 
 Goldstein ,  K. ( 1939 ).   Th e Organism: A Holistic Approach to Biology Derived fr om Pathological Data 
in Man  .  New York :  American Book Company . 

250
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Halligan ,  P. W. ,  Marshall ,  J. C. , &  Wade ,  D. T.  ( 1995 ).  Unilateral somatoparaphrenia aft er right 
hemisphere stroke: a case description.  Cortex ,  31 ,  173–182 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1991 ). Anosognosia:  Possible neuropsychological mechanisms. In  G. P. 
 Prigatano &  G. L.  Schacter (Eds.),   Awareness of Defi cit aft er Brain Injury:  Clinical and 
Th eoretical Issues  (pp. 53–62 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Barrett  ,  A. M. ,  Adair ,  J. C. ( 1998 ).  Possible mechanisms of anosognosia: a defect 
in self-awareness.  Philosophical Transactions Royal Society of London B, Biological Science , 
 353,  1903–1909 . 
 Hwang ,  J-P. ,  Yang ,  C-H. , and  Tsai ,  S-J. ( 2003 ).  Phantom boarder symptom in dementia. 
 International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry ,  18 ,  417–420 . 
 Jackson,  J. H. Evolution and dissolution of the nervous system. Croonian Lectures delivered at 
the Royal College of Physicians, March  1884 . Reprinted in  J.  Taylor (ed.),   Selected Writings 
of John Hughlings Jackson  , 1958, vol. 2, (pp.  45–75 ).  New York :  Basic Books . 
   Johnson ,  M. K.   ( 1991 ). Reality monitoring: Evidence from confabulation in organic brain dis-
ease patients. In   G. P.  Prigatano &  G. L.  Schacter (Eds.),  Awareness of Defi cit aft er Brain 
Injury: Clinical and Th eoretical Issues (pp. 176–197 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Laughlin ,  H. P. ( 1970 ).   Th e Ego and Its Defenses  .  New York :  Appleton-Century-Croft s . 
 Levine ,  D. N. ( 1990 ).  Unawareness of visual and sensorimotor defects: A hypothesis.  Brain and 
Cognition ,  13 ,  233–281 . 
   Levine ,  D. N.  ,   Calvanio ,  R.  , &   Rinn ,  W. E.   ( 1991 ).  Th e pathogenesis of anosognosia for hemiple-
gia.  Neurology ,  41 ,  1770–1781 . 
 Malloy,  P. ,  Cimino,  C. , and  Westlake,  R. ( 1992 ).  Diff erential Diagnosis of primary and secondary 
delusions.  Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology ,  5 ,  83–96 . 
 Malloy ,  P. F., &  Richardson ,  E. D. ( 1994 ).  Th e frontal lobes and content-specifi c delusions.    Th e 
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences ,  6 ,  455–466 . 
 Marcel ,  A. J ,  Tegnér ,  R , &  Nimmo-Smith ,  I. ( 2004 ).  Anosognosia for plegia: Specifi city, exten-
sion, partiality and disunity of bodily unawareness.    Cortex ,  40 ,  19–40 . 
 McKay ,  R. ,  Langdon ,  R. , &  Coltheart ,  M. ( 2005 ). “ Sleights of mind”: Delusions, defences and 
self-deception.  Cognitive Neuropsychiatry ,  10 ,  305–326 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Feinberg ,  T. E. ,  Lee ,  G. P. , &  Nichols ,  M. E.  ( 2000 ).  Anosognosia 
and asomatognosia during intracarotid amobarbital inactivation.  Neurology ,  55 ,  816–820 . 
  Northoff  ,  G., &  Bermpohl ,  F. ( 2004 ).  Cortical midline structures and the self.  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences ,  8 ,  102–107 . 
   Northoff  ,  G.  ,   Heinzel ,  A.  ,   de Greck ,  M.  ,   Bermpohl ,  F.  ,   Dobrowolny ,  H.  , &   Panksepp ,  J.   ( 2006 ). 
 Self-referential processing in our brain—a meta-analysis of imaging studies on the self.  
 Neuroimage ,  31 ,  440–457 . 
 Northoff  ,  G. ,  Schneider ,  F. ,  Rott e ,  M. ,  Matt hiae ,  C. ,  Tempelmann ,  C. ,  Wiebking ,  C. ,  Bermpohl , 
 F. ,  . . . , Panksepp ,  J. ( 2009 ).  Diff erential parametric modulation of self-relatedness and emo-
tions in diff erent brain regions  Human Brain Mapping ,  30 ,  369–382 . 
 Orfei ,  M. D. ,  Robinson ,  R. G. ,  Bria ,  P. ,  Caltagirone ,  C. , &  Spallett a ,  G. ( 2008 ).  Unawareness of 
illness in neuropsychiatric disorders:  Phenomenological certainty versus etiopathogenic 
vagueness.  Th e Neuroscientist ,  14 ,  203–222 . 
 Orfei ,  M. D. ,  Robinson ,  R. G. ,  Prigatano ,  G. P. ,  Starkstein ,  S. ,  Rüsch ,  N. ,  Bria ,  P. C. ,   Caltagirone , 
 C., &  Spallett a ,  G.  ( 2007 ).  Anosognosia for hemiplegia aft er stroke is a multifaceted phe-
nomenon: a systematic review of the literature.  Brain ,  130 ,  3075–3090 . 
 Pick ,  A. ( 1903 ).  On reduplicative paramnesia.  Brain ,  26 ,  260–267 . 
   Ptak ,  R.  , &   Schnider ,  A.   ( 1999 ).  Spontaneous confabulations aft er orbitofrontal damage: Th e role 
of temporal context confusions and self-monitoring.  Neurocase ,  5 ,  243–250 . 
  Ramachandran ,  V. S. ( 1995 ).  Anosognosia in parietal lobe syndrome.  Consciousness and Cognition , 
 4 ,  22–51 . 
  Ramachandran ,  V. S. ,  Altschuler ,  E. L. , &  Hillyer ,  S. ( 1997 ).  Mirror agnosia.  Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London, B.  264 ,  645–647 . 

Th e Neuropathologies of the Self
251
 Rubin ,  E. H. ,  Drevets ,  W. C. , &  Burke ,  W. J. ( 1988 ).  Th e nature of psychotic symptoms in senile 
dementia of the Alzheimer type.  Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology ,  1 ,  16–20 . 
 Schnider ,  A. ( 2008 ).   Th e confabulating mind: How the brain creates reality  .  New York :  Oxford . 
 Shanks ,  M. F. , &  Venneri ,  A. ( 2002 ).  Th e emergence of delusional companions in Alzheimer’s 
disease: An unusual misidentifi cation syndrome.  Cognitive Neuropsychiatry ,  7 ,  317–328 . 
 Spangenberg ,  K. B. ,  M. T.  Wagner , and  D. L.  Bachman ( 1998 ).  Neuropsychological analysis of 
a case of abrupt onset mirror sign following a hypotensive crisis in a patient with vascular 
dementia.  Neurocase ,  4 ,  149–154 . 
 Staton ,  R. D. ,  Brumback ,  R. A. ,  Wilson ,  H.  ( 1982 ).  Reduplicative paramnesia: A disconnection 
syndrome of memory.  Cortex ,  18 ,  23–36 . 
 Stuss ,  D. T . ( 1991 ). Disturbances of self-awareness aft er frontal system damage. In  G. P.  Prigatano 
&  G. L.  Schacter (Eds.),   Awareness of Defi cit aft er Brain Injury: Clinical and Th eoretical Issues 
injury  (pp.  63–83 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Stuss, D., & Benson, D. F. (1985).  Th e Frontal Lobes. New York: Raven Press. 
   Stuss ,  D. T.  ,   Picton ,  T. W.  , &   Alexander ,  M. P.   ( 2001 ). Consciousness, self-awareness, and the 
frontal lobes. In   S. P.   Salloway  ,   P. F.   Malloy   &   J. D.   Duff y  , (Eds.),   Th e fr ontal lobes and neuro-
psychiatric illness  (pp.  101–109 ).  Washington, DC :  American Psychiatric Publishing . 
   Stuss ,  D. T.  ,   Rosenbaum ,  R. S.  ,   Malcolm ,  S.     Christianna ,  W.,   &   Keenan ,  J. P.   ( 2005 ). Th e frontal 
lobes and self-awareness. In  T. E.  Feinberg &  J. P.  Keenan (Eds.),   Th e lost self: Pathologies of 
the brain and identity  (pp.  50–64 ).  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Taylor ,  M. ( 1999 ).   Imaginary companions and the children who create them  .  New York :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Tsakiris ,  M. ( 2009 ).  My body in the brain:  A  neurocognitive model of body-ownership. 
 Neuropsychologia ,  48 ,  703–712.  
   Turnbull ,  O. H.  ,   Berry ,  H.  , &   Evans ,  C. E. Y  . ( 2004 ).  A positive emotional bias in confabulatory 
false beliefs about place.  Brain and Cognition ,  55 ,  490–494 . 
 Vaillant ,  G. E. ( 1977 ).   Adaptation to Life  .  Boston :  Litt le, Brown . 
 Vaillant ,  G. E. ( 1992 ).   Ego Mechanisms of Defense:  A  Guide for Clinicians and Researchers  . 
 Washington, DC :  American Psychiatric Press . 
 Vaillant ,  G. E.  ( 1993 ).   Th e Wisdom of the Ego  .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Vallar ,  G., &  Ronchi ,  R. ( 2009 ).  Somatoparaphrenia: a body delusion. A review of the neuropsy-
chological literature.    Experimental Brain Research ,  192 ,  533–551 . 
 Venneri ,  A. ,  Shanks ,  M. F. ,  Staff  ,  R. T. , &  Della Sala ,  S. ( 2000 ).  Nurturing syndrome: a form 
of pathological bereavement with delusions in Alzheimer’s disease.    Neuropsychologia ,  38 , 
 213–224 . 
 Vie ´  J. ( 1930 ).  Un trouble de l’identifi cation des personnes: L’illusion des sosies.  Annales Médico- 
Psychologiques ,  88 ,  214–237 . 
 Vie ´  J. ( 1944 ).  Les meconnaissances systematiques.  Annales Médico- Psychologiques (Paris),  102 , 
 410–455 . 
 Vuilleumier ,  P. (2004).  Anosognosia: Th e neurology of beliefs and uncertainties .  Cortex ,  40 ,  9–17 . 
 Weinstein ,  E. A., &  Burnham ,  D. L. ( 1991 ).  Reduplication and the syndrome of Capgras. 
 Psychiatry ,  54 ,  78–88 . 
 Weinstein ,  E. A. ,  Kahn ,  R. L. , &  Morris ,  G. O. ( 1956 ).  Delusions about children following brain 
injury.  Journal of the Hillside Hospital ,  5 ,  290–298 .  

252
 C H A P T E R  12 
 Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
  
 Lee X.  Blonder  
 Introduction 
 Patient-oriented research into impairments of emotional expression has both 
theoretical and clinical signifi cance. Th e study of these disorders in individuals 
with neurologic disease has shed light on the neuroanatomic, neuropharmaco-
logic, and neurobehavioral mechanisms that underlie emotional expression. 
Furthermore, an understanding of how these disorders manifest themselves in 
diff erent patient populations has generated increased translational work includ-
ing eff orts to develop appropriate treatments. Some requirements in Positron 
Emission Tomography (PET) or functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(fMRI), such as the positioning of the individual in a scanning device and restric-
tion of head motion, limit the ability to design and conduct experiments on emo-
tional expression. Hence, current knowledge regarding both the neural substrates 
of and the eff ects of neurologic disease on emotional expression derives almost 
exclusively from patient-oriented research conducted either at the bedside, in the 
clinic or laboratory, or in the home.  
 Channels of Emotional Expression 
 Humans express emotion via verbal and non-verbal channels. Verbal communi-
cation of emotion occurs through spoken and writt en language and appears to 
be uniquely human— i.e,. there is litt le evidence suggesting that the capacity to 
use semantic, phonologic, and syntactic processes to express emotion is present 
in non-human primates. In contrast, non-verbal expression of emotion appears 
more primitive, given its use by non-human primates and mammals to commu-
nicate internal states and to establish position in the social hierarchy. Non-verbal 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
253
communication of emotion includes facial expression, prosodic expression (into-
nation, stress, pause, and rhythm in speech), and gesture (hand gestures and 
body posture). While verbal and non-verbal channels of emotional expression 
work in concert in the neurologically intact individual, research in behavioral 
neurology and neuropsychology suggests that they are oft en fractionated in the 
brain-damaged patient. Th us, a person might be capable of articulating an emo-
tionally expressive sentence such as “Th at makes me happy” but with a monotone 
voice, a “masked” facial expression, or both. Furthermore, in the neurologically 
intact individual, verbal and non-verbal expressions of emotion communicate 
internal state, affi  rm socio-cultural expectations including social status, and/
or deceive and manipulate others. In contrast, the expression of emotion by 
brain-damaged patients is made more complex in that reduced signal or chan-
nel inconsistent behavior may refl ect neural dysfunction rather than the patient’s 
feelings or communicative agenda. Th e remainder of this chapter will consist of 
a review of past and current research on the neurology of emotional expression 
including discussion of theoretical and clinical implications.  
 Prosody 
 Neurobehavioral research in stroke patients has shown that defi cits in prosody 
oft en accompany damage to the right hemisphere. In 1947, Norwegian neurol-
ogist Monrad-Krohn used the term “aprosody” to describe loss of prosody fol-
lowing neurologic disease. In 1977, Tucker, Watson, and Heilman published the 
fi rst experimental study describing emotional aprosody in patients with right 
temporo-parietal lesions and unilateral neglect. Th ese patients were also impaired 
in the comprehension of emotional prosody. Following this,  Ross & Mesulam 
(1979) reported two cases of patients with right hemisphere pathology in the 
supra-sylvian distribution who developed “motor aprosody”—loss of ability to 
express emotion through prosody. Th ese patients retained the ability to compre-
hend the emotion conveyed via prosody, suggesting that expressive and recep-
tive functions are mediated in diff erent brain regions. In 1981, Ross described ten 
cases of emotional aprosody following right hemisphere disease that he found to 
be homologous to aphasic syndromes that typically accompany left  hemisphere 
pathology. He suggested that the functional/anatomic organization of aff ective 
language in the right hemisphere mirrors that of the left . Subsequent research by 
Brådvik et al. (1991) failed to replicate this fi nding. However, additional stud-
ies have shown that anterior lesions tend to result in expressive prosodic defi -
cits, while posterior lesions oft en result in receptive defi cits ( Borod et al., 1986 ; 
 Heller et al., 1998 ;  Ross, 1981 ;  Ross & Mesulam, 1979 ). In a study of patients 
with cerebral infarcts located in diff erent brain regions,  Cancelliere & Kertesz 
(1990) found that disorders of emotional prosodic expression most oft en include 

254
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
damage to the basal ganglia. More recently,  Heilman et al. (2004) reported a man 
who sustained a right medial frontal cerebral infarction that resulted in expressive 
aprosody. 
 Several studies have used acoustic quantifi cation of speech to examine further 
the nature of aprosodic disorders in RHD patients and to corroborate clinicians’ 
impressions of “fl at aff ect.”  Kent & Rosenbek (1982) found that the speech of RHD 
patients strongly resembles that of Parkinson patients in that both had a normal 
or increased rate of speech and decreased fundamental frequency ( f o) variation. 
 Cooper et al. (1984)  showed that RHD patients’ intonation contours were fl att er 
and the duration of their utt erances and sentence fi nal words slightly shorter than 
that of Wernicke’s aphasics and normal controls.  Ryalls, Joanett e, & Feldman 
(1987) found a trend for RHD patients tested prior to 100 days post-onset, to have 
narrower  fo ranges than those tested at 100 days or more post-onset. Th ese results 
suggest that in some patients the disorder may resolve spontaneously .  Ross et al. 
(1988)  found signifi cant diff erences in several measures of  fo on an emotional pro-
sodic repetition task administered pre- and post-Wada testing.   Shapiro & Danly 
(1985) asked LHD patients and RHD patients with anterior, central, or posterior 
lesions, and a group of normal controls to read sentences using linguistic (inter-
rogative, declarative) or emotional (happy, sad) prosody. Th ey found that RHD 
patients with anterior and central lesions demonstrated more restricted  f o range 
in both linguistic and emotional prosody, while patients with posterior RHD 
had exaggerated  f o range during linguistic and emotional speech. Th e prosody of 
LHD patients was similar to that of normal controls.  
  Blonder et  al. (1995) had the unique opportunity to evaluate spontaneous 
prosody in audiotapes of interviews with a 77-year-old right-handed woman 
recorded six months before and six weeks aft er she suff ered a stroke aff ecting the 
right fronto-temporo-parietal regions and the right basal ganglia. Post-stroke, the 
patient had a normal Mini-mental Status Examination Score of 29, hemispatial 
neglect, and impairments in the comprehension of facial expression and prosody. 
Self-rated mood was within normal limits. We compared beginning, peak, and 
ending fundamental frequencies (fo ) in breath groups, the timing of these fo 
changes, rate of speech, pause duration, and breath-group duration . Results indi-
cated that post-stroke, the patient had a more restricted fo contour, no changes in 
the timing of peak fo, an increased rate of speech, less variability in pause dura-
tion, and no changes in breath-group duration. 
 Ross & Monnot (2008) conducted a lesion mapping study of aff ective apros-
ody using the aprosodia batt ery developed by  Ross et al. (1997) . Th ey found that 
spontaneous expressive aprosody is associated with lesions in the right frontal 
operculum usually including the right anterior insula. Furthermore, their fi nd-
ings largely support those of  Ross (1981) in that, with the exception of prosodic 
repetition, aff ective aprosody appears to be functionally homologous in orga-
nization to that of propositional language in the left  hemisphere. Moreover, in 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
255
contrast to the fi ndings of  Cancelliere & Kertesz (1990) described above,  Ross 
& Monnot (2008) suggest that expressive aprosody evolved as a cortically-based 
function in the human brain— in concert with language. 
 Th ere have been very few att empts to develop treatment protocols for disorders 
of aff ective communication such as the aprosodias. Recently however,  Rosenbek 
et al. (2004) and  Leon et al. (2005) published studies of mechanism-based treat-
ments for expressive aprosodia.  Leon et al. (2005) used a single subject design 
in which three patients with cerebral infarction in the right hemisphere that 
resulted in expressive aprosodia received two diff erent treatments. One treat-
ment was based on the hypothesis that aprosodia is due to motor programming 
defi cits related to vocal selection and planning. Participants were required to 
imitate emotional prosody in audiotapes. Th e alternative treatment was based 
on a cognitive-linguistic approach and used cards with cue words that included 
emotion labels, descriptions of the vocal components of aff ective prosody, and 
depictions of emotional facial expressions. Results indicated that both treat-
ments produced improvement in prosodic production as demonstrated by mod-
erate to large eff ect sizes. In a subsequent study involving additional participants, 
 Rosenbek et al. (2006) found that one or the other of these two treatments for 
expressive aprosodia showed evidence of signifi cant improvement in twelve of 
fourteen patients with right hemisphere damage. A subset of participants who 
were available at three-month follow-up continued to retain training eff ects. 
Th ese studies are among the fi rst att empts by clinical investigators to translate the 
fi ndings of decades of lesion research into eff ective interventions for neurologic 
patients who suff er from impairments of emotional expression in speech . 
 Disorders of prosody such as monopitch and loss of volume in the voice are also 
characteristic of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Th ese fi ndings have been observed 
both clinically and experimentally. For example,  Darley et al. (1969) performed a 
judgment study of speech characteristics in PD and found that monopitch, mono-
loudness, and increased rate were among the most pronounced prosodic abnor-
malities. Acoustic analyses of Parkinsonian speech have also found evidence of 
monotone production ( Canter, 1963 ,  Kent & Rosenbek, 1982 ). 
 Many consider speech disorders in PD a motor phenomenon. However, there 
is evidence that prosodic disturbances in PD may have an emotional dimension. 
 Scott  et al. (1984)  found that PD patients had diffi  culty producing anger through 
prosody.  Blonder et al. (1989) showed that PD patients’ ability to convey diff er-
ent emotions through prosody was judged to be impaired, and the intensity of 
their emotional prosody was also rated as less expressive than that of normal con-
trols.  Möbes et al. (2008) compared phonation, repetition, and emotional pro-
sodic expression in PD patients to probe the motor versus emotional nature of 
aprosodia. Th ey found that patients performed comparably to normal controls in 
phonation and prosodic repetition, but had restrictions in fundamental frequency 
and intensity ranges when producing spontaneous emotional prosody. Taken 

256
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
together, these studies support the notion that the neuropathological changes 
associated with PD hinder patients’ ability to express emotion through prosody. 
It is likely that dysfunction in mesocorticolimbic dopamine systems that regulate 
emotion play a role in Parkinsonian aprosodia. 
 Whether or not aprosodia in Parkinson’s disease is emotional in nature or 
caused by rigidity and bradykinesia aff ecting the vocal apparatus, the impact is 
the same: the ability of these patients to express emotion nonverbally is compro-
mised and this may result in mis-communication.  Pentland et al. (1987) reported 
that Parkinson patients were perceived by observers as more anxious, hostile, 
suspicious, unhappy, bored, introverted, and tense than were normal controls. 
Th ey were also perceived as less intelligent and less likeable than normal controls. 
More recently,  Pell & Leonard (2005)  found that naïve listeners had diffi  culty 
identifying the intended emotion in Parkinsonian prosody, and some utt erances 
were characterized by naïve listeners as sad or devoid of emotion. Th ese studies 
suggest that non-verbal communicative defi cits in Parkinson’s disease may con-
vey mood-incongruent or ambiguous signals, and thus have a negative impact on 
interpersonal relations. 
 Facial Expression 
 In addition to emotional aprosody, RHD stroke patients oft en suff er from loss 
of ability to produce emotional facial expressions–both spontaneously and voli-
tionally. In an early study,  Buck & Duff y (1980)  videotaped patients’ reactions to 
emotionally-evocative fi lms and found that those with right hemisphere stroke or 
Parkinson’s disease were signifi cantly less expressive than left  hemisphere stroke 
patients and normal volunteers. Th ese results were confi rmed in several studies 
by Borod and colleagues (see Borod, 2002 for a review) who also found reduced 
emotional facial expressivity following unilateral damage to the right hemisphere . 
Furthermore, recent research by  Kazandjian et al. (2007) suggests that reduc-
tions in facial expressivity are associated with lesions in the right frontal lobes. 
 In contrast to studies showing reductions in facial expressivity in RHD stroke, 
 Caltagirone et al. (1989) and  Mammucari et al. (1988) used the Facial Aff ect 
Coding System (FACS;  Ekman & Friesen 1978 ) and failed, in part, to support 
these fi ndings. However,  Mammucari et al. (1988)  found that RHD patients did 
show reduced gaze aversion to an unpleasant movie, suggesting that they failed to 
process the negative emotions depicted. 
 Most studies of nonverbal expressivity in neurologic patients used 
laboratory-based experiments to examine the ability of patients to produce emo-
tional expression.  Blonder et al. (1993)  examined the eff ects of unilateral stroke 
on emotional communication in the natural environment. We compared facial 
expressivity in RHD stroke patients, LHD stroke patients, and normal controls 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
257
during videotaped semi-structured interviews with the patient and spouse in 
their home. Th ree research assistants rated 120 ten-second segments of video-
tape per patient on a seven-point expressivity scale. Raters were trained to a cri-
terion reliability of 0.80 using segments of videotape not included in the analysis. 
Following att ainment of this criterion, raters rated the study videotapes. We 
found that RHD patients showed reduced facial expressivity in comparison to 
both LHD and normal control subjects during spontaneous conversation. In par-
ticular, RHD patients smiled and laughed signifi cantly less than LHD patients 
and normal controls. Th ese fi ndings were not a general feature of communicative 
incompetence in RHD patients as discourse production equaled that of normal 
controls. Reduced facial expressivity and smiling were not a manifestation of dys-
phoria, as these patients did not report depression. 
 More recently,  Blonder et al (2005) compared spontaneous emotional facial 
and verbal expressivity in RHD and LHD stroke patients. Nine aprosodic RHD 
patients and 14 aphasic LHD patients participated in a videotaped interview 
within a larger treatment protocol. Two naïve raters viewed segments of video-
tape and rated facial expressivity. Verbal aff ect production was tabulated using 
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count soft ware ( Pennebaker et al. 2001 ). Results 
indicated that RHD patients smiled and laughed signifi cantly less than did LHD 
patients. In contrast, RHD patients produced a greater percentage of emotion 
words relative to total words than did LHD patients. Th ese fi ndings suggest that 
aprosodia and diminished emotional facial expressivity in RHD patients are not 
induced by an impaired ability to experience or express emotions verbally. Rather, 
they likely represent encoding abnormalities specifi c to nonverbal processing. 
Th is interpretation is not supported by the work of  Montreys & Borod (1998) 
however, who found that RHD patients produced less intense facial expressions 
and reported less intense emotional experiences during storytelling than did 
LHD and healthy control participants. 
 Based on the fi ndings of  Blonder et al. (1993) and others,  Langer, Pett igrew, & 
Blonder (1998) hypothesized that reduced facial expressivity might cause others 
to form negative impressions of RHD stroke patients. We asked naïve coders to 
rate the likeability of unilateral stroke patients in videotaped interviews. Results 
indicated that when liking judgments were based on facial expressions, RHD 
stroke patients were liked less than LHD patients and normal controls, suggest-
ing that reduced facial expressivity associated with RHD may negatively impact 
patients’ relationships with others. 
 In a subsequent study, we hypothesized that the nonverbal impairments typi-
cally associated with right hemisphere strokes and the verbal impairments typi-
cally associated with left  hemisphere strokes would result in patients sending 
channel-inconsistent messages—in which the verbal and nonverbal elements 
are not matched in emotional valence (e.g., utt ering positive words with a frown; 
 Langer et al. 2000 ). Eleven RHD, ten LHD, and six normal control participants 

258
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
were videotaped while engaging in social interaction. Observers made judgments 
about the valence of the patients’ (1) words (based on transcripts of the interac-
tions); and (2) facial expressions (based on soundless videos of the interactions). 
Analysis of word-face diff erence scores confi rmed our hypothesis: messages of 
RHD patients were judged more positive in verbal content than in facial expres-
sion; messages of LHD patients were judged more positive in facial expression 
than in verbal content, and messages of controls were judged as channel-consistent 
(similar in valence across facial and verbal channels). 
 Communication research that supports the nonverbal primacy hypothesis un-
derscores the signifi cance of these fi ndings. In particular, investigators have 
found that the message communicated by non-verbal signals is judged to have 
greater veracity than the message communicated verbally in the event of incon-
sistency ( Hale & Stiff  1990 ). Channel-inconsistent messages are more diffi  cult 
to interpret, and if individuals att ribute greater signifi cance to nonverbal signals 
when judging the true meaning of the message, then RHD patients with fl at aff ect 
will be misunderstood. 
 In sum, most past work on emotional communication in RHD stroke patients 
indicates that these patients display loss of ability to express their feelings via 
facial behavior. Th ese defi cits tend to be associated with lesions in the right frontal 
regions and basal ganglia. Furthermore, loss of facial expressivity in these patients 
is associated with reduced likeability. Finally, their messages are inconsistent due 
to perceived diff erences in valence between verbal and non-verbal components. 
Th ese impairments place the patients at risk for social isolation and may also 
aff ect family members struggling to interpret patients’ messages. 
 In addition to this research showing loss of facial expressivity associated with 
focal lesions in the right hemisphere, clinicians have long observed that a core 
feature of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease is the expressionless, hypomimic, or 
“masked” face. Several studies conducted over the last thirty years have used 
experimental methods to investigate this phenomenon.  Buck & Duff y (1980)  
videotaped Parkinson patients, unilateral left  and right hemisphere damaged 
stroke patients, and normal controls while each participant viewed a set of emo-
tionally evocative slides. Raters then watched the videotapes and rated subjects’ 
emotional expressivity on a seven point scale. Participants with either right hemi-
sphere stroke or Parkinson’s disease were rated as signifi cantly less expressive than 
individuals with left  hemisphere stroke or no history of neurologic disease.  Scott  
et al. (1984)  found specifi c defi cits in Parkinson patients’ ability to produce facial 
expressions of anger.  Katsikitis & Pilowski (1988 , 1991) used a microcomputer 
program to quantify facial expressions of Parkinson patients who had observed 
a series of amusing slides. Th ey found that patients smiled less frequently than 
controls did. 
 Historically, neurologists have distinguished between disorders of volitional 
facial expression that result from lesions to the motor strip or corticobulbar 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
259
projections, and those of spontaneous facial expression that result from subcorti-
cal lesions, particularly involving the basal ganglia. Although Parkinson patients 
do not have facial paralysis for volitional movement, there is some controversy 
as to whether reductions in facial expressivity are limited to spontaneous dis-
plays or also involve voluntary or posed expressions of emotion ( Borod et al., 
1990 ;  Bowers et al., 2006 ;  Jacobs et al., 1995 ; see  Rinn 1984, 2007 ). Th us it has 
been observed that PD patients are able to make facial expressions to command, 
but that resting, spontaneous facial expression tends to be “fl at” ( Rinn, 1984 ). 
Additional studies have found diminished emotional facial expressivity during 
posed conditions, suggesting that both systems are aff ected by PD ( Borod et al. 
1990 ,  Jacobs et al., 1995 ). 
 Smith et al. (1996) used the Facial Action Coding system developed by  Ekman 
& Friesen (1978) to analyze both spontaneous and posed facial expressions. Th ey 
found that Parkinson patients displayed less emotional reactivity to emotionally 
laden fi lm clips than the normal control group. Furthermore, in those with mod-
erate Parkinson’s disease, the intensity of spontaneous smiles was less than the 
intensity of posed smiles, and the Parkinson group produced fewer true or “felt” 
smiles than the controls did during the spontaneous condition. Th ese results cor-
roborate those of  Pitcairn and collaborators (1990) who found that PD patients 
produced fewer true or “felt” smiles than the controls during the spontaneous 
condition. Loss of facial expressivity in PD does not appear to be associated 
with diminished capacity to experience emotion:  Smith et al. (1996) found that 
patient ratings of subjective emotion experienced in response to the videoclips 
were comparable, if not more intense, than ratings by controls. Th e investigators 
concluded that spontaneous facial expression appears to be selectively aff ected 
in Parkinson’s disease, whereas posed expression and the ability to experience 
emotion remain relatively intact. In contrast to these results,  Bowers et al. (2006) 
undertook computerized analysis of facial expressions in Parkinson patients and 
controls. Th ey found that the patients had reduced facial movement and were sig-
nifi cantly slowed in reaching a peak expression during posed conditions. Taken 
together, these results suggest that Parkinson’s disease aff ects spontaneous 
expressions and may also aff ect expressions that are posed. 
 An unresolved issue in the Parkinson literature is whether loss of facial expres-
sivity is linked to emotional dysfunction (e.g., depression, apathy, or anhedonia) 
or whether it is but another manifestation of bradykinesia. In the study by  Smith 
et al. (1996) cited above, Parkinson patients with reduced facial expressivity per-
formed normally in ratings of felt emotion. Furthermore, loss of facial expres-
sivity is more prevalent among Parkinson patients than is dysphoria, suggesting 
that the two disorders may share only partially overlapping brain regions ( Rinn, 
1984 ). In two studies of spontaneous facial expressions, investigators failed to fi nd 
a correlation between depression scores and facial expressivity scores, suggest-
ing that diminished facial expressivity is not necessarily refl ective of depressed 

260
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
mood or linked to aff ective state ( Katsikitis & Pilowsky, 1991 ;  Smith et. al., 1996 ). 
Alternatively, the masked facies of Parkinson’s disease might be related to apa-
thy and frontal lobe dysfunction, both known concomitants of the illness ( Isella 
et al,. 2002 ;  Pluck & Brown, 2002 ;  Starkstein et al., 1992 ;  Zgaljardic et al., 2007 ). 
In a recent study of awareness of blunted aff ect,  Mikos et al. (2009) found that PD 
participants are aware of reduced expressivity, yet report experiencing emotions 
as intensely as healthy controls. 
  Pentland et al. (1987) conducted a study of the impact of fl att ened aff ect in 
PD on observers’ judgments of these patients. Th ey videotaped PD patients 
and control patients with ischemic heart disease while they participated in a 
semi-structured interview. Observers (physiotherapists and occupational thera-
pists) watched silent videorecordings of the interviews and then made judgments 
about the mood, personality, and intellect of the patients; they also made a judg-
ment about how much they liked the patients. Patients also completed a batt ery of 
psychological tests. Both groups showed no abnormalities with respect to aff ect, 
personality, and intelligence on these tests; however, the Parkinsonian patients 
were perceived by the observers as more anxious, hostile, suspicious, unhappy, 
bored, introverted, and tense than the normal controls. Th ey were also perceived 
as less intelligent, and were less liked than the normal controls. What this study 
tells us is that informed perceivers, including physiotherapists and occupational 
therapists who one might expect to be empathetic toward the patients, in fact 
formed negative impressions of them. 
 Facial Aff ect Processing and Mirror Circuitry   
 Experimental studies in normal volunteers have identifi ed a phenomenon 
termed “primitive contagion” or the “chameleon eff ect,” in which humans tend 
to mimic or synchronize gestures or facial expressions with those of another 
person ( Hatfi eld et al. 1994 ,  Chartrand & Bargh 1999 ). Th is “mirroring” of emo-
tional behavior has been shown to facilitate interpersonal communication and 
is associated with increased empathy ( Chartrand & Bargh 1999 ). Furthermore, 
research has demonstrated that when exposed to photographs of emotional 
faces, individuals respond with distinct facial electromyographic reactions 
(EMG;  Lundqvist 1995 ,  Dimberg et al. 2000 ). Th ere is evidence that this EMG 
reactivity patt ern is mediated by the right hemisphere ( Dimberg & Pett erson 
2000 ). Studies by  Adelmann & Zajonc (1989) and  Levenson et al. (1990)  have 
shown that producing an emotional facial expression through volitional con-
traction of facial muscles induces the emotional state normally associated with 
that expression. 
 More recently, functional neuroimaging studies have identifi ed an action 
representation system in the human brain that appears to be homologous to a 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
261
network of “mirror” neurons in the brains of macaque monkeys ( Iacoboni et al 
1999 ). Th is network includes the inferior frontal gyrus, the superior temporal 
sulcus, and the posterior parietal lobe. In a functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing (fMRI) study in humans,  Carr et al. (2003) found activation in these regions 
plus the premotor face area, the insula, and the amygdala during passive viewing 
of emotional facial expressions and, to a greater extent, during facial imitation 
( Carr et al. 2003 ). Th ese fi ndings lead  Carr et al. (2003) to conclude that “action 
representation mediates the recognition of emotion in others even during sim-
ple observation .” Subsequently,  Leslie et al. (2004) found that passive viewing 
of emotional faces produced activation in the right ventral premotor area, sug-
gesting a special role for the right hemisphere in unconscious facial mimicry. 
Furthermore, many imaging studies have implicated mirror neuron regions 
such as the inferior frontal gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, and/or amygdala in 
the processing of emotional facial expressions ( Baird et al. 1999 ,  Breiter et al. 
1996 , Glascher et al. 2004 ,  Kesler-West et al. 2001 ,  Phillips et al. 1997 ,  Sato 
et al. 2004 , Sprengelmeyer et al. 1998 ,  Whalen et al. 1998 ,  Williams et al. 2005 ). 
Finally,  Shamay-Tsoory et al. (2003) conducted lesion analysis examining the 
neural substrates of empathy and associated functions and found that individu-
als with right posterior cortical pathology were impaired in empathy and facial 
aff ect recognition. Taken together, these studies suggest that facial aff ect rec-
ognition, facial mimicry, and empathy are interdependent functions that share 
overlapping neural substrates, predominantly located in right hemisphere mir-
ror neuron circuits. Th is research also provides a mechanism linking disorders of 
facial aff ect recognition and expression. If the decoding of aff ective facial expres-
sions by neurologically intact individuals induces mimicry and empathy that 
are expressed facially, then damage to mirror circuits by infarcts could explain 
co-morbid disorders of aff ective facial expression and recognition. Th ere is con-
siderable evidence in the neurology literature that defi cits in the production and 
recognition of emotional facial expressions reliably co-occur (see  Brozgold et al. 
1998 ,  Heilman et al. 2003 ).  
 Verbal Emotional Expression 
 Some investigators have found impairments in verbal emotional expression in 
the speech of RHD patients. For example,  Bloom et al. (1990) found that RHD 
patients were judged to produce words of lower emotional intensity in response to 
emotionally-laden slides than LHD patients and normal volunteers. In a second 
study,  Bloom et al. (1992)  showed that RHD patients produced fewer emotional 
content elements than visual-spatial or neutral content elements on a picture 
story task. Cimino et al. (1991)  found that RHD patients produced autobiograph-
ical memories that were judged as less emotional than those of normal volunteers. 

262
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Borod et al. (1996) had raters judge emotionality in monologues produced by 
RHD, LHD, and normal volunteers. RHD patients’ monologues were rated as 
signifi cantly less emotional than the monologues of normal controls. Th ere was 
also a trend for RHD patients’ monologues to be rated as less emotional than 
LHD patients. Th is research suggests that the reductions in aff ective expression 
associated with RHD span multiple communicative channels.  Montreys & Borod 
(1998) videotaped unilateral stroke patients and normal controls while recollect-
ing emotional and non-emotional experiences. Th ey found that RHD patients 
reported less intense emotional experiences than LHD patients and normal 
volunteers. 
 Several studies conducted in our laboratory, however, do not support these 
fi ndings and suggest that disorders of aff ective communication are specifi c to 
non-verbal representations of emotion ( Blonder et al. 1991, 2004 ,  Langer et al. 
2000 ,  Blonder et al. 2005 ). For example, in a study of spontaneous expression 
during videotaped interviews,  Langer et al. (2000) showed that the messages of 
RHD patients were judged to be channel inconsistent; i.e., more positive in verbal 
content than in facial expression. LHD patients’ messages showed the opposite 
patt ern. Th ese results reveal a discrepancy in the emotional content of the ver-
bal versus nonverbal message. As such, they lend support to the hypothesis that 
aff ective impairments following RHD may refl ect specifi c disruption of the abil-
ity to encode and communicate feelings via non-verbal channels. More recently, 
we found that RHD stroke patients with aprosodia also had signifi cant reduc-
tions in facial expressivity, particularly smiling and laughing, when compared 
with left  hemisphere damaged aphasic stroke patients ( Blonder et al. 2005 ). In 
contrast, these RHD stroke patients produced a signifi cantly larger proportion of 
positive and negative emotion words during the interviews than LHD aphasics. 
Th ese results suggest that RHD disrupts patients’ ability to encode or commu-
nicate emotions via non-verbal signals but that verbal communication of emo-
tion remains functional. Furthermore, this conclusion is consistent with prior 
fi ndings that the right hemisphere may house a non-verbal aff ect lexicon, i.e., an 
internal representation of non-verbal communicative signals coupled with infor-
mation regarding the emotional signifi cance of these displays (see  Blonder et al. 
1991 ,  Bowers et al. 1993 ). In past research,  Blonder et al. (1991) showed that RHD 
patients lacked the ability to infer the emotion communicated by verbal descrip-
tions of non-verbal expressions (e.g., “he smiled”), but had no diffi  culty correctly 
interpreting the emotional message of verbal descriptions of evocative events (e.g. 
“children tracked dirt over your new white carpet”). 
 In sum, the clinical literature on neural representations of aff ective communi-
cation shows that circuits in the right hemisphere specialize in facial aff ect expres-
sion. Th e basis for this conclusion largely derives from studies of impairments in 
patients with focal brain lesions, particularly stroke. Some of the discrepancies 
in the literature regarding verbal aff ect production defi cits in RHD patients may 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
263
be due to lack of adequate anatomic data and subsequent inclusion of patients 
who have undetected bilateral damage.  Adolphs et al. (2000)  found an associa-
tion between naming the aff ect on the face and left  frontal opercular damage. In 
particular, “silent” bilateral lesions could account for inconsistencies in the litera-
ture regarding the extent to which right hemisphere networks control the verbal 
aff ect lexicon. For example,  Rapcsak et al. (1989, 1993 ) reported two individuals 
who sustained selective defi cits in naming facial emotion following lesions in the 
middle temporal gyrus of the right hemisphere. However, the two patients both 
had anomalous cerebral dominance. 
 Th ere are several unresolved questions that emerge from this literature. First, 
what is the relationship between facial aff ect perceptual disorders and impair-
ments in expression among RHD patients? Research by  Adolphs et al. (2000) in 
which right somatosensory cortices were essential in processing aff ective facial 
expressions suggests a mechanism whereby perception and expression might be 
linked . If an individual’s prior internal experience of aff ect and its manifestation 
on the face is critical feedback in interpreting facial expression, then this region 
might constitute a center of integration in decoding and encoding emotion on the 
face. Leventhal et al. (1990)  established that voluntary facial activity matching 
particular emotional expressions produced signifi cant levels of subjective experi-
ence of the associated emotion, and that autonomic distinctions among emotions 
exist both between negative and positive emotions and among negative emotions. 
If proprioceptive feedback is critical in judging the emotional expression dis-
played on the face of another, then blunted facial expressivity may contribute to 
diffi  culty interpreting facial aff ect. Similarly, if facial aff ect recognition disorders 
associated with stroke are due in part to damage to somatosensory cortices, then 
the loss of knowledge pairing facial confi guration and emotional expression may 
also infl uence encoding abilities. 
 In conclusion, emotional expressivity is a fundamental aspect of human com-
munication. Research on the fractionation and impairment of aff ective expres-
sion in patients with neurologic disease has revealed a considerable amount 
regarding the neural organization, function, and signifi cance of this behavior. 
Th ese studies have laid the foundation for fi elds such as “aff ective” or “social” 
neuroscience that tend to use functional neuroimaging rather than the lesion 
model to study the neural substrates of aff ective processing. However, as men-
tioned previously, current imaging modalities are not well suited to examine 
the neural substrates of expressive behavior, particularly as it occurs in the con-
text of social interaction. Nor would such research reveal the extent of disabil-
ity in neurologic patients who suff er from such disorders. Future eff orts point 
to a paradigm shift  in which the knowledge gained from this research further 
stimulates translational studies to develop therapeutic interventions that help 
patients with focal brain injury and neurodegenerative diseases improve com-
municative competence.  

264
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Acknowledgments 
 Th e author would like to acknowledge the support of NIMH/NINDS grant 
R01MH78228. 
 References 
 Adelmann ,  P. K. , &  Zajonc  R. B. ( 1989 ).  Facial eff erence and the experience of emotion .  Annual 
Review of Psychology  40 ,  249–280 . 
  Adolphs ,  R. ,  H.  Damasio ,  D.  Tranel ,  G.  Cooper , &  A. R.  Damasio . ( 2000 ).  A role for somatosen-
sory cortices in the visual recognition of emotion as revealed by three-dimensional lesion 
mapping.  Journal of Neuroscience  20 ,  2683–2690 . 
   Baird ,  A. A.  ,   S. A.   Gruber  ,   D. A.   Fein  ,   L. C.   Maas  ,   R. J.   Steingard  ,   P. F.   Renshaw  ,   B. M.  Cohen , & 
 D. A.  Yurgelun-Todd . ( 1999 ).  Functional magnetic resonance imaging of facial aff ect rec-
ognition in children and adolescents.  Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry  38 ,  195–199 . 
 Blonder ,  L. X. ,  Gur ,  R. E. , &  Gur ,  R. C. ( 1989 ).  Th e eff ects of right and left  hemiparkinsonism on 
prosody.  Brain and Language  36 ,  193–207 . 
 Blonder ,  L. X. ,  D.  Bowers , &  K. M.  Heilman . ( 1991 ).  Th e role of the right hemisphere in emo-
tional communication.  Brain  114 ,  1115–1127 . 
   Blonder ,  L. X.  ,   A. F.   Burns  ,   D.   Bowers  ,   R. W.   Moore  , &   K. M.   Heilman  . ( 1993 ).  Right hemisphere 
facial expressivity during natural conversation.  Brain and Cognition  21 ,  44–56 . 
 Blonder ,  L. X. ,  K. M.  Heilman ,  T. U.  Kett erson ,  J. C.  Rosenbek ,  B.  Crosson ,  S.  Raymer ,  L.  Maher , 
 R.  Glueckauf , &   L. G.  Rothi . ( 2005 ).  Aff ective facial and lexical expression in aprosodic 
versus aphasic stroke patients.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  11, 
 677–685 . 
  Blonder ,  L.X. ,  Pickering ,  J.E. ,  Heath ,  R. L,  Smith ,  C. , &  Butler ,  S. ( 1995 ).  Prosodic characteristics 
of speech before and aft er right hemisphere stroke.  Brain and Language  51 ,  318–335 . 
 Bloom,  R.L. ,  Borod,  J.C. ,  Obler,  L.K. , &  Koff ,  E. ( 1990 ).  A preliminary characterization of lexi-
cal emotional expression in right and left  brain-damaged patients.  International Journal of 
Neuroscience  55 ,  71–80 . 
 Bloom ,  R. ,  Borod ,  J. C. ,  Obler ,  L. , &  Gerstman ,  L. ( 1992 ).  Impact of emotional content on 
discourse production in patients with unilateral brain damage.  Brain and Language  42 , 
 153–164 . 
 Borod ,  J. C. ,  E.  Koff  ,  M. P.  Lorch , &  M.  Nicholas . ( 1986 ).  Channels of emotional expression in 
patients with unilateral brain damage .  Archives of Neurology  42 ,  345–348 . 
   Borod ,  J. C.  ,   E.   Koff   ,   M. P.   Lorch  , &   M.   Nicholas  . ( 1986 ).  Expression and perception of facial 
emotion in brain-damaged patients .  Neuropsychologia  24 ,  169–180 . 
 Borod,  J.C. ,  Rorie,  K.D. ,  Haywood,  C.S, ,  Andelman,  F. ,  Obler,  L.K. ,  Welkowitz,  J. ,  Bloom, 
 R.L. , &  Tweedy,  J.R.. ( 1996 ).  Hemispheric specialization for discourse reports of emo-
tional experiences: relationships to demographic, neurological, and perceptual variables.  
 Neuropsychologia ,  34 : 351–359 . 
 Borod ,  J.C. ,  Welkowitz, Alpert ,  M. ,  Brozgold ,  A.C. ,  Martin ,  C. ,  Peselow ,  E. &  Diller ,  L. ( 1990 ). 
 Parameters of emotional processing in neuropsychiatric disorders: Conceptual issues and a 
batt ery of tests.   Journal of Communication Disorders  23 ,  247–271 . 
 Borod ,  J. C.  ,   Bloom ,  R. L.  Brickman ,  A. M.  Nakhutina ,  L.  &  Curko ,  E. A. ( 2002 ).  Emotional 
processing defi cits in individuals with unilateral brain damage.  Applied Neuropsychology 
 9 ,  23–36 . 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
265
 Bowers ,  D. ,  Miller ,  K. ,  Bosch ,  W. ,  Gokcay ,  D. ,  Pedraza , &  O.  Springer ,  U. et al. ( 2006 ).  Faces of 
emotion in Parkinson’s disease: micro-expressivity and bradykinesia during voluntary facial 
expressions.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  12 ,  765–773 . 
 Bowers ,  D. ,  Bauer ,  R. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1993 ).  The nonverbal affect lexicon: Theoretical 
perspectives from neuropsychological studies of affect perception.   Neuropsychology  7 , 
 433–444 . 
 Bradvik ,  B. ,  Dravins ,  C. ,  Holtas ,  S. ,  Rosen ,  I. ,  Ryding ,  E. , &  Ingvar ,  D. H. ( 1991 ).  Disturbances 
of speech prosody following right hemisphere infarcts.  Acta Neurologica Scandinavica ,   54 , 
 114–126 .  
 Breiter ,  H. C. ,  N. L.  Etcoff  ,  P. J.  Whalen ,  W. A.  Kennedy ,  S. L.  Rauch ,  R. L.  Buckner ,  M. M.  Strauss , 
 S. E.  Hyman , &  B. R.  Rosen . ( 1996 ).  Response and habituation of the human amygdala dur-
ing visual processing of facial expression.  Neuron  17 ,  875–887 . 
 Brozgold,  A.Z. ,  Borod,  J.C. ,  Martin.  C.C. ,  Pick,  L.H. ,  Alpert,  M. , &  Welkowitz,  J. ( 1998 ).  Social 
functioning and facial emotional expression in neurological and psychiatric disorders . 
 Applied Neuropsychology  5 ,  15–23 . 
 Buck ,  R. ,  Duff y ,  R. J. ( 1980 ).  Nonverbal communication of aff ect in brain-damaged patients . 
 Cortex  16 ,  351–362 . 
 Caltagirone ,  C. ,  Ekman ,  P. ,  Friesen ,  W. ,  Gainott i ,  G. ,  Mammucari ,  A. ,  Pizzamiglio ,  L. , & 
 Zoccolatt i ,  P. ( 1989 ).  Posed emotional facial expressions in brain damaged patients .  Cortex 
 25 ,  653–663 . 
 Cancelliere ,  A.E. , &  Kertesz ,  A. ( 1990 ).  Lesion localization in acquired defi cits of emotional 
expression and comprehension .  Brain and Cognition  13 ,  133–147 . 
 Canter ,  G.  1963 .  Speech characteristics of patients with Parkinson’s disease. I. Intensity, pitch, and 
duration.  Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders  28 ,  221–229 . 
 Carr ,  L. ,  Iacoboni ,  M.  Dubeau ,  M. C.  Mazziott a ,  J. C. , &  Lenzi ,  G. L.  2003 .  Neural mechanisms of 
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas.  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  100 ,  5497–5502 . 
 Chartrand ,  T. L. , &  Bargh ,  J. A .  1999 .  Th e chameleon eff ect: the perception-behavior link and 
social interaction.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  76 ,  893–910 . 
 Cimino CR, Verfaellie M, Bowers D, Heilman KM. 1991. Autobiographical memory: Infl uence of 
right hemisphere damage on emotionality and specifi city. Brain and Language 15: 106–118. 
 Cooper ,  W. ,  Soares ,  C. ,  Nicol ,  J. ,  Michelow ,  D. , &  Goloskie ,  S.  1984  Clausal intonation aft er uni-
lateral brain damage.  Language and Speech  27 ,  17–24 . 
 Darley F. L., Aronson A. E., & Brown J. R. 1969. Clusters of deviant speech dimensions in the 
dysarthrias. J of Speech and Hearing Research 12, 462–96. 
 Dimberg ,  U. , &  Pett erson ,  M  .  2000 .  Facial reactions to happy and angry facial expressions: evi-
dence for right hemisphere dominance .  Psychophysiology  37 ,  693–696 . 
 Dimberg ,  U. ,  Th unberg ,  M. &  Elmehed ,  K.  2000 .  Unconscious facial reactions to emotional facial 
expressions .  Psychological Science  11 ,  86–89 . 
 Ekman ,  P. , &  Friesen ,  W. V. ( 1978 ).   Facial Action Coding System  .  Palo Alto, CA :   Consulting 
Psychologists Press . 
 Glascher J, Tuscher O, Weiler C, Buchel C. Eleveated responses to constant facial emotions in dif-
ferent faces in the human amygdala: an fMRI study of facial identify and expression. BMC 
Neuroscience 2004 5: 45–54 
   Hale ,  J.  ,   Stiff  ,  J.B.   ( 1990 ).  Non-verbal primacy in veracity judgments .  Southern Speech 
Communication Journal  55 ,  206–229 . 
 Hatfi eld ,  E. ,  Cacioppo ,  J. T. &  Rapson ,  R. L. ( 1994 ).   Emotional contagion  .  Cambridge University 
Press ,  Cambridge . 
 Heilman ,  K.M. ,  Blonder ,  L.X. ,  Bowers ,  D. &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 2003 ). Emotional Disorders 
Associated with Neurological Diseases. In  K.M.  Heilman and  E.  Valenstein (Eds.),   Clinical 
Neuropsychology  , Fourth Edition (pp. 447–478).  Oxford, UK :  Oxford University Press . 

266
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
  Heilman,  K.M. ,  Leon,  S.A. , &  Rosenbek, J. C. ( 2004 ).  Aff ective aprosodia from a medial frontal 
stroke .  Brain and Language  89 ,  411–416 . 
   Heller ,  W.,   Nitschke ,  J.B.,   Miller ,  G.A.   ( 1998 ). Lateralization in Emotion and Emotional 
Disorders. Current Directions in Psychological Science. Vol. 7, No. 1, In M. T. Banich and 
W. Heller   Evolving Perspectives on Lateralization of Function  , (pp.  26–32).  Published by Sage 
on behalf of Association for Psychological Science . 
 Iacoboni ,  M. ,  Woods ,  R. P.  Brass ,  M.  Bekkering ,  H.  Mazziott a ,  J. C. &  Rizzolatt i ,  G. ( 1999 ). 
 Cortical mechanisms of human imitation .  Science  286 ,  2526–2528 . 
 Isella ,  V. ,  Melzi ,  P. ,  Grimaldi ,  M. ,  Iurlaro ,  S. ,  Piolti ,  R. ,  Ferrarese ,  C. , &  Appollonio ,  I. ( 2002 ). 
 Clinical, neuropsychological, and morphometric correlates of apathy in Parkinson’s disease. 
 Movement Disorders  17 ,  366–371 . 
   Jacobs ,  D.H.  ,   Shuren ,  J.  ,   Bowers ,  D.   &   Heilman ,  K.M.    1995 .  Emotional facial imagery, perception, 
and expression in Parkinson’s disease.  Neurology  45 ,  1696–1702 . 
   Katsikitis ,  M.   &   Pilowski ,  I.   ( 1988 ).  A study of facial expression in Parkinson’s disease using a 
novel microcomputer-based method .  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry  51 , 
 362–366 . 
 Katsikitis ,  M. &  Pilowsky ,  I.  1991 .  A controlled quantitative study of facial expression 
in Parkinson’s disease and depression .  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease  179 , 
 683–688 . 
 Kazandjian,  S. ,  Borod,  J.C. , &  Brickman, A. M. ( 2007 ).  Facial expression during emotional mono-
logues in unilateral stroke: an analysis of monologue segments .  Applied Neuropsychology  14 , 
 235–246 . 
 Kent ,  R. &  Rosenbek ,  J.C. ( 1982 ).  Prosodic disturbance and neurologic lesion .  Brain and 
Language  15 ,  259–291 . 
  Kesler-West ,  M. L. ,  Andersen ,  A. H.  Smith ,  C. D.  Avison ,  M. J.  Davis ,  C. E.  Kryscio ,  R. J. & 
 Blonder ,  L. X.    2001 .  Neural substrates of facial emotion processing using fMRI .  Cognitive 
Brain Research  11 ,  213–226 . 
 Langer ,  S. L. ,  Pett igrew ,  L. C. &  Blonder ,  L. X. ( 1998 ).  Observer liking of unilateral stroke 
patients .  Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology  11 ,  218–224 . 
 Langer ,  S. L. ,  Pett igrew ,  L. C. ,  Wilson ,  J. F &  Blonder ,  L. X. ( 2000 ).  Channel-consistency fol-
lowing unilateral stroke:  An examination of patient communication across verbal and 
non-verbal domains .  Neuropsychologia  38 ,  337–344 . 
 Leon ,  S.A. ,  Rosenbek ,  J.C. ,  Crucian ,  G.P. ,  Hieber ,  B. ,  Holiway ,  B. ,  Rodriguez ,  A.D. ,  Kett erson , 
 T.U. ,  Ciampitt i ,  M.Z. ,  Freshwater ,  S. ,  Heilman ,  K. , &  Gonzalez-Rothi ,  L. ( 2005 ).  Active 
treatments for aprosodia secondary to right hemisphere stroke .  Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development  42 ,  93–101 . 
 Leslie ,  K. ,  Johnson-Frey ,  S. &  Graft on ,  S.  2004 .  Functional imaging of face and hand imita-
tion: towards a motor theory of empathy .  Neuroimage  21 ,  601–607 . 
 Levenson ,  R. W. ,  Ekman ,  P. , &  Friesen ,  W. V. ( 1990 ).  Voluntary facial action generates 
emotion-specifi c autonomic nervous system activity .  Psychophysiology  27 ,  363–384 . 
  Lundqvist ,  L. O. ( 1995 ).  Facial EMG reactions to facial expressions: a case of facial emotional 
contagion?  Scandinavian Journal of Psychology  36 ,  130–141 . 
 Mammucari ,  A. ,  Caltagirone ,  C. ,  Ekman ,  P. ,  Friesen ,  W. ,  Gainott i ,  G. ,  Pizzamiglio ,  L. , &  Zoccolatt i , 
 P. ( 1988 ).  Spontaneous facial expression of emotions in brain damaged patients .  Cortex  24 , 
 521–533 . 
 Mikos,  A.E. ,  Springer,  U.S. ,  Nisenzon,  A.N. ,  Kellison,  I.L. ,  Fernandez,  H.H. ,  Okun  M.S. , & 
 Bowers,  D. ( 2009 ).  Awareness of expressivity defi cits in non-demented Parkinson disease . 
 Clinical Neuropsychology  23 ,  805–817 . 
   Möbes,   J.   ,   Joppich,   G.  ,   Stiebritz,   F.  ,   Dengler,   R.  , &   Schröder,   C.   ( 2008 ).  Emotional speech in 
Parkinson’s disease.  Movement Disorder  23 ,  824–829 . 
 Montreys ,  C.R. &  Borod ,  J.C. ( 1998 ).  A preliminary evaluation of emotional experience and 
expression following unilateral brain damage.  International Journal of Neuroscience  96 , 
 269–283 . 

Th e Neurology of Emotional Expression
267
 Pell ,  M. D. , &  Leonard ,  C. L. ( 2005 ).  Facial expression decoding in early Parkinson’s disease. 
 Cognitive  Brain Research  23 ,  327–340 . 
   Pennebaker ,  J.W. ,  Francis ,  M.E. , &  Booth ,  R.J.   ( 2001 ).   Linguistic inquiry and word count soft ware 
program  . Austin, TX: e LIWC.net.  
   Pentland ,  B.  ,   Pitcairn ,  T. K.  ,   Gray ,  J. M.   &   Riddle ,  W.J.R.   ( 1987 ).  Th e eff ects of reduced expression 
in Parkinson’s disease on impression formation by health professionals .  Clinical Rehabilition 
 1 ,  207–313 . 
 Phillips ,  M. L. ,  Young ,  A. W. ,  Senior ,  C. ,  Brammer ,  M. ,  Andrew ,  C. ,  Calder ,  A. J. ,  Bullmore ,  E. T. , 
 Perrett  ,  D. I. ,  Rowland ,  D. ,  Williams ,  S. C. ,  Gray ,  J. A. , &  David ,  A. S. ( 1997 ).  A specifi c neu-
ral substrate for perceiving facial expressions of disgust .  Nature  389 ,  495–508 . 
 Pitcairn ,  T.K. ,  Clemie ,  S. ,  Gray ,  J.M. , &  Pentland ,  B. ( 1990 ).  Non-verbal cues in the 
self-presentation of Parkinsonian patients.  British Journal of Clinical Psychology,  29 ,  177–184. 
 Pluck ,  G. C. &  Brown ,  R. G. ( 2002 ).  Apathy in Parkinson’s disease.  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery,& Psychiatry  73 ,  636–642 . 
 Rapscak ,  S. ,  Kasniak ,  A. , &  Rubins ,  A. ( 1989 ).  Anomia for facial expressions: evidence for a cat-
egory specifi c visual verbal disconnection.  Neuropsychologia  27 ,  1031 – 1041 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Comer ,  J. F. , &  Rubens  A. B. ( 1993 ).  Anomia for facial expressions. neuropsycho-
logical mechanisms and anatomical correlates.  Brain and Language  45 ,  233–252 . 184. 
 Rinn ,  W.E. ( 1984 ).  Th e neuropsychology of facial expression:  a review of the neurological 
and psychological mechanisms for producing facial expressions.   Psychological Bulletin 
 95 ,  52–77 . 
   Rinn ,  W. E.  ( 2007 ).  Emotional facial expression in Parkinson’s disease: a response to Bowers. 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  13 ,  721–722 . 
 Rosenbek,  J.C. ,  Crucian,  G.P. ,  Leon,  S.A. ,  Hieber,  B. ,  Rodriguez,  A.D. ,  Holiway,  B. ,  Kett erson, 
 T.U. ,  Ciampitt i,  M. ,  Heilman,  K. , &  Gonzalez-Rothi ,  L. ( 2004 ).  Novel treatments for expres-
sive aprosodia: a phase I investigation of cognitive linguistic and imitative interventions.  
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  10 ,  786–793 . 
 Rosenbek,  J.C. ,  Rodriguez,  A.D. ,  Hieber,  B. ,  Leon,  S.A. ,   Crucian,  G.P. ,  Kett erson,  T.U. ,  Ciampitt i, 
 M. ,  Singletary,  F. ,  Heilman,  K.M. , &  Gonzalez Rothi,  L.J. ( 2006 ).  Eff ects of two treatments 
for aprosodia secondary to acquired brain injury .  Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development  43 ,  379–390 . 
   Ross,   E. D.   ( 1981 ).  Th e aprosodias. Functional-anatomic organization of the aff ective compo-
nents of language in the right hemisphere .  Archives of Neurology  38 ,  561–569 . 
 Ross ,  E.D. ,  Edmondson ,  J.A. ,  Seibert ,  G.B. , &  Homan ,  R.W. ( 1988 )  Acoustic analysis of aff ec-
tive prosody during right-sided Wada test: a within-subjects verifi cation of the right hemi-
sphere’s role in language .  Brain and Language  33 ,  128–145 . 
   Ross,   E.D.  , and   Mesulam,   M.M.   ( 1979 ).  Dominant language functions of the right hemisphere? 
Prosody and emotional gesturing.  Archives of Neurology  36 ,  144–148 . 
 Ross,  E.D. ,  Monnot,  M. ( 2008 ).  Neurology of aff ective prosody and its functional-anatomic orga-
nization in right hemisphere .  Brain and Language  104 ,  51–74 . 
 Ross,  E.D. ,  Thompson,  R.D. ,  Yenkosky,  J. ( 1997 ).  Lateralization of affective prosody in brain 
and the callosal integration of hemispheric language functions.  Brain and Language 
 56 ,  27–54 . 
 Ryalls ,  J. ,  Joanett e ,  Y. , &  Feldman ,  L. ( 1987 ).  An acoustic comparison of normal and right hemi-
sphere damaged speech prosody.   Cortex  23, : 685–694 . 
 Sato ,  W. ,  Kochiyama ,  T.  Yoshikawa ,  S.  Naito ,  E. , &  Matsumura ,  M. ( 2004 ).  Enhanced neural 
activity in response to dynamic facial expressions of emotion: an fMRI study .  Cognitive 
Brain Research  20 ,  81–91 . 
 Scott  ,  S. ,  Caird ,  F. I. , &  Williams ,  B. O. ( 1984 ).  Evidence for an apparent sensory speech disorder 
in Parkinson’s disease.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry  47 ,  840–843 . 
 Shamay-Tsoory ,  S.G. ,  Tomer ,  R.  Berger ,  B.D. &  Aharon-Peretz ,  J. ( 2003 ).  Characterization of 
empathy defi cits following prefrontal brain damage: the role of the right ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex.   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  15 ,  324–37 . 

268
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Shapiro ,  B. , &  Danly ,  M. ( 1985 ).  Th e role of the right hemisphere in the control of speech pros-
ody in prepositional and aff ective contexts.  Brain and Language  25 ,  19–26 . 
 Smith ,  M.C. ,  Smith ,  M.K. , &  Ellgring ,  H. ( 1996 ).  Spontaneous and posed facial expression in 
Parkinson’s disease.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  2 ,  383–391 . 
 Sprengelmeyer ,  R. ,  Rausch ,  M.  Eysel ,  U. T. &  Przuntek ,  H. ( 1998 ).  Neural structures associated 
with recognition of facial expressions of basic emotions.   Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences  265 ,  1927–1931 . 
 Starkstein ,  S. E. ,  Mayberg ,  H. S. ,  Preziosi ,  T. J. ,  Andrezejewsk ,  P. ,  Leuguarda ,  R. &  Robinson , 
 R. G. ( 1992 ).  Reliability, validity, and clinical correlates of apathy in Parkinson’s disease. 
 Journal of Neuropsychiatry & Clinical Neuroscience  4 ,  134–139 . 
 Whalen ,  P. J. ,  Rauch ,  S. L.  Etcoff  ,  N. L Mc Inerney ,  S. C.  Lee ,  M. B. , &  Jenike ,  M. A. ( 1998 ). 
 Masked presentations of emotional facial expressions modulate amygdala activity without 
explicit knowledge.  Journal of Neuroscience  18 ,  411–418 . 
  Williams ,  M. A. , Mc Glone ,  F.  Abbott  ,  D. F., &  Matt ingley ,  J. B. ( 2005 ).  Diff erential amygdala 
responses to happy and fearful facial expressions depend on selective att ention.   Neuroimage 
 2 ,  417–425 . 
 Zgaljardic ,  D. J.  ,   Borod ,  J. C. ,  Foldi ,  N. S. ,  Rocco ,  M. ,  Matt is ,  P. J. ,  Gordon ,  M. F. , et al. ( 2007 ). 
 Relationship between self-reported apathy and executive dysfunction in nondemented 
patients with Parkinson disease.  Cognitive Behavioral Neurology  20 ,  184–192 .  

269
 C H A P T E R  13 
 Behavioral and Cognitive Eﬀ ects 
of Antiepileptic Drugs
  
 Kimford J .  Meador  
 Case Descriptions 
 Th ree cases will be presented followed by a discussion of the literature and 
descriptions of management for these cases. 
 Case 1. A 22 year old man has suff ered a generalized convulsion. His room-
mate recalls that on two recent occasions, the patient had episodes of unrespon-
sive staring, sometimes with lip smacking movements. Neurological exam is 
normal. MRI demonstrates a few small subcortical hyperdensities. EEG reveals 
intermitt ent slowing and sharp waves in the right anterior temporal lobe. History 
includes an automobile accident with severe closed head injury at 17 years old 
associated with coma for fi ve days. Th e patient recovered except for an acquired 
att entional problem, requiring methylphenidate to maintain school performance. 
A diagnosis of focal epilepsy is made, and antiepileptic drug (AED) therapy is 
recommended. Th e patient is concerned about possible cognitive eff ects of AEDs. 
What should be included in the discussion of options and risks? 
 Case 2. A 68 year-old man has had repeated episodes of brief time lapses, 
which began fi ve months ago and have been increasing. His wife noted that he 
is unresponsive during these episodes. Previously, he has had three MRIs and 
three EEGs, all of which were normal. Past medical history is signifi cant for 
resection of esophageal cancer three years ago followed by radiation and che-
motherapy. He has had no recurrence of the cancer, and is otherwise healthy 
except for well controlled hypertension. In the review of systems, his wife notes 
that his personally has been diff erent ever since the diagnosis of cancer; she 
states that he is pessimistic when before he was always optimistic. He does not 
meet diagnosis of major depression, but has dysphoria. What actions should be 

270
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
recommended, and what options and risks should be included in the informed 
consent process? 
 Case 3. A 19-year-old woman has suff ered two generalized convulsions in the 
last month without any obvious precipitants or known risk factors. On question-
ing, she admits to occasional jerks of her arms in the early morning on fi rst awak-
ening. Neurological examination and MRI are normal. EEG reveals generalized 
spike wave discharges with frontal predominance. A diagnosis of juvenile myo-
clonic epilepsy is made. Should AED risks to a possible child in a future preg-
nancy be discussed at this time and should such risks aff ect recommendations for 
choice of AED? If so, what are the known cognitive and behavioral risks for a child 
exposed  in utero to AEDs? 
 Cognitive Defi cits in Patients with Epilepsy 
 A variety of factors can aff ect cognition in epilepsy patients, including: 1) etiol-
ogy of epilepsy; 2) cerebral lesions acquired prior to onset of epilepsy; 3) type of 
seizures; 4) age at seizure onset; 5) seizure frequency; 6) duration and severity of 
seizures; 7) transient dysfunction from interictal discharges, seizures or postictal 
eff ects; 8) structural brain damage from seizures; 9) genetic factors; 10) psycho-
social issues; 11) epilepsy surgery; and 12) antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) ( Meador, 
2009 ). Cognition is impaired at epilepsy onset ( Hermann, et al., 2006 ;  Smith, 
Craft , Collins, Matt son, & Cramer, 1986 ) consistent with the etiology of seizures 
acting as a major factor on cognition ( Meador, 2009 ). Th e incidence of epilepsy is 
increased in patients with mental retardation, progressive cerebral degeneration, 
or focal brain lesions ( Dodrill, 1992 ). Patients with idiopathic epilepsy are more 
likely to have normal intelligence. Epilepsy is more likely to be refractory in cer-
tain conditions (e.g., mental retardation). Patients with multiple generalized con-
vulsions are more likely to have cognitive impairments compared to those with 
absence seizures or focal seizures without loss of awareness. Earlier age of seizure 
onset is associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment. 
 Seizure frequency, duration, and severity can impact cognition ( Dikmen 
& Matt hews, 1977 ). Seizures may alter consciousness, and interictal epilep-
tiform discharges can impair cognition ( Shewmon & Erwin, 1988 ). Todd’s 
paralysis lasts less than 24 hours, but postictal cognitive dysfunction may last 
several days, including confusion, dysphasia, and impaired memory consolida-
tion ( Jokeit, Daamen, Zang, Janszky, & Ebner, 2001 ). Chronic dysfunction can 
extend beyond the area of seizure focus. Interictal hypometabolism extends to 
the lateral temporal cortex in patients with mesial temporal epilepsy ( Henry & 
Votaw, 2004 ). Repetitive or prolonged seizures may damage the brain via anoxia, 
lactic acidosis, or excessive excitatory neurotransmitt ers. Temporal lobe sei-
zures over several decades can cause hippocampal atrophy and reduce cognitive 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
271
abilities ( Helmstaedter, 2002 ). Memory is impaired in patients with epilepsy, and 
it is remarkable that the molecular mechanisms of animal models for epilepsy 
(i.e., kindling) and memory formation (i.e., long term potentiation) are similar 
( Meador, 2007 ). 
 Factors unrelated or indirectly related to epilepsy contribute to cognition. In 
population studies, maternal intelligence is the most predictive of a child’s intel-
ligence ( Satt ler, 1992 ). Psychosocial variables such as depression or other envi-
ronmental factors can aff ect cognition. 
 Treatments for seizures may impact cognition. Epilepsy surgery may improve 
cognition or result in defi cits. Th e remainder of the chapter will focus on the cog-
nitive and behavioral eff ects of antiepileptic drugs. 
 Antiepileptic Drugs 
 AEDs are the major therapeutic modality for seizures and are frequently used for 
other indications (e.g., pain and psychiatric disorders). Th erefore, the behavioral 
and cognitive eff ects of AEDs including diff erences between AEDs and their 
eff ects relative to other clinical considerations are important. When AEDs are 
used within the standard therapeutic ranges, their adverse cognitive eff ects are 
generally modest, especially when these eff ects are modulated by reduced sei-
zures ( Meador, 2009 ). However, the eff ects may be clinically signifi cant even 
under these conditions, as evidenced by the highly signifi cant inverse correla-
tion of neurotoxicity symptoms and quality of life, even in the absence of overt 
toxicity ( Gilliam, Carter, & Vahle, 2004 ). Some AEDs reduce verbal paragraph 
memory by 15–20 percent ( Motamedi & Meador, 2004 ) and withdrawal of some 
AEDs can produce an 11–28 percent improvement on neuropsychological tests 
( Lossius, et al., 2008 ). Th e risks of adverse cognitive eff ects are increased by with 
polypharmacy and with increasing AED dosages/blood levels, although the risks 
of polytherapy with newer AEDs are less clear. An individual patient may achieve 
the best seizure control with the fewest cognitive side eff ects using polytherapy. 
Both positive (e.g., mood stabilization) and negative (e.g., depression, irritability/
agitation, psychosis) psychotropic eff ects have been observed for AEDs. Several 
AEDs are used routinely to treat psychiatric conditions (e.g., carbamazepine, 
lamotrigine, valproate). 
 Methodological Issues . Flaws in experimental design, analysis, and interpreta-
tion are common in investigations of AED cognitive eff ects, including subject 
selection bias, non-equivalence of clinical and of dependent variables, sample size, 
test–retest eff ects, neuropsychological tests employed, inappropriate statistics, 
type I and II errors, non-orthogonal contrasts, and comparison of studies with 
non-equivalent designs/statistics ( Meador, 2009 ). Statistical fi ndings have to be 
interpreted taking into account the magnitude of eff ects, overall risk-to-benefi t 

272
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
ratio, and severity of seizure disorder. Although cognitive side eff ects are primar-
ily monitored in the clinical sett ing by patient report, subjective perception of 
cognitive eff ects is related more to mood than objective performance ( Marino, 
et al., 2009 ). 
 Older Antiepileptic Drugs . Th e greatest and most consistent adverse AED 
cognitive eff ects are observed with barbiturates and benzodiazepines ( Meador, 
2009 ). Double-blind, randomized, crossover, monotherapy design studies have 
demonstrated that carbamazepine, phenytoin, and valproate have similar adverse 
cognitive eff ects ( Dodrill & Troupin, 1991 ;  Meador, Loring, Huh, Gallagher, & 
King, 1990 ;  Meador, et al., 1995 ;  Prevey, et al., 1996 ). Other studies have also 
confi rmed these fi ndings (see  Table 13.1 ). ( Hessen, Lossius, & Gjerstad, 2009 ; 
 Meador, et al., 1993 ;  Meador, et al., 1991 ;  Meador, et al., 1990 ;  Meador, et al., 
1995 ;  Pulliainen & Jokelainen, 1994 ). 
 Newer Antiepileptic Drugs . Some newer AEDs have fewer cognitive side eff ects 
than older AEDs. Cognitive eff ects have not been formally assessed for all AEDs. 
Th us, the relative cognitive/behavioral eff ects of the newer AEDs are not fully 
determined, but pertinent data are described below. 
 Felbamate . In clinical trials, felbamate had few cognitive side eff ects, but it is 
reported anecdotally to be alerting, which can be benefi cial or detrimental. No 
studies with formal cognitive assessments exist. 
 Gabapentin . Although gabapentin can produce some cognitive side eff ects, it 
has a favorable cognitive profi le in epilepsy patients. Gabapentin has exhibited 
less cognitive side eff ects than carbamazepine ( Meador, et al., 1999 ;  Salinsky, 
et al., 2002 ). Gabapentin can produce improvements in perceived well-being in 
epilepsy patients ( Dimond, Pande, Lamoreaux, & Pierce, 1996 ;  Wolf, Shinnar, 
Kang, Gil, & Moshe, 1995 ), but it can also result in irritability and agitation in 
children ( Wolf, et al., 1995 ). 
 Table 13.1  Cognitive Eff ects of Older Antiepileptic Drugs   
 % of Variables 
 Signifi cantly Diff erent 
 Antiepileptic Drugs 
 4–10%* 
 carbamazepine = phenytoin = valproate 
 32% 
 phenobarbital worse than phenytoin & valproate 
 52–55% 
 older AEDs** worse than no drug 
 * percent of variables that diff ered across the three drugs; no consistent diff erential patt ern 
present. 
 ** carbamazepine, phenytoin, and valproate. 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
273
 Lamotrigine . No cognitive eff ects with lamotrigine versus placebo were seen 
on a limited neuropsychological batt ery in epilepsy patients (62). Lamotrigine 
had fewer cognitive side eff ects compared to carbamazepine, diazepam, phe-
nytoin, placebo, topiramate, and valproate in healthy adults ( Aldenkamp, et al., 
2002 ;  Cohen, et al., 1985 ;  Meador, et al., 2001 ;  Meador, et al., 2005 ). In clinical 
trials, lamotrigine has been bett er tolerated than carbamazepine and phenytoin 
( Brodie, Overstall, & Giorgi, 1999 ;  Steiner, et al., 1999 ). Lamotrigine has shown 
benefi cial eff ects on perceived quality of life in epilepsy patients compared with 
placebo or carbamazepine ( Brodie, Richens, & Yuen, 1995 ;  Smith, Baker, Davies, 
Dewey, & Chadwick, 1993 ), and has positive psychotropic properties in bipolar 
disorder patients and epilepsy patients. In epilepsy patients, lamotrigine exhibits 
positive mood eff ects compared to levetiracetam ( Labiner, et al., 2009 ). 
 Levetiracetam . Th e cognitive profi le of levetiracetam is favorable in patients, 
but a few adult and pediatric patients can experience adverse behavioral side 
eff ects. Levitiracetam had less adverse cognitive eff ects than carbamazepine 
in a double-blind, randomized, healthy volunteer study ( Meador, Gevins, 
et al., 2007 ). 
 Oxcarbazepine . Similar cognitive eff ects were seen for oxcarbazepine and 
phenytoin in an epilepsy patient study and a healthy volunteer study ( Aikia, 
Kalviainen, Sivenius, Halonen, & Riekkinen, 1992 ;  Salinsky, Spencer, Oken, & 
Storzbach, 2004 ). 
 Rufi namide . No statistically signifi cant cognitive changes were found for rufi n-
amide in a placebo-controlled study ( Aldenkamp & Alpherts, 2006 ). 
 Tiagabine . No signifi cant cognitive eff ects were reported in a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of epilepsy patients ( Sveinbjornsdott ir, 
et al., 1994 ). 
 Topiramate . Greater adverse cognitive side eff ects were seen for topira-
mate than gabapentin and lamotrigine in healthy volunteers ( Salinsky, et al., 
2005 ) ( Meador, et al., 2005 ), and lamotrigine in epilepsy patients ( Blum, et al., 
2006 ). Two randomized patient studies comparing adjunctive topiramate to 
valproate reported worse eff ects for topiramate, but the eff ects were few aft er 
extended treatment ( Aldenkamp, et  al., 2000 ;  Meador, Loring, Hulihan, 
Kamin, & Karim, 2003 ). Verbal fl uency, att ention, processing speed, and 
working memory are particularly vulnerable to topiramate. Irritability and 
psychosis have been reported with topiramate. Th e risk of cognitive eff ects 
from topiramate are increased by faster initial titration, higher dosage, and 
polytherapy, but some patients experience adverse eff ects even when these risk 
factors do not exist. 
 Vigabatrin . Vigabatrin produced few adverse eff ects on cognition or quality 
of life compared to placebo in epilepsy patients ( Dodrill, Arnett , Sommerville, 
& Sussman, 1993, 1995 ). Drug-induced depression and psychosis have been 
reported ( Ferrie, Robinson, & Panayiotopoulos, 1996 ). 

274
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Zonisamide . Although limited formal neuropsychological data are available 
for zonisamide, it impaired cognition in two studies of epilepsy patients ( Berent, 
et al., 1987 ;  Park, et al., 2008 ). 
 Tables 13.2 and 13.3   summarize the data presented above. Information on 
cognitive eff ects of other new AEDs is inadequate. 
   EF FECTS OF A N T I EPI L EP T IC DRUGS AT AGE E X T R E M E S  
 Elderly . Although the elderly have increased risk of epilepsy and increased sus-
ceptibility to drug-induced cognitive eff ects for both pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic reasons, there are few studies examining AED cognitive eff ects 
in the elderly. Phenytoin and valproate had similar cognitive eff ects in elderly 
patients ( Craig & Tallis, 1994 ). Reanalysis of the original VA Cooperative Study 
demonstrated that elderly patients were more likely to have cognitive side eff ects 
 Table 13.2  Newer AEDs vs. Placebo 
 % Variables Signifi cantly 
 Worse on Placebo 
 Antiepileptic Drug 
 0% 
 tiagabine 
 1–17% 
 lamotrigine 
 0–19% 
 gabapentin 
 11% 
 levetiracetam 
 46% 
 oxcarbazepine 
 29–88% 
 topiramate 
 Table 13.3  Comparative Cognitive Eff ects of Newer AEDs 
 % of Variables 
 Signifi cantly Diff erent 
 Antiepileptic Drugs 
 26% 
 carbamazepine worse than gabapentin 
 48% 
 carbamazepine worse than lamotrigine 
 42% 
 carbamazepine worse than levetiracetam 
 0% 
 oxcarbazepine = phenytoin 
 50% 
 topiramate worse than gabapentin 
 80% 
 topiramate worse than lamotrigine 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
275
( Ramsay & Pryor, 2000 ). Th e recent VA Cooperative Study in elderly epilepsy 
patients showed that patients tolerated gabapentin and lamotrigine bett er than 
carbamazepine, and that intolerance to carbamazepine was mainly due to adverse 
side eff ects on the central nervous system ( Rowan, et al., 2005 ). 
 Children . Even though adverse cognitive AED eff ects during neurodevelop-
ment could pose a special risk, investigations in children are fewer than adults. 
Th e observed AED eff ects available for children are similar to the fi ndings in 
adults. See  Table  13.4 . Studies of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, 
and valproate in children have demonstrated comparable cognitive eff ects 
( Aldenkamp, et al., 1993 ;  Donati, et al., 2007 ;  Forsythe, Butler, Berg, & McGuire, 
1991 ;  Forsythe & Sills, 1984 ;  Tonnby, et al., 1994 ). Phenobarbital has greater 
adverse cognitive eff ects compared to valproate and carbamazepine in children 
with epilepsy ( Chen, Chi Chow, & Lee, 2001 ;  Chen, Kang, & So, 1996 ;  Vining, 
et al., 1987 ) and compared to placebo in children with febrile seizures ( Farwell, 
et al., 1990 ). Lamotrigine had no signifi cant eff ects compared to placebo in chil-
dren with epilepsy (Pressler, 2006). Carbamazepine had fewer eff ects than topi-
ramate ( Kang, et al., 2007 ). Additional studies are needed in children not only to 
defi ne the cognitive eff ects, but also to defi ne relative eff ectiveness across AEDs. 
 Neurodevelopmental Eff ects of  In Utero AED Exposure 
 Neurodevelopmental of children whose mothers have epilepsy may be infl uenced 
by AEDs, type and severity of seizures during pregnancy, genetics, maternal age/
parity, and socioeconomic status ( Meador, 2009 ). Although data is incomplete, 
animal and human studies indicate that AEDs play a role. 
 Animal Studies . AED-induced behavioral teratogenesis (i.e., cognitive/behav-
ioral defi cits) has been observed in animals at dosages lower than those required 
 Table 13.4   Antiepileptic Drug (AED) Cognition Studies in Children 
 Relative AED Cognitive Eff ects 
 valproate less than phenobarbital 
 placebo less than phenobarbital 
 carbamazepine = phenytoin = valproate 
 carbamazepine = valproate; both less than phenobarbital 
 placebo = lamotrigine 
 carbamazepine = oxcarbazepine = valproate 
 carbamazepine less than topiramate. 

276
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
to produce anatomical malformations ( Finnell & Dansky, 1991 ). Prenatal expo-
sure to phenobarbital or phenytoin can alter neurons and result in cognitive and 
behavioral abnormalities in animals. Similar to alcohol in the third trimester, 
exposure of the immature neonatal rat brain to clonazepam, diazepam, phe-
nobarbital, phenytoin, vigabatrin, or valproate can result in widespread neuro-
nal apoptosis ( Bitt igau, et  al., 2002 ;  Bitt igau, Sifringer, & Ikonomidou, 2003 ; 
 Stefovska, et al., 2008 ). Th is eff ect occurs at therapeutically relevant blood levels 
and is dose-dependent. Th e eff ect is associated with reduced expression of neuro-
trophins and levels of protein kinases that promote neuronal growth and survival. 
Similar apoptotic eff ects were not seen at therapeutic dosages for carbamazepine, 
lamotrigine, levetiracetam, or topiramate monotherapy ( Glier, et al., 2004 ;  Katz, 
Kim, Gale, & Kondratyev, 2007 ;  Kim, Kondratyev, & Gale, 2007 ;  Manthey, et al., 
2005 ). However, synergistic eff ects can produce apoptosis in polytherapy. Th ese 
observations raise serious concern that AEDs commonly used in women of child-
bearing potential and in neonate could cause adverse eff ects in exposed children. 
Future studies should investigate other AEDs in animals and determine if similar 
eff ects occur in humans. 
 Human Studies . Neurodevelopmental defi cits are increased in children of 
women with epilepsy, but AED risks in humans are only partially delineated 
( Meador, 2009 ). Many studies have not been prospective with adequate assess-
ment of confounding factors such as parental IQ and education, etiology of epi-
lepsy, seizure type and frequency, AED dose/blood levels, maternal age/parity, 
socioeconomic status, and home environment. Formal cognitive assessments in 
children have not always been blinded to AED exposure. 
 A population-based study found developmental delay in 19 percent of children 
exposed  in utero to AEDs versus 3 percent unexposed ( Dean, et al., 2002 ). Th e risk 
of developmental delay is increased higher dose and numbers of AEDs, decreased 
maternal education, impaired maternal-child relationship, and maternal focal sei-
zure disorder ( Meador, 2009 ;  Meador, Baker, Cohen, Gaily, & Westerveld, 2007 ). 
Men exposed prenatally to phenobarbital had signifi cantly lower verbal IQ scores 
(about 7 points) in two retrospective studies from Denmark, and the eff ect was 
markedly increase by lower socioeconomic status and “unwanted” pregnancy 
( Reinisch, Sanders, Mortensen, & Rubin, 1995 ). 
 Children exposed  in utero  to valproate monotherapy had increased risk of 
developmental delay in a cohort less than 6 years old, and reduced verbal IQ (6 –
15 points) in a second cohort age 6–16 years compared to unexposed and those 
exposed to other AEDs in a retrospective UK study ( Adab, et al., 2004 ). Verbal IQ 
was reduced (13–14 points) in children exposed  in utero to valproate compared 
to unexposed and to carbamazepine-exposed children in a prospective Finnish 
study, but the valproate sample size was small and maternal IQ was not measured 
( Gaily, et al., 2004 ). Th ese earlier fi ndings were confi rmed recently by a large pro-
spective study controlling for multiple confounding factors including maternal 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
277
IQ ( Meador, et al., 2009; 2013 ). Children exposed  in utero to valproate exhibited 
a 6–9 IQ point reduction at age 3 years and 7–10 IQ point reduction at age 6 years 
compared to those exposed to carbamazepine, lamotrigine, or phenytoin. Th e 
valproate eff ect was dose dependent. A small study suggests that fetal exposure 
to levetiracetam has low risk for cognitive defi cits (Shallcross, et al., 2011. Th e 
behavioral teratogenetic risks for other AEDs remain to be fully delineated. 
 Conclusions 
 Cognitive and behavioral eff ects of AEDs have to be assessed within the con-
text of other factors, which may adversely aff ect brain function in patients with 
epilepsy. AED cognitive eff ects are increased with polypharmacy and with 
higher dosage/anticonvulsant blood levels. AED cognitive eff ects can be clini-
cally signifi cant since they can reduce the patient’s quality of life. AEDs can 
impair psychomotor processing speed, sustained att ention, memory, and dual 
processing. Special concern should be directed at patients dependent on these 
skills for work or school. Further, fetal exposure to some AEDs (e.g., valproate) 
may have long-lasting neurodevelopment consequences. Some AEDs have posi-
tive psychotropic eff ects (e.g., carbamazepine, lamotrigine, valproate), but these 
and other AEDs can also produce negative behavioral eff ects. For an individual 
patient, the goal is to achieve the best seizure control while producing the few-
est side eff ects. Subjective perception of cognitive side eff ects may be altered by 
mood and by habituation of the subjective eff ects. Clinicians should be aware 
of the limitations of subjective reports and be alert to increased risk for cogni-
tive side eff ects posed by specifi c AEDs and by the circumstances noted above. 
Further studies are needed to fully delineate the cognitive and behavioral eff ects 
for many AEDs.  
    Management of Cases (Described at Beginning 
of Chapter)  
 Case 1. Th e 22 year old college student with new onset temporal lobe epilepsy 
and a history of acquired att entional defi cit disorder due to head trauma was 
concerned about possible AED cognitive eff ects. Th e informed consent process 
should include options and risks. Issues to address include AED eff ectiveness, 
systemic side eff ects (e.g., skin rash, osteoporosis), drug interactions, and central 
nervous system risks (e.g., sedation, slowed cognition, memory problems, depres-
sion). Th e student’s concern is well justifi ed as some AEDs can reduce memory 
acquisition and impact school performance, even in students without pre-existing 
cognitive problems. Th us, those AEDs with the lowest demonstrated adverse 

278
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
cognitive risks were considered (e.g., lamotrigine, levetiracetam). Th e patient was 
started on levetiracetam and titrated up to 500mg twice a day. He became seizure 
free and maintained good school performance. 
 Case 2. Th e 68-year-old man with episodes of loss of awareness was felt to 
have seizures due to focal epilepsy despite his normal MRIs, EEGs and neu-
rological examinations. His epilepsy risk factors are age and hypertension. It 
is unlikely that there is any direct relationship to his prior esophageal cancer. 
A therapeutic AED trial was recommended to confi rm the diagnosis and con-
trol the spells. Because of increased susceptibility of elderly to AED cognitive 
eff ects, those AEDs with the lowest demonstrated adverse cognitive risks were 
considered. Lamotrigine was recommended given his dysphoria and its positive 
psychotrophic eff ects. However, the patient chose phenytoin because he wanted 
a quick response, a less costly medicine, and was worried about the skin rash with 
lamotrigine. Once he started an AED, he never had another episode of loss of 
awareness, confi rming his diagnosis. However, he suff ered problems with att en-
tion and mental speed despite borderline low therapeutic levels of phenytoin and 
a month of therapy for habituation. He was switched to levetiracetam because 
he was still concerned about lamotrigine skin rash. Levetiracetam is frequently 
used in the elderly because of its favorable cognitive profi le and lack of pharma-
cokinetic interactions, which is important in the elderly as they typically are tak-
ing multiple medications. Once he was converted to levetiracetam, his cognitive 
problems resolved, and he remained seizure free. However, his wife noted that he 
had been become extremely irritable, which is a known side eff ect in a minority 
of patients on levetiracetam. Next, he was slowly titrated onto lamotrigine and 
tapered off  levetiracetam. His irritability resolved, and he remained seizure free 
without cognitive complains. Furthermore, his wife noted that his dysphoria 
resolved and his premorbid optimistic personality returned. 
 Case 3. Th e 19-year-old woman with new onset juvenile myoclonic epilepsy 
was started on AED therapy to prevent recurrent convulsions. For women of 
childbearing potential, the informed consent process should include additional 
issues such as potential AED eff ects on reproductive function and AED terato-
genic eff ects. Th ese teratogenic risks include not only malformations but also 
behavioral/cognitive risks to the unborn child. Discussion of teratogenic eff ects 
should be included even if there are no immediate plans for pregnancy since 
almost half of pregnancies are unplanned. Further, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy 
has a high recurrence rate when AEDs are withdrawn, so that the choice of AED 
in this case may be lifelong. Although valproate has the best effi  cacy for idiopathic 
generalized epilepsies, it has the highest risk for both malformations and reduced 
cognitive abilities. Further, there are other eff ective therapies that work for many 
women. Of the AEDs which are eff ective in primary generalized epilepsy, the 
AED with the lowest risks for the fetus based on current information is lamotrig-
ine. Other alternatives might include levetiracetam, topiramate, and zonisamide. 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
279
Topiramate has an approximately 4.5 percent risk of major congenital malforma-
tions (especially cleft  palate). Levetiracetam appears to have a low risk of malfor-
mations, and one small study suggests that it has low risk for cognitive defi cits. 
Information on malformation risks for zonisamide is inadequate, and human data 
on the risks of impaired cognitive development from fetal exposure to topiramate 
or zonisamide do not exist. Th e decision was made with the patient to begin her 
on lamotrigine, and seizures were well controlled.    
 References 
 Adab ,  N. ,  Kini ,  U. ,  Vinten ,  J. ,  Ayres ,  J. ,  Baker ,  G. ,  Clayton-Smith ,  J. , et al. ( 2004 ).  Th e longer term 
outcome of children born to mothers with epilepsy.    Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & 
Psychiatry ,  75 ( 11 ),  1575–1583 . 
   Aikia ,  M.  ,   Kalviainen ,  R.  ,   Sivenius ,  J.  ,   Halonen ,  T.  , &   Riekkinen ,  P. J.   ( 1992 ).  Cognitive eff ects 
of oxcarbazepine and phenytoin monotherapy in newly diagnosed epilepsy:  one year 
follow-up.  Epilepsy Research ,  11 ( 3 ),  199–203 . 
 Aldenkamp ,  A. P. , &  Alpherts ,  W. C. ( 2006 ).  Th e eff ect of the new antiepileptic drug rufi namide 
on cognitive functions.  Epilepsia ,  47 ( 7 ),  1153–1159 . 
 Aldenkamp ,  A. P. ,  Alpherts ,  W. C. ,  Blennow ,  G. ,  Elmqvist ,  D. ,  Heijbel ,  J. ,  Nilsson ,  H. L. , et al. 
( 1993 ).  Withdrawal of antiepileptic medication in children—eff ects on cognitive func-
tion: Th e Multicenter Holmfrid Study.  Neurology ,  43 ( 1 ),  41–50 . 
 Aldenkamp ,  A. P. ,  Arends ,  J. ,  Bootsma ,  H. P. ,  Diepman ,  L. ,  Hulsman ,  J. ,  Lambrechts ,  D. , et al. ( 2002 ). 
 Randomized double-blind parallel-group study comparing cognitive eff ects of a low-dose 
lamotrigine with valproate and placebo in healthy volunteers.    Epilepsia ,  43 ( 1 ),  19–26 . 
 Aldenkamp ,  A. P. ,  Baker ,  G. ,  Mulder ,  O. G. ,  Chadwick ,  D. ,  Cooper ,  P. ,  Doelman ,  J. , et al. ( 2000 ). 
 A multicenter, randomized clinical study to evaluate the eff ect on cognitive function of 
topiramate compared with valproate as add-on therapy to carbamazepine in patients with 
partial-onset seizures.  Epilepsia ,  41 ( 9 ),  1167–1178 . 
 Berent ,  S. ,  Sackellares ,  J. C. ,  Giordani ,  B. ,  Wagner ,  J. G. ,  Donofrio ,  P. D. , & Abou- Khalil ,  B. 
( 1987 ).  Zonisamide (CI-912) and cognition:  results from preliminary study.  Epilepsia , 
 28 ( 1 ),  61–67 . 
 Bitt igau ,  P. ,  Sifringer ,  M. ,  Genz ,  K. ,  Reith ,  E. ,  Pospischil ,  D. ,  Govindarajalu ,  S. , et al. ( 2002 ). 
 Antiepileptic drugs and apoptotic neurodegeneration in the developing brain.    Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  99 ( 23 ),  15089–15094 . 
 Bitt igau ,  P. ,  Sifringer ,  M. , &  Ikonomidou ,  C. ( 2003 ).  Antiepileptic drugs and apoptosis in the 
developing brain.  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences ,  993  ,  103–114 ; discussion 
123-104. 
   Blum ,  D.  ,   Meador ,  K.  ,   Biton ,  V.  ,   Fakhoury ,  T.  ,   Shneker ,  B.  ,   Chung ,  S.  , et al. ( 2006 ).  Cognitive 
eff ects of lamotrigine compared with topiramate in patients with epilepsy.    Neurology ,  67 ( 3 ), 
 400–406 . 
   Brodie ,  M. J.  ,   Overstall ,  P. W.  , &   Giorgi ,  L.   ( 1999 ).  Multicentre, double-blind, randomised com-
parison between lamotrigine and carbamazepine in elderly patients with newly diagnosed 
epilepsy. Th e UK Lamotrigine Elderly Study Group.  Epilepsy Research ,  37 ( 1 ),  81–87 . 
 Brodie ,  M. J. ,  Richens ,  A. , &  Yuen ,  A. W. ( 1995 ).  Double-blind comparison of lamotrigine and car-
bamazepine in newly diagnosed epilepsy. UK Lamotrigine/Carbamazepine Monotherapy 
Trial Group.  Lancet ,  345 ( 8948 ),  476–479 . 
   Chen ,  Y.  , Chi   Chow ,  J.  , &   Lee ,  I.   ( 2001 ).  Comparison the cognitive eff ect of anti-epileptic drugs 
in seizure-free children with epilepsy before and aft er drug withdrawal.  Epilepsy Research , 
 44 (1),  65–70 . 

280
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Chen ,  Y. J.  ,   Kang ,  W. M.  , &   So ,  W. C.   ( 1996 ).  Comparison of antiepileptic drugs on cognitive 
function in newly diagnosed epileptic children:  a psychometric and neurophysiological 
study.  Epilepsia ,  37 ( 1 ),  81–86 . 
 Cohen ,  A. F. ,  Ashby ,  L. ,  Crowley ,  D. ,  Land ,  G. ,  Peck ,  A. W. , &  Miller ,  A. A. ( 1985 ).  Lamotrigine 
(BW430C), a potential anticonvulsant. Eff ects on the central nervous system in comparison 
with phenytoin and diazepam.  British Jourmal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  20 ( 6 ),  619–629 . 
 Craig ,  I. , &  Tallis ,  R. ( 1994 ).  Impact of valproate and phenytoin on cognitive function in 
elderly patients: results of a single-blind randomized comparative study.    Epilepsia ,  35 ( 2 ), 
 381–390 . 
 Dean ,  J. C. ,  Hailey ,  H. ,  Moore ,  S. J. ,  Lloyd ,  D. J. ,  Turnpenny ,  P. D. , &  Litt le ,  J. ( 2002 ).  Long term 
health and neurodevelopment in children exposed to antiepileptic drugs before birth. 
 Journal of Medical Genetics,  39 ( 4 ),  251–259 . 
  Dikmen ,  S. , &  Matt hews ,  C. G.   ( 1977 ).  Eff ect of major motor seizure frequency upon 
cognitive-intellectual functions in adults.    Epilepsia ,  18 ( 1 ),  21–29 . 
   Dimond ,  K. R. ,  Pande ,  A. C. ,  Lamoreaux ,  L. , &  Pierce ,  M. W.   ( 1996 ).  Eff ect of gabapentin 
(Neurontin) [corrected] on mood and well-being in patients with epilepsy.  Progress in 
Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry ,  20 ( 3 ),  407–417 . 
 Dodrill ,  C. B. ( 1992 ).  Neuropsychological aspects of epilepsy.  Psychiatric Clinics of North America , 
 15 ( 2 ),  383–394 . 
 Dodrill ,  C. B. ,  Arnett  ,  J. L. ,  Sommerville ,  K. W. , &  Sussman ,  N. M. ( 1993 ).  Evaluation of the 
eff ects of vigabatrin on cognitive abilities and quality of life in epilepsy.  Neurology ,  43 ( 12 ), 
 2501–2507 . 
 Dodrill ,  C. B. ,  Arnett  ,  J. L. ,  Sommerville ,  K. W. , &  Sussman ,  N. M. ( 1995 ).  Eff ects of diff ering 
dosages of vigabatrin (Sabril) on cognitive abilities and quality of life in epilepsy.  Epilepsia , 
 36 ( 2 ),  164–173 . 
 Dodrill ,  C. B. , &  Troupin ,  A. S. ( 1991 ).  Neuropsychological eff ects of carbamazepine and phe-
nytoin: a reanalysis.  Neurology ,  41 ( 1 ),  141–143 . 
 Donati ,  F. ,  Gobbi ,  G. ,  Campistol ,  J. ,  Rapatz ,  G. ,  Daehler ,  M. ,  Sturm ,  Y. , et al. ( 2007 ).  Th e cogni-
tive eff ects of oxcarbazepine versus carbamazepine or valproate in newly diagnosed children 
with partial seizures.    Seizure ,  16 ( 8 ),  670–679 . 
   Farwell ,  J. R.  ,   Lee ,  Y. J.  ,   Hirtz ,  D. G.  ,   Sulzbacher ,  S. I.  ,   Ellenberg ,  J. H.  , &   Nelson ,  K. B. ( 1990 ). 
 Phenobarbital for febrile seizures—eff ects on intelligence and on seizure recurrence.  New 
England Journal of Medicine ,  322 ( 6 ),  364–369 . 
 Ferrie ,  C. D. ,  Robinson ,  R. O. , &  Panayiotopoulos ,  C. P. ( 1996 ).  Psychotic and severe behavioural 
reactions with vigabatrin: a review.  Acta Neurologica Scandinavica ,  93 ( 1 ),  1–8 . 
 Finnell ,  R. H. , &  Dansky ,  L. V. ( 1991 ).  Parental epilepsy, anticonvulsant drugs, and reproductive 
outcome: epidemiologic and experimental fi ndings spanning three decades; 1: animal stud-
ies.  Reproductive Toxicology ,  5 ,  281–299 . 
 Forsythe ,  I. ,  Butler ,  R. ,   Berg ,  I. , &  McGuire ,  R. ( 1991 ).  Cognitive impairment in new cases of epi-
lepsy randomly assigned to carbamazepine, phenytoin and sodium valproate.    Developmental 
Medicine and Child Neurology ,  33 ( 6 ),  524–534 . 
   Forsythe ,  W. I.  , &   Sills ,  M. A.   ( 1984 ).  One drug for childhood grand mal: medical audit for 
three-year remissions.  Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology ,  26 ( 6 ),  742–748 . 
 Gaily ,  E. ,  Kantola-Sorsa ,  E. ,  Hiilesmaa ,  V. ,  Isoaho ,  M. ,  Matila ,  R. ,  Kotila ,  M. , et al. ( 2004 ).  Normal 
intelligence in children with prenatal exposure to carbamazepine.  Neurology ,  62 ( 1 ),  28–32 . 
   Gilliam ,  F.  ,   Carter ,  J.  , &   Vahle ,  V.   ( 2004 ).  Tolerability of antiseizure medications: implications for 
health outcomes.    Neurology ,  63  ( 10 Suppl 4 ),  S9–S12 . 
 Glier ,  C. ,  Dzietko ,  M. ,  Bitt igau ,  P.  ,   Jarosz ,  B.  ,   Korobowicz ,  E.  , &   Ikonomidou ,  C.   ( 2004 ). 
 Th erapeutic doses of topiramate are not toxic to the developing rat brain.  Experimental 
Neurology ,  187 ( 2 ),  403–409 . 
 Helmstaedter ,  C. ( 2002 ).  Eff ects of chronic epilepsy on declarative memory systems.  Progress in 
Brain Res ,  135 ,  439–453 . 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
281
 Henry ,  T. R. , &  Votaw ,  J. R. ( 2004 ).  Th e role of positron emission tomography with [18F]fl uo-
rodeoxyglucose in the evaluation of the epilepsies.  Neuroimaging Clinics of North America , 
 14 ( 3 ),  517–535 , ix. 
   Hermann ,  B.  ,   Jones ,  J.  ,   Sheth ,  R.  ,   Dow ,  C.  ,   Koehn ,  M.  , &   Seidenberg ,  M.   ( 2006 ).  Children with 
new-onset epilepsy:  neuropsychological status, and brain structure.  Brain ,  129 ( Pt 10 ), 
 2609–2619 . 
   Hessen ,  E.  ,   Lossius ,  M. I.  , &   Gjerstad ,  L.   ( 2009 ).  Antiepileptic monotherapy signifi cantly impairs 
normative scores on common tests of executive functions.    Acta Neurologica Scandinavica , 
 119 ( 3 ),  194–198 . 
 Jokeit ,  H. ,  Daamen ,  M. ,  Zang ,  H. ,  Janszky ,  J. , &  Ebner ,  A. ( 2001 ).  Seizures accelerate forgett ing in 
patients with left -sided temporal lobe epilepsy.  Neurology ,  57 ( 1 ),  125–126 . 
 Kang ,  H. C. ,  Eun ,  B. L. , Wu  Lee ,  C. , Ku  Moon ,  H. ,  Kim ,  J. S. , Wook  Kim ,  D. , et al. ( 2007 ).  Th e 
eff ects on cognitive function and behavioral problems of topiramate compared to carba-
mazepine as monotherapy for children with benign rolandic epilepsy.  Epilepsia ,  48 ( 9 ), 
 1716–1723 . 
 Katz ,  I. ,  Kim ,  J. ,  Gale ,  K. , &  Kondratyev ,  A. ( 2007 ).  Eff ects of lamotrigine alone and in combi-
nation with MK-801, phenobarbital, or phenytoin on cell death in the neonatal rat brain.  
 Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Th erapeutics ,  322 ( 2 ),  494–500 . 
 Kim ,  J. ,  Kondratyev ,  A. , &  Gale ,  K. ( 2007 ).  Antiepileptic drug-induced neuronal cell death in the 
immature brain: eff ects of carbamazepine, topiramate, and levetiracetam as monotherapy ver-
sus polytherapy.  Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Th erapeutics ,  323 ( 1 ),  165–173 . 
 Labiner ,  D. M. ,  Ett inger ,  A. B. ,  Fakhoury ,  T. A. ,  Chung ,  S. S. ,  Shneker ,  B. ,  Tatum Iv ,  W. O. , et al. 
( 2009 ).  Eff ects of lamotrigine compared with levetiracetam on anger, hostility, and total 
mood in patients with partial epilepsy.  Epilepsia ,  50 ( 3 ),  434–442 . 
 Lossius ,  M. I. ,  Hessen ,  E. ,  Mowinckel ,  P. ,  Stavem ,  K. ,  Erikssen ,  J. ,  Gulbrandsen ,  P. , et al. ( 2008 ). 
 Consequences of antiepileptic drug withdrawal:  a randomized, double-blind study 
(Akershus Study).  Epilepsia ,  49 ( 3 ),  455–463 . 
 Manthey ,  D. ,  Asimiadou ,  S. ,  Stefovska ,  V. ,  Kaindl ,  A. M. ,  Fassbender ,  J. ,  Ikonomidou ,  C. , et al. 
( 2005 ).  Sulthiame but not levetiracetam exerts neurotoxic eff ect in the developing rat brain. 
 Experimental Neurology ,  193 ( 2 ),  497–503 . 
   Marino ,  S. E.  ,   Meador ,  K. J.  ,   Loring ,  D. W.  ,   Okun ,  M. S.  ,   Fernandez ,  H. H.  ,   Fessler ,  A. J.  , et al. 
( 2009 ).  Subjective perception of cognition is related to mood and not performance.    Epilepsy 
& Behavior ,  14 ( 3 ),  459–464 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ( 2007 ).  Th e basic science of memory as it applies to epilepsy.    Epilepsia ,  48  Suppl 
9 ,  23–25 . 
   Meador ,  K. J.   ( 2011 ). Cognitive eff ects of epilepsy and of antiepileptic medications. In   E.   Wyllie  , 
 G.  Cascino ,  B.  Gidal &  H.  Goodkin (Eds.),   Th e Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles & Practice  
(5th ed., pp. 1028–1036).  Philadelphia :  Lippincott  Williams & Wilkins . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Baker ,  G. ,  Cohen ,  M. J. ,  Gaily ,  E. , &  Westerveld ,  M. ( 2007 ).  Cognitive/behavioral 
teratogenetic eff ects of antiepileptic drugs.  Epilepsy &Behavior ,  11 ( 3 ),  292–302 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Baker ,  G. A. ,  Browning ,  N. , Clayton- Smith ,  J. , Combs- Cantrell ,  D. T. ,  Cohen ,  M. , 
et al. ( 2009 ).  Cognitive function at 3 years of age aft er fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs. 
 New England Journal of Medicine ,  360 ( 16 ),  1597–1605 . 
 Meador, K. J., Baker, G. A., Browning, N., Cohen, M. J., Bromley, R. L., Clayton-Smith, J., . . . , 
NEAD Study Group. (2013). Fetal antiepileptic drug exposure and cognitive outcomes at 
age 6 years: a prospective observational study.  Lancet Neurology, 12 (3), 244–252. 
   Meador ,  K. J.  ,   Gevins ,  A.  ,   Loring ,  D. W.  , Mc  Evoy ,  L. K.  ,   Ray ,  P. G.  ,   Smith ,  M. E.  , et al. ( 2007 ). 
 Neuropsychological and neurophysiologic eff ects of carbamazepine and levetiracetam. 
 Neurology ,  69 ( 22 ),  2076–2084 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Abney ,  O. L. ,  Allen ,  M. E. ,  Moore ,  E. E. ,  Zamrini ,  E. Y. , et al. ( 1993 ). 
 Eff ects of carbamazepine and phenytoin on EEG and memory in healthy adults.  Epilepsia , 
 34 ( 1 ),  153–157 . 

282
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Meador ,  K. J.  ,   Loring ,  D. W. ,  Allen ,  M. E. ,  Zamrini ,  E. Y. ,  Moore ,  E. E. ,  Abney ,  O. L. , et al. ( 1991 ). 
 Comparative cognitive eff ects of carbamazepine and phenytoin in healthy adults.  Neurology , 
 41 ( 10 ),  1537–1540 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Huh ,  K. ,  Gallagher ,  B. B. , &  King ,  D. W. ( 1990 ).  Comparative cogni-
tive eff ects of anticonvulsants.  Neurology ,  40 ( 3 Pt 1 ),  391–394 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Hulihan ,  J. F. ,  Kamin ,  M. , &  Karim ,  R. ( 2003 ).  Diff erential cognitive 
and behavioral eff ects of topiramate and valproate.  Neurology ,  60 ( 9 ),  1483–1488 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Moore ,  E. E. ,  Th ompson ,  W. O. ,  Nichols ,  M. E. ,  Oberzan ,  R. E. , et al. 
( 1995 ).  Comparative cognitive eff ects of phenobarbital, phenytoin, and valproate in healthy 
adults.  Neurology ,  45 ( 8 ),  1494–1499 . 
   Meador ,  K. J.  ,   Loring ,  D. W.  ,   Ray ,  P. G.  ,   Murro ,  A. M.  ,   King ,  D. W.  ,   Nichols ,  M. E.  , et al. ( 1999 ). 
 Diff erential cognitive eff ects of carbamazepine and gabapentin.    Epilepsia ,  40 ( 9 ),  1279–1285 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Ray ,  P. G. ,  Murro ,  A. M. ,  King ,  D. W. ,  Perrine ,  K. R. , et al. ( 2001 ). 
 Diff erential cognitive and behavioral eff ects of carbamazepine and lamotrigine.  Neurology , 
 56 ( 9 ),  1177–1182 . 
 Meador ,  K. J. ,  Loring ,  D. W. ,  Vahle ,  V. J. ,  Ray ,  P. G. ,  Werz ,  M. A. ,  Fessler ,  A. J. , et al. ( 2005 ). 
 Cognitive and behavioral eff ects of lamotrigine and topiramate in healthy volunteers.  
 Neurology ,  64 ( 12 ),  2108–2114 . 
   Motamedi ,  G. K.  , &   Meador ,  K. J.   ( 2004 ).  Antiepileptic drugs and memory.    Epilepsy & Behavior , 
 5 ( 4 ),  435–439 . 
 Park ,  S. P. ,  Hwang ,  Y. H. ,  Lee ,  H. W. ,  Suh ,  C. K. ,  Kwon ,  S. H. , &  Lee ,  B. I. ( 2008 ).  Long-term 
cognitive and mood eff ects of zonisamide monotherapy in epilepsy patients.  Epilepsy Behav , 
 12 ( 1 ),  102–108 . 
 Pressler, R. M., Binnie, C. D., Coleshill, S. G., Chorley, G. A., & Robinson, R. O. (2006). Eff ect of 
lamotrigine on cognition in children with epilepsy.  Neurology, 66 , 1495–1499. 
 Prevey ,  M. L. ,  Delaney ,  R. C. ,  Cramer ,  J. A. ,  Catt anach ,  L. ,  Collins ,  J. F. , &  Matt son ,  R. H. 
( 1996 ).  Eff ect of valproate on cognitive functioning. Comparison with carbamazepine. 
Th e Department of Veterans Aff airs Epilepsy Cooperative Study 264 Group.  Archives of 
Neurology ,  53 ( 10 ),  1008–1016 . 
  Pulliainen ,  V. , &  Jokelainen ,  M. ( 1994 ).  Eff ects of phenytoin and carbamazepine on cognitive func-
tions in newly diagnosed epileptic patients.    Acta Neurologica Scandinavica ,  89 ( 2 ),  81–86 . 
 Ramsay ,  R. E. , &  Pryor ,  F. ( 2000 ).  Epilepsy in the elderly.  Neurology ,  55  ( 5 Suppl 1 ),  S9–14 ; dis-
cussion S54-18. 
 Reinisch ,  J. M. ,  Sanders ,  S. A. ,  Mortensen ,  E. L. , &  Rubin ,  D. B. ( 1995 ).  In utero exposure to phe-
nobarbital and intelligence defi cits in adult men.  Journal of the American Medical Association , 
 274 ( 19 ),  1518–1525 . 
 Rowan ,  A. J. ,  Ramsay ,  R. E. ,  Collins ,  J. F. ,  Pryor ,  F. ,  Boardman ,  K. D. ,  Uthman ,  B. M. , et al. ( 2005 ). 
 New onset geriatric epilepsy: A randomized study of gabapentin, lamotrigine, and carbam-
azepine.  Neurology ,  64 ( 11 ),  1868–1873 . 
 Salinsky ,  M. C. ,  Binder ,  L. M. ,  Oken ,  B. S. ,  Storzbach ,  D. ,  Aron ,  C. R. , &  Dodrill ,  C. B. ( 2002 ). 
 Eff ects of gabapentin and carbamazepine on the EEG and cognition in healthy volunteers.  
 Epilepsia ,  43 ( 5 ),  482–490 . 
   Salinsky ,  M. C.  ,   Spencer ,  D. C.  ,   Oken ,  B. S.  , &   Storzbach ,  D.   ( 2004 ).  Eff ects of oxcarbazepine 
and phenytoin on the EEG and cognition in healthy volunteers.  Epilepsy & Behavior ,  5 ( 6 ), 
 894–902 . 
   Salinsky ,  M. C.  ,   Storzbach ,  D.  ,   Spencer ,  D. C.  ,   Oken ,  B. S.  ,   Landry ,  T.  , &   Dodrill ,  C. B.   ( 2005 ). 
 Eff ects of topiramate and gabapentin on cognitive abilities in healthy volunteers.  Neurology , 
 64 ( 5 ),  792–798 . 
 Satt ler ,  J. M. ( 1992 ).   Assessment of Children  (3rd ed.).  San Diego :  Jerome M. Satt ler Pub., Inc . 
 Shallcross, R., Bromley, R. L., Irwin, B., Bonnett , L. J., Morrow, J., Baker, G. A. (2011). Liverpool 
Manchester Neurodevelopment Group; UK Epilepsy and Pregnancy Register. Child devel-
opment following in utero exposure:  levetiracetam vs. sodium valproate.  Neurology, 76 , 
383–399. 

Eff ects of Antiepileptic Drugs
283
 Shewmon ,  D. A. , &  Erwin ,  R. J. ( 1988 ).  Th e eff ect of focal interictal spikes on perception and reac-
tion time. I. General considerations.    Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology , 
 69 ( 4 ),  319–337 . 
   Smith ,  D.  ,   Baker ,  G.  ,   Davies ,  G.  ,   Dewey ,  M.  , &   Chadwick ,  D. W.   ( 1993 ).  Outcomes of add-on 
treatment with lamotrigine in partial epilepsy.  Epilepsia ,  34 ( 2 ),  312–322 . 
 Smith ,  D. B. ,  Craft  ,  B. R. ,  Collins ,  J. ,  Matt son ,  R. H. , &  Cramer ,  J. A. ( 1986 ).  Behavioral char-
acteristics of epilepsy patients compared with normal controls.  Epilepsia ,  27 ( 6 ),  760–768 . 
 Stefovska ,  V. G. ,  Uckermann ,  O. ,  Czuczwar ,  M. ,  Smitka ,  M. ,  Czuczwar ,  P. ,  Kis ,  J. , et al. ( 2008 ). 
 Sedative and anticonvulsant drugs suppress postnatal neurogenesis.    Annals of Neurology , 
 64 ( 4 ),  434–445 . 
 Steiner ,  T. J. ,  Dellaportas ,  C. I. ,  Findley ,  L. J. ,  Gross ,  M. ,  Gibberd ,  F. B. ,  Perkin ,  G. D. , et al. ( 1999 ). 
 Lamotrigine monotherapy in newly diagnosed untreated epilepsy: a double-blind compari-
son with phenytoin.    Epilepsia ,  40 ( 5 ),  601–607 . 
 Sveinbjornsdott ir ,  S. ,  Sander ,  J. W. ,  Patsalos ,  P. N. ,  Upton ,  D. ,  Th ompson ,  P. J.  , &   Duncan ,  J. S.   
( 1994 ).  Neuropsychological eff ects of tiagabine, a potential new antiepileptic drug.    Seizure , 
 3 ( 1 ),  29–35 . 
 Tonnby ,  B. ,  Nilsson ,  H. L. ,  Aldenkamp ,  A. P. ,  Alpherts ,  W. C. ,  Blennow ,  G. ,  Elmqvist ,  D. , et al. 
( 1994 ).  Withdrawal of antiepileptic medication in children. Correlation of cognitive func-
tion and plasma concentration--the multicentre “Holmfrid” study.  Epilepsy Research ,  19 ( 2 ), 
 141–152 . 
 Vining ,  E. P. ,  Mellitis ,  E. D. ,  Dorsen ,  M. M. ,  Cataldo ,  M. F. ,  Quaskey ,  S. A. ,  Spielberg ,  S. P. , et al. 
( 1987 ).  Psychologic and behavioral eff ects of antiepileptic drugs in children: a double-blind 
comparison between phenobarbital and valproic acid.    Pediatrics ,  80 ( 2 ),  165–174 . 
   Wolf ,  S. M.  ,   Shinnar ,  S.  ,   Kang ,  H.  ,   Gil ,  K. B.  , &   Moshe ,  S. L.   ( 1995 ).  Gabapentin toxicity in chil-
dren manifesting as behavioral changes.  Epilepsia ,  36 ( 12 ),  1203–1205 .  

284
 C H A P T E R  14 
 Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition 
  
 David Q.  Beversdorf  
 Introduction 
 In behavioral neurology and neuropsychology, one typically thinks of localiza-
tion studies involving focal lesions of the brain or functional neuroimaging. One 
also thinks of the understanding of the brain obtained from the neuropsychologi-
cal eff ects of a specifi c neurological condition. However, another critical part of 
the puzzle is revealed by examining the role of neurotransmitt er systems in how 
the brain relates to behavior. Th e importance of the major neurotransmitt er sys-
tems will be examined in the context of specifi c cases descriptions. 
 Case 1:  A 19-year-old male college student without a history of any neuro-
logical or psychiatric conditions presents with progressive diffi  culty with taking 
tests. In high school, most of the classes were not terribly challenging for him, 
and he did not experience any problems with taking the tests on this material. 
However, when he took his Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) he became very anx-
ious and reports that he did not do as well as he expected. His high school coun-
selor agreed that his performance on the SAT was below what would be predicted 
based upon the rest of his academic performance. Upon entering college, he did 
not initially encounter any diffi  culties, but during fi nals week of each semester, 
he would become extremely anxious while preparing for and taking his exami-
nations, and would perform at a level somewhat below his performance during 
the rest of the semester. As he was seriously considering applying to competitive 
graduate programs in psychology to prepare for a career in neuropsychology, or 
applying to medical school with the goal of training in behavioral neurology, he 
was very concerned about this problem. He was beginning his second year dur-
ing which he was to take a full load with several challenging psychology and 
required pre-medical courses, and he needed to get grades that would allow him 
to pursue these goals. Aft er consultation with a physician, he was given several 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
285
tablets of a low dose of propranolol, a central and peripherally active nonselec-
tive beta-adrenergic antagonist, to take before each anxiety-inducing exam. Th e 
patient complied with these recommendations, and reported signifi cant improve-
ment in his anxiety during these exams, and his performance on fi nal exams 
improved to within the range expected based on his performance during the rest 
of the semester on those classes. 
 Noradrenergic Eff ects on Cognition  
 Performance anxiety and test anxiety have long been suspected to be due to 
activation of the noradrenergic system, leading to the development of treatment 
limiting the adrenergic activating eff ects of stress. Propranolol has been used to 
mitigate stress-induced impairment in performance on tasks including public 
speaking in anxiety-prone individuals ( Lader, 1998 ;  Laverdue and Boulenger, 
1991 ). Th is practice supports a role of the noradrenergic system in the impact 
of stress on performance. Furthermore, research involving healthy adolescents 
with a history of stress-induced cognitive impairment during exams has dem-
onstrated that treatment with the beta-adrenergic antagonist propranolol sig-
nifi cantly improved scores on the SAT ( Faigel, 1991 ). However, the eff ects of 
stress and the noradrenergic system on cognition are not limited to patients 
with stress-induced cognitive impairment. Stress has been known to impair 
performance on tasks requiring “creativity” (Martindale & Greenough, 1973), 
and stress also increases activity of the noradrenergic system ( Ward et al., 1983 ; 
 Kvetnansky et al., 1988 ). Th erefore, one might expect that in the patient described 
above, the stress of examination increased activity in the noradrenergic system, 
which contributed to impairments in performance on the challenging task of tak-
ing a test on diffi  cult material. Presumably, propranolol reversed the impairing 
eff ects of this stress response by blocking the action of the noradrenergic system. 
Future understanding of who is most susceptible to stress-induced cognitive 
impairment will be clinically important. We found that in individuals without 
any history of anxiety-related disorders, that a well characterized social stressor 
characterized by public speaking and mental arithmetic ( Kirschbaum et  al., 
1993 ) resulted in impaired performance on a tasks requiring fl exibility of access 
to lexical, semantic, and associative networks. Th is impairment was reversed by 
propranolol (Alexander et al., 2007). Th erefore, the pharmacological and stress 
eff ects on cognition in this sett ing appear to represent a fundamental aspect of the 
brain-behavior relationship, not requiring the presence of an anxiety-related dis-
order or a dysregulated noradrenergic system. However, the eff ect of propranolol 
in this study does not exclusively implicate the noradrenergic system, since pro-
pranolol also blocks the corticosterone-induced impairment of working memory 
( Roozendaal et al., 2004 ). 

286
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Th e locus coeruleus contains the majority of noradrenergic neurons in the 
central nervous system, sending eff erents throughout the brain ( Barnes & 
Pompeiano, 1991 ) ( Figure 14.1 ). Th e eff ects of the noradrenergic system outside 
the sett ing of stress are subtle. In our previous work, performance on the ana-
gram task was bett er aft er administration of the centrally and peripherally act-
ing beta-adrenergic antagonist propranolol than aft er the noradrenergic agonist 
ephedrine ( Beversdorf et al., 1999 ;  Heilman et al., 2003 ). Performance on the 
anagram task was also bett er aft er administration of propranolol than aft er the 
peripheral-only beta-adrenergic antagonist nadolol ( Beversdorf et  al., 2002 ), 
suggesting that the eff ect of propranolol on this aspect of cognition is mediated 
centrally rather than as a result of peripheral feedback. A  central mechanism 
would be predicted by the eff ect of norepinephrine on the signal-to-noise ratio 
of neuronal activity within the cerebral cortex, where increased norepinephrine 
results in greater sensitivity to the dominant signal input in recordings taken from 
neurons in cortical sections, and decreased norepinephrine results in greater 
noise from remote inputs ( Hasselmo et al., 1997 ). As further support of a cen-
tral mechanism, the electronic coupling of noradrenergic neurons in the mon-
key cortex is correlated with the proportions of goal-directed versus exploratory 
 
LC
amyg
thal
to hippocampus
 Figure 14.1  Noradrenergic pathways. The locus coeruleus (LC) projects 
posteriorly to the cerebellum and up to the thalamus (thal) and amygdala (amyg), 
as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating 
posteriorly at the hippocampus ( Heimer, 1995 ). The descending fibers to the spinal 
cord are also shown. Not shown is the lateral tegmental noradrenergic system which 
also projects to the amygdala and down to the spinal cord (see color insert).  

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
287
behavior in these animals ( Usher et al., 1999 ). However, in the anagram studies, 
whereas performance on propranolol was bett er than on ephedrine or nadolol, 
it did not signifi cantly diff er from placebo ( Beversdorf et al., 1999 ;  Beversdorf 
et al., 2002 ). In order to bett er understand the eff ect of propranolol, subsequent 
research examined how task diffi  culty might relate to the drug’s eff ect, as this 
drug might be expected to benefi t a broad search of a network due to increased 
sensitivity to remote inputs resulting from blockade of noradrenergic receptors, 
with the aforementioned eff ects of norepinephrine on signal-to-noise. Th erefore, 
propranolol might be expected to yield a greater benefi cial eff ect when problems 
are more challenging, requiring greater access to remote inputs. Consistent with 
this, propranolol helped for a range of verbal problem-solving tasks requiring net-
work fl exibility, where access to more remote inputs is necessary, when the sub-
ject was struggling, and did not help and, in some cases, hurt performance when 
the subject was solving problems without diffi  culty ( Campbell et al., 2008 ). Th e 
benefi t was seen both for the subjects who had the greatest diffi  culty solving the 
problems, and for the most diffi  cult problems across all subjects ( Campbell et al., 
2008 ). However, propranolol can benefi t performance on such language tasks for 
the easiest problems in situations where there is upregulated activity of the nor-
adrenergic system due to cocaine withdrawal ( Kelley et al., 2005 ;  Kelley et al., 
2007 ) and psychosocial stress (Alexander et al., 2007), or where there are ana-
tomic alterations of the language network due to conditions such as autism, with 
decreased interaction between language regions in the brain ( Beversdorf et al., 
2007a ;  Beversdorf et al., 2008 ), and Broca’s aphasia due to stroke, due to anatomi-
cal damage to the language areas ( Beversdorf et al., 2007b ). 
 Th e variability in eff ect of noradrenergic drugs between individuals, as 
observed in cocaine withdrawal, autism, and aphasia, may also be important 
for att ention defi cit disorder. Early theories proposed that arousal and optimal 
performance might be related on inverted U shaped curve ( Yerkes & Dodson, 
1908 ). Th erefore, whereas markedly increased arousal or noradrenergic tone 
might result in hyperarousal and an inability to perform a task in most individu-
als, a person with att ention defi cit disorder might at baseline be in a subopti-
mal point on the inverted U shaped curve and require stimulants to perform 
optimally. Animal data suggest that the locus coeruleus has an optimal point 
of tonic activity that supports the emergence of phasic activity, which in single 
unit studies in animals has been shown to be associated with optimal perfor-
mance on tasks requiring focused or selective att ention ( Aston-Jones et  al., 
1999 ;  Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005 ). Noradrenergic transmission is known to 
be genetically weaker, due to presence of genetic variants that reduce catechol-
aminergic transmission to suboptimal levels, in some patients with att ention 
defi cit disorder ( Arnsten, 2007 ). 
 In addition to variation in response between patient groups, performance on 
verbal problem solving tasks is also aff ected by alterations in noradrenergic tone 

288
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
due to changes in posture ( Lipnicki and Byrne, 2005 ), sleep phase ( Stickgold 
et al., 2001 ), and vagal nerve stimulation ( Ghacibeh et al., 2006 ). Such cog-
nitive eff ects do not appear to occur with non-adrenergic anxiolytics ( Silver 
et al., 2004 ). 
 However, data are only beginning to emerge regarding how propranolol might 
aff ect network performance. As described above, evidence from models derived 
from activity in brain slice preparations support an eff ect of norepinephrine on 
the signal-to-noise ratio of neuronal activity within the cerebral cortex, with 
greater sensitivity in responding to dominant inputs with higher levels of nor-
epinephrine, but less sensitivity to dominant inputs and greater sensitivity to 
noise with lower levels of norepinephrine ( Hasselmo et al., 1997 ). Presumably, 
propranolol increases access to “noise,” which in this case would be represented 
by increased associational input that might be adaptive for solving more diffi  cult 
problems, where the most immediate response is not optimal (Alexander et al., 
2007). In one population characterized by decreased fl exibility of network access 
(Beversdorf et al., 2007a), a potential imaging marker is observed. Decreased 
functional connectivity on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 
or a decrease in the synchrony of activation between activated brain regions, is 
observed in autism ( Just et al., 2004 ;  Just et al., 2007 ) and is believed to be related 
to the underconnectivity between distant cortical regions in autism ( Belmonte 
et al., 2004 ). Recent evidence suggests that propranolol increases functional con-
nectivity on fMRI in autism, lending some support to the proposed mechanism 
of action of propranolol on access to more remote inputs in a network (Narayanan 
et al., 2010). 
 It is not clear, though, whether the noradrenergic system is dysregulated in 
autism. Increased reactivity to clinical procedures such as blood drawing and 
urine collection in autism may have led to the earlier atypical fi ndings in studies 
assessing noradrenergic activity in autism ( Minderaa et al., 1994 ). Pathology is 
also not found in the volume, cell counts, or cell density in postmortem tissue 
from the locus coeruleus in autism ( Martchek et al., 2006 ). However, others have 
proposed that the behavioral eff ects of fever in autism ( Curran et al., 2007 ) may 
be related to normalization of a developmentally dysregulated noradrenergic sys-
tem in autism ( Mehler & Purpura, 2009 ). Regardless of the ambient activity of 
the noradrenergic system in autism, network rigidity in autism ( Beversdorf et al., 
2007a ) and the suggested eff ect or propranolol on access to more remote inputs in 
a network ( Campbell et al., 2008 ) suggest a potential for benefi t from noradren-
ergic blockade in ASD. Furthermore, case series have suggested a benefi t in both 
social and language domains in autism with beta-adrenergic antagonists ( Ratey 
et al., 1987 ). 
 Th e role of the noradrenergic system in behavior is, of course, not lim-
ited to eff ects on networks as is detailed above. Th e noradrenergic system is 
critical in arousal ( Smith & Nutt , 1996 ;  Coull et al., 1997 ;  Coull et al., 2004 ). 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
289
Furthermore, the prefrontal cortex, important in a range of types of cognitive 
fl exibility ( Vikki et al., 1992 ;  Karnath & Wallesch, 1992 ;  Eslinger & Gratt an, 
1993 ;  Duncan et al., 1995 ;  Robbins, 2007 ), has aff erent projections to the locus 
coeruleus in primates ( Arnsten & Goldman-Rakic, 1984 ). Th e locus coeruleus is 
the region containing the majority of noradrenergic neurons in the central ner-
vous system and sending eff erents throughout the brain ( Barnes & Pompeiano, 
1991 ), as described above. Th e verbal problem solving tasks such as anagrams 
on the compound remote associates task (where the participant must produce 
a word that forms a compound with tree presented words, example: presented 
words- cone+ apple+ tree, solution- pine) ( Bowden & Jung-Beeman, 2003 ), 
which involve a search through a wide network in order to identify a solution 
(“unconstrained fl exibility”, where the number of potential solutions is not lim-
ited), appear to be modulated by the noradrenergic system as described above. 
For such tasks, performance generally improves with decreased noradrenergic 
activity. However, other cognitive fl exibility tasks such as the Wisconsin Cart 
Sort Test ( Heaton, 1981 ) involve set-shift ing between a limited range of options 
(“constrained fl exibility”, where the solution is one of a limited set of options), 
which may not be modulated by the noradrenergic system in the same manner, 
and may even benefi t from increased noradrenergic activity ( Usher et al., 1999 ; 
 Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005) . Evidence suggests that decreased noradrener-
gic activity appears to benefi t tasks such as anagrams when subjects are strug-
gling or challenged by stressors (Alexander et al., 2007,  Campbell et al., 2008 ), 
whereas increased set switching on a two alternative forced choice tasks is asso-
ciated with increased noradrenergic tone in primate studies ( Usher et al., 1999 ; 
 Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005 ). “Constrained” fl exibility can be further subdi-
vided into intradimensional and extradimensional set-shift ing ( Robbins, 2007 ). 
Intradimensional set shift  requires a shift  to responding to new cues from within 
the same stimulus modality (the subject is still responding to odor, but there 
are two new odors). Extradimensional Set Shift  involves a shift  to responding to 
new cues from a diff erent stimulus modality (switching from responding to odor 
to responding to texture). Th e dopaminergic system appears to aff ect intradi-
mensional set-shift ing ( Robbins, 2007 ), while the noradrenergic system, spe-
cifi cally by action on the alpha-1 receptor, appears to modulate performance on 
extradimensional set-shift ing ( Lapiz & Morilak, 2006 ;  Robbins, 2007 ). Th e beta 
adrenergic receptors in the noradrenergic system, though, appear to modulate 
the “unconstrained” fl exibility ( Beversdorf et al., 1999 ;  Beversdorf et al., 2002 ; 
Alexander et al., 2007). Noradrenergic agents are also known to have a range of 
other cognitive eff ects, including eff ects on motor learning ( Foster et al., 2006 ), 
response inhibition ( Chamberlain et  al., 2006 b), working memory and emo-
tional memory ( Chamberlain et al., 2006 a). 
 Th e role of the noradrenergic system in emotional memory deserves par-
ticular comment, due to a potentially important clinical role. Centrally acting 

290
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists are known to reduce the enhancement 
of memory resulting from emotional arousal ( Cahill et al., 1994 ;  van Stegeren 
et al., 1998 ). Th e enhancement may contribute to the development of intrusive 
memories in clinical conditions such as postt raumatic stress disorder ( Ehlers 
et al., 2002 ;  Ehlers et al., 2004 ;  Smith & Beversdorf, 2008 ). Propranolol may help 
prevent the development of postt raumatic stress disorder, by interfering with 
reconsolidation, the process of reinforcement of a memory trace that results aft er 
reactivation of that previously consolidated memory trace ( Pitman et al., 2002 ; 
 Vaiva et al., 2003 ). Alpha-1 antagonists have similar benefi ts in patients with post-
traumatic stress disorder ( Arnsten, 2007 ). 
 In the periphery, alpha-2 adrenergic agonists inhibit release of norepinephrine 
presynaptically, which might make one consider that they would have a similar 
eff ect as the postsynaptic beta-adrenergic antagonists. However, alpha-2 agonists 
have distinct eff ects. High-dose clonidine, an alpha-2 agonist, improves imme-
diate spatial memory in monkeys ( Arnsten et  al., 1988 ;  Arnsten et  al’, 1991 ) 
( Franowicz and Arnsten, 1999 ). Th is eff ect is believed to be mediated by action 
at the prefrontal cortex ( Li et al., 1999 ). Lower doses of clonidine, those typi-
cally utilized clinically in humans, demonstrate varying results at diff erent doses, 
including impaired visual working memory, impulsive responses on planning 
tasks, and varying eff ects on spatial working memory ( Coull et al., 1995 ;  Jäkälä 
et al., 1999) . Pharmacological stimulation of postsynaptic alpha-2A adrenorecep-
tors decreases noise and results in benefi cial eff ects for att ention defi cit disorder 
patients ( Brennan& Arnsten, 2008 ). However, alpha-2 agonists do not appear 
to have the eff ect on verbal problem solving that beta-adrenergic antagonists do 
( Choi et al., 2006 ). 
 Less is known about the specifi c cognitive eff ects of beta-1 and beta-2 adren-
ergic receptors. However, in one animal study, endogenous beta-1 selective 
activation impaired working memory ( Ramos et  al., 2005 ). Subsequent study 
demonstrated that beta-2 selective agonists enhance working memory in aging 
animals ( Ramos et al., 2008 ), suggesting opposing eff ects between beta-1 and 
beta-2 receptors on working memory, explaining the lack of eff ect of proprano-
lol on working memory in previous research ( Li and Mei, 1994 ;  Arnsten and 
Goldman-Rakic, 1985 ). Further research will be necessary to bett er understand 
the specifi c cognitive eff ects on selective beta receptors. 
 Case 2:  A 65 year-old male with a fi ft een-year history of Parkinson’s disease 
reports a new complaint. His parkinsonian motor signs have slowly progressed 
over the years, and he now has a moderate degree of rigidity and resting pill-rolling 
tremor. He has observed that whenever he is working on one task, he has a much 
more diffi  cult time shift ing his att ention to another task. He is unable to describe 
the eff ect of his dopaminergic agents on this symptom, as it is only observed on 
those occasions when he is very focused on a task. However, it has become chal-
lenging for him to keep up with activities around the house. 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
291
 Dopaminergic Eff ects on Cognition  
 Th e majority of dopaminergic neurons originate in the substantia nigra, project-
ing to the striatum, critical for motor control, and in the ventral tegmentum, pro-
jecting to the limbic system and the cortex, that is thought to be important in the 
reward pathway. Th e predominant cortical target of the dopaminergic projecting 
fi bers is the prefrontal cortex ( Hall et al., 1994 ;  Lidow et al., 1991 ) ( Figure 14.2 ). 
 One early window on the eff ects of the dopaminergic system on cognition was 
revealed in priming studies.  Kischka et al (1996) showed in a priming experi-
ment that in healthy individuals, word recognition occurs more rapidly when 
presented 700 ms aft er exposure to another directly related or indirectly related 
word. Aft er administration of L-dopa, the precursor for dopamine, only words 
presented aft er directly related words are recognized quickly. Th is fi nding was 
interpreted as a dopaminergic restriction of the semantic network in priming, 
since the spreading activation of either a directly or indirectly related word facili-
tated word recognition without L-dopa, but only the directly related word facili-
tated word recognition with L-dopa. Th is eff ect is sensitive to the time between 
the initial and target stimuli, likely a refl ection of the timing of spreading activa-
tion.  Angwin et al (2004)  found that L-dopa aff ected both direct and indirect 
 
striatum
amyg
V S
T N
A
 Figure 14.2  Dopaminergic pathways. Projections from the substantia nigra (SN) to 
the striatum are demonstrated, as are projections from the ventral tegmental area 
(VTA) to the amygdala (amyg), ventral striatum, and frontal cortex ( Heimer, 1995 ). 
Not shown are the tuberoinfundibular and posterior hypothalamic dopaminergic 
systems (see color insert).  

292
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
priming with an interstimulus interval of 500 ms, but had no eff ect at 250 ms. 
However, since L-dopa is a dopamine precursor, it remained unclear as to which 
specifi c dopamine receptors were responsible for the priming eff ect. Studies in 
healthy volunteers ( Roesch-Ely et al., 2006 ), in addition to work in our lab in 
patients with Parkinson’s disease ( Pederzolli et al., 2008 ), suggest that the prim-
ing eff ect is mediated by the D1 receptor. L-dopa, though, is also a precursor to 
norepinephrine. Th erefore, further study was then required to disentangle the 
potential dopaminergic and noradrenergic roles in priming and “unconstrained” 
cognitive fl exibility in problem solving, both of which are known to be sensitive 
to catecholaminergic agents (dopamine and norepinephrine) acting on semantic 
networks ( Kischka et al., 1996 ;  Campbell et al., 2008 ). Dopaminergic agonists 
did not have eff ects on “unconstrained” cognitive fl exibility in problem solving 
( Smyth & Beversdorf, 2007 ), and noradrenergic agents did not aff ect priming 
in the manner observed with dopaminergic agents ( Cios et al., 2009 ). In order 
to determine how dopaminergic agents might exhibit an eff ect on semantic net-
work, the eff ect of L-dopa on functional connectivity was examined during a 
non-priming language task. An isolated increase in connectivity was observed 
with L-dopa between the left  fusiform and the receptive language areas, with no 
other region pairs aff ected ( Tivarus et al., 2008 ). Because the Visual Word Form 
Area is thought to be located in the left  fusiform gyrus ( Beversdorf et al., 1997 ), 
this would appear to fi t with the eff ects on priming as an interaction between this 
fusiform area and Wernicke’s area. However, as the predominant target among 
cortical areas for dopaminergic projecting fi bers is the frontal lobe ( Hall et al., 
1994 ;  Lidow et al., 1991 ), such an eff ect of L-dopa on posterior regions seems 
unexpected. Evidence from our lab using independent component analysis of 
fMRI data during language tasks suggests that the posterior eff ects of L-dopa 
may be mediated indirectly by the fronto-thalamic connections from the areas 
containing the frontal projections of the dopaminergic fi bers (Kim et al., 2010). 
A more recent fMRI study examining the eff ect of L-dopa on priming reported 
activation with drug in the dorsal prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, left  rolan-
dic operculum, and left  middle temporal gyrus ( Copland et al., 2009 ). Th is activa-
tion patt ern may suggest an indirect frontal-posterior interaction. 
 Th e dopaminergic system has a range of other cognitive eff ects, in addition to 
the well known eff ects on the motor system. Animal studies demonstrate varying 
eff ects of dopaminergic agents on set shift ing tasks, depending on the receptor 
subtype sensitivity for each agent ( Floresco et al., 2005 ). Th is eff ect is appears to 
be specifi c to intradimensional set-shift ing ( Robbins, 2007 ). Whereas agonists 
for both D1 and D2 receptors did not aff ect set shift ing, D2 antagonists impaired 
set shift ing in rodents ( Stefani & Moghaddam, 2005 ;  Floresco et al., 2006 ) and 
humans ( Mehta et al., 2004 ). Th is may explain the diffi  culties with att entional 
shift ing reported in the patient with Parkinson disease described above. Ability to 
maintain and fl exibly alter cognitive representations in response to environmental 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
293
demands is impaired in Parkinson disease ( Cools, 2006 ). Computational models 
propose that phasic stimulation of D2 receptors in the striatum drives fl exible 
adaptation of cognitive representation which are maintained by the prefrontal 
cortex, such as the updating of working memory ( Cohen et al., 2002 ), which con-
trasts with the eff ect on priming which appears to be mediated by D1 receptors 
( Roesch-Ely et al., 2006 ;  Pederzolli et al., 2008 ). Regarding the eff ect of dopa-
mine in patient populations, though, the interaction between dopaminergic ago-
nists and Parkinson disease and their eff ect on cognition is a complex relationship 
for set shift ing and working memory ( Cools, 2006 ). 
 In healthy subjects, individuals with lower working memory capacity tend to 
be the ones that benefi t from increased prefrontal function with dopaminergic 
stimulation ( Gibbs & D’Esposito, 2005 ; Kimberg et al., 1997). Th is eff ect is prob-
ably because dopamine synthesis in the striatum is related to working memory 
capacity. Diminished working memory capacity is associated with less dopamine 
production, and therefore benefi t from dopaminegic stimulation ( Cools et al., 
2008 ). In animal models, this eff ect on working memory is mediated at the D1 
receptor ( Arnsten et al., 1994 ;  Sawaguchi & Goldman-Rakic, 1991 ;  Williams & 
Goldman-Rakic, 1995 ). Dopamine also appears to be critical for a range of other 
aspects of cognition involving frontal-subcortical circuits, including the temporal 
coupling of deliberation and execution during decision-making. As evidence of 
this, dopamine replacement reverses the delay specifi c to decision-related hesi-
tations, independent of motor slowing, in situations requiring decision-making 
in uncertainty in patients with Parkinson disease ( Pessiglione et  al., 2005 ). 
Furthermore, recent positron emission tomography (PET)/fMRI comparison 
studies have investigated the role of the dopaminergic system in activation of 
the amygdala, demonstrating a relationship between PET D1 receptor binding 
correlating with amygdala signal change in response to fearful faces as assessed 
by fMRI, a relationship not observed for PET D2 receptor binding ( Takahashi 
et al., 2010 ). 
 Another critical role of dopamine has recently become apparent with the 
development of pathological gambling in the sett ing of treatment with dopami-
nergic agonists ( Dodd et al., 2005 ;  Gallagher et al., 2007 ). Th is has contributed 
to a greater understanding of the roles of dopamine in decision making, reveal-
ing that dopamine neurons encode the diff erence between expected and received 
rewards, and interact with other neurotransmitt er systems to regulate such 
decision-making ( Nakamura et al., 2008 ). 
 Case 3:  A 67 year-old female presented to clinic while spending the winter in 
Florida with a one-year history of diffi  culty with memory. Th e family acknowl-
edged her slight slowing in ambulation. In the previous couple of months, the 
patient reported seeing litt le children running around the room, when none were 
there. Th e patient’s symptoms also showed a high degree of day-to-day variability, 
and she had some diffi  culty sleeping. Her husband reported that she would thrash 

294
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
around a lot in her sleep. Examination confi rmed memory impairment and visuo-
spatial processing diffi  culties, and diffi  culty with frontal systems tasks, including 
response inhibition and motor programming. She had mild masked facies, mild 
bradykinesia, and some cogwheel rigidity. She was diagnosed with dementia with 
Lewy bodies and started on cholinesterase inhibitors. Th e cognitive symptoms 
showed marked improvement. She returned home for the summer in New Jersey, 
where she saw her physician. He assessed her, and found her cognitive perfor-
mance on his screening assessment to be normal, and told her to stop taking the 
cholinesterase inhibitor. Within a few weeks, she exhibited cognitive decline, and 
began to see animals running around her room. Th is prompted a visit to the emer-
gency room, where neuroleptics were started. Th e patient rapidly became rigid 
and poorly responsive. Th is prompted a call to her memory specialists in Florida, 
at which point the neuroleptics were discontinued and the cholinesterase inhibi-
tors restarted. Th e patient improved, but not quite back to her previous baseline.  
 Cholinergic Eff ects on Cognition 
 Neurons in the nucleus basalis, medial septal nucleus, and the diagonal band 
of Broca in the basal forebrain are the main sources of cholinergic projection 
throughout the neocortex and hippocampus ( Figure 14.3  ). Th e cholinergic sys-
tem is another neurotransmitt er system involved in modulating the signal-to-
noise ratio within the cortex by suppressing background intrinsic cortical activity 
( Hasselmo & Bower, 1992 ), thus modulating effi  ciency of cortical processing of 
sensory or associational information ( Sarter and Bruno, 1997 ). Acetylcholine is 
particularly important for att ention ( Sarter & Bruno, 2001 ). Studies in rodents 
demonstrate that acetylcholine is critical for both top-down and bott om-up pro-
cessing of stimuli, mediated by action on the prefrontal cortex ( Gill et a., 2000 ; 
 Newman & McGaughy, 2008 ). Cholinergic dysfunction has been used as a model 
for Alzheimer’s disease ( Whitehouse et al., 1982 ), due to the signifi cant degenera-
tion of the cholinergic neurons in these patients. Among the two main subtypes 
of acetylcholine receptors, muscarinic receptors have been clearly demonstrated 
to interfere with encoding of new information with less of an eff ect on previously 
stored information ( Hasselmo & Wyble, 1997 ). Blockade of nicotinic receptors 
has signifi cant eff ects on memory in an age-dependent manner ( Newhouse et al., 
1992 ;  Newhouse et al., 1994 ). However, despite clear eff ects on signal-to-noise 
ratio in the cortex as well as memory eff ects, neither muscarinic nor nicotinic 
blockade aff ected performance on the unconstrained cognitive fl exibility tasks 
as previously described that are aff ected by blockade oft he noradrenergic system 
( Smyth & Beversdorf, in preparation ). 
 Whereas cholinesterase inhibitor treatment to increase the availability of 
acetylcholine in the synapse is a mainstay of treatment for Alzheimer’s disease 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
295
( Doody et al., 2001 ), evidence suggests that patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies, such as the one described above, have a greater impairment of cholinergic 
activity than is observed in Alzheimer disease ( Perry et al., 1994 ). In fact, in the 
original cholinesterase inhibitor trials for Alzheimer’s disease, many of the best 
responders were subsequently found to have Lewy body dementia on postmor-
tem examination ( Levy et al., 1994 ;  Perry et al., 1994 ). Subsequent studies have 
revealed a robust eff ect of cholinesterase inhibitors in Lewy body dementia to fur-
ther support this ( McKeith et al., 2000 ;  Beversdorf et al., 2004 ). Th is may explain 
the high degree of sensitivity to cholinesterase inhibitors in the patient described 
above. Perception, att ention, and working memory are particularly impaired in 
Lewy body dementia ( Calderon et al., 2001 ). Sleep and balance disturbances are 
also common in Lewy body dementia, and the cognitive impairment can fl uctuate 
markedly over time ( McKeith et al., 2004 ). Many of these feature were observed 
in the aforementioned patient. Furthermore, REM behavior disorder is particu-
larly common in these patients ( Boeve et al., 2001 ), which is the most likely etiol-
ogy of the “thrashing around a lot in her sleep” reported in the described patient. 
Finally, due to the prominence of both cholinergic and dopaminergic dysfunc-
tion, these patients are extremely sensitive to anticholinergic and antidopami-
nergic agents ( McKeith et al., 2004 ). Unfortunately, antidopaminergic agents are 
 
hippocampus
basal
forebrain
 Figure 14.3  Cholinergic pathways. Cortical projections from the basal forebrain 
are demonstrated to the cingulate, and pericingulate cortex, as well as the mesial 
frontal cortex along a mesial pericingular tract, and laterally through the external 
capsule and claustrum to the capsular region and lateral neocortex ( Selden 
et al., 1998 ) (see color insert).  

296
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
oft en att empted for the hallucinations, as was the case in the patient described 
above, or anticholinergic agents for sleep, possible incontinence, and occasionally 
presumed vertigo, resulting in signifi cant decline. 
 Other Neurotransmitt ers and Other Considerations 
 Our understanding of the role of individual neurotransmitt er systems in cognition 
has signifi cantly progressed over the past 20 years. However, these systems do not 
act in isolation. Complex interactions occur between them, which are only begin-
ning to be understood. For example, action at D2 dopaminergic receptors and at 
NMDA receptors appear to interact in their eff ects on set-shift ing ( Floresco et al., 
2005 ;  Floresco et al., 2006 ;  Stefani & Moghaddam, 2005 ). Also, as described 
above, the dopaminergic system appears to aff ect intradimensional set-shift ing 
( Robbins, 2007 ), while the noradrenergic system, specifi cally by action on the 
alpha-1 adrenergic receptor, appears to modulate performance on extradimen-
sional set-shift ing ( Lapiz & Morilak, 2006 ;  Robbins, 2007 ). Noradrenergic 
innervation of dopaminergic neurons, specifi cally by action on alpha 1 adrenergic 
receptors, is known to directly inhibit the activity of the dopaminergic neurons 
( Paladini & Williams, 2004 ). In addition, the eff ects of drugs on cognition also 
depend on location of action, when isolated brain regions are studied ( Cools & 
Robbins, 2004 ). Also, the mechanism by which the regulatory neurotransmit-
ters is beginning to be more fully understood, with potential treatment options 
including targeting of second messenger systems, which are the intermediaries 
inside of neurons through which action on a neurotransmitt er receptor is trans-
mitt ed, allowing communication of the receptor binding with the neurotransmit-
ter to impact the functioning of the neuron ( Arnsten, 2007 ;  Arnsten, 2009 ). 
 Th e serotonergic system has neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus projecting 
throughout the forebrain and neocortex (  Figure 14.4 ). Th is system has eff ects 
on mood and aff ect. However, recent research reveals that the serotonergic sys-
tem and its interaction with other neurotransmitt er systems serve important 
cognitive roles as well. Th e balance between the serotonergic and dopaminergic 
systems appears to be critical for processing of reward and punishment ( Krantz 
et al., 2010 ). Th e fi ring of midbrain dopamine neurons show a fi ring patt ern that 
refl ects the magnitude and probability of rewards ( Schultz, 2007 ;  Roesch et al., 
2007 ), while tryptophan depletion enhances punishment prediction but does 
not aff ect reward prediction ( Cools et al., 2008 ), but serotonergic neurons do 
appear to signal reward value ( Nakamura et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, prefron-
tal serotonin depletion aff ects reversal learning, but not set shift ing ( Clarke 
et al., 2005 ).        
 Th e role of neuropeptides is also beginning to be elucidated. For example, oxy-
tocin has been found to play an important role in social approach and engagement 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
297
behavior ( Kosfeld et al., 2005 ;  Carter, 1998 ), which may have implications for 
clinical populations such as autism ( Andari et al., 2010 ). Continued understand-
ing of the roles of neurotransmitt er interactions, localized eff ects, and other types 
of neurotransmitt ers will be needed to fully understand the how cognitive pro-
cesses are carried out in the brain. Further understanding of this will result in 
clinical benefi ts for patients with a wide variety of clinical syndromes. 
 References 
 Alexander ,  J.K. ,  Hillier ,  A. ,  Smith ,  R.M. ,  Tivarus ,  M.E. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2007 ).  Noradrenergic 
modulation of cognitive fl exibility during stress.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 19 : 468–478 . 
 Andari ,  E. ,  Duhamel ,  J-R. ,  Zalla ,  T. ,  Herbrecht ,  E. ,  Leboyer ,  M. ,  Sirigu ,  A. ( 2010 ).  Promoting 
social behavior with oxytocin in high-functioning autism spectrum disorders .  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107 : 4389–4394 . 
 Angwin ,  A.J. ,  Chenery ,  H.J. ,  Copland ,  D.A. ,  Arnott  ,  W.L. ,  Murdoch ,  B.E. ,  Silburn ,  P.A. ( 2004 ). 
 Dopamine and Semantic Activation:  An Investigation of Masked Direct and Indirect 
Priming .  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society ,  10 : 15–25 . 
 
amyg, hippo
thal
to hippocampus
DRN
striatum
 Figure 14.4  Serotonergic pathways. Th e dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) project posteriorly 
to the cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and up to the thalamus (thal), with 
projections also to the amygdala (amyg), hippocampus (hippo), hypothalamus, 
olfactory and entorhinal cortices, then to the ventral striatum as well as throughout the 
neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating posteriorly at the hippocampus 
( Heimer, 1995 ). Not shown is the caudal raphe nuclei, which also project to the 
cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and down to the spinal cord (see color insert). 

298
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 2007 )  Catecholamine and second messenger infl uences on prefrontal cortical 
networks of “representational knowledge”: a rational bridge between genetics and the symp-
toms of mental illness.  Cerebral Cortex  17 : i6–i15 . 
  Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 2009 )  Ameliorating prefrontal cortical dysfunction in mental illness: inhibition 
of phosphotidyl inositol-protein kinase C signaling.   Psychopharmacology  202 : 445–455 . 
 Arnsten ,  A.F. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P.S. ( 1984 )  Selective prefrontal cortical projections to the region 
of the locus coeruleus and raphe nuclei in the rhesus monkey.  Brain Research.  306 : 9–18 . 
 Arnsten ,  A.F. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P.S. ( 1985 )  Alpha-2 adrenergic mechanisms in prefrontal cortex 
associated with cognitive decline in aged non-human primates.  Science  230 : 1273–1276 . 
 Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ,  Cai ,  J.X. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P.S. ( 1988 )  Th e alpha-2 adrenergic agonist guanfacine 
improves memory in aged monkeys without sedative or hypotensive side eff ects: evidence 
for alpha-2 receptor subtypes.  Journal of Neuroscience  8 : 4287–4298 . 
   Arnsten ,  A.F.  ,   Cai ,  J.X.  ,   Murphy ,  B.L.  ,   Goldman-Rakic ,  P.S.   ( 1994 )  Dopamine D1 receptor mech-
anisms in the cognitive performance of young adult and aged monkeys.  Psychopharmacology 
(Berl)  116 : 143–151 . 
 Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ,  Leslie ,  F.M . ( 1991 )  Behavioral and receptor binding analysis of the alpha-2 
adrenergic agonist, 5-bromo-6 [2-imidazoline-2-yl amino] quinoxaline (uk-14304):  evi-
dence for cognitive enhancement at an alpha-2-adrenoreceptor subtype.  Neuropharmacology 
 30 : 1279–1289 . 
   Aston-Jones ,  G.  ,   Cohen ,  J.D.   ( 2005 )  An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-norpeinephrine 
function: adaptive gain and optimal performance.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  28 : 403–450 . 
 Aston-Jones ,  G. ,  Rajkowski ,  J. ,  Cohen ,  J. ( 1999 )  Role of locus coeruleus in att ention and behav-
ioral fl exibility.  Biological Psychiatry  46 : 1309–1320 . 
  Barnes ,  C.A. ,  Pompeiano ,  M. ( 1991 )  Neurobiology of the locus coeruleus.  Progress in Brain 
Research  88 : 307–321 . 
   Belmonte ,  M.K.  ,   Allen ,  G.  ,   Beckel-Mitchener ,  A.  ,   Boulanger ,  L.M.  ,   Carper ,  R.A.  ,   Webb ,  S.J.   
( 2004 )  Autism and abnormal development of brain connectivity.   Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 : 9228–9231 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Carpenter ,  A.L. ,  Miller ,  R.F. ,  Cios ,  J.S. ,  Hillier ,  A. ( 2008 )  Eff ect of propranolol 
on verbal problem solving in autism spectrum disorder.  Neurocase  14 : 378–383 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Hughes ,  J.H. ,  Steinberg ,  B.A. ,  Lewis ,  L.D. ,  Heilman ,  K.M. ( 1999 )  Noradrenergic 
modulation of cognitive fl exibility in problem solving.  NeuroReport  10 : 2763–2767 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Narayanan ,  A. ,  Hillier ,  A. ,  Hughes ,  J.D. ( 2007a )  Network model of decreased 
context utilization in autism spectrum disorder.  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  37 : 1040–1048 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Ratcliff e ,  N.R. ,  Rhodes ,  C.H. ,  Reeves ,  A.G. ( 1997 ).  Pure alexia: clinical-pathologic 
evidence for a lateralized visual language association cortex.   Clinical Neuropathology , 
 16 : 328–331 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Sharma ,  U.K. ,  Phillips ,  N.N. ,  Notestine ,  M.A. ,  Slivka ,  A.P. ,  Friedman ,  N.M. , 
 Schneider ,  S.L. ,  Nagaraja ,  H.N. ,  Hillier ,  A. ( 2007b )  Eff ect of propranolol on naming in 
chronic Broca’s aphasia with anomia.   Neurocase  13 : 256–259 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  Warner ,  J.L. ,  Davis ,  R.A. ,  Sharma ,  U.K. ,  Nagaraja ,  H.N. ,  Scharre ,  D.W. ( 2004 ) 
 Donepezil in the treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies.  American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry  12 : 542–544 . 
 Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ,  White ,  D.M. ,  Cheever ,  D.C. ,  Hughes ,  J.D. ,  Bornstein ,  R.A. ( 2002 )  Central 
beta-adrenergic blockers modulation of cognitive fl exibility.   NeuroReport  13 : 2505–2507 . 
  Boeve ,  B. ,  Silber ,  M. ,  Ferman ,  T. ,  Lucas ,  J. ,  Parisi ,  J. ( 2001 )  Association of REM sleep behav-
ior disorder and neurodegenerative disease may refl ect an underlying synucleinopathy. 
 Movement Disorders  16 : 622–630 . 
   Bowden ,  E.M.  ,   Jung-Beeman ,  M.   ( 2003 )  Normative data for 144 compound remote associate 
problems.  Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers ,  35 : 634–639 . 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
299
 Brennan ,  A.R. ,  Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 2008 )  Neuronal mechanisms underlying att ention defi cit hyper-
activity disorder:  the infl uence of arousal on prefrontal cortical function.  Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences  1129 : 236–245 . 
 Cahill ,  L. ,  Prins ,  B. ,  Weber ,  M. ,  McGaugh ,  J.L. ( 1994 ).  β -Adrenergic activation and memory for 
emotional events.  Nature  371 : 702–704 . 
 Calderon ,  J. ,  Perry ,  R.J. ,  Erzinclioglu ,  S.W. ,  Berrios ,  G.E. ,  Dening ,  T.R. ,  Hodges ,  J.R. ( 2001 ) 
 Perception, att ention, and working memory are disproportionately impaired in dementia 
with Lewy bodies compared with Alzheimer’s disease   Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & 
 Psychiatry  70 : 157–164 . 
   Campbell ,  H.L.  ,   Tivarus ,  M.E.  ,   Hillier ,  A.  ,   Beversdorf ,  D.Q.   ( 2008 )  Increased task diffi  culty 
results in greater impact of noradrenergic modulation of cognitive fl exibility.  Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry, and Behavior  88 : 222–229 . 
 Carter ,  C.S. ( 1998 )  Neuroendocrine perspectives on social att achment and love. 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  23 : 779–818 . 
 Chamberlain ,  S.R. ,  Müller ,  U. ,  Blackwell ,  A.D. ,  Clark ,  L. ,  Robbins ,  T.W. ,  Sahakian ,  B. ( 2006 ) 
 Neurochemical modulation of response inhibition and probabilistic learning in humans.  
 Science  311 : 861–863 . 
 Chamberlain ,  S.R. ,  Müller ,  U. ,  Blackwell ,  A.D. ,  Robbins ,  T.W. ,  Sahakian ,  B. ( 2006 )  Noradrenergic 
modulation of working memory and emotional memory in humans.  Psychopharmacology 
 188 : 397–407 . 
 Choi ,  Y. ,  Novak ,  J. ,  Hillier ,  A. ,  Votolato ,  N.A. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2006 ).  Th e eff ect of  α -2 adren-
ergic agonists on memory and cognitive fl exibility  Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology 
 19 : 204–207 . 
 Cios ,  J.S. ,  Miller ,  R.F. ,  Hillier ,  A. ,  Tivarus ,  M.E. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2009 ).  Lack of noradrenergic 
modulation of indirect semantic priming.  Behavioral Neurology  21 : 137–143 . 
 Clarke ,  H.F. ,  Walker ,  S.C. ,  Croft s ,  H.S. ,  Dalley ,  J.W. ,  Robbins ,  T.W. ,  Roberts ,  A.C. ( 2005 ). 
 Prefrontal serotonin depletion aff ects reversal learning but not att entional set shift ing. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  25 : 532–538 . 
 Cohen ,  J.D. ,  Braver ,  T.S. ,  Brown ,  J.W. ( 2002 )  Computational perspectives in dopamine function 
in prefrontal cortex.  Current Opinion in Neurobiology  12 :  223–229 . 
   Cools ,  R.   ( 2006 )  Dopaminergic modulation of cognitive function-implications for L-DOPA 
treatment in Parkinson’s disease.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  30 :  1–23 . 
 Cools ,  R. ,  Gibbs ,  S.E. ,  Miyakawa ,  A. ,  Jagust ,  W. ,  D’Esposito ,  M. ( 2008 )  Working memory capac-
ity predicts dopamine synthesis capacity in the human striatum.   Journal of Neuroscience 
 28 : 1208–1212 . 
 Cools ,  R. ,  Robbins ,  R.W. ( 2004 ).  Chemistry of the adaptive mind.  Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London A  362 : 2871–2888 . 
 Cools ,  R. ,  Robinson ,  O.J. ,  Sahakian ,  B. ( 2008 ).  Acute tryptophan depletion in healthy 
volunteers enhances punishment prediction but does not aff ect reward prediction. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology  33 : 2291–2299 . 
 Copland ,  D.A. ,  McMahon ,  K.L. ,  Silburn ,  P.A. ,  de Zubicaray.  G.I. ( 2009 )  Dopaminergic 
neruomodulation of semantic priming: a 4T fMRI study with levodopa.  Cerebral Cortex 
 19 : 2651–2658 . 
 Coull ,  J.T. ,  Frith ,  C.D. ,  Dolan ,  R.J. ,  Frackowiak ,  R.S.J. ,  Grasby ,  P.M. ( 1997 )  Th e neural correlates 
of the noradrenergic modulation of human att ention, arousal and learning.  European Journal 
of Neuroscience  9 : 589–598 . 
   Coull ,  J.T.  ,   Jones ,  M.E.P.  ,   Egan ,  T.D.  ,   Frith ,  C.D.  ,   Maze ,  M.   ( 2004 )  Att entional eff ects of nor-
adrenaline vary with arousal level:  selective activation of thalamic pulvinar in humans.  
 NeuroImage  22 : 315–322 . 
 Coull ,  J.T. ,  Middleton ,  H.C. ,  Robbins ,  T.W. ,  Sahakian ,  B.J. ( 1995 )  Contrasting eff ects of 
clonidine and diazepam on tests of working memory and planning.   Psychopharmacology 
 120 : 311–321 . 

300
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Curran ,  L.K. ,  Newschaff er ,  C.J. ,  Lee ,  L. ,  Crawford ,  S.O. ,   Johnston ,  M.V. ,  Zimmerman ,  A.W. 
( 2007 ).  Behaviors associated with fever in children with autism spectrum disorders. 
 Pediatrics  120 : e1386–e1392 . 
 Dodd ,  M.L. ,  Klos ,  K.J.  ,  Bower ,  J.H. ,  Geda ,  Y.E. ,  Josephs ,  K.A. ,  Ahlskog ,  J.E . ( 2005 )  Pathological 
gambling caused by drugs used to treat Parkinson disease.   Archives of Neurology 
 62 : 1377–1381 . 
 Doody ,  R.S. ,  Stevens ,  J.C. ,  Beck ,  C. ,  Dubinsky ,  R.M. ,  Kaye ,  J.A. ,  Gwyther ,  L. ,  Mohs ,  R.C. ,  Th al ,  L.J. , 
 Whitehouse ,  P.J. ,   DeKosky ,  S.T. ,  Cummings ,  J.L. ( 2001 )  Practice parameter: management of 
dementia (an evidence based review). Report of the Quality Standards Subcommitt ee of the 
American Academy of Neurology.  Neurology  56 : 1154–1166 . 
 Duncan ,  J. ,  Burgess ,  P. ,  Emslie ,  H. ( 1995 )  Fluid intelligence aft er frontal lobe lesions. 
 Neuropsychologia  33 : 261–268 . 
 Ehlers ,  A. ,  Hackmann ,  A. ,  Michael ,  T. ( 2004 ).  Intrusive re-experiencing in post-traumatic stress 
disorder: Phenomenology, theory, and therapy.  Memory  12 : 403–415 . 
 Ehlers ,  A. ,  Hackmann ,  A. ,  Steil ,  R. ,  Clohessy ,  S. ,  Wenninger ,  K. ,  Winter ,  H. ( 2002 ).  Th e nature 
of intrusive memories aft er trauma: the warning signal hypothesis.  Behaviour Research and 
Th erapy  40 :  995–1002 . 
 Eslinger ,  P.J. ,   Gratt an ,  L.M. ( 1993 )  Frontal lobe and frontal-striatal substrates for diff erent forms 
of human cognitive fl exibility.  Neuropsychologia  31 : 17–28 . 
 Faigel ,  H.C. ( 1991 )  Th e eff ect of beta blockade on stress-induced cognitive dysfunction in ado-
lescents.  Clinical Pediatrics  30 : 441–445 . 
 Floresco ,  S.B. ,  Ghods-Sharifi  ,  S. ,  Vexelman ,  C. ,  Magyar ,  O. ( 2006 )  Dissociable roles for the nucleus 
accumbens core and shell in regulating set shift ing.  Journal of Neuroscience  26 :  2449–2457 . 
  Floresco ,  S.B. ,  Magyar ,  O. ,  Ghods-Sharifi  ,  S. ,  Vexelman ,  C. ,  Tse ,  M.T.L. ( 2005 )  Multiple dopa-
mine receptor subtypes in the medial prefrontal cortex of the rat regulate set-shift ing. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology   31  :  297–309 . 
 Foster ,  D.J. ,  Good ,  D.C. ,  Fowlkes ,  A. ,  Sawaki ,  L. ( 2006 )  Atomoxetine enhances a short-term 
model of plasticity in humans.  Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation  87 : 216–221 . 
 Franowicz ,  J.S. ,  Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 1999 )  Treatment with the noradrenergic alpha-2 agonist cloni-
dine, but not diazepam, improves spatial working memory in normal rhesus monkeys. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology  21 : 611–621 . 
 Gallagher ,  D.A. ,  O’Sullivan ,  S.S. ,  Evans ,  A.H. ,  Lees.  A.L. ,  Schrag ,  A. ( 2007 )  Pathological gam-
bling in Parkinson’s disease: risk factors and diff erences from dopaminergic dysregulation. 
An analysis of published case series.  Movement Disorders  22 : 1757–1763 . 
  Ghacibeh ,  G.A. ,  Shenker ,  J.I, ,  Shenal ,  B. ,  Uthman ,  B.M. ,  Heilman ,  K.M. ( 2006 )  Eff ect of vagus 
nerve stimulation on creativity and cognitive fl exibility.  Epilepsy & Behavior  8 : 720–725 . 
 Gibbs ,  S.E. ,  D’Esposito ,  M. ( 2005 )  Individual capacity diff erences predict working memory 
performance and prefrontal activity following dopamine receptor stimulation.   Cognitive, 
Aff ective, & Behavioral Neuroscience  5 : 212–221 . 
 Gill ,  T.M. ,  Sarter ,  M.  ,  Givens ,  B. ( 2000 )  Sustained visual att ention performance-associated 
prefrontal neuronal activity evidence for cholinergic modulation.  Journal of Neuroscience 
 20 : 4745–4757 . 
   Hall ,  H.  ,   Sedvall ,  G.  ,   Magnusson ,  O.  ,   Kopp ,  J.  ,   Halldin ,  C.  ,   Farde ,  L.   ( 1994 )  Distribution of 
D1- and D2-dopamine receptors, and dopamine and its metabolites in the human brain. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology  11 : 245–256 . 
 Hasselmo ,  M.E. ,  Bower ,  J.M. ( 1992 )  Cholinergic suppression specifi c to intrinsic not aff erent 
fi ber synapses in rat piriform (olfactory) cortex.  Trends in Neurosciences  67 :  1222–1229 . 
   Hasselmo ,  M.E.  ,   Linster ,  C.  ,   Patil ,  M.  ,   Ma ,  D.  ,   Cecik ,  M.   ( 1997 )  Noradrenergic suppression of 
synaptic transmission may infl uence cortical signal-to-noise ratio.  Journal of Neurophysiology 
 77 :  3326–3339 . 
  Hasselmo ,  M.E. ,  Wyble ,  B.P. ( 1997 )  Simulation of the eff ects of scopolamine on free recall and 
recognition in a network model of the hippocampus.  Behavioural Brain Research  89 : 1–34 . 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
301
 Heaton ,  R.K. ( 1981 )  Wisconsin Card Sort Test Manual .  Odessa, FL :  Psychological Assessment 
Resources . 
 Heilman ,  K.M. ,  Nadeau ,  S.E. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q, ( 2003 ).  Creative innovation:  possible brain 
mechanisms.   Neurocase ,  9 : 369–379 . 
 Heimer ,  L. ( 1995 ).  Th e Human Brain and Spinal Cord , 2nd Edition.  New  York, Berlin : 
 Springer-Verlag . 
 Jäkälä ,  P. ,  Riekkinen ,  M. ,  Sirvi ,  J ,  Koivisto ,  E. ,  Kejonen ,  K. ,  Vanhanen ,  M. ,  Riekkinen ,  P.   Jr ( 1999 ) 
 Guanfacine, but not clonidine, improves planning and working memory performance in 
humans.  Neuropsychopharmacology  20 : 460–470 . 
 Just ,  M.A. ,  Cherkassky ,  V.L. ,  Keller ,  T.A. ,  Kana ,  R.K. ,  Minshew ,  N.J. ( 2007 )  Functional and ana-
tomical cortical underconnectivity in autism: evidence from an fMRI study of an executive 
function task and corpus callosum morphometry.  Cerebral Cortex  17 : 951–961 . 
 Just ,  M.A. ,  Cherkassky ,  V.L. ,  Keller ,  T.A. ,  Minshew ,  N.J. ( 2004 )  Cortical activation and synchro-
nization during sentence comprehension in high-functioning autism: evidence of under-
connectivity.  Brain  127 : 1811–1821 . 
 Karnath ,  H.O. ,  Wallesch ,  C.W. ( 1992 )  Infl exibility of mental planning: a characteristic disorder 
with prefrontal lobe lesions.   Neuropsychologia 30 : 1011–1016 . 
 Kelley ,  B.J. ,  Yeager ,  K.R. ,  Pepper ,  T.H. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2005 ).  Cognitive impairment in acute 
cocaine withdrawal.  Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology ,  18 : 108–112 . 
 Kelley ,  B.J. ,  Yeager ,  K.R. ,  Pepper ,  T.H. ,  Bornstein  R.A.,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q ( 2007 )  Th e eff ect of 
propranolol on cognitive fl exibility and memory in acute cocaine withdrawal.  Neurocase 
 13 : 320–327 . 
   Kim ,  N.  ,   Goel ,  P.K.  ,   Tivarus ,  M.E.  ,   Hillier ,  A.  ,   Beversdorf ,  D.Q.   (2010)  Independent component 
analysis of the eff ect of L-dopa on fMRI of language processing.  PLoS ONE 5 : e11933. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011933 
 Kimberg ,  D.Y. ,  D’Esposito ,  M. ,  Farah ,  M.J. ( 1997 )  Eff ects of bromocriptine on human subjects 
depend on working memory capacity.  Neuroreport  8 : 3581–3585 . 
 Kirschbaum ,  C. ,  Pirke ,  K.M. ,  Hellhammer ,  D.H. ( 1993 ).  Th e “Trier Social Stress Test”—a tool for 
investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory sett ing.   Neuropsychobiology , 
 28 : 76–81 . 
 Kischka ,  U. ,  Kammer ,  T.H. ,  Maier ,  S. ,  Weisbord ,  M. ,  Th imm ,  M. ,  Spitzer ,  M. ( 1996 ).  Dopaminergic 
Modulation of Semantic Network Activation.  Neuropsychologia ,  34 : 1107–1113 . 
   Kosfeld ,  M.  ,   Heinrichs ,  M.  ,   Zak ,  P.J.  ,   Fischbacher ,  U.  ,   Fehr ,  E.   ( 2005 ).  Oxytocin increases trust in 
humans.  Nature  435 : 673–676 . 
 Krantz ,  G.S. ,  Kasper ,  S. ,  Lanzenberger ,  R. ( 2010 ).  Reward and the serotonergic system. 
 Neuroscience  166 : 1023–1035 . 
 Kvetnansky ,  R. ,  Pacak ,  K. ,  Sabban ,  E.L. ,  Kopin ,  I.J. ,  Goldstein ,  D.S. ( 1998 )  Stressor specifi city of 
peripheral catecholaminergic activation.  Advances in Pharmacology  42 : 556–560 . 
 Lader ,  M. ( 1988 )  Beta-adrenergic antagonists in neuropsychiatry: an update.  Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry  49 : 213–223 . 
   Lapiz ,  M.D.S.  ,   Morilak ,  D.A.   ( 2006 )  Noradrenergic modulation of cognitive function in rat 
medial prefrontal cortex as measured by att entional set shift ing capability.  Neuroscience 
 137 : 1039–1049 . 
 Laverdue ,  B. ,  Boulenger ,  J.P. ( 1991 )  Medications beta-bloquantes et anxiete. Un interet therapeu-
tique certain. [Beta-blocking drugs and anxiety. A proven therapeutic value.]  L’Encephale 
 17 : 481–492 . 
 Levy ,  R. ,  Eagger ,  S. ,  Griffi  ths ,  M ,  Perry ,  E. ,  Honavar ,  M. ,  Dean ,  A. ,  Lanots ,  P. ( 1994 )  Lewy bodies 
and response to tacrine in Alzheimer’s disease.  Lancet  343 :176. 
   Li ,  B-M.  ,   Mao ,  Z.M.  ,   Wang ,  M.  ,   Mei ,  Z-T.   ( 1999 )  Alpha-2 adrenergic modulation of pre-
frontal cortical neuronal activity related to spatial working memory in monkeys.  
 Neuropsychopharmacology  21 : 601–610 . 

302
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Li ,  B-M.  ,   Mei ,  Z-T.   ( 1994 )  Delayed response defi cit induced by local injection of the alpha-2 
adrenergic antagonist yohimbine into the dosolateral prefrontal cortex in young adult mon-
keys.  Behavioral and Neural Biology  62 : 134–139 . 
  Lidow ,  M. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P. ,  Gallager ,  D. ,  Rakic ,  P. ( 1991 )  Distribution of dopaminergic 
receptors in the primate cerebral cortex: Quantitative autoradiographic analysis using (H3 ) 
 raclopide, (H3 )  spiperone and (H3 )  SCH23390.  Neuroscience  40 : 657–671 . 
 Lipnicki ,  D.M. ,  Byrne ,  D.G. ( 2005 )  Th inking on your back: solving anagrams faster when supine 
than when standing.  Cognitive Brain Research  24 : 719–722 . 
 Martchek ,  M. ,  Th evarkunnel ,  S. ,  Bauman ,  M. ,  Blatt  ,  G. ,  Kemper ,  T. ( 2006 )  Lack of evidence of 
neuropathology in the locus coeruleus in autism.  Acta Neuropathologica  111 : 497–499 . 
 Martindale ,  C. ,  Greenough ,  J. ( 1973 )  Th e diff erential eff ect of increased arousal on creative and 
intellectual performance.   Journal of Genetic Psychology  123 : 329–335 . 
 McKeith ,  I. ,  del Ser ,  T.  ,  Spano ,  P.F. ,  Emre ,  M. ,  Wesnes ,  K. ,  Anand ,  R. ,  Cicin-Sain ,  A. ,  Ferrara ,  R. , 
 Spiegel ,  R. ( 2000 )  Effi  cacy of rivastigmine in dementia with Lewy bodies: a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled international study.  Lancet  356 : 2031–2036 . 
  McKeith ,  I. ,  Mintzer ,  J. ,  Aarsland ,  D. ,  Burn ,  D. ,  Chiu ,  H. ,  Cohen-Mansfi eld ,  J. ,  Dickson ,  D. , 
 Dubois ,  B. ,  Duda ,  J.E. ,  Feldman ,  H. ,  Gauthier ,  S. ,  Halliday ,  G. ,  Lawlor ,  B. ,  Lippa ,  C.  , 
 Lopez.  O.L. ,  Machado ,  J.C. ,  O’Brien ,  J. ,  Playfer ,  J. ,  Reid ,  W. , on behalf of the International 
Psychogeriatric Association Expert Meeting on DLB ( 2004 )  Dementia with Lewy bodies.  
 Lancet Neurology  3 : 19–28 . 
   Mehler ,  M.F.  ,   Purpura ,  D.P.   ( 2009 )  Autism, fever, epigenetics and the locus coeruleus.   Brain 
Research Reviews ,  59 : 388–392 . 
 Mehta ,  M.A. ,  Manes ,  F.F. ,  Magnolfi  ,  G. ,  Sahakian ,  B.J. ,  Robbins ,  T.W. ( 2004 )  Impaired set-shift ing 
and dissociable eff ects on tests of spatial working memory following the dopamine D2 
receptor antagonist sulpiride in human volunteers.  Psychopharmacology  176 :  331–342 . 
 Minderaa ,  R.B. ,  Anderson ,  G.M. ,  Volkmar ,  F.R. ,  Akkerhuis ,  G.W. ,  Cohen ,  D.J. ( 1994 ) 
 Noradrenergic and adrenergic functioning in autism.   Biological Psychiatry  36 : 237–241 . 
 Nakamura ,  K. ,  Matsumoto ,  M. ,  Hikosaka ,  O. ( 2008 )  Reward-dependent modulation of neural 
activity in the primate dorsal raphe nucleus.  Journal of Neurosci ence  28 : 5331–5343 . 
   Narayanan ,  A.  ,   White ,  C.A.  ,   Saklayen ,  S.  ,   Scaduto ,  M.J.  ,   Carpenter ,  A.L.  ,   Abduljalil ,  A.  , 
 Schmalbrock ,  P. ,   Beversdorf ,  D.Q. (2010)  Eff ect of propranolol on functional connectivity 
in autism spectrum disorder-a pilot study.   Brain Imaging and Behavior  4 :189 – 197.  
  Newhouse ,  P.A. ,  Pott er ,  A. ,  Corwin ,  J. ,  Lenox ,  R. ( 1992 )  Acute nicotinic blockade produces cog-
nitive impairment in normal humans.  Psychopharmacology  108 : 480–484 . 
 Newhouse ,  P.A. ,  Pott er ,  A. ,  Corwin ,  J. ,  Lenox ,  R. ( 1994 )  Age-Related eff ects of the nico-
tinic antagonist mecamylamine on cognition and behavior.   Neuropsychopharmacology 
 10 : 93–107 . 
 Newman ,  L.A. ,  McGaughy ,  J. ( 2008 )  Cholinergic deaff erentation of prefrontal cortex increases 
sensitivity to cross-modal distractors during a sustained att ention task.  Journal of Neuroscience 
 28 : 2642–2650 . 
  Paladini ,  C.A. ,  Williams ,  J.T. ( 2004 )  Noradrenergic inhibition of midbrain dopamine neurons. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  24 : 4568–4575 . 
 Pederzolli ,  A.S. ,  Tivarus ,  M.E. ,  Agrawal ,  P. ,  Kostyk ,  S.K. ,  Th omas ,  K.M. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. 
( 2008 ).  Dopaminergic modulation of semantic priming in Parkinson disease.  Cognitive and 
Behavioral Neurology  21 : 134–137 . 
 Perry ,  E.K. ,  Haroutunian ,  V. ,  Davis ,  K.L. ,  Levy ,  R. ,  Lantos ,  P. ,  Eagger ,  S. ,  Honavar ,  M. ,  Dean ,  A. , 
 Griffi  ths ,  M. ,  McKeith ,  I.G. ,  Perry ,  R.H. ( 1994 )  Neocortical cholinergic activities diff erenti-
ate Lewy body dementia from classical Alzheimer’s disease.  NeuroReport  5 : 747–749 . 
 Pessiglione ,  M. ,  Czernecki ,  V. ,  Pillon ,  B. ,  Dubois ,  B. ,  Schüpback ,  M. ,  Agid ,  Y. ,  Tremblay ,  L. ( 2005 ) 
 An eff ect of dopamine depletion on decision-making: the temporal coupling of deliberation 
and execution.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  17 : 1886–1896 . 

Neuropsychopharmacology and Cognition
303
 Pitman ,  R.K. ,  Sanders ,  K.M. ,  Zusman ,  R.M. ,  Healy ,  A.R. ,  Cheema ,  F. ,  Lasko ,  N.B. ,  Cahill ,  L. , 
 Orr ,  S.P. ( 2002 )  Pilot study of secondary prevention of postt raumatic stress disorder with 
propranolol.  Biological Psychiatry  51 : 189–192 . 
 Ramos ,  B.P. ,  Colgan ,  L.A. ,  Nou ,  E. ,  Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 2008 )  β 2 adrenergic agonist, clen-
buterol, enhances working memory performance in aging animals.  Neurobiology of Aging 
 29 : 1060–1069 . 
 Ramos ,  B.P. ,  Colgan ,  L. ,  Nou ,  E. ,  Ovaria ,  S. ,  Wilson ,  S.R. ,  Arnsten ,  A.F.T. ( 2005 )  Th e beta-1 
adrenergic antagonist, betaxolol, improves working memory performance in rats and mon-
keys.  Biological Psychiatry  58 : 894–900 . 
 Ratey ,  J.J. ,  Bemporad ,  J. ,  Sorgi ,  P. ,  Bick ,  P. ,  Polakoff  ,  S. ,  O’Driscoll ,  G. ,  Mikkelsen ,  E. ( 1987 )  Brief 
report: open trial eff ects of beta-blockers on speech and social behaviors in 8 autistic adults.  
 Journal of Autism & Developmental Disorders  17 : 439–446 . 
 Robbins ,  T.W. ( 2007 )  Shift ing and stopping: fronto-striatal substrates, neurochemical modula-
tion and clinical implications.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences  362 : 917–932 . 
 Roesch ,  M.R. ,  Calu ,  D.J. ,  Schoenbaum ,  G. ( 2007 ).  Dopamine neurons encode the bett er option 
in rats between deciding between diff erently delayed or sized rewards.   Nature Neuroscience 
 10 : 1615–1624 . 
 Roesch-Ely ,  D. ,  Weiland ,  S. ,  Scheff el ,  H. ,  Schwaninger ,  M. ,  Hundemer ,  H-P. ,  Kolter ,  T .,  Weisbrod , 
 M. ( 2006 ).  Dopaminergic modulation of semantic priming in healthy volunteers.   Biological 
Psychiatry  60 : 604–611 . 
 Roozendaal ,  B. ,  McReynolds ,  J.R. ,  McGaugh ,  J.L. ( 2004 ).  Th e basolateral amygdala interacts 
with the medial prefrontal cortex in regulating glucocorticoid eff ects on working memory 
impairment.  Journal of Neuroscience  24 : 1385–1392 . 
 Sarter ,  M. ,  Bruno ,  J.P. ( 1997 )  Cognitive functions of cortical acetylcholine: toward a unifying 
hypothesis.  Brain Research Reviews  23 : 28–46 . 
 Sarter ,  M. ,  Bruno ,  J.P. ( 2001 )  Th e cognitive neuroscience of sustained att ention: where top-down 
meets bott om-up.  Brain Research Reviews  35 : 146–160 . 
 Sawaguchi ,  T. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P.S. ( 1991 )  D1 dopamine receptors in prefrontal cor-
tex: Involvement in working memory.  Science  251 : 947–950 . 
 Schultz ,  W. ( 2007 ).  Multiple dopamine functions at diff erent time courses.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  30 : 259–288 . 
 Selden ,  N.R. ,  Gitelman ,  D.R. ,  Salamon-Murayama ,  N. ,  Parrish ,  T.B. ,  Mesulam ,  M-M. ( 1998 ). 
 Trajectories of cholinergic pathways within the cerebral hemispheres of the brain.   Brain 
 121 : 2249–2257 . 
 Silver ,  J.A. ,  Hughes ,  J.D. ,  Bornstein ,  R.A. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2004 )  Eff ect of anxiolytics on cogni-
tive fl exibility in problem solving.  Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology  17 : 93–97 . 
 Smith ,  A. ,  Nutt  ,  D. ( 1996 )  Noradrenaline and att ention lapses.  Nature  380 : 291 . 
 Smith ,  R.M. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2008 )  Eff ects of semantic relatedness on recall of stimuli preced-
ing emotional oddballs.  Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society  14 : 620–628 . 
   Smyth ,  S.F.  ,   Beversdorf ,  D.Q.   ( 2007 ).  Lack of dopaminergic modulation of cognitive fl exibility.  
 Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology  20 : 225–229 . 
 Smyth ,  S.F. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. (in preparation)  Muscarinic and nicotinic modulation of memory 
but not cognitive fl exibility.  
 Stefani ,  M.R. ,  Moghaddam ,  B. ( 2005 )  Systemic and prefrontal cortical NMDA receptor block-
ade diff erentially aff ect discrimination learning and set-shift  ability in rats.  Behavioral 
Neuroscience  119 :  420–428.  
 Stickgold ,  R. ,  Hobson ,  J.A. ,  Fosse ,  R. ,  Fosse ,  M. ( 2001 )  Sleep, learning, and dreams: off -line 
memory reprocessing.  Science  294 : 1052–1057 . 
 Takahashi ,  H. ,  Takano ,  H. ,  Kodaka ,  F. ,  Arakawa ,  R. ,  Yamada ,  M. ,  Otsuka ,  T. ,  Hirano ,  Y. ,  Kikyo , 
 H. ,  Okubo ,  Y. ,  Kato ,  M. ,  Obata ,  T. ,  Ito ,  H. ,  Suhara ,  T. ( 2010 )  Contribution of dopamine D1 
and D2 receptors to amygdala activity in humans.  Journal of Neuroscience  30 : 3043–3047 . 

304
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Tivarus ,  M.E. ,  Hillier ,  A. ,  Schmalbrock ,  P. ,  Beversdorf ,  D.Q. ( 2008 ).  Functional connectivity in 
an fMRI study of semantic and phonological processes and the eff ect of L-dopa.  Brain and 
Language  104 : 42–50 . 
 Usher ,  M. ,  Cohen ,  J.D. ,  Servan-Schreiber ,  D. ,  Rajkowski ,  J. ,  Aston-Jones ,  G. ( 1999 )  Th e role of 
locus coeruleus in the regulation of cognitive performance.  Science  283 : 549–554 . 
 Vaiva ,  G, ,  Ducrocq ,  F. ,  Jezequel ,  K. ,  Averland ,  B. ,  Lestavel ,  P. ,  Brunet ,  A. ,  Marmar ,  C.R. ( 2003 ) 
 Immediate treatment with propranolol decreases postt raumatic stress disorder two months 
aft er trauma.  Biological Psychiatry  54 : 947–949 . 
 van Stegeren ,  A.H. ,  Everaerd ,  W. ,  Cahill ,  L. ,  McGaugh ,  J.L. ,  Gooren ,  L.J.G. ( 1998 ).  Memory 
for emotional events: diff erential eff ects of centrally versus peripherally acting  β -blocking 
agents.  Psychopharmacology  138 : 305–310 . 
   Vikki ,  J.   ( 1992 )  Cognitive fl exibility and mental programming aft er closed head injuries and ante-
rior and posterior cerebral excisions.  Neuropsychologia  30 : 807–814 . 
 Ward ,  M.M. ,  Metford ,  I.N. ,  Parker ,  S.D. ,  Chesney ,  M.A. ,  Taylor ,  C.B. ,  Keegan ,  D.L. ,  Barchas , 
 J.D.   ( 1983 )  Epinephrine and norepinephrine responses in continuously collected human 
plasma to a series of stressors.  Psychosomatic Medicine  45 : 471–486 . 
 Whitehouse ,  P.J. ,  Price ,  D.L. ,  Strubble ,  R.G. ,  Clark ,  A.W. ,  Coyle ,  J.T. , De Long ,  M.R. ( 1982 ) 
 Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia—loss of neurons in the basal forebrain.   Science 
 215 :  1237–1239 . 
 Williams ,  G. ,  Goldman-Rakic ,  P. ( 1995 )  Modulation of memory fi elds by dopamine D1 receptors 
in prefrontal cortex.   Nature  376 : 549–550 . 
 Yerkes ,  R.M. ,  Dodson ,  J.D. ( 1908 )  Th e relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-forma-
tion.   Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology  18 : 458–482.  

305
 C H A P T E R  15 
 Attractor Basins: A Neural Basis for the 
Conformation of Knowledge   
  A  U N I F I E D  AC C O U N T  OF  PAT T E R N S  OF  L I N G U I S T I C 
I M PA I R M E N T,  M A G N I T U DE  E S T I M AT I O N ,  A N D 
H E M I S PAT I A L   N E G L E C T
 
 Stephen E.  Nadeau  
 Norman Geschwind (1965), in his landmark paper “Disconnexion syndromes 
in animals and man,” demonstrated the power of knowledge of neuroanatomy in 
enabling us to understand the complex behavioral syndromes described by behav-
ioral neurologists over the prior 100 years. Th is paper and his other work provided 
a major contribution to the astonishing cognitive neuroscience renaissance we 
have observed since. Since then, knowledge of neuroanatomy and neural systems 
has continued to advance, but not suffi  ciently rapidly to keep up with the blister-
ing pace of advances in cognitive neuroscience borne of behavioral studies. In fact, 
knowledge of neural systems now lags so far behind that it now provides but a weak 
and uneven source of hypothesis generation in behavioral studies. For decades, 
behavioral studies have been driven either by substantially heuristic models (e.g., 
information processing models) or theoretical models developed without neuro-
scientifi c considerations (e.g., linguistics). Functional imaging studies have sought 
to fi ll this void, with only occasional success. 
 Th is chapter incorporates a fi eld of science, parallel distributed processing 
(PDP)(McClelland, Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group, 1986), that is fully capa-
ble of fi lling this void. PDP can enable us to understand how complex behaviors 
can emerge from neural networks. PDP is a branch of the mathematics of chaotic 
systems (Gleick, 1987). Chaotic systems are systems in which order emerges from 
the interactions of large numbers of relatively simple units, each constrained only 
by its own relatively simple operational constraints. Most of the order we witness 

306
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
in the world is chaotic order, not deterministic order, whether it be in cloud patt ers, 
the function of ant colonies, the shape and organization of our organs, including 
our brains, or the evolution of species. In PDP, the units serve as counterparts to 
neurons or cortical neural micro-columns, and the constraints governing individual 
unit behavior are limited to the mathematics governing the generation and spread of 
unit activity and the modifi cation of unit interconnectivity. With knowledge of neu-
ral systems now vastly expanded by the rapid growth of PDP science, we now have a 
renewed capacity for establishing a full dialectic between human subject studies and 
theory. A principal aim of this chapter will be to show how this is possible. 
 I will begin this chapter with some further elaboration of PDP models in 
 general. Th is will be followed by discussion of a simple computational model 
that will provide the basis for understanding how concepts might be supported 
by neural structure. I will then expand on this in discussion of semantic mem-
ory, taking full advantage of what we have learned from research on semantic 
dementia. It will then be possible to understand how the broad principles delin-
eated can be applied to other domains of language function, to be discussed, and 
indeed, to a broad array of knowledge domains. Th e latt er sections of this chap-
ter will use this background to consider psychophysical phenomena subsumed 
under Steven’s power law of magnitude estimation and hemispatial neglect. One 
key underlying principle will bring unity to this diversity of knowledge and the 
behaviors related to it: the computational properties of the activation function 
of neural networks characterized by autoassociator structure, properties that 
yield att ractor basins and att ractor trenches. Th ese concepts will be detailed in 
later sections. 
 Th is chapter will not be a simple review of the PDP-behavioral study dialectic 
in a number of diff erent cognitive domains. Rather, it will focus on a paradox: on 
the one hand, the PDP properties of neural networks enable us to miraculously 
acquire large and apparently seamless domains of knowledge from a series of indi-
vidual experiences; on the other hand, knowledge acquired in such a way comes 
with intrinsic limitations, limitations refl ected in empirical fi ndings involving broad 
array of cognitive processes. 
 Th e eff ect of genes on the knowledge stored in the brain appears to lie largely 
in their infl uence on the genesis of the neural scaff old upon which knowledge is 
accumulated. Knowledge itself is acquiredlargely through experience, as modi-
fi cations of strengths of synaptic connections. In many ways, that knowledge is 
not veridical. For example, neural networks, in and of themselves, cannot reli-
ably discriminate fact from inference—hence the phenomenon of false memo-
ries (Beversdorf et al., 2000).Information is far more likely to be encoded if it is 
consistent with existing mental models. Its recall, therefore, involves substantially 
revisionist processes. Th ese phenomena refl ect mechanisms that infl uence the 
correctness of individual memories. Th is chapter, however, will focus on limita-
tions and distortions imposed by the neural representation of entire domains of 

Att ractor Basins
307
knowledge. A prevailing theme will be that what we know is what we have expe-
rienced. Because of this, perceptions and concepts that fall at the margins of our 
direct experience, or beyond, may be processed diff erently than perceptions and 
concepts that are familiar to us. Furthermore, not all that we know is processed 
equally because all our knowledge is infl uenced by the frequency of our experi-
ence with it, the age at which we acquired it, and our familiarity with it—att ri-
butes that are also realized in the relative strength of the neural connections that 
instantiate the knowledge.  
  Parallel Distributed Processing 
 PDP models are neural-like in that they incorporate large arrays of simple units 
that are heavily interconnected with each other, like neurons in the brain. A PDP 
model that fully emulates neural network principles constitutes a hypothesis not 
just about the organization of cognitive processes, but also about neural organi-
zation. Th at hypothesis can then be tested in normal and brain-injured human 
subjects. Th e processing sophistication of PDP models stems from the simulta-
neous interaction of large numbers of units (hundreds or even thousands). Th e 
instantiation of short-term (working) memory (as patt erns of unit activity) and 
long-term memory (as unit interconnection strengths) in the same neural nets 
that are responsible for processing further emulates brain function. PDP mod-
els are particularly appealing in the context of language processing because they 
involve simultaneous processing at a number of levels and locations, apparently 
mimicking what is going on in the brain. Finally, pure PDP models (models with-
out incorporated digital devices) implicitly learn the rules governing the data they 
process in the course of their experience with that data (e.g., Plaut, McClelland, 
Seidenberg, & Patt erson, 1996). Th us, in a pure PDP model of phonology, there 
is no need to build in specifi c structures to account for specifi c phonological phe-
nomena. Th e structure of the model is defi ned entirely in terms of the domains of 
information accessible to it and the topographic relationship of these domains to 
each other. Th e absence of specifi c, ad hoc devices motivated by models (e.g., lin-
guistic) designed to account for particular phonological phenomena in an orderly 
fashion is also crucial to the maintenance of neurological plausibility. In humans, 
as in PDP models, the phonological phenomena we observe refl ect entirely the 
emergent behavior of the networks and the statistical regularities in the knowledge 
encoded within them. 
 PDP models incorporate explicitly defi ned assumptions that are “wired” into 
them in the mathematical details of their computer implementation. Th ey pro-
duce large numbers of predictions that can be (and have been) empirically tested 
through observations of normal subjects and brain-damaged individuals. Th ey 
have been remarkably successful in emulating the behavior of these subjects, 

308
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
and systematic analysis of the internal structure of these models has helped us 
to understand the network basis for behavior. PDP models exhibit properties 
of  graceful degradation and probabilistic selection, that is, when damaged or fed 
noisy input, they do not produce novel or bizarre output unachievable by an 
intact network with good input; rather, they tend to produce output that is not so 
reliably correct but is rule-bound.  
 A Simple Computational Model of a Knowledge Domain 
 Th e nature of concept representations can be best illustrated by a particular 
model developed by David Rumelhart and his colleagues (Rumelhart, Smolensky, 
McClelland, & Hinton, 1986). Th is “rooms in a house” model was comprised of 
40  “feature” units, each corresponding to an article typically found in particu-
lar rooms or an aspect of particular rooms. Each unit was connected with all the 
other units in the network—an att ribute that defi nes the model as an  autoasso-
ciator network.  Autoassociator networks have the capacity for “sett ling” into par-
ticular states that defi ne representations—states corresponding to  att ractorbasins . 
Connection strengths were defi ned by the likelihood that any two features might 
appear together in a typical house. When one or more units were clamped into the 
“on” state (as if the network had been shown these particular features or articles), 
activation spread throughout the model and the model eventually sett led into a 
steady state, an att ractor basin, that implicitly defi ned a particular room in a house. 
Th us, clamping “oven” ultimately resulted in activation of all the items one would 
expect to fi nd in a kitchen and thereby  implicitly defi ned, via a  distributed representa-
tion , the concept of a kitchen. No kitchen unit  per se  was turned on. Rather, kitchen 
was defi ned by the patt ern of feature units that were activated. Alternatively, we can 
say that the kitchen concept was population encoded. Th e network contained the 
knowledge, in the totality of its connections, that enabled this representation to be 
generated. Th e 40 unit model actually had the capability of generating distributed 
(population encoded) representations of a number of diff erent rooms in a house 
(e.g., bathroom, bedroom, living room, study), sub-components of rooms (e.g., easy 
chair and fl oor lamp, desk and desk chair, window and drapes) and blends of rooms 
that were not anticipated in the programming of the model (e.g., clamping both bed 
and sofa led to a distributed representation of a large, fancy bedroom replete with a 
fi replace, television, and sofa). 
 Th is autoassociator model, simple though it is, has the essential att ributes of 
a network that might be capable of generating the distributed representations of 
meaning underlying semantics. Th e brain’s semantic autoassociator obviously is 
comprised of vastly more that 40 features, and enables an enormous repertoire of 
distributed representations corresponding to the vast number of concepts we are 
capable of representing—the topic of the next section. 

Att ractor Basins
309
  Semantic Memory 
 Perhaps the best place to start in extrapolating the simple model of the previ-
ous section to the neural instantiation of semantic memory is with a dement-
ing process that represents nearly a pure lesion of cortices supporting world 
knowledge: semantic dementia (Rogers, Ivanoiu, Patt erson, & Hodges, 2006). 
Semantic dementia is associated with pathology that is maximal in the tempo-
ral poles but also involves lateral and inferior temporal cortices through much of 
their extent (Desgranges et al., 2007; Diehl et al., 2004; Grossman & Ash, 2004), 
albeit usually sparing the most posterior portions of temporal cortex (Lambon 
Ralph, Graham, & Patt erson, 1999) associated with object gnosis, visual percep-
tual processes, and matching object images refl ecting diff erent views (Hovius, 
Kellenbach, Graham, Hodges, & Patt erson, 2003; Rogers, et  al., 2006). Th e 
regions of the brain that are most severely involved in semantic dementia are 
visual and auditory association cortices. Temporal polar cortex also provides a 
major associative link to the amygdala, a core structure of the limbic system. Both 
hemispheres are aff ected, but classically left  hemisphere pathology is more severe. 
Semantic dementia is characterized by selective impairment in semantic memory 
with impoverished knowledge of objects and people, impaired semantic sorting, 
severe anomia in spontaneous language and naming to confrontation, severely 
reduced category fl uency, and impaired spoken and writt en word comprehension 
(Hodges, Patt erson, Oxbury, & Funnell, 1992; Rogers, et al., 2006). Perceptual 
skills and nonverbal problem solving skills are relatively spared, as are grammatic 
and phonologic function. Because so much of human knowledge of the world 
is based substantially upon visual and limbic att ributes, the impact of semantic 
dementia on knowledge is pervasive. Th ere may be some involvement of the peri-
rhinal and anterior entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus in semantic dementia, 
but episodic memory and biographic knowledge are relatively preserved until late 
in the disease course. 
 Knowledge of objects and people is  implicitly hierarchically organized. A broad 
superordinate category such as  animals include many exemplars, of which  dogs is 
one, and each exemplar may include a number of subordinate types: in the case 
of dogs, Labradors, German shepherds, poodles, etc. Th e items in each level of 
the hierarchy are defi ned by their characteristic features, and the lower the hier-
archical level, the more features are required to defi ne an item and the fewer the 
items that have the additional, more fi nely discriminating features. Th us, the 
category  animals is for the most part defi ned by moderate size, four legs, head, 
eyes, ears, nose, and eating and sexual behavior. To defi ne  dogs , one must add 
features of warm blooded, carnivorous, furry, and complex social behavior. To 
defi ne  Labrador , one must add further features of black color, medium length 
hair, weight of 50—80 pounds, and retriever instincts—features shared by rela-
tively few exemplars. Th e strength with which knowledge of objects and people is 

310
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
instantiated in the brain refl ects frequency of exposure, age of knowledge acquisi-
tion, and familiarity eff ects. Th e resilience of knowledge in the face of disease pro-
cesses refl ects these factors interacting with the number of exemplars possessing 
a given feature. 
 Semantic dementia provides a  prima facie case for neural representation of 
knowledge in terms of features because the degree to which knowledge of an item 
is att enuated is: 1) proportional to the number of features required to defi ne that 
item, which in turn is dependent on the quantity of remaining connections in 
aff ected association cortices; and 2) inversely proportional to the strength of the 
connections between particular features, which is related to the number of con-
cepts that share these features and the frequency with which these concepts are 
used (Devlin, Gonnerman, Andersen, & Seidenberg, 1998; Harm & Seidenberg, 
2004; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1985; McRae, De Sa, & Seidenberg, 1997; 
Randall, Moss, Rodd, Greer, & Tyler, 2004). Items defi ned by relatively distinc-
tive features, shared by fewer other items, and used less frequently (with accord-
ingly less redundant interconnectivity) are more susceptible to the eff ects of 
pathology. Th us, knowledge supporting superordinate categories is relatively 
preserved, along with naming, comprehension of, and ability to sort items into 
these categories, whereas knowledge of subordinate categories is most severely 
aff ected (Hodges, Graham, & Patt erson, 1995; Hodges, et  al., 1992; Rogers 
et al., 2004; Woollams, Cooper-Pye, Hodges, & Patt erson, 2008). Naming errors 
are either within category substitutions (e.g., hippopotamus for rhinoceros) or 
superordinate substitutions (e.g., animal for rhinoceros). Superordinate errors 
or prototype errors (e.g., “horse” for all large animals) become more common 
as the disease progresses (Hodges, et al., 1995). Low frequency exemplars are 
much more severely aff ected than high frequency exemplars (Hodges, et  al., 
1995; Hodges, et al., 1992), refl ecting the relationship between frequency of 
occurrence in experience and the degree of redundancy with which knowledge 
borne of experience is encoded. Subjects with semantic dementia are oft en able 
to provide broad superordinate information about an object (e.g., an elephant 
is an animal) but are unable to answer more specifi c questions, e.g., about an 
elephant’s habitat, size, peculiar features, or disposition (Hodges, et al., 1995). 
Th e performance of subjects with semantic dementia on animal drawing tasks 
is revealing (Bozeat et al., 2003) (see also see also subjectsstatus post herpes 
simplex encephalitis; Sartori & Job, 1988). Subjects with semantic dementia are 
very likely to omit features in their drawings in proportion to the severity of their 
dementia, and they are most likely to omit highly distinctive features, character-
izing only one or a few exemplars. Th ey are most likely to  add features common 
to the domain. For example, when asked to draw a rhinoceros, the production 
typically resembles a pig, the distinctive horns and armor having been omitt ed 
because the underlying knowledge has been lost. When asked to draw a duck, 
the production may be a reasonable facsimile of a duck—except that it has four 

Att ractor Basins
311
legs. Th us, as knowledge underlying discriminating features is lost, there is a ten-
dency for all items at a given level of the knowledge hierarchy to assume the 
features of the prototype. Eventually, even knowledge of the prototype may be 
lost, relegating the subject to reliance on knowledge supporting the next higher 
level of the knowledge hierarchy. 
 Th e patt ern of breakdown of semantic knowledge in PDP models precisely 
recapitulates the behavior of subjects with semantic dementia (Rogers, Lambon 
Ralph, Garrard, et al., 2004). Th e rooms in a house model of Rumelhart et al. 
(1986) was based on an autoassociator network comprised of 40 features. Th e 
activation function of an autoassociator neural network supporting semantic 
knowledge would be based on N features and be expressed in an N-dimensional 
hyperspace. By taking a 3-dimensional “slab” of the activity function, we can 
achieve some insight into its operation (Woollams, et al., 2008). Let us take the 
slab pertaining to animal knowledge. Because we are dealing with an autoassocia-
tor network, network activity corresponding to animals will tend to sett le into a 
broad basin—an att ractor basin, the central, lowest point of which corresponds 
to the “centroid” of animal knowledge—the representation of a creature that best 
defi nes our sense of animalness. Within the animal basin there are innumerable 
att ractor sub-basins corresponding to specifi c animals. Very close to the centroid 
are sub-basins corresponding to animals likely to be very close to the centroid 
representation, e.g., dogs, cats, cows, horses, etc. Distant from the centroid are 
sub-basins corresponding to animals that are quite atypical, e.g., platypuses, sea 
gooseberries, and narwhales. Distance from the centroid is defi ned by the degree 
of atypicality (see also Kiran, 2007; Patt erson, 2007; Woollams, et al., 2008). 
Within any given sub-basin, there may be sub-sub basins, e.g., corresponding 
to types of dogs. Within these sub-sub-basins may be sub-sub-sub-basins corre-
sponding to types within types, or perhaps the Labrador that was our pet and 
generic Labradors. Th e depth of a basin, relative to that of its sub-basins, refl ects 
the degree to which features are shared by the sub-basins within that basin. For 
example, the animal basin is deeper than the tool basin because animals, by and 
large, share many more features than tools. 
 Th e location of the various att ractor basins within the semantic fi eld refl ects reg-
ularities in the knowledge of the relationships between concepts (which are defi ned 
by empirical associations between features), acquired through experience, hence 
the eff ects of frequency and age of acquisition. Similarities between items refl ect 
the number of features they share. Frequency and age of acquisition also defi ne the 
depth of sub-basins, simple (corresponding to single entities), and complex (cor-
responding to quasi-regular domains 1 ), regardless of location. Semantic priming 
occurs to the extent that a stimulus engages features of a concept representation. 
Th e more superordinate a concept representation, the greater the number of subor-
dinate representations it shares features with, and the larger the number of subordi-
nate representations that will prime it. 

312
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Th e eff ect of lesions (focal or diff use) will be to produce graceful degrada-
tion of network performance (Hodges, et al., 1992; Shallice, 1988; Warrington, 
1975; Warrington & Shallice, 1984). Deep basins will become shallower and 
sub-basins, particularly those that are shallower and more distant from the cen-
troid—corresponding to more atypical exemplars—will disappear (Woollams, 
et al., 2008). Th e deeper and therefore more resilient basins are defi ned by knowl-
edge that is represented in neural connectivity with the greatest degree of redun-
dancy, as a result of stronger connection strengths, which refl ect frequency, age 
of acquisition, and familiarity eff ects (Hinton & Shallice, 1991; Hodges, et al., 
1995; Rogers, Lambon Ralph, Garrard, et al., 2004). As sub-basins become shal-
low or disappear, responses will refl ect the sett ling of the network into surviving 
neighbors located nearer the centroid—neighbors of higher typicality (yielding 
coordinate errors, e.g., horse in lieu of donkey); the parent basin (yielding super-
ordinate errors, e.g., animal in lieu of donkey); or failure to sett le at all, yield-
ing omission errors (particularly likely to occur with more atypical exemplars 
that lack near neighbors). Th is is precisely what has been observed in semantic 
dementia (Woollams, et al., 2008). 
 Th us, it is apparent that two major factors impact the probability of retrieving 
semantic knowledge and the delay in retrieving it: atypicality and frequency. As 
Patt erson (Patt erson, 2007)has pointed out, the more atypical the exemplar—
that is, the more distant it is from the att ractor basin centroid—the less likely it is 
to be retrievable and the longer it will take to retrieve it. Generally, this atypical-
ity eff ect dominates, but it can sometimes be mitigated by the presence of deep 
sub-basins, however atypical, corresponding to single entities or to quasi-regular 
domains of high frequency. For example, even though whales are atypical ani-
mals, because of their compelling features, not the least their size, intelligence, 
sociability, and history of interaction with man, they are frequently mentioned 
in discourse. For this reason, features of whales defi ne a quasi-regular domain 
that provides the basis for a large deep sub-basin within the animal basin that is 
located rather far from the animal basin centroid. Variable atypicality, frequency, 
and age of acquisition, the majorfactors infl uencing sub-basin location and depth, 
characterize all domains of knowledge. Th ese knowledge att ributes, refl ected in 
the att ractor basin landscape, will provide the unifying threads in the discussions 
to follow. 
 In order to lay further groundwork for sections to follow, I will extend the 
att ractor basin metaphor to patt ern associator networks as the  att ractor trench . 
A patt ern associator network is one that translates a representation in one domain, 
e.g., orthographic, into a representation in another domain, e.g., phonological. 
Th e PDP reading model developed by Plaut and colleagues is illustrative(Plaut, 
et al., 1996; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989). Th e model was composed of three 
layers: 1) an input layer of 105 grapheme units grouped into clusters, the fi rst 
cluster including all possibilities for the one or more consonants of the onset, the 

Att ractor Basins
313
second cluster including all the possible vowels in the nucleus, and the third clus-
ter including all possibilities for the one or more consonants in the coda; 2) a hid-
den unit layer of 100 units; and 3) an output layer of 61 phoneme units grouped 
into clusters, including all the possibilities for onset, nucleus, and coda, respec-
tively (as for the graphemes). Local representations were used for the graphemes 
and phonemes. Th ere were one-way connections from each of the grapheme 
input units to each of the hidden units, and two-way connections between each 
of the hidden units and each of the phoneme output units. Every output unit was 
connected to every other output unit, providing the network the autoassociator 
capability for “sett ling into” the best solution (as opposed to its own approximate 
solution). Th e model was trained using a mathematical algorithm (back propaga-
tion) that incrementally alters the strengths of connections in proportion to their 
contribution to the error, which is computed as the diff erence between the actual 
output of the network and the desired output. Th e orthographic representations 
of 3000 English single syllable words and their corresponding phonological forms 
were presented, one pair at a time, cycling repeatedly through the entire corpus. 
In this way, the model ultimately learned to produce the correct pronunciation of 
all the words it had read. One of the most striking things about the trained model 
is that it also was able to produce correct pronunciations of plausible English non-
words (i.e., orthographic sequences it had never encountered before). How was 
this possible? 
 One might have inferred that the model was simply learning the pronunciation 
of all the words by rote. If this had been the case, however, the model would have 
been incapable of applying what it had learned to novel words. In fact, what the 
model learned was the relationships between  sequences of graphemes and  sequences 
of phonemes that are characteristic of the English language. To the extent that 
there is a limited repertoire of sequence types, the model was able to learn it and 
then apply that knowledge to novel forms that incorporated some of the sequen-
tial relationships in this repertoire. Th e information the model acquired through 
its long experience with English orthographic-phonological sequential relation-
ships went considerably beyond this, however, fully refl ecting the statistical 
regularities in its experience. Certain sequences, those most commonly found in 
English single syllable words, were more thoroughly etched in network connec-
tivity. Th us, the model was very fast with high frequency words. It was also very 
fast with words with an absolutely consistent orthographic-phonologic sequence 
relationship, e.g., words ending in  ust , which are always pronounced / Λ st / ( must, 
bust, trust, lust, crust , etc.). Th e model encountered diffi  culty, refl ected in pro-
longed reading latency, only with low frequency words (for which frequency 
cannot trump atypicality), and only to the extent that it had learned diff erent, 
competing pronunciations of the same orthographic sequence. Th us, it was slow 
to read  pint  because in every case but  pint , the sequence  int is pronounced / Int / 
(e.g.,  mint, tint, fl int, lint ). It was also slow, though not quite so slow, to read words 

314
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
like  shown  because there are two equally frequent alternatives to the pronuncia-
tion of  own ( gown, down, town  versus  shown, blown, fl own ). It was very slow with 
words that are unique in their orthographic-phonologic sequence relationship, 
e.g., aisle ,  guide and  fugue —i.e., highly atypical words. Th ese behaviors precisely 
recapitulate the behavior of normal human subjects given reading tasks. 
 Th e knowledge the model acquires refl ects competing eff ects of type fre-
quency and token frequency. If a single word is suffi  ciently common (high 
token frequency), the model acquires enough experience with it that competing 
orthographic-phonologic sequential relationships have a negligible impact on 
naming latency. However, if a word is relatively uncommon (e.g.,  pint ), its nam-
ing latency will be signifi cantly aff ected by the knowledge of other words that, 
though equally uncommon, together belong to a competing type (e.g.,  mint, fl int, 
tint, sprint ). 
 Th e implicit knowledge of various sequence regularities captured by the 
model (and the brain), through experience, defi nes quasi-regular domains (pre-
cisely as with dogs or whales in semantic knowledge). For example, in the case 
of words ending in  own , orthographic-phonologic regularity exists but it is only 
quasi-regular because there is not one but two alternatives ( shown versus  gown ), 
a particular alternative being determined by the onset cluster. Quasi-regular 
domains may be composed of more or less equally competing subdomains, each 
corresponding to a regularity, as in the case of  own words, or a domain that is 
regular but for a single member (e.g.,  mint, tint, splint , etc. versus  pint ). In some 
cases they may be fully regular (e.g., the  ust words). Th e higher the frequency of a 
word and the stronger the connectivity between units involved in its production, 
the less its production is infl uenced by similarity to neighbors, and the more it 
approaches a regular domain that has only one member. Whether or not linguis-
tic forms belong to particular quasi-regular domains depends upon the particular 
regularities that the network is endowed to capture through experience. When 
a neural network supporting a quasi-regular domain sett les into the wrong state 
(the wrong sub-basin or sub-trench), the result is a paraphasic error: phonemic, 
verbal or semantic, but also morphologic (paragrammatic) or syntactic, depend-
ing on the network. 
 A patt ern associator network linking two networks with autoassociator prop-
erties that supports sequence representations provides the basis for an att ractor 
trench, which constitutes a translation pathway between the two autoassociator 
domains. Given a particular input patt ern of activity (e.g., the orthographic repre-
sentation), the patt ern associator network will tend to sett le into a trench, at the 
other end of which is the correct output patt ern of activity (e.g., the correspond-
ing phonological representation). Even a patt ern associator network that incor-
porates knowledge of as many regularities as exist between English orthography 
and phonology yields an att ractor trench landscape that is prett y drab—more like 
a plane riddled by gullies—compared with the complex sub-sub-basins within 

Att ractor Basins
315
sub-basins within basins lunar crater-scape of semantics. Nevertheless, the same 
two major factors impact the probability of retrieving knowledge and the delay 
in retrieving it:  atypicality (corresponding to distance from the centroid) and 
frequency (corresponding to trench/basin depth). For example, within the  int 
trench, which corresponds to a quasi-regular domain, the sub-trench correspond-
ing to  /Int/ is both more typical and deeper because it provides the phonology for 
most English single syllable  int words, whereas the sub-trench corresponding to 
 /aint/ is atypical and shallow, corresponding to a single outlier  pint . 
 Knowledge Underlying Other Domains of Language 
 WRITTEN FORCED CHOICE LEXICAL DECISION  
 Whether or not lexical decision depends upon access to semantics remains a sub-
ject of considerable debate. Rogers and colleagues (Patt erson et al., 2006; Rogers, 
Lambon Ralph, Hodges, & Patt erson, 2004) sought to address this question, and 
a related issue central to this chapter—the impact of atypicality on lexical deci-
sion—in an ingenious experiment. Th ey created 72 stimulus pairs, each consisting 
of a word and a possible pseudo-homophone. For half of these pairs, the bigram 
and trigram frequency of the word was greater (e.g., cheese/cheize). For the other 
half, the bigram and trigram frequency of the nonword was greater (e.g., seize/
seese)—that is, the orthography of the real word was atypical. Normal control sub-
jects performed at ceiling and thus their performance could not address the ques-
tion of what knowledge, orthographic or semantic, was being recruited to make 
the lexical decision. Subjects with semantic dementia performed nearly normally 
when the word representation was more orthographically typical than the non-
word—that is, when their response could be guided by the most orthographically 
typical exemplar. However, when nonwords were more typical than words—that 
is, sub-basins corresponding to orthographic representations of words were sub-
stantially att enuated by disease because of their atypicality, their lexical decision 
performance fell and it was below chance among the most severely aff ected sub-
jects for low frequency words/nonwords (there were signifi cant atypicality and 
frequency eff ects and a signifi cant atypicality by frequency interaction). Th e results 
of this experiment tell us that visual lexical decision can be made on the basis of 
orthographic representations and that, when these representations are damaged, 
as they are likely to be in semantic dementia because these networks are located 
in the inferior temporal lobes, atypicality eff ects (distance from the centroid of the 
att ractor basin) and frequency eff ects (depth of att ractor basins and sub-basins) 
become evident. 
 An alternative explanation, favored by Rogers et al. (Patt erson, et al., 2006; 
Rogers, Lambon Ralph, Hodges, et al., 2004),is that normal att ractor basins cor-
responding to atypical orthographic exemplars are insuffi  cient to support lexical 

316
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
decision, particularly when the exemplars are low frequency, in which case the full 
extent of meaning representations must be accessed. In subjects with semantic 
dementia, these extended meaning representations are of course defective, impair-
ing lexical decision. It was thought that because subjects with semantic dementia 
could read regular words as well as controls, and because the most clear-cut abnor-
malities on anatomic and functional imaging studies are in more anterior tempo-
ral lobe, their orthographic representations must have been intact. Importantly, 
whichever interpretation is correct, the results provide clear-cut  evidence of atypi-
cality, frequency, and atypicality by frequency interaction eff ects.  
 READING, SPELLING, AND VERB PAST TENSE 
PRODUCTION  
 Patt erson and colleagues (Patt erson, 2007; Patt erson, et al., 2006) reported a pat-
tern of performance by subjects with semantic dementia on three other tasks, 
reading, spelling, and verb past-tense production, that precisely recapitulates the 
patt ern reported above with visual lexical decision. In all three of these domains, 
subjects demonstrated atypicality, frequency, and atypicality by frequency interac-
tion eff ects. 
 Although performance in all three domains correlated highly with semantic per-
formance, all three domains correspond to att ractor trenches, rather than basins. 
Th us, in all three domains, performance with atypical exemplars, infrequent exem-
plars, and most particularly, atypical low frequency exemplars, corresponding to 
the shallowest att ractor sub-trenches lying the farthest from the trench centroid, 
was most aff ected and in many cases, performance was at worse than chance levels. 
Furthermore, most errors represented slips into att ractor sub-trenches closer to the 
centroid. 
 Reading aloud, spelling, and verb past-tense production can be accomplished 
without recourse to semantic representations, and indeed, it is only in these 
non-semantic routes that there exist quasi-regular domains containing both typi-
cal sub-domains near the trench centroid and atypical sub-domains corresponding 
to shallower sub-trenches distal from the centroid.Reading by the semantic route 
engages a patt ern associator network that instantiates very few regularities (which 
defi ne trenches and substrenches) because there is litt le relationship between 
orthography and phonology on the one hand, and word meaning on the other. 
Only reading by the phonologic route provides the opportunity to engage the 
complex att ractor trench landscape of orthographic-phonologic regularities. Th e 
evidence suggests that the pathology of semantic dementia att enuates the shallow 
distal att ractor sub-trenches, just as it does the shallow distal sub-basins. Notably, 
reading, spelling, and verb past-tense production all depend, at least in part, on 
temporal lobe networks that are at risk for the pathology underlying semantic 
dementia. 

Att ractor Basins
317
 For reading, spelling, and verb past-tense production, low frequency  irregular 
exemplarsare supported by both direct phonological patt ern associator networks 
and patt ern associator networks that include semantics. However, these low fre-
quency irregular exemplars diff erentially rely on the semantic route, and therefore 
are diff erentially susceptible to degradation of semantic networks, because they do 
not derive benefi t from the sequence regularities encoded in phonological patt ern 
associator networks(Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Nadeau, 2001; Plaut, et al., 1996; 
Rapcsak & Beeson, 2000; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989; Woollams, Lambon 
Ralph, Plaut, & Patt erson, 2007). To the extent that degradation of semantic net-
works occurs, it will produce a pseudo-atypicality/frequency eff ect—pseudo 
because the eff ect has nothing to do with the topography of att ractor trenches sup-
porting the quasi-regular domains of the phonological routes, but rather, owes to 
dissolution of semantic processing routes. However, direct, non-semantic routes 
also support processing of all words, regular and irregular, so even accepting the 
impact of disease on semantic route function, the results reviewed still provide evi-
dence of atypicality, frequency, and atypicality by frequency interaction eff ects. Th e 
combined eff ects of att ractor trench landscape and att enuation of the substrate for 
semantics provides the basis for the regularization errors observed in subjects with 
semantic dementia. 
 Patt erson et. al. (2006) argued that because of the very high correlation between 
semantic impairment on the one hand and reading, spelling, and verb past-tense 
defi cits on the other, the latt er defi cits were rooted in the semantic defi cit. However, 
their argument seems to be undermined by the absence of quasi-regular domains 
in semantic reading, spelling, and verb-past tense production routes, as well as by 
a number of reported dissociations between reading, spelling, and verb past-tense 
production on the one hand, and semantic impairment on the other (reviewed in 
their paper). 
 Th ese scientifi c issues remain incompletely resolved. However, whichever 
hypothesis is correct, these data provide strong evidence that atypicality and fre-
quency defi ne the att ractor trench topography of reading, spelling, and verb past 
tense production. Output corresponding to distal, shallow sub-trenches may be 
defective, either because of att enuation of these sub-trenches, or because noisy, 
imprecise input generated from degraded semantic representations interferes with 
the sett ling of network activity into distal shallow trenches (Woollams, et al., 2007). 
Instead, the “ball” of network activity tends to tumble down the slope to deep parts 
of the trench, closer to the centroid. 
 Th e Conformation of Linguistic Knowledge 
 If linguistic knowledge, whether refl ected in the att ractor basins of semantic 
memory, or the att ractor trenches underlying translation between forms via 

318
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
patt ern associator networks, were represented in the brain in veridical fashion, 
all items of knowledge would be equally accessible. Th us, reaction time (RT) 
would be a constant, refl ecting only generic processing speeds: 
 RT = k 
 and the probability of accessing an exemplar would be equal for all exemplars: 
 P(A) = q 
 However, we know from the foregoing that this is not correct. Reaction times, 
e.g., word reading times, are longer for normal subjects for highly atypical 
words (e.g.,  aisle ), and they are prolonged when there are competing att ractor 
sub-trenches/sub-basins within basins corresponding to quasiregular domains 
(e.g.,  pint versus lint, tint, mint , and  stint ) (Plaut, et  al., 1996; Seidenberg & 
McClelland, 1989), for which the centroid of the trench lies closer to  lint than 
to  pint , rendering  pint more atypical. Probability of a correct response declines 
with increasing atypicality and falling frequency, a phenomenon most apparent 
in disease states. 
 Rather, RT and P(A) are likely to be defi ned by equations of the following 
general form: 
 RT =  α e β (atypicality/frequency) 
 P(A) =  γ e - δ (atypicality/frequency) 
 Where  α ,  β ,  γ ,  and  δ  are scaling factors, and atypicality and frequency ranges are 
such that  β (atyp/frequency) and  δ (atyp/frequency) are always ≥0. Equation 1 
indicates that for exemplars that are low in atypicality and high in frequency, the 
exponent approaches 0, and because e 0  = 1, RT approaches its minimum,  α . Th e 
higher the atypicality, the longer the RT, unless atypically is mitigated by frequency. 
By analogy, for low atypicality and high frequency, P(A) reduces to  γ . P(A) drops 
with increasing atypicality, mitigated by frequency. 
 Although these equations may capture the general relationships of reaction time 
and probability of access to atypicality and frequency, they nevertheless represent 
an oversimplifi cation, for a number of reasons: 
 1)  To the extent that an att ractor basin or trench is occupied by sub-basins and 
subtrenches, exemplars may be additionally susceptible to the atypicality/fre-
quency trade-off s of these subregions in activity space.  
 2)  Age of acquisition eff ects are also a factor with a degree of infl uence that is 
inversely proportional to the extent of regularities encoded in the domain (e.g., 
low in domains with substantial regularity, such as the orthographic-phonologic 
patt ern associator, and high in domains that encode largely arbitrary relation-
ships, e.g., the patt ern associator linking word meaning to word sound (Lambon 
Ralph & Ehsan, 2006)).  

Att ractor Basins
319
 3)  Measuring the properties of a domain, e.g., semantics, may be confounded by 
the properties of networks that enable input to or output from that domain. 
An outstanding example is the basic level eff ect, which refl ects the impact of 
experience and expertise on our choice of name for a given entity (Rogers 
& McClelland, 2004).Many people, on seeing a dog, would call it a  dog . 
However, many would more oft en produce the name of the type of dog, e.g., 
 poodle or  German shepherd .Very few would respond  animal . Basic level names, 
e.g.,  dog or  poodle , do not bear a consistent relationship to frequency in word 
databases, though more oft en than not they are more frequent than more gen-
eral or more specifi c terms. Th is is because they are substantially defi ned by 
personal experience and expertise. Th e basic level terms employed by a veteri-
narian might involve, for example, specifi c types of poodles. Basic level eff ects 
are also strongly refl ective of age of acquisition (see above). Basic level eff ects 
interact with the properties of the semantic system. Because atypical exem-
plars (e.g., platypus)derive less benefi t from semantic att ractor basin eff ects, 
successful production of the name is more likely to refl ect basic level eff ects. 
On the other hand, with semantic network damage, superordinate categories 
(e.g., animals) will have an advantage and will be preserved even as subcat-
egories corresponding to basic level exemplars are lost. Basic level eff ects also 
refl ect, in part, properties of the semantic system. Expertise aff ects not just fre-
quency of use of particular terms, but also degree of diff erentiation in seman-
tic networks.  
 Th e patt ern of knowledge representation and its att ractor basin/att ractor trench 
counterpart detailed here for language characterize a broad range of knowledge 
domains and can be regarded as a unifying principle for understanding not just 
cognitive butmany psychophysical functions. Th is will be the subject of the next 
section. 
 Psychophysics and Stevens’ Power Law 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Perception is defined by the interaction of afferent sensory input and existing 
knowledge represented as neural connection strengths in sensory association 
cortices. Knowledge reflects what has been deemed important by the nervous 
system. Kilgard and Merzenich (1998) provided a dramatic demonstration of 
this in an ingenious experiment. Microstimulation electrodes were implanted 
in the nucleus basalis of rats. The nucleus basalis provides the entire choliner-
gic projection to the cortex. Its extensive afferent input from the limbic system 
(Sarter & Bruno, 1997), which defines subjective value,translates into choliner-
gic bursts to the cortex that signal which neural activity is important and should 

320
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
lead to modification of neural connectivity—the instantiation of knowledge. 
Acetylcholine delays the closing of a potassium channel, thereby prolonging 
the influx of calcium through NMDA voltage gated sodium/calcium chan-
nels, and it acts at a metabotropic receptor to release calcium from intracel-
lular stores. The resultant transient increases in intracellular calcium enable the 
molecular biologic processes that alter synaptic connection strengths. During 
the training period, all of the rats were exposed daily to a frequently repeated 
sound stimulus, e.g., a 9 kHz tone, of no intrinsic behavioral importance. In 
half the rats, the tone was accompanied by brief stimulation of nucleus basalis, 
which, by transiently increasing cortical extracellular acetylcholine and hence 
intracellular calcium, assured that the tone was learned. At the conclusion of 
the training period, the tonotopic organization of the primary auditory cortex 
was mapped. In the rats that  did not  receive nucleus basalis stimulation, pri-
mary auditory cortex was characterized by the normal systematic array of tonal 
responsivity ranging from 1 kHz to 64 kHz—there had been no alteration in 
pre-existing cortical auditory knowledge. In the rats that  did receive nucleus 
basalis micro-stimulation, the organization of the primary auditory cortex had 
been profoundly altered such that it exhibited tonal responses solely to frequen-
cies in the 9±4 kHz range, that is, to the narrow range of frequencies that had 
been designated important by nucleus basalis stimulation. Thus, even in the 
domain of auditory perception, which involves a primary sensory cortex that 
one might have thought would be hard-wired, the knowledge represented had 
been transformed to reflect the regularities of experience and the value attached 
to that experience. 
 Absent such ingenious contrivances as the Kilgard and Merzenich experiment, 
knowledge constraining perception refl ects the experiences of daily life accumu-
lated over a lifetime. Typicality corresponds to perceptual dimensions that are most 
shared by the entities we have lived with. 2 Th is knowledge, derived of experience, 
is instantiated in cortical connectivity in various sensory domains andis the basis 
for network activity functions characterized by att ractor basin properties. Stimuli 
near the centroids of these basins are likely to be perceived in nearly veridical fash-
ion. Stimuli at the high end (e.g., high pitch, loud sounds, long lines) are likely to 
be perceived as falling at or near the highest magnitude stimulus ever experienced, 
characteristic of few, if any, of the entities we have lived with, leaving a substantial 
probability that these stimuli will be underestimated. Stimuli at the very low end 
(low pitch, quiet sounds, very short lines) are likely to be perceived as falling at 
or near the lowest end ever experienced, also characteristic of few entities we have 
lived with, leaving a substantial probability that they will be overestimated. Th is has 
been shown in line length judgment tasks (Hollingworth, 1909; Mennemeier et al., 
2005; Tegnér & Levander, 1991; Worth & Poppel, 1988).In att ractor basin terms, 
stimuli falling at or beyond the margins of experience are likely to elicit representa-
tions closer to the centroid of the basin. 

Att ractor Basins
321
 Th is qualitative conceptualization corresponds directly to well-studied princi-
ples of psychophysics. In a series of infl uential papers, Stevens (1957, 1970) argued 
that magnitude estimation in a wide variety of domains can be characterized by a 
function of the form: 
 Ψ  = kS n 
 where  Ψ  is the perceived magnitude, S is the actual magnitude, n an exponent that 
varies from domain to domain, and to a lesser degree, from individual to individual, 
and k is a scaling factor. If n = 1, 
 Ψ  = kS 
 and all stimuli are perceived with equal accuracy, modifi ed only by the “skewing” 
factor, k, which impacts perception at the extremes precisely as it impacts percep-
tion in the heavily experienced middle (see below for possible implications). If 
n < 1, the equation yields progressively greater underestimation at the high end. For 
example, if n = 0.5 and k = 1, 
 for S=1,  Ψ  = 1 
 for S=2,  Ψ  = 1.414, a 29.3% underestimate, 
 and for S = 10,  Ψ  = 3.162, a 68.4% underestimate. 
 Th e att ractor basin slope at the low end need not obey the same function as the 
slope at the high end. However, if the units of measurement are chosen such that the 
value of S at the centroid is 1, then we can see that the equation above defi nes the 
perceptual att ractor basin properties discussed above—overestimation at the low 
end as well as underestimation at the high end. Th us, for n = 0.5 and k = 1,   
 for S = 0.5,  Ψ  = 0.707, a 41% overestimate,  
 and for S = 0.1,  Ψ  = 0.316, a 316% overestimate, whereas 
 for S = 1,  Ψ  =1 and perception is veridical. 
 Th e discussion here has focused on magnitude estimation. However, there are other 
methods of probing the role of atypicality in perception, most notably reaction time 
as a function of stimulus intensity (Neumann & Niepel, 2004). 
 Th e tendencies to overestimation at the low end and underestimation at the 
high end might be, and have been, construed as representing merely regression to 
the mean: because statistically, low-end stimuli occur exclusively in the context of 
higher/larger stimuli, they are likely to be overestimated, and by the same token, 
high-end stimuli are likely to be underestimated. Regression to the mean may 
indeed be an experimental factor but this explanation has diffi  culty accounting 
for the variability in the shape of att ractor basins governing magnitude estima-
tion, which vary enormously from one sensory domain to another (see below). 

322
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
Stevens simply accepted the regression eff ect as a ubiquitous factor that led to 
underestimation of the exponent of the magnitude estimation power functions 
(Stevens, 1970). In fact, the impact of the regression eff ect on the exponent is 
quite small (Algom & Marks, 1990).  
 QUALIFICATIONS  
 Our goal so far has been to establish a plausible, principled relationship between the 
psychophysical phenomena of magnitude estimation and cortical network struc-
ture and function. Psychophysics is now a vast and complicated fi eld, substantially 
dominated by the work of mathematical psychologists (e.g., Stevens) who have 
sought to defi ne mathematical models that accurately account for empirical obser-
vations. With rare exceptions, however, these models have not been informed by 
knowledge of neural structure. Consequently, there has not been a neural network 
theory-behavioral study dialectic:  neither the models nor the experiments have 
been able to benefi t from knowledge of neural networks, nor have the models and 
experiments served to inform us about neural network mechanisms. Th e ideas pro-
posed here may serve as a beginning of a solution to this problem. However, the 
neural model proposed above is far too simple to have a chance of accounting for 
the vast range of psychophysical phenomenology, even in the fi eld of magnitude 
estimation. In the following, I will briefl y discuss some of the most important quali-
fying factors. 
 Th e Exponent 
 Stevens (1970)estimated the exponent of the power function defi ning magnitude 
estimation in a variety of stimulus domains (Table 15.1). Notably, for a number of 
domains the value of the exponent is >1. Th e att ractor basin model cannot account 
for exponents >1 because this would mean that the magnitude of response to atypi-
cal stimuli would be greater than that for typical stimuli. Four hypotheses can be 
off ered to account for this: 
 1)  Sub-basin eff ects (see below). 
 2)  Context eff ects (see below). 
 3)  Eff ects of interactions of two or more cortical domains engaged in the estima-
tion process. 
 4)  Eff ects of cortical, subcortical, brainstem, spinal cord, or peripheral receptor 
processes that serve to magnify response to stimuli at the extremes (e.g., the 
disproportionate responses to edges by the visual system). 
 Th ere is no reason to presume that any given magnitude estimation power func-
tion is the product of the properties of a single sensory transducer or neural system, 
and in fact, the evidence is to the contrary. Th e exponents (some positive and some 

Att ractor Basins
323
negative, adding and subtracting) refl ect the multiple sequential and interacting 
stages of neural processing that occur in every sensory modality (see Stevens, 1970). 
Th e point to be made here is that, whatever the peripheral, subcortical, and primary 
cortical processing, components of perception taking place in association cortices, 
which are likely constrained by att ractor basin dynamics and hence characterized by 
an exponent <1, may provide useful insight into many experimental results, includ-
ing magnitude estimation, but also hemispatial neglect, which is overwhelmingly 
associated with cortical lesions, to be discussed in the next section.  
 Sub-Basin Eff ects 
 Att ractor basin dynamics defi ned by cortical networks supporting magnitude 
estimation are just as likely to be infl uenced by sub-basin eff ects as are those 
associated with semantic function. Line length can be taken as a useful example. 
All of us have particularly extensive experiences with line lengths characteristic 
 Table 15.1  Magnitude estimation power function exponents (Stevens, 1970)   
 Sensory Domain 
 Exponent 
 Loudness 
 0.67 
 Brightness 
 0.33–0.5 
 Smell 
 0.6 
 Taste 
 1.3–1.4 
 Temperature 
 1.0–1.5 
 Vibration 
 0.6–0.95 
 Visual length 
 1.0 
 Visual area 
 0.7 
 Duration 
 1.1 
 Finger span 
 1.3 
 Pressure on palm 
 1.1 
 Heaviness 
 1.45 
 Force of handgrip 
 1.7 
 Vocal eff ort 
 1.1 
 Electric shock 
 3.5 
 Tactual roughness 
 1.5 
 Tactual hardness 
 0.8 
 Angular acceleration 
 1.41 

324
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
of objects in peripersonal space. Th us, we are likely to have an att ractor sub-basin 
corresponding to this subdomain of experience and the knowledge acquired 
from it. All of us also have substantial experience with a range of longer lines 
encountered in our experience within our homes and offi  ces—the basis for 
another att ractor sub-basin. Some people, possibly pilots, may have extensive 
experience of very long lines, defi ning yet another att ractor sub-basin, but also 
illustrating a potential source of individual variability in magnitude estimation.  
 Context Eff ects 
 To this point, I have dealt with att ractor basins as if the neural network structure 
(the knowledge base) underling them were static. Th is is unlikely to be the case, 
even though underlying knowledge must exert powerful constraining forces. 
Context eff ects might act to alter the boundaries of att ractor basins, to shift  the cen-
troid, or to alter the location of sub-basins relative to the centroid. Th ere are at least 
four possible ways by which the neural networks defi ning att ractor basins might be 
at least transiently altered in experimentally important ways: 
 1)  Learning: Even though the human brain and experimental neural networks 
exhibit age of acquisition eff ects, without question the knowledge stored in 
neural network connectivity can be signifi cantly altered at any age by inten-
sive atypical experience. Connectivity within cortical networks can be 
directly altered in this way, or it can be indirectly altered through changes in 
multi-synaptic cortical-hippocampal–cortical loops instantiating episodic 
memory (Alvarez & Squire, 1994; McClelland, McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 
1995; Rolls & Treves, 1998; Squire & Zola-Morgan, 1991).Experiential eff ects 
may also occur through procedural learning (practice eff ects), which is instan-
tiated independently of hippocampal systems. Atypical experience may occur 
over long periods of time or quite acutely (everything sounds quiet on leaving 
a rock concert). Acute experience may include experience of the experimental 
paradigm itself.  
 2)  Implicit memory: recent experience leaves temporary traces in network connec-
tivity that defi ne implicit memory—memory that is not consciously accessible 
but is revealed as “guilty knowledge” in appropriately constructed experiments 
(Bauer, Grande, & Valenstein, 2003). 
 3)  Working memory: any stimulus automatically leads to a briefl y sustained patt ern 
of network activity or network bias that defi nes working memory. Furthermore, 
certain experimental paradigms may lead to characteristic patt erns of volitional 
engagement of selected networks, instantiating working memory, which may be 
prolonged. Th is phenomenon may account for expectancy and top-down pro-
cessing eff ects. Episodic memory, implicit memory, and working memory can 
potentially account for the eff ects of response to one stimulus on response to a 
subsequent stimulus. 

Att ractor Basins
325
 4)  Concurrent stimuli or their absence. Neural network activity refl ects the 
response of the network, with its incorporated knowledge, to a particular stimu-
lus. However, that activity patt ern may be diff erent if there is a concurrent stimu-
lus in the same domain, or in diff erent domains when there is synesthesia. What 
we know about particular sensory stimuli is typically acquired in variously noisy 
environments. Exposure to a particular stimulus in the context of a diff erent 
environment (e.g., a carefully controlled lab) may elicit a somewhat diff erent 
response. 
 Th ese four mechanisms have the eff ect of transiently distorting att ractor basins. 
To illustrate this eff ect, taking an example from grammar, consider the sentence 
“the cute bunny att acked the vicious pit bulls.” Although we all have a trenchant 
idea of what cute bunnies are, and this idea will not receive any long term alteration 
by having read this sentence, for a brief period of time, our cute bunny att ractor 
basin will refl ect engagement of features we do not normally associate with cute 
bunnies. Recent or concurrent stimuli will have an analogous distorting eff ect on 
att ractor basins related to magnitude estimation. Att ractor basin distortion eff ects 
on magnitude estimation should be within stimulus modality except to the extent 
that the ancillary stimulus may have synesthetic eff ects (e.g., the impact of loud/soft  
or high/low pitched noise; soft /sharp or hot/cold somatosensory stimulation; or 
sweet/bitt er taste on line length estimation). 
 Given the number of neural mechanisms that potentially infl uence magni-
tude estimation, it is hardly surprising that the study of magnitude estimation has 
proven to be extraordinarily challenging. Th e mechanisms discussed potentially 
provide the basis for context eff ects that have been the focus of particular interest 
among psychophysicists (e.g.,Sarris, 2004). It is to be hoped that explicit consid-
eration of these mechanisms may lead us beyond purely empirical approaches to 
psychophysical modeling, and in turn empower psychophysical modeling to fur-
ther inform us of specifi c brain mechanisms. More generally, these considerations 
serve to emphasize the somewhat ephemeral and non-veridical nature of much of 
what we “know.”  
  Hemispatial Neglect 
 Hemispatial neglect is defi ned by the failure to att end to, orient towards, or 
respond to stimuli in the contralesional hemispace (Heilman, Watson, & 
Valenstein, 2003). Th ere may be underlying att entional or intentional defi cits 
(Na et al., 1998). Th e focus here will be on att ention. Att ention is the process of 
focusing sensory resources upon one single stimulus. It involves selective engage-
ment of neural networks in relevant sensory association cortices. Normal indi-
viduals exhibit a subtle left -right gradient in att ention, as revealed, for example, 

326
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
in a tendency to bisect lines very slightly off  center, usually to the left  (Milner, 
Brechman, & Pagliarini, 1992), although not all studies agree (Mennemeier, 
et al., 2005).In subjects with hemispatial neglect, this gradient is much steeper, 
leading to behavior that is clearly diff erent in the two horizontal hemispaces, but 
also to a gradient within each hemispace (Butt er, Mark, & Heilman, 1989). 
 Th e behavioral consequences of a horizontal gradient in att ention can usefully 
be considered in the att ractor basin terms that have been the focus of this paper, 
and corresponding mathematic interpretation in terms of a power law. In this 
conceptualization, impaired att ention corresponds to a reduction in the depth of 
att ractor basins instantiating perception. Because all representations are aff ected 
equally, representations of atypical exemplars (at the high and low extremes) are 
lost entirely and the breadth of att ractor basins is reduced as well. As previously 
noted, normal subjects overestimate short lines and underestimate long lines, con-
sistent with att ractor basin dynamics. Reduction in att ractor basin breadth as a 
result of the att entional impairment associated with hemispatial neglect would be 
expected to exaggerate this tendency. Th is has been shown (Mennemeier, Vezey, 
Lamar, & Jewell, 2002; Tegnér & Levander, 1991). Th e eff ect of att enuation of 
att ention should impact att ractor basins associated with all cognitive and percep-
tual processes. As evidence of this, Chatt erjee (1995) found that subjects with 
hemispatial neglect and neglect dyslexia tended to read long lett er strings, words or 
nonwords, as shorter than their objective length and short lett er strings as longer 
than their objective length. 
 With reduced att ention in the left  hemispace (as in typical hemispatial neglect), 
long lines to the left  of midline will be diff erentially underestimated, leading to 
rightward line bisection errors. Furthermore, as discussed above for magnitude 
estimation, short lines will be overestimated, with the result that at some point, 
as lines to be bisected become shorter and shorter, the overestimation should 
lead to a cross-over eff ect, in which the line is bisected to the left  of center. Th is, a 
repeatedly observed but somewhat mysterious phenomenon (Tegnér & Levander, 
1991), has also been demonstrated in a test of center estimation in rectangular 
spaces (Mennemeier, Rapcsak, Dillon, & Vezey, 1998). It depends only upon there 
being some degree of hemispheric asymmetry in spatial att ention. Because normal 
subjects typically exhibit a subtle asymmetry, usually favoring the left , it could be 
anticipated that they would demonstrate a crossover eff ect in which at some point, 
with very short lines, they should bisect to the right of center. Th is has now been 
demonstrated empirically (Jewell & McCourt, 1999; McCourt & Jewell, 1999; 
Mennemeier, et al., 2005). Expectably, subjects with left  hemisphere lesions also 
demonstrate a crossover eff ect, but in a direction opposite to that seen in subjects 
with right hemisphere lesions (Mennemeier, et  al., 2002). Because line length 
estimation and line bisection are driven by the same basic mechanisms, errors on 
line length estimation are strongly correlated with bisection errors (Mennemeier, 
et  al., 2002). Because att entional impairment and its eff ects on att ractor basin 

Att ractor Basins
327
characteristics are greater in subjects with right hemisphere lesions and hemispatial 
neglect than in subjects with left  hemisphere lesions and neglect, both line estima-
tion errors and bisection errors are greater in subjects with left  hemispatial neglect 
(Mennemeier, et al., 2002). Because alterations in att ractor basins are at the heart 
of the line bisection behavior exhibited by subjects with hemispatial neglect, one 
might expect to see comparable behavior in other domains of perception involv-
ing magnitude estimation. Th is has been borne out in a study by Chatt erjee, Ricci, 
& Calhoun (2000), in which subjects with hemispatial neglect exhibited both a 
tendency to underestimate the weight of objects held in the left  hand relative to 
objects held simultaneously in the right hand, and a crossover eff ect. 
 Th e position of lines in egocentric space would be expected to have complex 
eff ects on long-line bisection behavior in subjects with hemispatial neglect. Th is 
is because, added to att ractor basin eff ects, there are two att entional gradient 
eff ects:  1)  a right-to-left  declining gradient of att ention related to neglect; and 
2) a near midline-to-far-from-midline declining gradient corresponding to reduced 
att ention to stimuli and portions of lines in the periphery (Werth 1988, cited in 
Werth & Pöppel, (1988). In the left  hemispace, both gradients favor rightward 
bisection errors for long lines, plus the att enuation of att ention related to neglect 
is greatest in left  hemispace. In the right hemispace, the neglect-related att entional 
gradient is less, favoring less extreme rightward bisection errors, and the periph-
eral att entional reduction favors left ward bisection errors. Th is has been born out 
in empirical studies (Mennemeier, Rapcsak, Pierce, & Vezey, 2001). Because most 
normal subjects tend to bisect lines slightly to the left  of center (Milner, et al., 1992), 
refl ecting a subtle declining left  to right att entional gradient, one would expect a 
tendency to behavior opposite to that observed in subjects with left  hemispatial 
neglect, albeit with smaller deviations due to the more subtle right-left  att entional 
gradient. Th is too has been substantially borne out (Mennemeier, et al., 2001). Th e 
magnitude of peripheral att enuation of att ention, particularly on very long lines, 
relatively litt le studied, is a source of uncertainty. 
 Simple reduction in att ractor basin depth due to impaired att ention should 
correspond to a reduction in the constant, k, of the power law equation. In fact, 
on average k is slightly elevated in subjects with hemispatial neglect (Chatt erjee, 
Mennemeier, & Heilman, 1994). However, reconsideration of the power function 
in logarithmic terms: 
 Log  Ψ  = n log S + log k 
 reveals that k is entirely an artifact of the units chosen to represent S—that is, 
in practice it truly is merely a scaling constant. If S were scaled such that S=1 
corresponded to the centroid of the att ractor basin (the “optimal stimulus” of 
Mennemeier and colleagues (Mennemeier, et al., 1998)), as discussed above, k 
would be related to the depth of the att ractor basin. It is uncertain to what extent 
damage to visuospatial representations themselves in subjects with hemispatial 

328
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
neglect contributes to alteration of the scaling constant and the exponent. If att en-
tional impairment diff erentially aff ects atypical stimuli (stimuli peripheral to the 
centroid of the att ractor basin), perhaps by reducing signal-to-noise ratio, then one 
would expect reduction in the exponent of the power law, which has been reported 
(Chatt erjee, et al., 1994; Mennemeier, et al., 2005; Mennemeier, et al., 2002). Th e 
theory propounded here is fundamentally congruent with the orientation/estima-
tion hypothesis of Mennemeier, Chatt erjee and colleagues (Mennemeier, et al., 
2005). It diff ers only in its att empt to relate behavior not just to posited neuropsy-
chological mechanisms but to underlying neural network function. 
 As discussed in the section on psychophysics and Stevens’ Power Law, att ractor 
basins may be altered in various ways by context eff ects. Marshall, Lazar, Krakauer, 
& Sharma (1998)performed an interesting experiment on context eff ects on line 
bisection by subjects with neglect that rather directly tests the central tenets of the 
theory proposed here. Th ey had subjects bisect lines of various lengths alone and 
subsequently admixed with an equal number of “reference lines” of a single length. 
Bisection of an isolated line is guided solely by knowledge acquired through experi-
ence (which defi nes the att ractor basin dimensions and location of the centroid), 
perverted of course by the impact of the att entional gradient. However, recent or 
concurrent experience can transiently alter the dimensions of a basin. Th e voice of 
a soft -spoken companion may seem barely audible during or immediately aft er the 
rock concert but overloud in the confi nes of a quiet apartment. Repeated recent 
experience with a shorter line would tend to push the longer bisection target to 
the long side of the centroid and potentiate rightward bisection errors. Repeated 
recent experience with a longer line should shift  a short bisection target to the short 
side of the centroid, reduce rightward bisection errors, and potentiate crossover. 
Th is is exactly what Marshall and colleagues observed.Ricci & Chatt erjee (2001) 
replicated these results. Th ey also showed that the crossover eff ect is not purely a 
context eff ect—it is seen only with absolutely short lines and not simply relatively 
short lines. Th is fi nding fully accords with the theory developed here: the crossover 
eff ect is founded in att ractor basin properties, which refl ect a lifetime of knowledge 
gained of experience, and therefore is only somewhat susceptible to the eff ects of 
recent experience. 
 Cueing, e.g., by having subjects place the pencil point at one end of a line before 
bisecting it, would be expected to reduce the att entional gradient (e.g., left  cue-
ing in subjects with left  hemispatial neglect) or increase the att entional gradient 
(e.g., right cueing in subjects with left  hemispatial neglect). If this eff ect is mul-
tiplicative, the impact of cueing would be expected to be substantial in subjects 
with large baseline gradients and small in those with minimal gradients (e.g., nor-
mal subjects). Both hypotheses have been supported (Mennemeier, et al., 2005). 
Similar eff ects were seen on the magnitude of the crossover eff ect in subjects with 
left  hemispatial neglect. In experiments in which subjects observe a line for a 
period of time and then bisect an imaginary line of similar length starting at the 

Att ractor Basins
329
left  or the right end, the impact of att entional gradients on performance should 
be att enuated and performance should become predominantly a function of mag-
nitude estimation biases. All subjects should overestimate short lines, leading to 
rightward errors when starting from the left  and left ward errors when starting 
from the right. All subjects should underestimate long lines (leading to left ward 
errors when starting from the left  and rightward errors when staring from the 
right. Th ese eff ects should be exaggerated in subjects with reduced att ractor basin 
breadth, e.g., those with left  hemispatial neglect. Th ese predictions have also been 
substantially born out in empirical studies (Mennemeier, et al., 2005).  
  Conclusion  
 Concept representations likely have a major infl uence on all processes involv-
ing the cerebral cortex, whether they involve traditional knowledge domains 
such as semantics, or domains perhaps viewed heretofore as entirely perceptual 
and/or att entional, such as magnitude estimation and line bisection. Research 
on PDP models over the past 30 years has revolutionized our understanding of 
the neural network basis of concept representations. Wedding this research to 
cognitive neuropsychological studies of subjects with language disorders has 
been instrumental to our current understanding of the key role played by autoas-
sociator networks and associated att ractor basin and att ractor trench dynamics, 
and most particularly, to appreciation of the particular importance of atypi-
cality and frequency in defi ning robustness of knowledge and the patt erns of 
performance breakdown in normal and brain-injured subjects. Th e fundamen-
tally PDP nature of neural networks confers the enormous power to assemble 
continuous knowledge domains from series of individual experiences, but this 
comes at a cost: knowledge around the edges (high atypicality, low frequency) 
is fragile and susceptible to systematic distortions. In this chapter, I have tried to 
show that the approach taken here, inspired by discoveries involving language, 
has considerable explanatory value in relating magnitude estimation and hemis-
patial neglect to neural network behavior and considerable power to explain the 
results of empirical studies. Th e results provide substantial evidence that this 
approach has broad applicability to processes based in association cortices and 
off ers a powerful means for strengthening the dialectic between behavioral stud-
ies and principles of neural network function.    
 Notes 
 
 1 .  A quasi-regular domain is a domain that corresponds to two or more closely related entities. 
Dogs constitute a quasi-regular domain because, while we would all agree on what a dog is, 
there is enormous variability in the range of characteristics that defi ne diff erent breeds of 
dogs. In contrast, for most of us, zebras constitute a regular domain. 

330
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 
 2 .  Th is defi nition of typicality might seem to be dangerously close to frequency, and certainly 
typicality and frequency are correlated. However, typicality, when it comes to perceptual 
domains, is bett er understood as commonality. Just as atypicality and frequency can be 
uncoupled in semantics, as in the case of whales, typicality and frequency can be uncoupled 
in perception, as in the case of white noise, which characterizes nothing we live with (i.e., is 
atypical), but is a familiar and instantly recognized irritation generated by radios and televi-
sions without a signal (i.e., is frequent).     
 References 
    Algom ,  D.  , &   Marks ,  L. E.   ( 1990 ).  Range and regression, loudness scales, and loudness process-
ing:  toward a context-bound psychophysics.    Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Human 
Perception and Human Performance,  16 ,  706–727 . 
 Alvarez ,  P. , &  Squire ,  L. R. ( 1994 ).  Memory consolidation and the medial temporal lobe: a simple 
network model.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,  91 ,  7041–7045 . 
 Bauer ,  R. M. ,  Grande ,  L. , &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 2003 ).  Amnesic disorders. In K.  M. Heilman 
& E.  Valenstein (Eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology (pp.  495–573 ).  New  York :   Oxford 
University Press . 
  Beversdorf ,  D. Q. ,  Smith ,  B. W. ,  Crucian ,  G. ,  Anderson ,  J. ,  Keillor ,  J. ,  Barrett  ,  A. , et al. ( 2000 ). 
 Increased discrimination of “false memories” in autism spectrum disorder.    Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences,  97 ,  8734–8737 . 
 Bozeat ,  S. , Lambon  Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Graham ,  K. S. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Wilkin ,  H. ,  Rowland ,  J. , et al. 
( 2003 ).  A duck with four legs: investigating the structure of conceptual knowledge using 
picture drawing in semantic dementia.  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  20 ,  27–47 . 
 Butt er ,  C. M. ,  Mark ,  V. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1989 ).  An experimental analysis of factors underlying 
neglect in line bisection.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,  51 ,  1581–1583 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 1995 ).  Cross-over, completion and confabulation in unilateral spatial neglect.  
 Brain,  118 ,  455–465 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Mennemeier ,  M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1994 ).  Th e psychophysical power law and 
unilateral spatial neglect.  Brain and Cognition,  25 ,  92–107 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Ricci ,  R. , &  Calhoun ,  J. ( 2000 ).  Weighing the evidence for cross over in neglect. 
 Neuropsychologia,  38 ,  1390–1397 . 
  Desgranges ,  B. ,  Matuszewski ,  V. ,  Piolino ,  P. ,  Chétat ,  G. ,  Mézenge ,  F. ,  Langeau ,  B. , et al. ( 2007 ). 
 Anatomical and functional alterations in semantic dementia: a voxel-based MRI and PET 
study.  Neurobiology of Aging,  28 ,  1904–1913 . 
 Devlin ,  J. T. ,  Gonnerman ,  L. M. ,  Andersen ,  E. S. , &  Seidenberg ,  M. S. ( 1998 ).  Category-specifi c 
semantic defi cits in focal and widespread brain damage: a computational account.  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience,  10 ,  77–94 . 
 Diehl ,  J. ,  Grimmer ,  T. ,  Drzezga ,  A. ,  Riemenschneider ,  M. ,  Förstl ,  H. , &  Kurz ,  A. ( 2004 ).  Cerebral 
metabolic patt erns at early stages of frontotemporal dementia and semantic dementia.  
A PET study.  Neurobiology of Aging,  25 ,  1051–1056 . 
 Geschwind ,  N. ( 1965 ).  Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man.  Brain,  88 ,  237–294 , 
 585–644 . 
   Gleick ,  J.   ( 1987 ).  Chaos :  Making a New Science. New York :  Viking . 
 Grossman ,  M. , &  Ash ,  S. ( 2004 ).  Primary progressive aphasia: a review.  Neurocase,  10 ,  3–18 . 
   Harm ,  M. W.  , &   Seidenberg ,  M. S.   ( 2004 ).  Computing the meanings of words in reading: coop-
erative division of labor between visual and phonological processes.    Psychological Review, 
 111 ,  662–720 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Watson ,  R. T. , &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 2003 ).  Neglect and related disorders. In 
K. M. Heilman & E. Valenstein (Eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology   (4th ed., pp.  296–346 ). 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 

Att ractor Basins
331
 Hinton ,  G. E. , &  Shallice ,  T. ( 1991 ).  Lesioning an att ractor network: investigations of acquired 
dyslexia.  Psychological Review,  98 ,  74–95 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ,  Graham ,  N. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 1995 ).  Charting the progression in semantic demen-
tia: implications for the organization of semantic memory.  Memory,  3 ,  463–495 . 
 Hodges ,  J. R. ,  Patt erson ,  K. ,  Oxbury ,  S. , &  Funnell ,  E. ( 1992 ).  Semantic dementia. Progressive 
fl uent aphasia with temporal-lobe atrophy.  Brain,  115 ,  1783–1806 . 
 Hollingworth ,  H. L. ( 1909 ).  Th e indiference point. In  H. L.  Hollingworth (Ed.),  Th e Inaccuracy 
of Movement.  New York :  Science Press . 
   Hovius ,  M.  ,   Kellenbach ,  M. L.  ,   Graham ,  K. S.  ,   Hodges ,  J. R.  , &   Patt erson ,  K. ( 2003 ).  what does 
the object decision task measure? Refl ections on the basis of evidence from semantic 
dementia.  Neuropsychology,  17 ,  100–107 . 
 Jewell ,  G. , & Mc Court ,  M. E. ( 1999 ).  Pseudoneglect: a review and meta-analysis of performance 
factors in line bisection tasks.  Neuropsychologia,  38  ,  93–110 . 
 Kilgard ,  M. P. , &  Merzenich ,  M. M. ( 1998 ).  Cortical map reorganization enabled by nucleus basa-
lis activity.  Science,  279 ,  1714–1718 . 
 Kiran ,  S. ( 2007 ).  Complexity in the treatment of naming disorders.  American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology,  16 ,  18–29 . 
 Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. , &  Ehsan ,  S. ( 2006 ).  Age of acquisiton eff ects depend on the mapping 
between representations and the frequency of occurrence: empirical and computational evi-
dence.  Visual Cognition,  13 ,  928–948 . 
 Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Graham ,  K. S. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 1999 ).  Is a picture worth a thousand 
words? Evidence from concept defi nitions by patients with semantic dementia.  Brain and 
Language,  70 ,  309–335 . 
 Marshall ,  R. S. ,  Lazar ,  R. M. ,  Krakauer ,  J. , &  Sharma ,  R. ( 1998 ).  Stimulus context in hemineglect.  
 Brain,  121 ,  2003–2010 . 
 McClelland ,  J. L. ,  McNaughton ,  B. L. , &  O’Reilly ,  R. C. ( 1995 ).  Why there are complementary 
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures 
of connectionist models of learning and memory.  Psychological Review,  102 ,  419–457 . 
 McClelland ,  J. L. , &  Rumelhart ,  D. E. ( 1985 ).  Distributed memory and the representation of 
general and specifi c information.    Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,  114 ,  159–188 . 
 McClelland ,  J. L. ,  Rumelhart ,  D. E. , & PDP Research Group. ( 1986 ).   Parallel Distributed 
Processing.   Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 McCourt ,  M. E. , &  Jewell ,  G. ( 1999 ).  Visuospatial att ention in line besection: stimulus modula-
tion of pseudoneglect.  Neuropsychologia,  37 ,  843–855 . 
 McRae ,  K. , De  Sa ,  V. R. , &  Seidenberg ,  M. S. ( 1997 ).  On the nature and scope of featural repre-
sentations of word meaning.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,  126 ,  99–130 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Pierce ,  C. A. ,  Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Anderson ,  B. ,  Jewell ,  G. ,  Dowler ,  R. , et al. ( 2005 ). 
 Biases in att entional orientation and magnitude estimation explain crossover: neglect is a 
disorder of both.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,  17 ,  1194–1211 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Dillon ,  M. , &  Vezey ,  E. ( 1998 ).  A search for the optimal stimu-
lus.  Brain and Cognition,  37 ,  439–459 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Rapcsak ,  S. Z. ,  Pierce ,  C. , &  Vezey ,  E. ( 2001 ).  Crossover by line length and 
spatial location.  Brain and Cognition,  47 ,  412–422 . 
 Mennemeier ,  M. ,  Vezey ,  E. ,  Lamar ,  M. , &  Jewell ,  G. ( 2002 ).  Crossover is not a consequence 
of neglect:  a test of the orientation/estimation hypothesis.  Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society,  8 ,  107–114 . 
 Milner ,  A. D. ,  Brechman ,  M. , &  Pagliarini ,  L. ( 1992 ).  To have and halve not: an analysis of line 
bisection judgments in normal subjects.  Neuropsychologia,  30 ,  515–526 . 
 Na ,  D. L. ,  Adair ,  J. C. ,  Williamson ,  D. J. ,  Schwartz ,  R. L. ,  Haws ,  B. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 1998 ). 
 Dissociation of sensory-att entional from motor-intentional neglect.  Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,  64 ,  331–338 . 
   Nadeau ,  S. E.   ( 2001 ).  Phonology: A review and proposals from a connectionist perspective.    Brain 
and Language,  79 ,  511–579 . 

332
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Neumann ,  O. , &  Niepel ,  M. ( 2004 ).  Timing of “perception” and perception of “time.” In 
 C.  Kaernbach ,  E.  Schröger &  H.  Müller (Eds.),  Psychophysics beyond Sensation. Laws 
and Invarients of Human Cognition (pp.  245–269 ).  Mahwah, NJ :   Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates . 
 Patt erson ,  K. ( 2007 ).  Th e reign of typicality in semantic memory.  Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society, B,  362 ,  813–821 . 
 Patt erson ,  K. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Jeff eries ,  E. ,  Woollams ,  A. M. ,  Jones ,  R. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , et al. 
( 2006 ).  “Presemantic” cognition in semantic dementia: six defi cits in search of an explana-
tion.   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,  18 ,  169–183 . 
 Plaut ,  D. C. ,  McClelland ,  J. L. ,  Seidenberg ,  M. S. , &  Patt erson ,  K.   ( 1996 ).  Understanding nor-
mal and impaired word reading:  computational principles in quasi-regular domains.  
 Psychological Review,  103 ,  56–115 . 
 Randall ,  B. ,  Moss ,  H. E. ,  Rodd ,  J. M. ,  Greer ,  M. , &  Tyler ,  L. K. ( 2004 ).  Distinctiveness and corre-
lation in conceptual structure: behavioral and computational studies.  Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,  30 ,  393–406 . 
 Rapcsak ,  S. Z. , &  Beeson ,  P. M. ( 2000 ).  Agraphia. In S. E.  Nadeau ,  L. J. Gonzalez Rothi & B. Crosson 
(Eds.),  Aphasia and Language. Th eory to Practice (pp.  184–220 ).  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Ricci ,  R. , &  Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2001 ).  Context and crossover in unilateral neglect.  Neuropsychologia, 
 39 ,  1138–1143 . 
 Rogers ,  T. T. ,  Ivanoiu ,  A. ,  Patt erson ,  K. , &  Hodges ,  J. R. ( 2006 ).  Semantic memory in 
Alzheimer’s disease and the frontotemporal dementias: a longitudinal study of 236 patients. 
 Neuropsychology,  20 ,  319–335 . 
  Rogers ,  T. T. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Garrard ,  P. ,  Bozeat ,  S. ,  McClelland ,  J. L. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , et al. 
( 2004 ).  Structure and deterioration of semantic memory: a neuropsychological and com-
putational investigation.  Psychological Review,  111 ,  205–235 . 
 Rogers ,  T. T. ,  Lambon Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 2004 ).  Natural selection: the 
impact of semantic impairment on lexical and object decision.  Cognitive Neuropsychology, 
 21 ,  331–352 . 
 Rogers ,  T. T. , & Mc Clelland ,  J. L. ( 2004 ).   Semantic Cognition. A Parallel Distributed Processing 
Approach.   Cambridge :  MIT Press . 
 Rolls ,  E. T. , &  Treves ,  A. ( 1998 ).   Neural networks and brain function.   New  York :   Oxford 
University Press . 
 Rumelhart ,  D. E. ,  Smolensky ,  P. ,  McClelland ,  J. L. , &  Hinton ,  G. E. ( 1986 ).  Schemata and 
sequential thought processes in PDP models. In  J. L.  McClelland ,  D. E.  Rumelhart & the 
PDP Research Group (Eds.),  Parallel distributed processing (Vol. 2, pp.  7–57 ).  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press . 
   Sarris ,  V.   ( 2004 ).  Frame of reference models in psychophysics: a perceptual-cognitive approach.  
In C.   Kaernbach ,  E.   Schröger & H. Müller (Eds.),   Psychophysics behond Sensation. Laws and 
Invariants of Human Cognition (pp.  69–88 ).  Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
 Sarter ,  M. , &  Bruno ,  J. P. ( 1997 ).  Cognitive functions of cortical acetylcholine: Toward a unifying 
hypothesis.  Brain Research Reviews,  23 ,  28–46 . 
 Sartori ,  G. , &  Job ,  R. ( 1988 ).  Th e oyster with four legs: a neuropsychological study on the interac-
tion of visual and semantic information.  Cognitive Neuropsychology,  5 ,  105–132 . 
 Seidenberg ,  M. S. , &  McClelland ,  J. L. ( 1989 ).  A distributed, developmental model of word rec-
ognition and naming.  Psychological Review,  96 ,  523–568 . 
 Shallice ,  T. ( 1988 ).   From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure.   Cambridge :   Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Squire ,  L. R. , &  Zola-Morgan ,  S. ( 1991 ).  Th e medial temporal lobe memory system.    Science,  253 , 
 1380–1386 . 
 Stevens ,  S. S. ( 1957 ).  On the psychophysical law.  Psychological Review,  64 ,  153–181 . 
 Stevens ,  S. S. ( 1970 ).  Neural events and the psychophysical law.  Science,  170 ,  1043–1050 . 
 Tegnér ,  R. , &  Levander ,  M. ( 1991 ).  Th e infl uence of stimulus properties on visual neglect.    Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,  54 ,  882–887 . 

Att ractor Basins
333
 Warrington ,  E. K. ( 1975 ).  Th e selective impairment of semantic memory.    Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology,  27 ,  635–657 . 
 Warrington ,  E. K. , &  Shallice ,  T. ( 1984 ).  Category specifi c semantic impairments.  Brain,  107 , 
 829–854 . 
   Werth ,  R.  , &   Pöppel ,  E.   ( 1988 ).  Compression and lateral shift  of mental coordinate systems in a 
line bisection task.  Neuropsychologia,  26 ,  741–745 . 
 Woollams ,  A. M. ,  Cooper-Pye ,  E. ,  Hodges ,  J. R. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 2008 ).  Anomia: a doubly typi-
cal signature of semantic dementia.  Neuropsychologia,  46 ,  2503–2514 . 
 Woollams ,  A. M. , Lambon  Ralph ,  M. A. ,  Plaut ,  D. C. , &  Patt erson ,  K. ( 2007 ).  SD-squared: on 
the association between semantic dementia and surfact dyslexia.    Psychological Review,  114 , 
 316–339 . 
   Worth ,  R.  , &   Poppel ,  E.   ( 1988 ).  Compression and lateral shift  of mental coordinate system in a 
line bisection task.  Neuropsychologia,  26 ,  741–745 .  

334
 C H A P T E R  16 
 Plasticity
  
 Victor W.   Mark  
 Introduction 
 In recent years clinical studies that have stop imputed neurologic plasticity, or 
neuroplasticity, have become rampant. Th e topic has cachet in both the scientifi c 
literature and the popular press, 1  in reaction to the long held but now diminishing 
perception that the adult central nervous system (CNS) is either incapable or at 
best minimally capable of intrinsic modifi cation and repair. Th e original reasons 
for such an infl exible and pessimistic view of the nervous system were never clear. 
Aft er all, adults routinely learn new names, games, faces of colleagues, routes to 
work, and motor skills such as using chopsticks. Indeed, it has long been recog-
nized that with advancing age adults signifi cantly improve their vocabulary. 2 
Given that an adult’’s skills can improve with practice in so many ways, how could 
such phenomena possibly occur except from substantial modifi cation of the ner-
vous system? Furthermore, in view of the considerable learning that can occur 
in healthy adults—albeit with less effi  ciency than in juveniles and children—it 
is surprising that such a faculty was long considered beyond the reach of indi-
viduals who had become disabled by acute brain injury, despite their oft en show-
ing gradually relearned neurologic functions such as speech or walking during 
inpatient rehabilitation. Indeed, this author has found that some of his physical 
and occupational therapy co-workers would routinely reject the pleas of stroke 
patients to be hospitalized to train their motor defi cits if they had been more than 
a month post-injury, even if they had never had a rehabilitation trial in the fi rst 
place. Th e explanation given was that they would likely be too set in their oft en 
maladaptive ways to benefi t. (No credible citations were provided upon request 
to support these denials of care.) 
 However, considerable experimental work in the past several decades demon-
strates that the adult human is indeed capable of substantial neuroplasticity and 

Plasticity
335
moreover that this can be harnessed for functional benefi t following disabling 
neurologic illness. Th is chapter will review the historical background that, fi rst, 
undermined confi dence in adult neuroplastic reorganization and, second, sup-
ported its occurrence. However, before reviewing the foundations and extent of 
our modern understanding, fi rst a clarifi cation for how the term ““plasticity”“ will 
be used. 
 Th e term plasticity is widely used imprecisely and inconsistently. 3, 4 It has 
been applied to diverse phenomena that included behavioral changes without 
specifying their neurobiological substrates, alterations in synaptic conductivity, 
diff erences in regional brain activation either between clinical populations or lon-
gitudinally within individuals following specifi c interventions, or use-dependent 
CNS morphological changes identifi ed from either microscopic or  in vivo neuro-
imaging investigations. Because this chapter describes neurobiological changes 
that are impressive and contrary to the standard wisdom concerning the infl ex-
ibility of the nervous system, particularly in adult humans, the emphasis will be 
on anatomically large-scale changes in CNS activity or structure. Furthermore, 
we will specify such changes in the adult and particularly following a considerable 
change in the individual’’s experiences, either as a result of training or reduction 
in activity. Th is is termed  use-dependent plasticity . Such anatomically described 
physiologic or structural changes, moreover, should  persist (if not permanently) 
aft er the termination of the change in activity . 5 Th ese neuroplastic changes thus 
are enduring rather than elastic. 
 Th e case for neurological stasis in the adult 
 In the neurological literature one seldom fi nds an overt declaration that the adult 
CNS cannot or does not change with experience. And yet, over and over, litera-
ture reviews have indicated that this was the common understanding for much of 
the 20th century. 4, 6–10 In retrospect the situation resembles an unverifi ed rumor, 
one that ““everybody knew”“ but which nonetheless was seldom put into writ-
ing and supported by credible citations. Here and there, though, one may fi nd 
such intimations. For example, in the fi rst edition of the venerable Adams and 
Victor text  Principles of Neurology,  one reads without att ribution that aft er the 
onset of disabling stroke, ““whatever motor paralysis remains aft er 5 to 6 months 
will probably be permanent.”“ 11 A similarly bleak forecast appears in Church and 
Peterson’’s text. 12 Such statements were probably correct with regard to standard 
care in the 20th century. Th ey also implied an inalterable hopelessness that, com-
ing from major textbooks, likely discouraged serious academic challenge. Such 
was the case despite numerous reports across the fi rst part of the century that 
indicated the substantial malleability of hemiparesis in humans that could fol-
low various interventions. 13–17 Apparently, such studies escaped common notice 

336
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
or their methods and outcomes were so unorthodox as not to merit consideration. 
Ruch and Fulton’’s physiology text at least acknowledged that hemiplegia could 
improve with training, but only as a result of compensatory actions by ““unaf-
fected”“ muscles and not through any neurological repair. 18 Again, no citations 
were provided. Other general neurological texts from the 20th century simply 
avoided discussing altogether the patt erns or prospects for neurologic recovery 
aft er CNS injury. Th is practice was in keeping with the emphasis of much of 
medicine at the time, which was devoted to the manifestations, pathobiological 
bases, and management of acute illness, but had litt le or nothing to say about the 
long-term consequences of disease. So dismal was the situation that neurologists 
were mocked with the slogan ““diagnose and  adios ”“,”“ to indicate that their prac-
tical skills were of litt le value. 
 Th e 20th century Zeitgeist that discredited neurologic remodeling, repair 
and recovery in the adult probably arose not from one particular infl uence but 
instead from the cumulative contributions of a variety of investigations that 
appeared to cohere to and thus reinforce this view. Th e following sources most 
likely contributed: 
 1)  Th e functional mapping of the cerebral cortex was largely inaugurated by the 
studies of Paul Broca, French neuroanatomist and anthropologist who in the 
1860s posited that the left  third frontal convolution is the ““seat”“ of articulate 
language, following his seminal post-mortem investigation of the chronically 
aphasic inpatient ““Tan.”“ 19 Broca did not comment on the capacity for apha-
sia to recover, and therefore in the assault on neuroplasticity he is blameless. 
(Indeed, it has been noted that Broca had ascribed the diff erences in head cir-
cumferences between medical students and nurses to their diff erent amounts 
of training! 20 ) However, Broca’’s publications inspired a new viewpoint, which 
held that from localizing sharply demarcated and solitary cerebral injuries in 
adults in regard to their subsequent eff ects on specifi c neurologic functions, 
one could establish a cartography of normal cognitive function in the nervous 
system. Following similarly meticulous clinicopathological investigations of 
subsequent European investigators, a veritable patchwork quilt of neurologic 
functions became stitched onto the cerebral cortex (notable examples are 
reviewed by Heidi Roth in this volume). Th us, one inferred that the functions 
that were mapped from the lesion technique represented a fi xed and predict-
able arrangement for all humans, 21 regardless of potentially modifying factors 
(e.g., level of education, handedness, cultural background, or history of prior 
neurologic injury). 
 Th is mapping of functions to structure was reinforced in the early 20th cen-
tury by the  in vivo cortical stimulation research of the American neurosurgeon 
Harvey Cushing, who determined in humans that a narrow vertical motor strip 

Plasticity
337
lies immediately anterior to the Rolandic fi ssure and a similarly narrow somato-
sensory strip just behind it. In artistry that presaged the conservative vs. liberal 
contrasts of latt er-day American politics, Cushing colored the motor area red 
and the somatosensory area blue, and the twain did not overlap. Th is conven-
tion thereaft er became the norm in neurosurgery textbooks. Th e simplifi cation 
withstood the contemporary challenges by other investigators that indicated a 
substantial anatomical overlap between motor and somatosensory areas in the 
human cerebral cortex. 22 Finally, yet another milestone in the history of human 
brain mapping came with the surgical investigations of Wilder Penfi eld. While at 
Montreal, Penfi eld determined that Cushing’’s sensory and motor cortices could 
be subdivided into respective “homunculi,” miniature inverted mannequins 
draped along the brain’’s lateral convexity that elongated parts of the body as if 
seen in a funhouse mirror, in proportion to their contribution to either tactile res-
olution or precision movements. 23 Penfi eld himself was blameless in the popular 
promulgation of a fi xed correspondence between structure and function, aware as 
he was not only of the considerable inter-individual variation in the somatotopi-
cal charts that were derived from cortical stimulation studies, but also that such 
mapping could change  within the individual from pre- to post-surgery. 24 (Later 
research showed that the homunculus could change simply by inducing transient 
ischemia to the arm. 25 ) Nonetheless, so persuasive were the graphic depictions of 
the mapmakers that by the mid-20th century the conventional teaching held that 
cerebral real estate comprised a motley arrangement of multiple, non-overlapping 
functional districts segregated by infl exible boundaries, corresponding to spe-
cifi c cognitive and perceptual abilities or somatosensory and motor somatotopi-
cal maps, despite contemporary reports indicating that such infl exibility and 
non-overlap were not the rule. 
 2)  Doubt for the existence or functional value of cerebral regeneration. Th e Spanish 
Nobel Prize laureate and histologist Santiago Ramón y Cajal initially held that 
the adult CNS does not undergo plastic reorganization. Cajal, whose micro-
scopic investigations established that the neuron is the fundamental cellular 
unit of the nervous system, 26 determined that sectioned peripheral nerves 
could regenerate. He agreed with the orthodox view at the time among histol-
ogists that regeneration within the adult CNS was not possible. However, his 
later research suggested to him that post-injury axonal sprouting could occur 
within the adult CNS but had no adaptive value. 27 However, Cajal also specu-
lated that use-dependent axonal and dendritic sprouting could be fundamen-
tal to normal cognitive maturation, although such changes would diminish 
during the lifespan of the individual. 28 In retrospect, Cajal’’s bivalent views 
on structural neuroplasticity are confusing, 27 and later investigators either did 
not appreciate or disregarded his diverse opinions on the existence and value 
of post-natal CNS structural plasticity. 29 

338
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 3)  Th e concept of a  critical period for plastic reorganization became established 
in the 20th century. Among its prominent contributors was the Yale experi-
mental neuroscientist Margaret Kennard. Her research in the 1930s-1940s on 
monkeys found that recovery of motor function aft er focal cortical ablation 
was greater in infants than in adults, 30 which became known as the ““Kennard 
principle.”“ Subsequent research by other investigators doubted the general 
consistency or validity of this principle. 31-33 Nonetheless, the basic theory, 
while not excluding use-dependent relearning in brain-injured adults, has 
considerably infl uenced experimental and clinical opinion to the present day 
concerning the relative abilities of adults vs. children to recover from acute 
brain injury 34 and thus may have dampened optimism for functional recovery 
aft er CNS injury in adults. In contrast, however, as a kind of anti-Kennard 
principle, the Nobel Prize-winning work of the Harvard visual system neu-
robiologists David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel in the 1960s-1970s found that 
the temporary deprivation of light input to one eye of kitt ens at a certain age 
would more likely cause permanent degeneration along the associated visual 
pathway and depressed physiologic responsiveness of associated visual cor-
tical areas, compared to older cats treated the same way. 35 Th is fi nding con-
siderably discouraged later investigators from any hope for use-dependent 
functional recovery following permanent CNS injury. 10 
 4)  Disbelief in post-natal neurogenesis. Early in the 20th century Cajal had 
declared that neurogenesis does not occur in the adult mammalian brain. 4 
Th is pessimism was reinforced decades later by the failure of Pasko Rakic at 
Yale University in the 1980s to fi nd evidence for cerebral neurogenesis in adult 
monkeys, despite numerous att empts. 36, 37 So persuasive were these negative 
fi ndings, and Rakic’’s infl uence, that earlier positive fi ndings of other neuro-
scientists were widely disregarded. 38-40 
 Th e turning of the tide: investigations in support 
of adult neuroplasticity 
 Although a surge in research interest in neurologic plasticity occurred in the 
fi nal third of the 20th century (summarized below) and continues to the pres-
ent, numerous historical reviews indicate that speculation on CNS plasticity 
in the adult extended as far back as late in the 19th century, including discus-
sions by William James, Eugenio Tanzi, and Ernest Lugaro, among others. 5, 41, 
42 However, the pivotal 20th century fi gure in inspiring wide acceptance for 
plastic reorganization in the brain was the Canadian experimental psycholo-
gist Donald Hebb of Dalhousie University. Hebb was impressed by anatomical 
reports of fi ber tract loops in the brain, which led him to suggest that neuro-
nal signals could be amplifi ed in physiological feedback loops and thus could 

Plasticity
339
maintain a percept aft er removal of the original stimulus. 43 Th is foundation 
inspired Hebb’’s landmark 1949 text  Th e Organization of Behavior, 44 which pos-
tulated that ““cell assemblies”“ exist in the brain that are fundamental for learn-
ing specifi c associations between stimuli. Neuronal assemblies that initially 
were tapped to process a particular stimulus were subsequently reinforced to 
strengthen their activations. Such neural enhancement occurred either mor-
phologically by synaptic growth or physiologically by changing the effi  cacy of 
synaptic conduction. In turn, such enhanced neural activity could allow the 
generalization of percepts following exposure to a restricted set of stimuli (e.g., 
recognizing that geometric shapes diff ering only in size are essentially the same 
shape) without requiring the burdensome recruitment of additional neurons 
for every diff erent stimulus encountered. 
 For much of the mid-20th century, learning was widely considered to occur 
through such postulated excitatory synaptic activation. Later modifi cations in 
the theory for a synaptic basis for learning invoked inhibitory synapses in neural 
circuitry as well. Subsequent empirical fi ndings on longterm potentiation were 
consistent with Hebb’’s hypotheses. 45 
 At Berkeley in the 1960s, Mark Rosenzweig, Edward Bennett , and colleague s 
showed that immersion of rats in spatially challenging environments could 
increase brain mass, even with exposure confi ned to adulthood. 9 Th e increased 
brain mass that followed training coincided with increased cholinesterase but 
reduced acetylcholinesterase activity per unit volume of cortex. Th is observation 
suggested to these investigators that the histological changes were from elements 
low in acetylcholine, including non-cholinergic neurons, glia, and blood vessels. 20 
Structural changes from exposure to such enriched environments were later 
shown to include thickened occipital cortex, gliosis, synaptogenesis, dendritic 
arborization, 46 and even new neurons in the hippocampus. 47 
 A major impetus to the study of experience-dependent adult neuroplasticity 
was the plethora of somatotopic cortical mapping studies in the late 20th cen-
tury performed in rats and primates following various forms of experimental 
neurologic injury or tactile training. In 1971 Patrick Wall and M. David Egger at 
University College, London, reported that they had unexpectedly found that the 
thalamic somatotopic map in rats had remarkably changed several days to weeks 
aft er unilateral nucleus gracilis ablation, such that the forelimb representation had 
expanded and invaded the territory formerly inhabited by the now deaff erented 
hindlimb. 48 Subsequently, Michael Merzenich and colleagues at the University of 
California at San Francisco and John Donoghue and Jerome Sanes and colleagues 
at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Brown University commenced a 
large series of studies in monkeys and rats on the changes in somatotopical sensory 
maps within the brain following manipulations such as peripheral denervation, 
digit amputation, surgical fusion of digits, and practice at tactile discrimination 
(summarized in Mark and Taub 49 ). 

340
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Th ese basic neuroscience studies set the stage for non-invasive investigations 
of use-dependent neuroplasticity in humans. Alon Mogilner and colleagues at 
New York University in 1993 demonstrated with magnetoencephalography the 
individuation of the receptive fi elds of the fi ngers on one hand following the sur-
gical relief of congenital syndactyly (fusion of the fi ngers). 50  At the same time, 
Alvaro Pascual-Leone and Fernando Torres at the NIH found signifi cantly 
enlarged digital maps overlying somatosensory cortex based on evoked poten-
tial recordings when stimulating the scanning fi ngers of blind individuals who 
were profi cient with reading Braille, compared to the fi ngers of the opposite hand 
and the hands of control subjects. 51 Th ese and numerous other clinical studies 
that followed established that use-dependent changes in somatosensory func-
tion in humans could be identifi ed by using various forms of non-invasive cortical 
mapping. 
 Further advances soon followed that indicated that effi  cacious physical ther-
apy for chronic post-stroke hemiparesis was associated with signifi cantly changed 
cortical motor representations of the paretic hand. Th ese studies, based on the 
work of Edward Taub of the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and 
affi  liated laboratories, utilized Constraint-Induced Movement therapy (CI ther-
apy), a treatment developed by Taub that promotes sustained improved use of a 
chronically hemiparetic extremity. 52 In the late 1990s several studies from this 
group showed that CI therapy signifi cantly alters hand representations based 
on neuroelectric source localization and transcranial magnetic stimulation 
mapping. 53–55 
 While the foregoing studies used various physiologic imaging methods, 
advances in quantitative  structural in vivo neuroimaging on MRI have further 
supported the idea of use-dependent neuroplasticity. Early in the present cen-
tury studies that used voxel-based morphometry from quantitative structural 
MRI suggested that the brain’’s grey matt er can increase in healthy individuals 
with activities such as profi cient taxi driving, juggling, and studying for exami-
nations. 56-58  Work by our laboratory at UAB extended these structural discover-
ies for the fi rst time to stroke patients, fi nding that grey matt er can signifi cantly 
increase in bilateral sensorimotor cortices and the hippocampi aft er only 2 weeks 
of CI therapy. 59 Th e histologic basis for such use-dependent changes in humans 
has not yet been established. Candidates include angiogenesis, gliosis, dendritic 
arborization, and possibly even neuronal mitosis (i.e., neurogenesis). 60 
 Aft er considerable debate, late in the 20th century the scientifi c consensus 
fi nally accepted that neural progenitor cells (sometimes termed stem cells) can 
undergo mitosis in the cerebrum of human adults. Th is consensus was based on a 
post-mortem study of terminally ill cancer patients who had undergone the ante-
mortem infusion of bromodeoxyuridine, a thymidine analog that labels dividing 
cells with an immunofl uorescent marker. 61 Th us far, neuronal generation in the 
adult mammalian CNS has been found only in the hippocampus, the olfactory 

Plasticity
341
bulb, 62 and the spinal cord. 63  Although use-dependent neurogenesis has not so far 
been confi rmed in humans  in vivo , 64 recent MRI research indicates that exercise 
in humans can augment regional cerebral blood fl ow in the adult human dentate 
gyrus, which would be expected to occur following the induction of focal neuro-
genesis and angiogenesis. 65 Th erefore, we may not be far from having the  in vivo 
confi rmation of use-dependent focal neurogenesis in adult humans. 
 Implications of neuroplasticity for understanding 
the neurologically-impaired individual 
 Th e foregoing fi ndings imply that the human CNS is constantly modifi ed in 
response to persisting environmental or internal challenges, changes, or pressures. 
In this way it behaves like other ““systems”“ of the natural world, such as ecosys-
tems (e.g., populations’’ gene pools changing following environmental upheavals) 
or the solar system (e.g., the orbit of a body becoming thrown off  course by the 
close approach of another, massive body). Furthermore, spontaneous modifi ca-
tions in the adult CNS can be functionally adaptive. For example, the brain’’s plas-
ticity can mitigate the damaging eff ects of a large cerebral infarction. Th us, Marcel 
Kinsbourne showed in 1971 that the speech of adults with aphasia following left  
cerebral infarction became much worse by transient inactivation of the right hemi-
sphere with intracarotid sodium amobarbital. Th is suggested that the right hemi-
sphere had compensated for acute language impairment prior to the barbiturate 
infusion. 66 In another example, functional imaging research by Maurizio Corbett a 
and colleagues showed that left  unilateral spatial neglect in humans aft er right 
cerebral infarction was initially associated with relative left  hemispheric overac-
tivity during spatial tasks. 67 However, aft er several months this interhemispheric 
functional asymmetry was signifi cantly reduced during the same tasks, coinciding 
with reduced spatial neglect. Th us, the fi ndings suggested that the spontaneous 
anatomical shift  over time in the activation of surviving brain regions that medi-
ated directional spatial att ention could ameliorate acute spatial neglect. In still 
another example, recent fi ndings from our laboratory at UAB have demonstrated 
that  chronic cerebral infarction size does not predict the severity of motor defi cits 
in patients, in contrast to the majority of studies that report that  acute infarction 
size  does predict concurrent clinical status. 68 We postulate that long-term reorga-
nization in the surviving CNS permits at least partial recovery from the initially 
damaging volumetric eff ects of acute cerebrovascular injury. 
 Th e ameliorating eff ects of neuroplastic reorganization following CNS disease 
may be maximal when the spatial extent of a focal illness progresses slowly over 
an extended period. Neurologists commonly recognize that slowly growing brain 
tumors are either clinically silent or at least subdued compared to acute infarc-
tions at the same location and size. 21, 69  A recent study of a right-handed man with 

342
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
a progressive left  frontotemporal glioma demonstrated a gradual shift  of meta-
bolic activity over several years toward the right hemisphere with only minimal 
eff ects on language. 70 Th is suggests that intact parts of the brain when given 
enough time can functionally compensate for the eff ects of focal chronic injury, 
perhaps through unmasking previously suppressed functions. Th e spinal cord in 
humans similarly adapts to slowly compressive lesions. 71 
 However, not all neuroplastic responses are adaptive. For example, acute spi-
nal cord injury can gradually induce severe, enduring, and spontaneous electric 
shock-like sensations in the dermatomes aff ected by the level of injury. Th e mecha-
nism of such ““neuropathic pain”“ is not well understood but is currently believed 
to refl ect the disinhibition or over-excitation of pain-associated pathways from 
the site of injury. 72 Th e delayed appearance and progression of limb hypertonia, 
or spasticity, can involve severe and very disabling fl exor spasms triggered by mild 
tactile stimulation and oft en follows paralyzing acute, congenital, or degenerative 
CNS injury (e.g., stroke, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy, 
multiple sclerosis 73 ). Spasticity, at least following acute CNS injury, is believed 
to refl ect neuroplastic reorganization of refl ex pathways. 74 Within the same indi-
vidual, spasticity can even be both adaptive and maladaptive. Th us, spasticity fol-
lowing hemiparetic stroke can help to stabilize the paretic leg during walking and 
transfers, while at the same time its involvement in the ipsilateral upper extrem-
ity can hinder functional activities. 75 Another disorder that suggests maladaptive 
plasticity is chronic tinnitus (the noxious experience of a constant high-pitched 
auditory tone, or ““ringing in the ears”“), which is associated with tonotopic 
remapping of the auditory cortex in humans. 76 Th e mechanism that incites tin-
nitus and such reorganization is not understood. Recent research suggests that 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to the temporal cortex can amelio-
rate the symptom. 77 Finally, numerous reports have indicated that in professional 
musicians, focal hand dystonia (the inability of the main performing hand to play 
a specialty instrument) is associated on magnetoencephalography with signifi -
cantly altered somatosensory maps of the digits of the aff ected hand compared 
to the opposite hand. 78 Th is is believed to result from overuse of the perform-
ing hand. Such maps in turn can be normalized by a controlled therapeutic pro-
gram of individuated fi nger exercises over an extended period, with simultaneous 
improvement of the dystonia. 78 
 Th us, neuroplastic responses to CNS injury or illness can either be ameliora-
tive or detrimental . It is unclear why biological processes that repair neurologi-
cal injury may in many instances (particularly aft er spinal cord injury) extend 
suff ering and thus inhibit functional activities. It seems that such responses lack 
suffi  cient feedback to adjust the strength or quality of their reparative processes. 
In this way, neuroplastic responses are like autoimmune responses, which can 
control somatic infections but can also have punishing eff ects when they fail 
to distinguish between intruders and one’’s own tissues, as for example when 

Plasticity
343
Guillain-Barré syndrome follows bacterial or viral exposure. 79 Another example 
is scar formation in the skin, which for minor penetrating injuries conveniently 
excludes infection or toxins, but aft er more severe injuries such as extensive burns 
can lead to disabling contractures. 80 
 As the above examples from tinnitus and performance dystonia suggest, 
however, therapists can directly harness neuroplastic mechanisms to improve 
function in the neurologically impaired individual. As a result, illnesses or condi-
tions that formerly were thought to have litt le prospect for clinical improvement 
at the hands of therapists have instead been shown to respond favorably to spe-
cifi c practice regimens. As noted above, post-stroke hemiparesis, at least if it is 
mild or moderate, can signifi cantly improve with one such approach, CI therapy. 
Similarly, an adaptation of CI therapy (Constraint-Induced Aphasia Th erapy) has 
been repeatedly shown to improve speech output in individuals with chronic, pri-
marily expressive aphasia. 81 Unexpectedly, such treatment can also benefi t  recep-
tive  language skills, through a process that has yet to be understood. Studies that 
used a variety of functional brain imaging techniques have preliminarily identi-
fi ed signifi cantly altered regional brain activation following this treatment. 82-84 
Another therapy for aphasia, Melodic Intonation Th erapy, has been associated 
with increased fi ber bundle counts in the arcuate fasciculus as evaluated by diff u-
sion tensor imaging, 85 thus suggesting that effi  cacious aphasia rehabilitation can 
promote structural neuroplastic changes. 
 Another promising intervention is prism adaptation training for left  spatial 
neglect, which involves practicing reaching while wearing goggles that shift  the 
subject’’s view 10-15 °  to the right. Such training over approximately 10-15 ses-
sions over a few weeks can be followed by signifi cantly reduced spatial neglect 
on laboratory measures for as long as 1 year, 86 although functional carryover to 
real-world activities has thus far been litt le evaluated, and results have not been 
consistent. 87  Nonetheless, functional brain imaging studies indicate signifi cant 
alterations in regional brain activity following this training in neurologically 
impaired as well as healthy subjects. 88, 89 
 Further innovations in cognitive rehabilitation have recently been shown in 
community-living, generally healthy elders who have undergone visual speed of 
processing training. Normal aging includes a constriction of the ““useful fi eld of 
view”“ (UFOV), 90 which is the region of the visual fi eld from which salient infor-
mation is effi  ciently extracted against clutt ered backgrounds. Extracting this infor-
mation is particularly diffi  cult when rapidly judging simultaneous central and 
peripheral transient events. 91 Th e UFOV is measured with a tachistoscopic test 
on a touchscreen on which subjects must touch the location of a briefl y presented 
peripheral target and verbally identify a simultaneous briefl y shown central silhou-
ett e. ’’’’Not surprising, a reduced UFOV predicts traffi  c accidents by drivers. 92  
 However, training to improve the UFOV through repetitive practice on the 
test can signifi cantly reduce dangerous driving maneuvers, with benefi ts lasting 

344
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
as long as 18 months following the few weeks of training. 93, 94 Although as of this 
writing no studies have evaluated neuroplastic responses to UFOV training, 
recent fi ndings in traumatic brain injury indicate that other forms of visual att en-
tion training are accompanied by elevated metabolic activity in the anterior cin-
gulate and precuneus areas. 95 UFOV training may induce similar changes. Th e 
UFOV treatment results represent another instance where cognitive remediation 
has lasting improvements that can transfer to the real life situation, as a result of 
neuroplastic reorganization. Th e old dog can learn new tricks. 
 However, despite the enthusiastic reception for demonstrations of neuro-
plastic responses to disease or treatment, one must cautiously interpret the evi-
dence. It has become very common to evaluate neuroplastic changes in the brain 
with functional neuroimaging techniques, particularly fMRI or PET scanning. 
Th ese methods generally require the participant to perform a specifi c task (such 
as moving the paretic hand repetitively to a metronome) while being scanned. 
Th e associated regional cerebral metabolic profi le is then compared either to 
diff erent clinical populations or longitudinally within individuals from pre- to 
post-intervention. 
 Th e approach is problematic for a few reasons. First, it requires the coopera-
tion of an individual who may be markedly impaired in the specifi c function of 
interest. Consequently, the procedure risks considerable diffi  culty with subject 
compliance or the reliable and repeated elicitation of the precise activity that is 
required, and thus may engender highly variable responses. 96 Second, the tech-
nique does not exclude the functional imaging eff ects from possible changes in 
the ways subjects actually undertake the task following an intervention. 97 Th us, 
if over the course of time a research subject adopts a diff erent approach to the 
particular task for any reason, the regional patt ern of metabolic activation could 
change without strictly requiring an associated physiologic or histologic struc-
tural change. To no surprise functional imaging studies of CI therapy aft er stroke 
show enormous inconsistency among subjects, complicating the understanding 
of training-associated neuroplasticity. 98  For these reasons, imaging methods that 
do not require the subject to perform a specifi c task, such as transcranial magnetic 
stimulation mapping, structural MRI, or resting network analyses are more reli-
able for assessing use-dependent neuroplasticity. 
 Concluding remarks 
 Th e studies of neuroplasticity teach us that the adult CNS is considerably reactive 
and adaptive, not stagnant. Th e anatomical distributions of specifi c brain func-
tions are much more fl uid than were formerly thought. Although there are prob-
able limits to the benefi cial outcomes of therapies that harness use-dependent 
plasticity, our understanding that spontaneous plastic reorganization and 

Plasticity
345
remodeling of the CNS is normal, not exceptional, and occurs even (or especially) 
aft er illness, inspires optimism for continuing to develop practice-based interven-
tions to overcome the functional limitations of chronic CNS disease. 
 In short, it is a good time to be a neurologist. 
 Literature Cited 
 1.  Buchtel  HA .  On defi ning neural plasticity .  Arch Ital Biol  1978 ; 116 : 241–247 . 
 2.  Verhaegen  P.  Aging and vocabulary scores: a meta-analysis .  Psychol Aging  2003 ; 18 : 332–339 . 
 3.  Jones  EG .  NEUROwords 8.  Plasticity and neuroplasticity [review] .  J Hist Neurosci 
 2000 ; 9 : 37–39 . 
 4.  Stahnisch  FW .  Making the brain plastic: early neuroanatomical staining techniques and the 
pursuit of structural plasticity, 1910-1970 [review] .   J Hist Neurosci  2003 ; 12 : 413–435 . 
   5.       Berlucchi   G  ,   Buchtel   HA  .  Neuronal plasticity: historical roots and evolution of meaning . 
 Exp Brain Res  2009 ; 192 : 307–319 . 
 6.  Illis  LS .  Central nervous stimulation in neurological disease [review] .  J R Soc Med 
 1983 ; 76 : 905–909 . 
 7.  Raineteau  O .  Plastic responses to spinal cord injury [review] .  Behav Brain Res 
 2008 ; 192 : 114–123 . 
 8.  Kaas  JH . Th e reorganization of sensory and motor maps in adult mammals [review]. 
In:  Gazzaniga  M , ed.   Th e Cognitive Neurosciences  .  Cambridge, Massachusett s :  MIT Press , 
 1995 :  51–71 . 
 9.  Bennett   EL ,  Diamond  MC ,  Krech  D ,  Rosenzweig MR. Chemical and anatomical plasticity 
of brain [review] .  Science  1964 ; 146 : 610–619 . 
 10.  Schwartz  JM ,  Begley  S , eds.   Th e Mind & Th e Brain  .  New York :  Harper Collins ,  2002 . 
  11.       Adams   RD  ,   Victor   M  .   Principles of Neurology  .  New York :  McGraw-Hill ,  1977 . 
 12.  Church  A ,  Peterson  F .   Nervous and Mental Diseases  , 9th ed.  Philadephia :  W.B. Saunders ,  1919 . 
  13.       Meige   H  .  Les amnésies motrices fonctionnelles et le traitement des hémiplégiques .   Rev 
Neurol (Paris)  1905 ; 13 : 183–184 . 
 14.  Franz  S ,  Scheetz  M ,  Wilson  A .  Th e possibility of recovery of motor function in long-standing 
hemiplegia .  JAMA  1915 ; 65 : 2150–2154 . 
 15.  Jelliff e  SE ,  White  WA .   Diseases of the Nervous System  . 6th ed.  Philadelphia :   Lea & 
Febiger ,  1935 . 
 16.  Ince  LP .  Escape and avoidance conditioning of response in the plegic arm of stroke 
patients: a preliminary study .   Psychon Sci  1969 ; 16 : 49–50 . 
 17.  Halberstam  JL ,  Zaretsky  HH ,  Brucker  BS ,  Gutt man  AR .  Avoidance conditioning of motor 
responses in elderly brain-damaged patients .  Arch Phys Med Rehabil  1971 ; 52 : 318–327 ,  336 . 
 18.  Ruch  TC . Th e cerebral cortex: its structure and motor functions. In:   Ruch   TC  ,   Fulton   JF  , eds. 
  Medical Physiology and Biophysics  .  Philadelphia :  W.B. Saunders Company ,  1960 :  249–276 . 
  19.       Broca   P.    Remarques sur le siège de la faculté du langage articulé, suivies d’’une observation 
d’’aphémie (perte de la parole).  Bulletin de la Société Anatomique de Paris  1861 ; 6 : 332–333 , 
 343–357 . 
 20.  Rosenzweig  M ,  Bennett    E  ,   Diamond   M  .  Brain changes in response to experience [review] . 
 Sci Am  1972 ; 226 (2): 22–29 . 
 21.  Desmurget  M ,  Bonnetblanc  F ,  Duff au  H .  Contrasting acute and slow-growing lesions: a new 
door to brain plasticity [review] .  Brain  2007 ; 130 : 898–914 . 
 22.  Uematsu  S ,  Lesser  RP ,  Gordon  B .  Localization of sensorimotor cortex: the infl uence of 
Sherrington and Cushing on the modern concept .  Neurosurgery  1992 ; 30 : 904–913 . 
 23.  Penfi eld  W ,  Boldrey  E .  Somatic motor and sensory representation in the cerebral cortex of 
man as studied by electrical stimulation .   Brain  1937 ; 60 : 389–443 . 

346
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
  24.       Schott   GD .  Penfi eld’’s homunculus:  a note on cerebral cartography [editorial] .  J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry  1993 ; 56 : 329–333 . 
 25.  Amassian  V ,  Cracco  R ,  Maccabee  P ,  Cracco  J.  Is the classical motor homunculus representa-
tion correct? [Abstract.] .  Neurology  1992 ; 42 :216. 
 26.  DeFelipe  J.  Sesquicentennary of the birthday of Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the father of mod-
ern neuroscience .  Trends Neurosci  2002 ; 25 : 481–484 . 
 27.  Stahnisch  FW ,  Nitsch  R.  Santiago Ramón y Cajal’’s concept of neuronal plasticity: the ambi-
guity lives on .  Trends Neurosci  2002 ; 25 : 589–591 . 
 28.  Jones  EG .  Santiago Ramón y Cajal and the Croonian lecture, March 1894 .  Trends Neurosci 
 1994 ; 17 : 190–192 .   
  29.       DeFelipe   J.    Brain plasticity and mental processes: Cajal again [review] .   Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2006 ; 7 : 811–817 . 
 30.  Kennard  M.  Reorganization of motor function in the cerebral cortex of monkeys deprived of 
motor and premotor areas in infancy .  J Neurophysiol  1938 ; 1 : 477–486 . 
 31.  Schneider  G.  Is it really bett er to have your brain lesion early? A revision of the ““Kennard 
Principle.”“ .  Neuropsychologia  1979 ; 17 : 557–583 . 
 32.  Passingham  R ,  Perry  V ,  Wilkinson  F .  Th e long-term eff ects of removal of sensorimotor cor-
tex in infant and adult rhesus monkeys .   Brain  1983 ; 106 : 675–705 . 
 33.  Duval  J ,  Braun  CM ,  Montour-Proulx  I ,  Daigneault  S ,  Rouleau  I ,  Bégin  J .  Brain lesions and 
IQ: recovery versus decline depends on age of onset .   J Child Neurol  2008 ; 23 : 663–668 . 
 34.  Johnson  DA ,  Rose  FD ,  Brooks  BM ,  Eyers  S .  Age and recovery from brain injury: legal opin-
ions, clinical beliefs and experimental evidence .  Pediatr Rehabil  2003 ; 6 : 103–109 . 
 35.  Hubel  D ,  Wiesel  T .  Th e period of susceptibility to the physiological eff ects of unilateral eye 
closure in kitt ens .  J Physiol  1970 ; 206 : 419–436 . 
  36.       Rakic   P  .  DNA synthesis and cell division in the adult primate brain .   Ann NY Acad Sci 
 1985 ; 457 : 193–211 . 
 37.  Rakic  P .  Limits of neurogenesis in primates .  Science  1985 ; 227 : 1054 – 1056 . 
 38.  Gross  C .  Neurogenesis in the adult brain: death of a dogma .  Nat Rev Neurosci  2000 ; 1 : 67–73 . 
 39.  Kaplan  M .  Environment complexity stimulates visual cortex neurogenesis: death of a dogma 
and a research career .  Trends Neurosci  2001 ; 24 : 617–620 . 
 40.  Gross  CG .  Th ree before their time: neuroscientists whose ideas were ignored by their con-
temporaries .  Exp Brain Res  2009 ; 192 : 321–334 . 
 41.  Jones  EG .  Plasticity and neuroplasticity [lett er] .  J Hist Neurosci  2004 ; 13 : 293 . 
 42.  Johansson  B .  Regeneration and plasticity in the brain and spinal cord [review] .  J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab  2007 ; 27 : 1417–1430 . 
 43.  Milner  P.  Th e mind and Donald O .   Hebb. Sci Am  1993 ; 268 ( 1 ): 124–129 . 
 44.  Hebb  DO .   Th e Organization of Behavior  .  New York :  John Wiley & Sons ,  1949 . 
 45.  Brown  RE ,  Milner  PM .  Th e legacy of Donald O.Hebb: more than the Hebb Synapse .   Nat 
Rev Neurosci  2003 ; 4 : 1013–1019 . 
  46.       Markham   JA  ,   Greenough   WT  .  Experience-driven brain plasticity:  beyond the synapse . 
 Neuron Glia Biol  2004 ; 1 : 351–363 . 
  47.       Kempermann   G  ,   Kuhn   HG  ,   Gage   FH  .  More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an 
enriched environment .  Nature  1997 ; 386 : 493–495 . 
 48.  Wall  PD ,  Egger  MD .  Formation of new connexions in adult rat brains following partial deaf-
ferentation .  Nature  1971 ; 232 : 542–545 . 
 49.  Mark  VW ,  Taub  E. Cortical reorganization and the rehabilitation of movement by CI therapy 
aft er neurologic injury. In:  Pessoa  L ,  de Weerd  P , eds.   Filling-in: From Perceptual Completion 
to Skill Learning  .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press ,  2003 . 
 50.  Mogilner  A ,  Grossman  J ,  Ribary  U , et al.  Somatosensory cortical plasticity in adult humans 
revealed by magnetoencephalography .  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  1993 ; 90 : 3593 – 3597 . 
 51.  Pascual-Leone  A ,  Torres  F .  Plasticity of the sensorimotor cortex representation of the read-
ing fi nger in Braille readers .  Brain  1993 ; 116 : 39–52 . 

Plasticity
347
 52.  Taub  E ,  Miller  NE ,  Novack  TA , et al.  Technique to improve chronic motor defi cit aft er 
stroke .  Arch Phys Med Rehabil  1993 ; 74 : 347–354 . 
 53.  Kopp  B ,  Kunkel  A ,  Mühlnickel  W ,  Villringer  K ,  Taub  E ,  Flor  H .  Plasticity in the motor sys-
tem correlated with therapy-induced improvement of movement aft er stroke .  NeuroReport 
 1999 ; 10 : 807–810 . 
 54.  Liepert  J ,  Miltner  WHR ,  Bauder  H , et al.  Motor cortex plasticity during constraint-induced 
movement therapy in stroke patients .  Neurosci Lett    1998 ; 250 : 5–8 . 
 55.  Liepert  J ,  Bauder  H ,  Miltner  WHR ,  Taub  E ,  Weiller  C .  Treatment-induced cortical reorgani-
zation aft er stroke in humans .  Stroke  2000 ; 31 : 1210–1216 . 
 56.  Maguire  EA ,  Gadian  DG ,  Johnsrude  IS , et al.  Navigation-related structural change in the 
hippocampi of taxi drivers .  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  2000 ; 97 : 4398–4403 . 
 57.  Draganski  B ,  Gaser  C ,  Busch  V ,   Schuierer  G ,  Bogdahn  U ,  May  A .  Neuroplasticity: changes in 
grey matt er induced by training .  Nature  2004 ; 427 : 311–312 . 
 58.  Draganski  B ,  Gaser  C ,  Kempermann  G , et al.  Temporal and spatial dynamics of brain struc-
ture changes during extensive learning .  J Neuroscience  2006 ; 26 : 6314 – 6317 . 
 59.  Gauthier  LV ,  Taub  E ,  Perkins  CE ,  Ortmann  M ,  Mark  VW ,  Uswatt e   G  .  Remodeling the 
brain: plastic structural brain changes produced by diff erent motor therapies aft er stroke . 
 Stroke  2008 ; 39 : 1520 – 1525 . 
 60.  Colcombe  SJ ,  Erickson  KI ,  Scalf  PE , et al.  Aerobic exercise training increases brain volume 
in aging humans .  J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2006 ; 61 : 1166 – 1170 . 
 61.  Eriksson  P ,  Perfi lieva  E ,  Björk-Eriksson  T , et al.  Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocam-
pus .  Nat Med  1998 : 1313–1317 . 
 62.  Rakic  P .  Neurogenesis in adult primates .  Progr Brain Res  2002 ; 138 : 3–14 . 
 63.  Mothe  AJ ,  Tator  CH .  Proliferation, migration, and diff erentiation of endogenous epen-
dymal region stem/progenitor cells following minimal spinal cord injury in the adult rat . 
 Neuroscience  2005 ; 131 : 177–187 . 
 64.  Couillard-Despres  S ,  Aigner  L .  In vivo imaging of adult neurogenesis .  Eur J Neurosci 
 2011 ; 33 : 1037–1044 . 
 65.  Pereira  AC ,  Huddleston  DE ,  Brickman  AM , et al.  An  in vivo correlate of exercise-induced 
neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus .  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  2007 ; 104 : 5638–5643 . 
 66.  Kinsbourne  M .  Th e minor cerebral hemisphere as a source of aphasic speech .  Arch Neurol 
 1971 ; 25 : 302–306 . 
 67.  Corbett a  M ,  Kincade  MJ ,  Lewis  C ,  Snyder  AZ ,  Sapir  A .  Neural basis and recovery of spatial 
att ention defi cits in spatial neglect .  Nat Neurosci  2005 ; 8 : 1603–1610 . 
 68.  Mark  VW ,  Taub  E ,  Perkins  C ,  Gauthier  L ,  Uswatt e  G .  MRI infarction load and CI therapy 
outcomes for chronic post-stroke hemiparesis .  Restor Neurol Neurosci  2008 ; 26 : 13–33 . 
 69.  Anderson  SW ,  Damasio  H ,  Tranel  D .  Neuropsychological impairments associated with 
lesions caused by tumor or stroke .  Arch Neurol  1990 ; 47 : 397–405 . 
 70.  Rosenberg  K ,  Liebling  R ,  Avidan  G , et al.  Language related reorganization in adult brain 
with slow growing glioma: fMRI prospective case-study .  Neurocase  2008 ; 14 : 465–473 . 
 71.  van Nuenen  B ,  Grotenhuis  A ,  Vliet  T ,  Gijtenbeek  A .  Spinal cord compression by an arach-
noid cyst: a case report and review of the literature .  Zentralbl Neurochirurg  2008 ; 69 : 155–157 . 
 72.  Kalous  A ,  Osborne  P ,  Keast  J .  Spinal cord compression injury in adult rats initiates changes 
in dorsal horn remodeling that may correlate with development of neuropathic pain .   J Comp 
Neurol  2009 ; 513 : 668–684 . 
 73.  Th ompson  AJ ,  Jarrett   L ,  Lockley  L ,  Marsden  J ,  Stevenson  V .  Clinical management of spastic-
ity [editorial] .  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry  2005 ; 76 : 459–463 . 
 74.  Frigon  A ,  Rossignol  S .  Functional plasticity following spinal cord lesions .  Prog Brain Res 
 2006 ; 157 : 231–260 . 
  75.       Rosales   RL  ,   Kanovsky   P  ,   Fernandez   HH  .  What’’s the ““catch”“ in upper-limb post-stroke 
spasticity: expanding the role of botulinum toxin applications [review] .   Parkinsonism Relat 
Disord  2011 ; 17 : S3–S10 . 

348
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 76.  Mühlnickel  W ,  Elbert  T ,  Taub  E ,  Flor  H .  Reorganization of auditory cortex in tinnitus .  Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA  1998 ; 95 : 1034 0– 1034 3 . 
 77.  Mennemeier  M ,  Chelett e  KC ,  Myhill  J , et al.  Maintenance repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation can inhibit the return of tinnitus .   Laryngoscope  2008 ; 118 : 1228–1232 . 
  78.  Candia  V ,  Wienbruch  C ,  Elbert  T ,  Rockstroh  B ,  Ray  W .  Eff ective behavioral treatment of 
focal hand dystonia in musicians alters somatosensory cortical organization .   Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA  2003 ; 100 : 7942–7946 . 
 79.  Hardy  TA ,  Blum  S ,  McCombe  PA ,  Reddel  SW .  Guillain-barré syndrome: modern theories 
of etiology [review] .  Curr Allergy Asthma Rep  2011 ; 11 : 197–204 . 
 80.  Parry  I ,  Walker  K ,  Niszczak  J ,  Palmieri  T ,  Greenhalgh  D .  Methods and tools used for the 
measurement of burn scar contracture [review] .  J Burn Care Res  2010 ; 31 : 888–903 . 
 81.  Cherney  LR ,  Patt erson  JP ,  Raymer  A ,  Frymark  T ,  Schooling  T .  Evidence-based systematic 
review: eff ects of intensity of treatment and constraint-induced language therapy for indi-
viduals with stroke-induced aphasia .  J Speech Lang Hear Res  2008 ; 51 : 1282–1299 . 
  82.  Breier  JI ,  Maher  LM ,  Novak  B ,  Papanicolaou  AC .  Functional imaging before and aft er 
constraint-induced language therapy for aphasia using magnetoencephalography .  Neurocase 
 2006 ; 12 : 322–331 . 
  83.       Meinzer   M  ,   Elbert   T  ,   Wienbruch   C  ,   Djundja   D  ,   Barthel   G  ,   Rockstroh   B  .  Intensive language 
training enhances brain plasticity in chronic aphasia .  BMC Biol  2004 ; 2 : 20 . 
 84.  Richter  M ,  Miltner  W ,  Straube  T .  Association between therapy outcome and 
right-hemispheric activation in chronic aphasia .   Brain  2008 ; 131 : 1391 – 1401 . 
  85.  Schlaug  G ,  Marchina  S ,  Norton  A .  Evidence for plasticity in white-matt er tracts of patients 
with chronic Broca’’s aphasia undergoing intense intonation-based speech therapy .  Ann NY 
Acad Sci  2009 ; 1169 : 385–394 . 
 86.  Humphreys  G ,  Watelet  A ,  Riddoch  M .  Long-term eff ects of prism adaptation in chronic 
visual neglect: a single case study .   Cogn Neuropsychol  2006 ; 23 : 463–478 . 
  87.       Nys   GMS  ,   de Haan   EHF  ,   Kunneman   A  ,   de Kort   PLM  ,   Dijkerman   HC  .  Acute neglect reha-
bilitation using repetitive prism adaptation: a randomized placebo-controlled trial .   Restor 
Neurol Neurosci  2008 ; 26 : 1–12 . 
 88.  Luauté  J ,  Michel  C ,  Rode  G , et al.  Functional anatomy of the therapeutic eff ects of prism 
adaptation on left  neglect .  Neurology  2006 ; 66 : 1859 – 1867 . 
 89.  Luauté  J ,  Schwartz  S ,  Rossett i  Y , et al.  Dynamic changes in brain activity during prism adap-
tation .  J Neurosci  2009 ; 29 : 169–178 . 
  90.  Edwards  J ,  Ross  L ,  Wadley  V , et al.  Th e Useful Field of View test: normative data .  Arch Clin 
Neuropsychol  2006 ; 21 : 275–286 . 
 91.  Sekuler  A ,  Bennett   P ,  Mamelak  M .  Eff ects of aging on the useful fi eld of view .  Experimental 
Aging Research  2000 ; 26 : 103–120 . 
 92.  Owsley  C ,  Ball  K ,  McGwin  G , et al.  Visual processing impairment and risk of motor vehicle 
crash among older adults .   JAMA  1998 ; 279 : 1083 – 1088 . 
 93.  Ball  K ,  Owsley  C . Increasing mobility and reducing accidents of older drivers. In:  Schaie 
 KW ,  Pietrucha  M , eds.   Mobility and Transportation in the Elderly  .  New  York :   Springer , 
 2000 :  213–251 . 
 94.  Roenker  D ,  Cissell  G ,  Ball  K ,  Wadley  V ,  Edwards  J .  Speed-of-processing and driving simula-
tor training result in improved driving performance .  Hum Factors  2003 ; 45 : 218–233 . 
  95.       Kim   YH  ,   Yoo   WK  ,   Ko   MH  ,   Park   CH  ,   Kim   ST  ,   Na   DL  .  Plasticity of the att entional network 
aft er brain injury and cognitive rehabilitation .  Neurorehabil Neural Repair  2009 ; 23 : 468–477 . 
 96.  Nelles  G .  Cortical reorganization—eff ects of intensive therapy [review] .  Restor Neurol 
Neurosci  2004 ; 22 : 239–244 . 
 97.  Rosenberger  PB ,  Rott enberg   DA  .  Does training change the brain? [Editorial.] .  Neurology 
 2002 ; 58 : 1139–1140 . 
 98.  Mark  VW ,  Taub  E  ,  Morris  DM .  Neuroplasticity and Constraint-Induced Movement therapy . 
 Eura Medicophys  2006 ; 42 : 269–284 .  

349
 C H A P T E R  17 
 Visual Art
  
 Anjan  Chatterjee  
 Introduction 
 Katherine Sherwood was 44 years old when she had a massive left  hemisphere 
stroke. Th is catastrophic event left  her with an aphasia and right-sided weak-
ness. She was (and is, as of this writing) an artist and a professor. Aft er recov-
ering from the psychological impact and some of the neurological defi cits from 
her stroke, she began to paint again using her left  hand. She laid canvasses hori-
zontally, and moved around them in a mobile chair. She also noticed a curious 
thing. Th e style and content of her painting changed ( Waldman, 2000 ). She pre-
viously regarded herself as a particularly cerebral painter, approaching her work 
in an over-intellectualized manner. Aft er her stroke, she felt that images fl owed 
from her more easily and expressively ( Sherwood, 2012 ) ( Figure 17.1 ). Something 
changed about her process of making art ( Chatt erjee, 2008 ). What changed? 
 More generally, cases like Professor Sherwood raise questions about what we 
can learn from the neuropsychology of art. Neuropsychology has been critical 
to advancing our knowledge of various cognitive systems, including perception, 
memory and language, as evidenced by other chapters in this book. But its impact 
on the study of aesthetics has been limited. Why is that? Certainly, an impor-
tant factor is that as a domain of inquiry, neuroaesthetics is relatively immature 
( Chatt erjee, 2004b ;  Chatt erjee, 2011 ). Th e data from which one might draw infer-
ences are sparse. Beyond the constraints of limited data, fundamental questions 
about proper methods remain. It is easy to be seduced by the striking phenom-
enology and to construct interesting “just so” stories to account for these obser-
vations. Cognitive neurology and neuropsychology has had a long tradition of 
starting with careful clinical observations before applying rigorous quantitative 
methods to the phenomena under consideration. Th e neuropsychology of art is at 
this threshold and seems poised to make the quantitative shift  ( Chatt erjee, 2009 ). 

350
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 17.1    Examples of Katherine Sherwood’s paintings. Permission obtained 
from Katherine Sherwood.  a) Test Sites, painted before her stroke  b) The Cart 
Before the Horse, painted after her stroke (see color insert).  

Visual Art
351
 One could speculate that artists, by virtue of their developed visuomotor 
skills, might be relatively protected from the visuomotor defi cits associated 
commonly with brain damage. Such speculation appears not to be true when 
we consider the eff ects of brain damage on artistic production ( Bogousslavsky 
& Boller, 2005 ;  Chatt erjee, 2004a, 2004 b;  Rose, 2006 ;  Zaidel, 2005 ). Unilateral 
spatial neglect is a disorder in which patients are unaware of one side of space 
( Chatt erjee, 2003 ; Heilman, Watson, & Valenstein, 1993). Artists with unilateral 
spatial neglect demonstrate neglect in their artwork ( Jung, 1974 ). Visual agno-
sia is the inability to perceive or recognize objects visually. Artists with visual 
agnosias have diffi  culty depicting objects in their art ( Wapner, Judd, & Gardner, 
1978 ). Achromatopsia is the inability to apprehend color. Artists with achroma-
topsia may be unable to use color properly in their images ( Sacks, 1995a ). In these 
cases, the artwork illustrates the nature of neuropsychological defi cits. While the 
depictions may be beautiful and captivating, they do not off er insight into the 
nature of artistic production itself. 
 In this chapter, I focus on two aspects of the neuropsychology of art. First, 
I will examine situations in which brain damage produces a paradoxical facilita-
tion ( Kapur, 1996 ) of artistic output. Th e eff ects of brain damage on the ability 
to produce visual art stand in sharp contrast to virtually all other complex human 
abilities. Diseases of the brain can impair our ability to communicate, coordinate 
movements, recognize objects, apprehend emotions and make rational deci-
sions. By contrast, while diseases of the brain oft en alter the ability to produce 
art, the alterations are sometimes interesting and occasionally even regarded as 
improvements ( Chatt erjee, 2006 ). Second, I will discuss the issue of measure-
ment in art. One might approach the idea of measuring aesthetic experiences with 
some trepidation. Th e fear is that quantifying these experience robs them of that 
which is fundamental. However, if neuropsychology of art is to advance as a sci-
ence, it must incorporate some form of quantifi cation in its methods ( Chatt erjee, 
Th omas, Smith, & Aguirre, 2009 ). I will describe our att empts to do so. 
 Th e Paradoxical Facilitation of Visual Art 
 Implicit in a discussion of the paradoxical facilitation of art is the view that there 
is no single art center in the brain. Nor does one hemisphere play a privileged 
role in art production per se. Rather, the production of art is highly complex with 
diff erent components mediated by diff erent parts of the brain. Th e fi nal artistic 
output emerges from a coordination of these diff erent components. Brain dam-
age alters the available parts of the brain dedicated to the overall artistic output 
that becomes the product of a diff erent coordination of components. By analogy, 
we might think of these neural systems like a suspended mobile. Th e mobile rests 
in some equilibrium of its weights. If a particular weight is removed, the entire 

352
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
confi guration might collapse. However, the confi guration might also fi nd itself 
in a new resting state that is diff erent from the original, but is also appealing. 
Similarly, brain damage may render an artist incapable of continuing to work 
analogous to the collapse of the mobile. Or it may create a new equilibrium in 
which the art proceeds in new and interesting confi gurations. 
 Th ere are four ways in which neurological disorders might improve art pro-
duction ( Chatt erjee, 2006 ). Th ese are the 1) disposition to produce visual art; 
2) provision of a unique visual vocabulary; 3) aids to descriptive accuracy; and 
4) changes in expressive powers. 
 DISPOSIT ION TO PRODUCE A RT  
 Fronto-temporal dementias (FTD) are a group of degenerative neurological dis-
eases in which people undergo profound changes in their social interactions. Th ey 
can be disinhibited and disorganized. Th ey can have problems with language, 
att ention, and the ability to make decisions. In addition to these alterations in per-
sonality and cognition, a few people with FTD develop a propensity to produce 
art for the fi rst time. Miller and colleagues ( Miller et al., 1998 ) note that their 
art is realistic, not abstract or symbolic. It is highly detailed and has an obses-
sive quality. Th e patients themselves seem intensely preoccupied with their art. 
Th e artistic output of people with FTD appears to be a consequence of changes 
in their personalities. Th e acquired obsessive-compulsive traits fi nd a graphic 
expression and they produce striking visual images as a part of their repetition 
and att ention to detail. 
 Several other examples show that obsessive-compulsive traits rendered by 
neurological diseases can predispose people to produce art. Sacks ( Sacks, 1995b ) 
described the Italian painter, Franco Magnani, living in San Francisco. Magnani 
painted hundreds of realistic scenes of an Italian town, Pontito, where he grew 
up. At the age of 31, Magnani probably had an encephalitic illness. Following that 
illness, he painted compulsively. Pontito preoccupied his thoughts and conversa-
tions. Sacks speculated that he had partial complex seizures and was in part dem-
onstrating an obsessive “sticky” personality sometimes associated with temporal 
lobe epilepsy ( Waxman & Geschwind, 1975 ). Such patients are also sometimes 
hypergraphic, meaning they write incessantly. Magnani’s hypergraphia was being 
expressed visually rather than verbally. 
 Lythgoe and colleagues (Lythgoe, Polak, Kalmus, de Haan, & Khean Chong, 
2005) reported the case of a builder with a sub-arachnoid hemorrhage. He also 
had no interest in art premorbidly but became an obsessive artist aft er recovery 
from the initial injury. Aft er the hemorrhage, he had a normal verbal and perfor-
mance IQ and normal behavior except for some degree of verbal disinhibition. 
He did well on most neuropsychological tasks except for those that involved men-
tal fl exibility. He also began to draw hundreds of sketches, mostly faces. He then 

Visual Art
353
moved to large-scale drawings sometimes covering entire rooms, while confi ning 
his art to a few themes. 
 Finally, about 10 percent of children with autism develop savant-like abili-
ties (Rimland & Fein, 1988). A subset of these children produce striking visual 
images ( Sacks, 1995c ). Th e most detailed description of such a case was Nadia, 
reported by Selfe ( Selfe, 1977 ). As a baby, Nadia did not respond to her mother, 
and as she got older she lacked social empathy. As a child, she was obsessively con-
cerned with the presence of other children without forming any substantial bonds 
with them. Her acquisition of language was delayed. Despite these developmental 
abnormalities, she was remarkably skilled at drawing. By the age of three she was 
drawing life-like horses. She drew intensively for a few moments at a time, always 
copying images. She also focused on specifi c kinds of images like horses, of which 
she drew hundreds of examples. While Nadia’s abilities were striking, she was not 
unique. Autistic children with these striking drawing skills seem to focus on spe-
cifi c subjects and draw them repeatedly. 
 Th us neurological disorders that produce obsessive-compulsive traits can also 
dispose people to produce art. Th ese artists produce realistic images and focus 
on a narrow range of themes. While the neural basis for obsessive-compulsive 
disorders is not completely understood, dopamine and alterations of reward cir-
cuits are probably involved. We reported a patient with Parkinson’s disease who 
produced art obsessively aft er being placed on dopamine agonists ( Chatt erjee, 
Hamilton, & Amorapanth, 2006 ). Interestingly, despite profound impairments 
in his motor control, which were evident when he wrote, he could make grace-
ful sinuous movements when drawing. Obsessive-compulsive traits are also 
associated with dysfunction of the orbito-frontal and medial temporal cortices 
and fronto-striatal circuits ( Kwon et al., 2003 ;  Saxena et al., 1999 ;  Ursu, Stenger, 
Shear, Jones, & CS, 2003 ). Notably, in cases such as those described in this sec-
tion, these regions may have been damaged, leaving posterior occipito-temporal 
cortices intact. Th e preservation of posterior cortices ensures that the neural sub-
strate that represents faces, places, and objects are preserved and are available as 
the focus of these patients’ obsessions. 
 V ISUA L VOC A BU L A RY  
 Neurological disorders such as migraine and epilepsy are associated with pro-
ductive visual phenomena. Of over 200 entries submitt ed to the fi rst National 
Art Competition sponsored by the British Migraine Association and WB 
Pharmaceuticals, 70 percent showed spectral appearances, 48 percent showed 
fortifi cations, 16  percent showed areas of visual loss and 2.5  percent showed 
mosaic visions ( Wilkinson & Robinson, 1985 ). 
 Th e artist, Ignatius Brennan, ( Podoll & Robinson, 2000 ) eloquently expressed 
how migrainous auras inspired his art. His migraines, beginning at the age of 11, 

354
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
were experienced frightening episodes of visual loss, oft en with a zigzag cloud 
obscuring much of his visual fi elds. As he got older, he saw triangles and rounded 
forms as well as mosaics. He also experienced visual distortions of things get-
ting larger or smaller. He recounts the eff ects of migraines on his art as follows: “I 
started with pictures of my migraine experiences unconsciously rather than 
deliberately, when I was in art school. I used to do a lot of drawings of landscapes 
at that time and oft en found that I would be drawing clouds not just in the sky, but 
everywhere, which I think was a reference to the visual voids experienced during 
visual loss. I also used serrated zigzag shapes in my drawings, symbolizing the 
experience of a whole being broken up . . . Clouds, zigzags, and other imagery are 
part of my own personal visual vocabulary, but which certainly has come out of 
migraine experiences. I’m absolutely sure. I don’t tend to do that deliberately, but 
when it suits a particular subject, e.g., to represent a feeling or an emotion, I make 
use of these images in diff erent ways . . . .” 
 Such patients off er insights into how artists generally have a visual vocabulary 
at their disposal. Greater analyses of these cases may inform us about how artists 
develop this visual vocabulary and how they develop a visual grammar in concat-
enating this visual vocabulary. 
 DE SCR I P T I V E ACCU R AC Y  
 For centuries, visual artists have been preoccupied with rendering objects and 
their surroundings accurately. Underlying the problem of descriptive accuracy 
in drawing and painting is the role of knowledge. Visual agnosias are a class of 
disorders in which patients have diffi  culty recognizing objects ( Farah, 1990 ). 
Since Lissauer’s classic descriptions of visual agnosias, object recognition defi -
cits are known to lie on a continuum between perceptual and conceptual defi -
cits ( Lissauer, 1890 ). Perceptually based agnosias, called apperceptive agnosias, 
impair the ability to process the visual information into a coherent object. 
Conceptually based agnosias, called associative agnosias, involve impairments of 
semantic knowledge of the object ( Farah, 1990 ). 
 Wapner, Judd and Gardner ( Wapner et al., 1978 ) described an artist with an 
apperceptive agnosia who had diffi  culty copying images despite being able to 
convey depth and shading in drawings that were otherwise fragmented. His pre-
served semantic system did not help guide his artistic production. Th us, when 
asked to draw a telephone, he constructed images by reasoning “It needs a base 
for it to stand on, a place to speak into, something to hear with a wire to plug 
in for communication and a place to dial.” Th is verbal strategy was not eff ective 
in rendering accurate images. Semantic knowledge by itself does not help render 
objects accurately. 
 Th is patient contrasts with two people with associative agnosias (Franklin, van 
Sommers, & Howard, 1992; Schwartz & Chawluck, 1990). In both cases, when 

Visual Art
355
asked to draw objects from verbal labels, these people drew crude, simplifi ed 
images similar to those drawn by a young child. However, when drawing from 
complex visual images, the results were strikingly diff erent. For example, one of 
these people could copy a portrait originally painted by Bott icelli or draw a por-
trait of a staff  worker beautifully ( Franklin et al., 1992 ). People can render objects 
accurately and beautifully without semantic knowledge. 
 Th e case of a Polish aphasic artist is also informative about the relationships 
between semantics and art ( Kaczmarek, 1991 ). Profoundly infl uenced by the events 
of the World War II, his premorbid paintings were antiwar statements. Th ey oft en 
included numbers, lett ers, and ideograms. Following his stroke, he was non-fl uent 
and only produced a few words. At its core, our semantic system functions to 
abstract and generalize. Th e use of abstracted symbols could be considered a marker 
for a preserved semantic system. Although testing of his semantic system was not 
reported, from the descriptions of his aphasia one might infer that it was impov-
erished. His inability to make use of verbal symbols extended to his artwork. He 
was no longer able to produce paintings in his previous style of using symbols to 
communicate his antiwar sentiments. However, he was still able to draw realistic 
landscapes and portraits well, despite having lost his ability to manipulate symbols! 
 Does semantic knowledge of an object hinder artistic production? Th e art his-
torian Gombrich ( Gombrich, 1960 ) observed that even trained artists impose 
knowledge of what they are looking at in their depictions in a way that can com-
promise their accuracy. Th us impaired knowledge, provided visual-motor sys-
tems are intact, might aid in the ability to depict objects and scenes accurately. 
Perhaps such impaired knowledge accounts for cases of autistic children with 
savant–like artistic abilities. 
 Autistic artists need only to look at an object for a few minutes before drawing 
them rapidly and accurately ( Sacks, 1995c ;  Selfe, 1977 ). Nadia’s abilities were not 
an accelerated version of other children’s drawing development. She did not fi rst 
pass through a phase of drawing simple schematic images before learning to draw 
realistically. Rather her skills developed very early and did not change much over 
time. Nadia initially drew horses deft ly and without hesitation. Two observations 
suggest that she treated horses as visual patt erns rather than as objects. Firstly, 
she would start drawing anywhere on the page. Rather than trying to squeeze the 
whole horse into a page, she would stop drawing when she came to the paper’s 
edge even if it meant only drawing part of the horse. Secondly, most people draw 
horses by starting at the head. Nadia could start her drawing at the neck and 
seemed unaff ected by critical features associated with a specifi c object, such as 
the head of a horse. Her remarkable skill at drawing horses, and later, pelicans 
were not hindered by semantic associations that interfere with the ability to “see” 
the visual object. As Nadia eventually acquired language her drawings became 
more prosaic. Presumably, the acquisition of language indicated development of a 
richer semantic system and detracted from her artistic skills. 

356
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 CH A NGED E X PR E SSI V IT Y  
 Visual art is, of course, not restricted to rendering objects and scenes accurately. 
Perhaps driven by the advent of photography, visual art diverged into many forms 
of expression. Among the most intriguing eff ects of brain damage on artists are 
a class of phenomena in which the inability to make accurate depictions results 
in surprisingly appealing stylistic changes. Th ese changes can occur in the use of 
color and form and in the content of images. 
 Sacks ( Sacks, 1995a ) described an artist with an acquired achromatopsia fol-
lowing a traumatic brain injury. His earlier paintings were colorful and abstract. 
Aft er the accident everything appeared “dirt gray” to him. His initial att empts 
to use color did not work and he resigned himself to painting in black and white. 
Eventually, he incorporated a limited set of colors to his paintings. Aft er an initial 
sense of helplessness, he considered his new way of seeing as a strange gift . He 
thought he saw the world as pure form, unclutt ered by color and endowed with a 
new range of expressions. 
 Right hemisphere damage can produce left  spatial neglect and artists with 
neglect omit the left  side of images that they draw or paint ( Blanke, Ortigue, & 
Landis, 2003 ;  Cantagallo & Sala, 1998 ;  Halligan & Marshall, 1997 ;  Jung, 1974 ; 
 Marsh & Philwin, 1987 ;  Schnider, Regard, Benson, & Landis, 1993 ). As they 
recover from their neglect, their use of line may still be altered. Two examples 
show how this change in the use of line can produce art that comes to be regarded 
highly. Lovis Corinth, an important German artist, had a right hemisphere stroke 
in 1911. As he recovered, he resumed painting. His self portraits and portraits of 
his wife showed clear changes in style, with details on the left  sometimes left  out 
and textures on the left  blended with the background. Alfred Kuhn character-
ized this work as follows (quoted in Gardner ( Gardner, 1975 )) “He [Corinth] had 
become prescient for the hidden facets of appearance . . . Th e contours disappear, 
the bodies are oft en as ript asunder, deformed, disappeared into textures . . . . also 
the faithfulness of portraits had ceased almost entirely . . .With wide stripes the 
person is captured in essence. Characterization is now exaggerated, indeed, oft en 
to caricature . . . Corinth always seems to be painting a picture behind the picture, 
one which he alone sees . . . at this point Corinth shift ed from the ranks of the great 
painters into the circle of the great artists.” 
 Heller ( Heller, 1994 ) reported the experience of the artist Loring Hughes, who 
aft er a right hemisphere stroke had diffi  culty coordinating the spatial relation-
ship between lines. Th is forced her to abandon her premorbid style of depictive 
accuracy. Instead she turned to her own imagination and emotions. Initially, she 
was too ashamed to display her paintings. Once she became comfortable with her 
new style, she began to show her work. Th e artistic community responded well 
to these distorted images. Th e critic Eileen Watkins described her work as now 
delivering “an emotional wallop,” that was not present previously. 

Visual Art
357
 Th e stylistic changes, when they occur with left  brain damage, might be diff er-
ent from those observed with right brain damage. Th e specifi c changes reported 
are the introduction of more vivid colors and a change in content. Th ese changes 
are exemplifi ed in the Bulgarian painter, Zlatio Boiyadjiev, the Californian artist 
Katherine Sherwood who was mentioned in the introduction, and a Swiss painter 
reported by Annoni and colleagues. 
 Boiyadjiev’s premorbid artistic style was natural and pictorial and he tended to 
use earth tones in his paintings. Following the onset of his aphasia, Boiyadjiev’s 
paintings have been described as richer, more colorful and containing more fl uid 
and energetic lines ( Brown, 1977 ;  Zaimov, Kitov, & Kolev, 1969 ). Th e imagery in 
his work became more inventive and at times even bizarre and fantastical. Similarly, 
as already mentioned, Katherine Sherwood suff ered a left  hemisphere hemor-
rhagic stroke that left  her with an aphasia and right-sided weakness ( Waldman, 
2000 ). She trained herself to paint with her left  hand, and since then her career 
has fl ourished. Premorbidly, her images were described as “highly cerebral,” incor-
porating a range of esoteric images such as cross-dressers, medieval seals, and 
spy photos. Aft er her stroke she felt that she could not produce such images if she 
wanted. Her new style is described as “raw” and “intuitive,” with large irregular 
circular movements. She says her left  hand enjoys an ease and a grace with the 
brush that her right hand never had, and describes it as “unburdened” ( Sherwood, 
2012 ). Finally, Annoni and colleagues ( Annoni, Devuyst, Carota, Bruggimann, 
& Bogoousslavsky, 2004 ) recently described a Swiss landscape painter whose art 
was described as being “fi gurative-impressionist.” He had a small stroke in the left  
thalamus. His wife thought he had mild emotional dyscontrol aft er his stroke. He 
felt that he was more sensitive to the hidden beauty of images and used bolder col-
ors. He switched from realistic to more impressionistic images. He thought that he 
was less likely to use lines, contours and perspective clearly, and was more creative. 
 A fi nal stylistic change rendered by brain damage is a move towards simplic-
ity. Annoni and colleagues ( Annoni et al., 2004 ) described a person with a left  
occipital lesion. A  month aft er his stroke he resumed drawing and painting. 
His new artwork was simplifi ed, stylized, increasingly abstract and confi ned to 
a limited use of colors. It is not known if damage to visual association cortices 
would consistently result in simplifi cation and abstraction. A  few artists with 
Alzheimer’s disease have continued to paint ( Crutch, Isaacs, & Rossor, 2001 ; 
 Maurer & Prvulovic, 2004 ;  Miller & Hou, 2004 ) and demonstrate a similar pat-
tern. 1    William Utermohlen painted a series of self-portraits several years into the 
course of his illness. As these portraits became increasingly simplifi ed and dis-
torted, they appear as haunting psychological self-expressions. 
 Willem DeKooning is probably the best-known artist who continued to paint 
aft er the onset of Alzheimer’s disease ( Storr, 1995 ). Aft er the onset of his neuro-
logical disease, DeKooning’s ex-wife and students provided the structure for him to 
continue to work. Th ey stretched his canvases and mixed his colors. Experts think 

358
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
this late period represents a new and coherent style. His paintings were simpler and 
he confi ned his palett e to primary colors. Traces of shapes from earlier works are 
evident, but were pared down. Garrels ( Garrels, 1995 ), the senior curator at the San 
Francisco Museum of Modern Art, thought “the vocabulary of forms was retained, 
but clarifi ed . . . the results are paintings of an openness and freedom not seen before, 
paintings that are extraordinarily lyrical, immediately sensual, and exhilarating.”  
 Quantifi cation in the Neuropsychology of Art 
 Despite the fascinating observations recounted above, much needs to be done if 
neuropsychology is to make substantive contributions to empirical aesthetics. 
For the fi eld to mature, it needs to go beyond describing fascinating anecdotes. 
Methodologically, it is critical to quantify features of artwork in order to assess 
change. Most of the cases reported are devoid of measurement. Claims about 
changes in art aft er brain damage are usually post-hoc comments supported by a 
few illustrative examples of artwork. 
 We need an instrument to assess art quantitatively. Such an instrument should 
have at least two characteristics. First, it should assess artwork along a compre-
hensive set of att ributes, which would include formal properties (use of line, 
color, composition, etc.) and content properties (abstract, realism, etc.) Second, it 
should distinguish between descriptive and evaluative judgments. With such an 
instrument one could begin to impose quantitative structure on otherwise casual 
observations about works of art. 
 With these considerations in mind, we developed the Assessment of Art 
Att ributes (AAA) (Chatt erjee, Widick, Sternschein, Smith II, & Bromberger, 
2010). Th e AAA assesses 12 descriptive att ributes that would apply to any piece 
of visual art. Six att ributes refer to formal/perceptual properties and six to con-
tent/conceptual properties. Th e six formal/perceptual att ributes are:   Balance , 
 Color Saturation ,  Color Temperature ,  Depth ,  Complexity , and  Stroke Style . Th e six 
content/conceptual att ributes are:  Abstractness ,  Animacy ,  Emotionality ,  Realism , 
 Representational Accuracy , and  Symbolism . Th e stimuli in the AAA consist of 24 
paintings from the Western canon. Th ese are paintings by well-known artists, but 
not their most famous works and encompass a range in the six formal/perceptual 
and six content/conceptual att ributes of interest. Th e paintings are also evaluated 
for preference or liking and their interestingness. 
 Art Production 
 We have used the AAA to examine changes in art production as well as art per-
ception following brain damage. For art production, we examined the work of 

Visual Art
359
three artists that have already been mentioned ( Chatt erjee, Bromberger, Smith, 
Sternshein, & Widick, 2011 ). Th ese are Sherwood and Boiyadjiev, both with left  
brain damage, and Corinth with right brain damage. In each case we sampled 
several paintings completed before and aft er their stroke. Average ratings on 
each att ribute were obtained for each painting. Th en the average ratings for all 
the pre- and post-morbid paintings were obtained for each participant for each 
artist. 
 We examined Sherwood and Boiyadjiev’s work to determine if left  brain dam-
age produces consistent changes in art. Sherwood describes her approach to her 
work pre-morbidly as over-intellectualized ( Chatt erjee, 2008 ). Post-morbidly, her 
work has been described as raw and more expressive, and less forced ( Sherwood, 
2012 ). In concordance with these descriptions, raters found her work following 
brain injury to be more abstract, more symbolic, more distorted, more vibrant, 
less realistic, and depicted with looser strokes. Raters also found her work to be 
fl att er and to contain warmer colors, changes not mentioned previously by critics 
describing her work. Boiyadjiev’s work has been described as becoming fantastic 
and sometimes bizarre with richer, more colorful forms and having fl uid, ener-
getic lines ( Brown, 1977 ). Consistent with these descriptions, raters found his 
work to be more abstract, more symbolic, less realistic, more distorted as well as 
having a looser stroke style. Th ey also found his work to be fl att er and less ani-
mate, changes also not mentioned by critics before. 
 Could motor defi cits for Sherwood and Boiyadjiev have caused these 
changes? Both were right-handed artists who began to paint with their left  
hands aft er their strokes, From these data, it is not clear if some pictorial aspects 
of the artwork, such as the coarser brushstroke, changed because of hemi-
spheric brain damage or because they began to use their left  hand. However, a 
shift  to the left  hand is unlikely to explain the use of increasingly vibrant colors 
or changes in conceptual att ributes of their artwork, such as greater symbolism 
or abstraction. 
 A priori, one could be pessimistic about the prospects of identifying system-
atic eff ects of brain damage on art production. Aft er all, artistic styles and con-
tent vary so much across diff erent artists that one might be comparing changes 
in qualitatively diff erent kinds of objects. Our observations of Sherwood and 
Boiyadjiev’s art suggest that this pessimism might not be warranted. Sherwood 
and Boiyadjiev’s artistic styles are quite diff erent from each other. For example, 
Sherwood’s paintings started out being substantially fl att er than Boiyadjiev’s 
paintings. Critically, both artists’ paintings were judged as becoming fl att er fol-
lowing their strokes, despite the fact that Sherwood’s paintings  before her stroke 
were more similar to Boiyadjiev’s paintings  aft er  his stroke in depicting depth. 
Th us, it would be a mistake to think that people with left  brain damage produce 
a  prototypic style of painting. Rather, it appears that left  brain damage produces a 
 prototypic shift  in style of painting. 

360
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Sherwood and Boiyadjiev’s paintings became more abstract, symbolic, and 
distorted as well as less realistic, and were painted with looser strokes, more 
vibrant colors, and less depth ( Chatt erjee et  al., 2011 ). Examining Corinth’s 
work would test the specifi city of these changes. Corinth’s paintings aft er his 
stroke were described as “deformed” and att empts at producing faithful portraits 
“ceased almost entirely.” Blanke ( Blanke, 2006 ) describes a broadening of brush 
strokes, a lack of depth, less spatial detail, and several deformities on the left  
side of his self-portrait paintings. Raters found Corinth’s paintings to be more 
abstract, more distorted, less realistic, and also to exhibit looser strokes and a 
fl att er perspective. 
 When Sherwood, Boiyadjiev and Corinth’s paintings are considered together, 
the following changes were found in all three artists. Th eir paintings became 
more abstract and distorted, and less realistic and accurate. Th ey were also ren-
dered with looser strokes, less depth, and with more vibrant colors. Th us, none of 
these changes can be ascribed to laterality of brain functions. Also, their paint-
ings did not change in complexity or emotionality. It remains to be seen whether 
these att ributes would be susceptible to change with other kinds of neurological 
illness. For example, we might expect the art of people with Alzheimer’s disease 
to become less complex over time. 
 All the changes observed in Corinth’s paintings were also observed in 
Sherwood and Boiyadjiev ( Chatt erjee et  al., 2011 ). Th us, chronic right hemi-
sphere damage does not appear to produce specifi c patt erns of change in artis-
tic production. By contrast, both Sherwood and Boiyadjiev’s paintings became 
more symbolic. Th is could mean that artists with left  brain damage, because of 
an unfett ered right hemisphere, engage meaning more loosely, specifi cally in the 
use of symbolism. Th ese data show that the popular idea that right hemisphere is 
the artistic hemisphere is wrong. Clearly, both hemispheres participate in artistic 
production as evidenced by the fact that the art of these artists changed regardless 
of which hemisphere was damaged. If anything, damage to the left  hemisphere 
produced more signifi cant alterations in artistic production than did damage to 
the right hemisphere. 
 We have also used the AAA to assess gradual changes in artistic styles in two 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Investigating artists with AD allows us to look 
for gradual changes in art production rather than sudden changes brought about 
by a stroke. 
 William Utermohlen was diagnosed with AD aft er a long, successful paint-
ing career ( Crutch et al., 2001 ). He was born in Philadelphia and studied at the 
Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts from 1951 to 1957. He moved to England 
in 1957 where he enrolled at the Ruskin School of Art in Oxford before sett ling 
in London. His early work was characterized by linear expressionism, with fre-
quent inclusion of Pop imagery and styles, including a use of strong colors. His 
earliest symptoms began four years before diagnosis, and involved diffi  culties 

Visual Art
361
with tying a necktie, calculating household fi nances, and memory for day‐to‐day 
events. Formal neuropsychological examination revealed a moderate degree of 
global cognitive deterioration, while MRI indicated generalized cerebral atro-
phy. Following the initial diagnosis at the age of 61, regular clinical assessments 
documented the expected gradual decline in cognitive function ( Crutch & 
Rossor, 2006 ). We used fi ve self-portraits executed by William Utermohlen in the 
four-year period following his diagnosis. 
 Th e second artist, Lester Pott s, was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease around 
age 70. He had worked in a rural Alabama sawmill during the Great Depression. 
He served in the Korean War and was regarded as a dependable civic leader. He 
had not painted before his enrollment at an adult day care center. At the center, he 
learned to use watercolors with a retired artist, as part of a community outreach 
program. By the time he died at age 78 Lester Pott s had painted over a 100 origi-
nal watercolors. 
 Using the AAA, we found that both artists’ paintings became more abstract 
and more symbolic. Th ey also became less depictively accurate and less realistic. 
Pott s’ paintings also showed more color saturation, shift s in hues, less complexity, 
and less emotion as his disease progressed. Notably, changes were not seen with 
balance, depth, or stroke quality in either person’s art. 
 Our observations were in general accord with other observations of the relation-
ship between AD and artistic production and off ered greater detail in the nature of 
change observed. For example, Fornazzari (Fornazzari, 2005) describe changes in 
the portraiture of a woman who suff ered from AD. Th ese changes include trends 
toward “unusual fi gure fond, loss of proportion in the facial features, and loss of 
proportionality . . . .” Th e changes that they mention might parallel those observed 
in Utermohlen and Pott s. “Unusual fi gure fond” and “loss of proportionality” 
might correspond to a decline in depictive accuracy. However, it is not clear if loss 
of proportionality could refer to loss of balance, which we did not see in either per-
son. Th is uncertainty highlights one of our points, which is that clear operational 
defi nitions of art att ributes are needed if we are to compare results across studies. 
 Our fi ndings also validate anecdotal observations of changes in abstraction and 
increased symbolism among artists with AD ( Crutch, 2001 #2984;  Cummings, 
1987 #3873; Rankin, 2007 #3401;  Chatt erjee, 2004  #2545). For example, art his-
torians describe a heightened trend towards abstraction in paintings executed by 
Willem de Kooning during the progression of his AD ( Garrels, 1995 ). Maurer 
& Prvulovic ( Maurer & Prvulovic, 2004 ) thought that in the later works of the 
painter Carolus Horn, “ornamental symbols and mythical creatures appeared, 
which were derived from a conjunction of diff erent species.” Cummings and Zarit 
( Cummings & Zarit, 1987 ) reported that an artist with AD over a period of two 
and a half years moved towards simplicity and distortion. Miller and Hou ( Miller 
& Hou, 2004 ) observed AD artists to produce works with less precision and att en-
tion to spatial relationships. 

362
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Art Perception 
 We know virtually nothing about the neuropsychology of the perception of art. 
One might expect that sensitivity to diff erent att ributes within a work of art would 
be aff ected by diff erent kinds of brain damage. Recently, we used the AAA to 
examine the eff ects of brain damage on art perception ( Bromberger, Sternschein, 
Widick, Smith, & Chatt erjee, 2011 ). We focus our investigation on the role of the 
right hemisphere. Th e right hemisphere participates prominently in visuospatial 
att ention and representation ( Chatt erjee, 2003 ;  Heilman et al., 1993 ). As a fi rst 
step, we wished to avoid confounding language comprehension with perceptual 
judgments in our study. For example, if a participant does not understand what 
the word  symbolic means, it would not be diffi  cult to assess their perception of 
symbolism in any painting. We also use contemporary lesion analysis methods in 
our study. Voxel-lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM) techniques allow us to for-
mally assess the way in which damage to a brain area correlates with behavioral 
scores ( Bates et al., 2003 ;  Kimberg, Coslett , & Schwartz, 2007 ;  Wu, Waller, & 
Chatt erjee, 2007 ) with the advantage that one does not have to establish a defi cit 
cut-off . Rather, behavior in VLSM considered a continuous variable. 
 In this study, the judgments of 20 people with right brain damage were com-
pared to 30 healthy age-matched control participants. Of the content/conceptual 
qualities, damage to the right frontal lobe was associated with diff erences in judg-
ments of abstractness, realism, animacy, and symbolism in visual art. In addition, 
damage to the right parietal lobe was related to deviations in judgments of ani-
macy and symbolism. Th ere were no brain behavior relationships for diff erences 
in evaluative judgments, those of preference or interestingness. 
 Any aesthetic experience is built upon at least three components ( Chatt erjee, 
2004 b;  Chatt erjee, 2011 ). Th ese components are the experience of sensory quali-
ties, the associated sets of meanings, and the emotional responses evoked by the 
aesthetic object. Broadly, one might regard the formal-perceptual att ributes of 
the AAA as probing the sensory experience, the content-conceptual att ributes 
as probing the meaning, and the evaluative questions as probing the emotional 
response to these paintings. Th e data from this study suggests that these three 
components of visual aesthetic experiences might segregate broadly in the orga-
nization of the brain. Most of our participants had damage in the distribution 
of the right middle cerebral artery. Th is distribution of brain damage involving 
lateral frontal-parietal and temporal cortices was more likely to aff ect judgments 
of conceptual att ributes. We would predict that damage in the posterior cerebral 
artery distribution aff ecting ventral occipital and temporal cortices might be 
more likely to aff ect the perceptual att ributes. Furthermore, given the extensive 
data implicating the ventral striatum and orbitofrotal cortex in subjective rewards 
( Kable & Glimcher, 2009 ), damage to ventro-medial prefrontal cortices is plausi-
bly more likely to aff ect people’s evaluation of paintings. 

Visual Art
363
 Th ese recent results demonstrate the feasibility of conducting systematic quan-
titative studies in the neuropsychology of art. Th is point by no means implies that 
theoretical analyses or qualitative approaches to art are not useful. It does mean 
that if the neuropsychology of art is to mature  as a science , it needs to incorpo-
rate quantitative approaches, and formal tests of hypotheses as part of its research 
program. 
 Conclusions 
 In reviewing the literature of the neuropsychology of art production, I emphasized 
the possible enhancing eff ects of brain damage on artistic production. Of course, 
these observations are based on selected artists. It is likely that many more artists 
are devastated by their brain injury and these cases are not reported. We simply 
do not know the base rate of facilitation eff ects. Yet, the examples of changed and 
possibly improved art following brain damage point to the multifaceted nature of 
art. In my view, exploring the mechanisms underlying the alterations and gaining 
insights into these facets is one way that neuropsychology can advance neuro-
aesthetics. Looking forward, unless the neuropsychology of art can incorporate 
the basic rigors of any experimental science, we will not get past the description 
of seductive artistic phenomenology under consideration. We are in a position 
to augment qualitative insights with quantitative approaches. Th e observations 
from patients can also serve to generate hypotheses to be tested using functional 
imaging techniques. For example, the hypothesis that the perception of art dis-
sociates from the evaluation of art is amenable to functional imaging methods. 
We can be guardedly optimistic that the neuropsychology of art may mature and 
serve as a fundamental anchor in the new fi eld of neuroaesthetics. 
 Note 
 
 1 .  My clinical experience is that such patients become too disorganized to bring art projects 
to completion. I have cared for several artist-patients who spend hours in their studio put-
tering around without producing much art.  
 References 
 Annoni ,  J. ,  Devuyst ,  G. ,  Carota ,  A. ,  Bruggimann ,  L. , & Bogoousslavsky. ( 2004 ).  Changes in artis-
tic style aft er minor posterior stroke.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  76 , 
 797–803 . 
 Bates ,  E. ,  Wilson ,  S. ,  Saygin ,  A. ,  Dick ,  F. ,  Sereno ,  M. ,  Knight ,  R. , &  Dronkers ,  N. ( 2003 ). 
 Voxel-based lesion symptom mapping.  Nature Neuroscience ,  6 ,  448–450 . 

364
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
  Blanke ,  O. ( 2006 ).  Visuo spatial neglect in Lovis Corinth’s self portraits.  International Review of 
Neurobiology ,  74 ,  193–214 . 
 Blanke ,  O. ,  Ortigue ,  S. , &  Landis ,  T. ( 2003 ).  Color neglect in an artist.  Lancet ,  361 ,  264 . 
 Bogousslavsky ,  J. , &  Boller ,  F. ( 2005 ).   Neurological Disorders in Famous Artists  .  Basel :  Karger . 
 Bromberger ,  B. ,  Sternschein ,  R. ,  Widick ,  P. ,  Smith ,  W. , &  Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2011 ).  Th e Right 
Hemisphere in Aesthetic Perception. [Original Research].   Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 
 5 . doi:10.3389/fnhum.2011.00109 
   Brown ,  J.   ( 1977 ).   Mind, Brain, and Consciousness. Th e Neuropsychology of Cognition  . 
 New York :  Academic Press . 
 Cantagallo ,  A. , &  Sala ,  S. D. ( 1998 ).  Preserved insight in an artist with extrapersonal spatial 
neglect.  Cortex ,  34 ,  163–189 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2003 ). Neglect. A disorder of spatial att ention. In  M.  D’Esposito (Ed.),   Neurological 
Foundations of Cognitive Neuroscience  (pp.  1–26 ).  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2004 a).  Th e neuropsychology of visual artists.    Neuropsychologia ,  42 ,  1568–1583 . 
doi:htt p://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.03.011 
 Chatt erjee ,  A.   ( 2004 b).  Prospects for a cognitive neuroscience of visual aesthetics.  Bulletin of 
Psychology and the Arts ,  4 ,  55–59 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2006 ).  Th e neuropsychology of visual art: conferring capacity.    International Review 
of Neurobiology ,  74 ,  39–49 . doi:htt p://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0074–7742(06)74003-X 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2008 ). Apoplexy and personhood in Katherine Sherwood’s Paintings. In  K. 
 Sherwood (Ed.),   Golgi’s Door  (pp.  44–52 ). Washington, DC:  National Academy of Sciences 
Exhibition Catalogue . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2009 ). Prospects for a neuropsychology of art. In  M.  Skov &  O.  Vartanian (Eds.), 
  Neuroaesthetics  (pp.  131–143 ).  Amityville, New York :  Baywood Publishing Company . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2011 ).  Neuroaesthetics: a coming of age story.  Th e Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 
 23 ( 1 ),  53–62 . doi:10.1162/jocn.2010.21457 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Bromberger ,  B. ,  Smith ,  W. B. ,  Sternshein ,  R. , &  Widick ,  P. ( 2011 ).  Artistic 
Production Following Brain Damage: A Study of Th ree Artists.  Leonardo ,  44 ( 5 ),  405–410 . 
doi:10.1162/LEON_a_00240 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Hamilton ,  R. H. , &  Amorapanth ,  P. X. ( 2006 ).  Art produced by a patient with 
Parkinson’s disease.    Behavioural Neurology ,  17 ,  105–108 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Th omas ,  A. ,  Smith ,  S. E. , &  Aguirre ,  G. K. ( 2009 ).  Th e neural response to facial 
att ractiveness.  Neuropsychology ,  23 ( 2 ),  135–143 . 
 Chatt erjee ,  A. ,  Widick ,  P. ,  Sternschein ,  R. ,  Smith II ,  W. B. , &  Bromberger ,  B. ( 2010 ).  Th e assess-
ment of art att ributes.  Empirical Studies of the Arts ,  28 ( 2 ),  207–222 . doi:10.2190/EM.28.2.f 
  Crutch ,  S. ,  Isaacs ,  R. , &  Rossor ,  M. ( 2001 ).  Some workmen can blame their tools:  artistic 
change in an individual with Alzheimer’s disease.  Lancet ,  347 ,  1096–1098 . doi:10.1016/
S0140–6736(00)05187–4 
 Crutch ,  S. J. , &  Rossor ,  M. N. ( 2006 ).  Artistic Changes in Alzheimer’s Disease. [10.1016/
S0074–7742(06)74012–0].  International Review of Neurobiology00747742 ,  74 ,  147–161 . 
doi:10.1016/S0074–7742(06)74012–0 
 Cummings ,  J. L. , &  Zarit ,  J. M. ( 1987 ).  Probable Alzheimer’s disease in an artist.  Th e Journal of the 
American Medical Association ,  258 ( 19 ),  2731–2734 . doi:10.1001/jama.1987.03400190113039 
 Farah ,  M. J. ( 1990 ).   Visual Agnosia  .  Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press . 
  Fornazzari ,  L. R. ( 2005 ).  Preserved painting creativity in an artist with Alzheimer’s disease. 
 European Journal of Neurology ,  12  ( 6 ),  419–424 . doi:10. 1111 /j. 1468–1331 . 2005 . 0112 8.x 
  Franklin ,  S. ,  van Sommers ,  P. , &  Howard ,  D. ( 1992 ). Drawing without meaning?: dissociations in 
graphic performance of an agnosic artist. In  R.  Campbell (Ed.),   Mental Lives. Case Studies in 
Cognition  (pp.  179–198 ).  Cambridge, USA :  Blackwell . 
 Gardner ,  H. ( 1975 ).   Th e Shatt ered Mind. Th e Person Aft er Brain Damage  .  New York :  Alfred A. Knopf . 
 Garrels ,  G. ( 1995 ). Th ree toads in the garden: line, color, and form. In J. Jenkins & S. Engberg 
(Eds.),   Willem de Kooning. Th e Late Paintings, Th e 1980s  (pp.  9–37 ).  Minneapolis :   San 
Franscisco Museum of Modern Art and Walker Arts Center . 

Visual Art
365
 Gombrich ,  E. ( 1960 ).   Art and Illusion  .  Princeton :  Princeton University Press . 
 Halligan ,  P. W. , &  Marshall ,  J. C. ( 1997 ).  Th e art of visual neglect.    Lancet ,  350 ,  139–140 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Watson ,  R. T. , &  Valenstein ,  E. ( 1993 ). Neglect and related disorders. In  K. 
M.   Heilman   &   E.   Valenstein   (Eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  (3rd ed., pp.  279–336 ). 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
   Heller ,  W.   ( 1994 ). Cognitive and emotional organization of the brain:  Infl uences on the 
creation and perception of art. In  D.  Zaidel (Ed.),  Neuropsychology (pp.  271–292 ). 
 New York :  Academic Press . 
   Jung ,  R.   ( 1974 ). Neuropsychologie und neurophysiologie des kontur und formsehens in zeich-
nerei und malerei. In   H.   Weick   (Ed.),   Pyschopathologie Mususcher Gestaltungen  (pp.  27–88 ). 
 Stutt gart :  FK Shatt auer . 
 Kable ,  J. W. , &  Glimcher ,  P. W. ( 2009 ).  Th e Neurobiology of Decision:  Consensus and 
Controversy.   Neuron ,  63 ( 6 ),  733–745 . 
 Kaczmarek ,  B. ( 1991 ).  Aphasia in an artist: A disorder of symbolic processing.  Aphasiology ,  5 , 
 361–371 . 
 Kapur ,  N. ( 1996 ).  Paradoxical functional facilitation in brain-behavior research.  Brain ,  119 , 
 1775–1790 . 
 Kimberg ,  D. Y. ,  Coslett  ,  H. B.  , &   Schwartz ,  M. F.   ( 2007 ).  Power in Voxel-based Lesion-Symptom 
Mapping.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  19 ( 7 ),  1067–1080 . 
   Kwon ,  J.  ,   Kinm ,  J.  ,   Lee ,  D.  ,   Lee ,  J.  ,   Lee ,  D.  ,   Kim ,  M.  , . . . ,   Lee ,  M.   ( 2003 ).  Neural correlates of 
clinical symptoms and cognitive dysfunctions in obsessive-compulsive disorder.  Psychiatry 
Research ,  122 ,  37–47 . 
   Lissauer ,  H.  ( 1890 ).  Ein Fall von Seelenblindheit Nebst Einem Beiträge zur Th eori derselben. 
 Archiv fur Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten ,  21 ,  222–270 . 
 Lythgoe ,  M. ,  Polak ,  T. ,  Kalmus ,  M. ,  de Haan ,  M. , &  Khean Chong ,  W. ( 2005 ).  Obsessive, prolifi c 
artistic output following subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Neurology ,  64 ,  397398 . 
 Marsh ,  G. G. , &  Philwin ,  B. ( 1987 ).  Unilateral neglect and constructional apraxia in a right-handed 
artist with a left  posterior lesion.  Cortex. ,  23 ( 1 ),  149–155 . 
 Maurer ,  K. , &  Prvulovic ,  D. ( 2004 ).  Paintings of an artist with Alzheimer’s disease: visuoconstruc-
tive defi cits during dementia.    Journal of Neural Transmission ,  111 ,  235–245 . doi:10.1007/
s00702–003-0046–2 
 Miller ,  B. , &  Hou ,  C. ( 2004 ).  Portraits of artists: Emergence of visual creativity in dementia. 
 Archives of Neurology ,  61 ,  842–844 . 
 Miller ,  B. L. ,  Cummings ,  J. ,  Mishkin ,  F. ,  Boone ,  K. ,  Prince ,  F. ,  Ponton ,  M. , &  Cotman ,  C. ( 1998 ). 
 Emergence of artistic talent in frontotemporal dementia.  Neurology ,  51 ,  978–982 . 
 Podoll ,  K. , &  Robinson ,  D. ( 2000 ).  Migraine experiences as artistic inspiration in a contempo-
rary artist.  Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine ,  93 ( 5 ),  263–265 . 
 Rimland ,  B. , &  Fein ,  D. ( 1988 ). Special talents of autistic savants. In  L.  Obler &  D.  Fein (Eds.), 
  Th e Exceptional Brain  (pp.  474–492 ).  New York :  Guilford . 
 Rose ,  F. E. ( 2006 ).   Th e Neurobiology of Painting  .  London :  Academic Press . 
 Sacks ,  O. ( 1995a ). Th e case of the color blind painter.   An Anthroplogist on Mars  (pp.  3–41 ). 
 New York :  Alfred A. Knopf, Inc . 
 Sacks ,  O. ( 1995b ). Th e landscape of his dreams.   An Anthropologist on Mars  (pp.  153–187 ). 
 New York :  Alfred A. Knopf . 
 Sacks ,  O. ( 1995c ). Prodigies.   An Anthropologist on Mars  (pp.  188–243 ).  New  York :   Alfred 
A. Knopf . 
 Saxena ,  S. ,  Brody ,  A. ,  Maidment ,  K. ,  Dunkin ,  J. ,  Colgan ,  M. ,  Alborzian ,  S. , . . . ,  Baxter ,  L. J. ( 1999 ). 
 Localized orbitofrontal and subcortical metabolic changes and predictors of response to 
paroxetine treatment in obsessive-compulsive disorder.   Neuropsychopharmacology ,  21 , 
 683–693 . 
 Schnider ,  A. ,  Regard ,  M. ,  Benson ,  D. F. , &  Landis ,  T. ( 1993 ).  Eff ect of a right-hemisphere stroke 
on an artist’s performance.  Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, & Behavioral Neurology ,  6 ( 4 ), 
 249–255 . 

366
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 Schwartz ,  M. , &  Chawluck ,  J. ( 1990 ). Deterioration of language in progressive aphasia: a case 
study. In  M.  Schwartz (Ed.),   Modular Defi cits in Alzheimer-Type Dementia  (pp.  245–296 ). 
 Cambridge, MA :  Th e MIT Press . 
 Selfe ,  L. ( 1977 ).   Nadia. A  case of extraordinary drawing ability in an autistic child  . 
 New York :  Academic Press . 
 Sherwood ,  K. ( 2012 ).  How a cerebral hemorrhage altered my art. [10.3389/fnhum.2012.00055/
abstract].  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience ,  6 . doi:papers2://publication/doi/10.3389/
fnhum.2012.00055/abstract 
   Storr ,  R.   ( 1995 ). At last light.   Willem de Kooning. Th e Late Paintings, Th e 1980s  (pp.  37–79 ). In 
J. Jenkins & S. Engberg (Eds.),  Minneapolis :  San Franscisco Museum of Modern Art and 
Walker Arts Center . 
 Ursu ,  S. ,  Stenger ,  V. ,  Shear ,  M. ,  Jones ,  M. , &  CS ,  C. ( 2003 ).  Overactive action monitoring in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder .  Psychological Science ,  14 ,  347–353 . 
 Waldman ,  P. ( 2000 , Friday May 12).  Master stroke: A tragedy transforms a right-handed artist 
into a left y—and a star .  Wall Street Journal, CXLII , 94. 
 Wapner ,  W. ,  Judd ,  T. , &  Gardner ,  H. ( 1978 ).  Visual agnosia in an artist.  Cortex ,  14 ,  343–364 . 
 Waxman ,  S. , &  Geschwind ,  N. ( 1975 ).  Th e interictal behavior syndrome associated with tempo-
ral lobe epilepsy.   Archives of General Psychiatry ,  32 ,  1580–1586 . 
  Wilkinson ,  M. , &  Robinson ,  D. ( 1985 ).  Migraine art.  Cephalalgia ,  5 ( 3 ),  151–157 . 
 Wu ,  D. H. ,  Waller ,  S. , &  Chatt erjee ,  A. ( 2007 ).  Th e functional neuroanatomy of thematic role and 
locative relational knowledge.  Th e Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  19 ,  1542–1555 . 
 Zaidel ,  D.  ( 2005 ).   Neuropsychology of Art  .  New York :  Psychology Press . 
 Zaimov ,  K. ,  Kitov ,  D. , &  Kolev ,  N. ( 1969 ).  Aphasie chez un peintre.  Encephale ,  58 ,  377–417 .  

367
 C H A P T E R  18 
 Creativity
  
 Valeria  Drago and  Glen R .  Finney  
 Introduction 
 Creativity is a multifaceted concept. It underlies the arts, such as painting, sculpt-
ing, dance, song, poetry, music, photography, as well as the sciences, such as 
mathematics, physics, cosmology, chemistry, geology, biology, and psychology. 
Creativity crops up in small acts of personal novelty to grand works of genius that 
transform the way we live, think, and believe. Hard to defi ne, hard to capture, yet 
creativity is an essential part of human culture. 
 In this chapter, we review the construct of creativity, and demonstrate how 
neurological diseases infl uence creativity and delineate the brain mechanisms 
that underlie these eff ects, including a discussion of case reports of artists with 
neurological diseases and how the disease interfered with their abilities. 
 Th e construct of creativity is of great interest in psychology and neuroscience, 
but the fi ndings of investigations are not always consistent. Th e reason for incon-
sistent fi ndings may partially be because creativity is a very diffi  cult domain to 
study. Diff erent researchers defi ne creativity diff erently, use diff erent paradigms, 
and provide diff erent explanations for the mechanisms that might underlie cre-
ative thinking. 
 Defi nitions of Creativity 
 COM MON DEF I N IT ION  
 What is creativity? Webster’s II University Dictionary (1988) provides a common 
defi nition of creativity as: “having the power or ability to create,” “productive,” 
“marked by originality,” “new.” Emphasized in this common defi ning of creativity 
is the idea of production and that of novelty.  

368
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 PRODUCT ION  
 Th e importance of production to creativity makes sense in that a workable idea 
in the abstract may fail in the execution. By this defi nition of creativity, a con-
cept must move beyond the mind of the imaginer to the actual production of a 
creative work. However, even with production, and skillful production at that, 
an act or work still may not be creative. Th ere is a diff erence between being 
creative and being skillful. Skill is oft en a necessary prerequisite for creativity, 
in that skilled musicians, artists, writers, and scientists replicating or providing 
minor fl ourishes on the works of others can be very productive without being 
creative.  
 NOV ELT Y  
 Novelty can be considered from two diff erent perspectives; novelty for a per-
son versus novelty for the world. Researchers oft en fi nd that what they initially 
believed were original or new ideas for future studies have already been conducted 
once they conduct a literature review. Th is represents a reinventing of the wheel. 
Are these instances of creativity, even though the idea was not new? Th ey seemed 
to be so initially to those who conceived them, until they discovered another had 
done so before. Th is certainly represents an act of creativity at the level of the 
individual. Th e creative process or creative thinking encompasses activities that 
engender novel products to an individual, so long as they had no prior knowledge 
of the concept. 
 T H E PROBL E M OF R A N DOM N E SS  
 Production and novelty, as defi ned here, are both necessary, but not suffi  cient to 
defi ne creativity. For instance, a list of words or colors randomly applied to a can-
vas are produced, and most likely novel, but lack creativity. It is highly unlikely 
that a room full of monkeys typing on typewriters (or should we say computers) 
would produce the equivalent of Shakespeare, or anything of value whatsoever. 
One way to get around this problem of randomness is to require that the act of 
creative production have an intentional component or goal. Another way is to 
summon the criterion of value. 
 VA LU E  
 Several researchers add that, in addition to being novel, a work should also have 
value in order to be considered creative ( Shavinina, 2003 ,  Sternberg, 1999 ). 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1988, 1996 , 1999)  provided a detailed analysis of the rele-
vance of both novelty and value to creativity. A novel product becomes creative 
only when it is accepted as “part of the domain” or valued by “the fi eld”(which can 

Creativity
369
refer to any external audience or consumers). In this view, if a product is rejected 
by “the fi eld,” that work is not creative regardless of its novelty. 
 Th ere are problems with the addition of value as a defi ning feature of creativ-
ity. Sometimes a work is not valued at the time it is produced, but only later. For 
example, the impressionist painters were criticized when they fi rst developed 
their style. Th ere is also the problem of who deems the work of value. In many 
daily cases of creativity, the creative work may be of value only to its creator. Th is 
is similar to the problem of the individual versus general novelty of a work. Th us, it 
may be more useful to separate creativity from the value of a work, and to consider 
a work as creative if it is produced (intentionally) and novel to its creator.  
 U N IT Y I N DI V ER SIT Y  
 A somewhat diff erent approach to the defi nition of creativity used in some 
research is that of  Bronowski (1972) :  “Creativity is fi nding unity in what appears 
to be diversity.” Th e concept of unity in diversity is an old one, known to St. 
Augustine in the 5th century. Frances Hutcheson in 1725 was one of the fi rst to 
write about unity in diversity as applied to an artistic endeavor such as music. 
Many great visual artworks use a wide palett e of colors and forms, and similarly, 
we can hear in several great musical pieces a variety of melodies and rhythms. 
For both paintings and symphonies, the creators develop a thread that unifi es 
these diverse elements, bringing order to seeming (or potential) chaos. Th is 
defi nition highlights the concept of a “global approach” as a common feature 
in creativity. Unfortunately, this defi nition lacks the previously mentioned fea-
tures of novelty and productivity. Heilman and colleagues provided a related 
defi nition of creativity that expanded on this, defi ning creativity as the ability 
to understand, develop, and express in a systematic fashion novel orderly rela-
tionships ( Heilman, 2004 ).  
 A SSOCI AT ED CONCEP TS: CON V ERGEN T A N D 
DI V ERGEN T T H I N K I NG   
 J.P. Guilford fi rst defi ned (1950), then elaborated (1967), two modes of thinking 
that play a role in both intelligence and creativity to varying degrees: convergent 
and divergent thinking. Convergent thinking can be defi ned as the ability to come 
up with the “correct” answer to a question or problem, when there is one known 
specifi c solution to a problem. Convergent thinking is most heavily involved in 
activities that normally are classifi ed as intelligence tasks, but convergent think-
ing can be part of the creative process depending on the task and the stage of 
creativity in question, especially in scientifi c and technological endeavors. In 
contrast to convergent thinking, divergent thinking can be defi ned as the genera-
tion of novel ideas or solutions to a question or problem. Th is process requires the 

370
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
thinker to go beyond known answers and processes and generate new ones, and 
thus is a key component of the creative process. 
 Prerequisites of Creativity 
 Guilford and Christensen (1973) thought creativity was a subset of intelligence. 
Guilford developed psychometric tests to “measure” creativity. His fi ndings indi-
cate that students with low IQ consistently performed poorly on these tests, but 
for those students with high IQ , performance on creativity tests did not highly 
correlate with their performance on IQ tests. Aft er reviewing the relationship 
between intelligence and creativity, Torrance (1974) suggested that IQ and cre-
ativity are only moderately related (Heilman, 2005). 
 Intelligence and Creativity 
 A signifi cant change in the direction of creativity research started around 1950. 
J.P. Guilford, an expert on intelligence testing, proposed that psychology had 
not done enough to examine thinking that went beyond the kind measured by 
traditional I.Q. tests, specifi cally creative thinking. Similar to creativity itself, 
there are many defi nitions of intelligence, such as the ability to do well in school, 
but for most, intelligence is the measure of a person’s ability to acquire and apply 
knowledge. 
 Sternberg & O’Hara (1999)  suggest several possible relationships between 
intelligence and creativity: 1) they are the same; 2) one is a subset of another, such 
as creativity is a subset of intelligence; 3) they are unrelated; 4) they are overlap-
ping but independent constructs. Another way to look at the diff erence between 
intelligence and creativity, at least as is oft en assessed on psychological testing, is 
in defi ning intelligence as the ability to come to a correct answer, whereas creativ-
ity is the ability to generate a new answer. 
 Th e founder of intelligence testing, Alfred Binet, may have initially thought 
that creativity and intelligence were the same or closely overlapping constructs 
because the fi rst intelligence test he devised in 1896 used inkblots to explore the 
imagination of children. Later, according to  Sternberg & O’Hara (1999) , he dis-
continued this inkblot test because he was unable to develop a reliable means of 
scoring it, a problem that still plagues creativity assessment to this day.  Guilford 
& Christensen (1973) thought creativity was a subset of intelligence. Terman 
(1954) found that the later day success (or lack thereof) of children in the gift ed 
range of the intelligence quotient (IQ) did not demonstrate increased creativ-
ity, at least by their self-report of their careers and achievements. Guilford and 
Christensen in 1973 used a divergent product batt ery to compare creativity to 

Creativity
371
IQ and found that divergence ability was closely correlated at IQs of lower levels, 
but became less so as IQ approached 130.  Barron & Harrington (1981) focused 
on the relationship between intelligence and creativity, studying creative peoples’ 
intelligence. Th eir article on creativity, intelligence, and personality suggested 
a curvilinear relationship between intelligence and creativity, with intelligence 
presumably becoming less and less relevant at the higher levels of intelligence. 
 Th ese observations suggest that there might be an IQ threshold, such that a 
person needs to be above this threshold for her or him to be successfully creative. 
 Simonton (1994) and Herr (1965) in their studies also found that the correla-
tion between intelligence and creativity is weak. Th is weak correlation, however, 
might be related to the tests that were used to measure intelligence. 
 Catt ell (1963) posited that there are two types of intelligence, which he 
termed, “crystallized” and “fl uid.” Crystallized intelligence refers to specifi c 
knowledge and skills that accumulate over a lifetime, including but not limited 
to such areas as declarative memories, knowing that Rome is the capital of Italy, 
or lexical-semantic knowledge such as knowing the meaning of the word  impale . 
Fluid intelligence has been defi ned as the ability to reason and think abstractly. 
Most intelligence tests, such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), 
assess both crystallized (e.g., vocabulary-defi nitions) and fl uid intelligence (e.g., 
How are a fl y and a tree similar?). Catt ell posited that while crystallized knowl-
edge is important as a prerequisite for creativity, it is fl uid intelligence that more 
directly relates to creative ability. Although fl uid intelligence may be the best pre-
dictor of creativity, there are no formal studies that have studied this relationship, 
and litt le has been litt le writt en about the brain mechanisms of fl uid intelligence 
and cognitive fl exibility ( Heilman, 2004, 2012 ). 
 Stages of Creativity 
 Socrates thought “inspired thinking” was bestowed by the gods, specifi cally the 
nine daughters of Zeus, the Muses, who were each responsible for a specifi c form 
of the arts. Th us, geniuses were thought to be the inspired instruments of the gods 
through which Nature revealed knowledge to humanity. Unlike antiquity, the 
modern era has focused on identifying the brain mechanisms that underlie cre-
ativity ( Weisberg, 2006 ). 
 Helmholtz (1826) with elaboration by  Wallas (1926) parsed the creative act 
into four stages: 
 •  Preparation 
 •  Incubation 
 •  Illumination 
 •  Verifi cation 

372
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 PR EPA R AT ION  
 Th e model begins with a “pre-creative” stage, preparation. It posits that in order to 
be creative an individual must learn to some degree the basic background knowl-
edge and skills necessary to engage in the specifi c creative endeavor. Th e most 
creative acts may require training or preparation in disparate, previously uncon-
nected areas of knowledge or skill, whose synthesis results in a truly novel innova-
tion. For some activities preparation may take years or even decades. 
 Kuhn (1996)  and others have noted that many important discoveries are initi-
ated by the observation of an anomaly and recognition of its potential signifi cance, 
as in the example of the “ruined” petri dishes that led to Alexander Fleming’s dis-
covery of penicillin. Louis Pasteur’s famous quote, “Chance favors the prepared 
mind,” perhaps has multiple meanings; that it takes knowledge and skill to iden-
tify and move forward when an anomalous observation or idea appears, but also 
that it takes a curious mind to even look for such anomalies.  
 I NCU BAT ION  
 As previously intimated, the more rich and varied the experiences and training 
of a person, the more the imagination will have to work with (the proverbial 
“grist for the mill”). Imagination takes advantage of the ability of our brain to 
displace diff erent life events in a new and original way. Th e creative person may 
engage in an active search for a creative answer to an unknown question, but in 
many cases at least part of this work is performed preconsciously, which may 
take advantage of the massively parallel processing ability of the subconscious 
brain, as opposed to conscious thought which seems more serial in nature. 
Th e fi nal phase of incubation seems to be best performed in a relaxed or low 
arousal state. Heilman has hypothesized that such a relaxed state might allow 
for weaker semantic connections to be made, whereas in an excited state only 
the strongest semantic connections tend to come to consciousness. Ramòn y 
Cajal in his book entitled “ Advice for a young investigator ” suggests:  “If a solu-
tion fails to appear  . . .  and yet you feel success is just around the corner, try resting 
for a while.”  
 I L LU M I NAT ION  
 Th e third stage is typically the briefest, but it oft en marks the moment of recog-
nition of a creative concept. Th is is illumination, sometimes referred to as the 
“Aha!” or “Ha!” or “Ah!” moment. Henri Poincare’ (1854–1912), the mathemati-
cian and scientist (Miller, 1996), reported several instances of illuminations when 
describing his creative achievements. It should be noted that scientists and art-
ists can develop this illumination without necessarily observing an anomaly. Th e 
occurrence of illuminations in the absence of a consciously deliberative process 

Creativity
373
is suggestive of unconscious processing, replacing the gift  of the gods of Socrates 
with the products of the subconscious brain. 
 Other famous examples from Incubation to Illumination.   
 •  Th e Bath—Greek inventor Archimedes, third century B.C.E.; the original 
“Eureka!” experience while relaxing in a bath, discovery of using water dis-
placement to discern volume of irregularly shaped objects, such as the crown 
he was charged to check if pure gold or not without melting it. 
 •   Newton and the Apple—English mathematician and physicist Sir Isaac 
Newton, 1666; inspired in his mother’s garden by idea of an apple’s fall, led to 
the surmise of gravity. 
 •  Kekulé and the Dream of Ouroborus—German chemist Friedrich August 
Kekulé, 1865; discovery of the ring-shaped structure of benzene that came to 
him as a daydream of snake seizing its tail, an Ouroborus. 
 •  Einstein and Light—Austrian physicist Albert Einstein worked in the patent 
offi  ce, engaged in thought experiments that led to theory of relativity. 
 •  Mullis and the Endless Highway—American chemist Kary Mullis had a 
breakthrough on polymerase chain reaction in 1983 driving late at night down 
the highway with his girlfriend. 
 Oft en the “Aha!” moment of illumination changes the state of arousal of the cre-
ating individual from one of relaxation to excitement or exhilaration. Of course, 
it is possible to have the sensation of illumination incorrectly, a false positive. 
 Metcalfe and Wiebe (1987) demonstrated that the subjective feeling of knowing 
(the “Aha!”) did not predict performance on insight problems. Th e constructs of 
incubation and illumination have received criticism for this and other reasons. 
 Weisberg (1986) suggested that creativity does not always require great leaps 
(illumination) and the processes that led to many great discoveries might not 
involve subconscious incubation, but rather a series of conscious steps. Helmholtz 
and later, Wallas, saw illumination as the culmination of the incubation process 
rather than being an independent factor. 
 John Kounios and Marc Beeman have writt en and set up experimental para-
digms to test the neural correlates of the illumination stage, using EEG and func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the neural correlates of 
the “Aha! moment” and its antecedents. Th eir results suggest that this illumina-
tion or “insight” phenomenon is the “culmination of a series of brain states and 
processes operating at diff erent time scales” (Kounios & Beeman, 2009). In their 
study, they used a type of test called the compound remote association test. Th is 
test consists in three words (e.g., crab, pine, sauce). Participants need to provide 
a single word that can form a compound or a familiar two word phrase with each 
of the three problem words (e.g., apple for pineapple, crabapple, applesauce). 
Th e EEG results indicated that insight solutions were associated with a burst of 

374
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
high frequency activity starting about 300 milliseconds before the solution was 
reached by the subjects over the right anterior temporal lobe. Th e insight eff ect 
was also evaluated with fMRI, with fi ndings localizing to the right anterior supe-
rior temporal gyrus, underneath where the electrodes found the corresponding 
EEG signal (Kounios & Beeman, 2009). 
 V ER I F IC AT ION  
 In this last stage, creative people validate their creative insight, such as when sci-
entists perform experiments to test their hypotheses. Th e verifi cation stage can 
be further divided into a production and a confi rmation stage. For successful pro-
duction, there must be appropriate initiation, persistence, and disengagement. 
Whether the work can be produced successfully is the fi rst form of verifi cation. 
Confi rmation is a more controversial part of the verifi cation stage, where the work 
created is reviewed for its novelty, and in many instances, its value. Th is confi rma-
tion step is unnecessary for those models of creativity that only require personal 
novelty and do not place any value stipulation. For those that require more gen-
eral novelty and/or value, however, it is a vital part of the process. 
 Neurobiology of Creativity 
 Th e following section will provide examples on the potential infl uence of neu-
rological diseases on various cognitive mechanisms that may be important in 
serving as a foundation for creative thinking. Th e specifi c brain mechanisms that 
potentially explain the eff ects of neurological diseases on creativity will also be 
reviewed. 
 T H E ROL E OF NON DOM I NA N T (R IGHT) H E M ISPH ER E I N 
CR E AT I V IT Y  
 Bruce Miller and colleagues ( Miller et al., 1998 ;  Miller, Boone, Cummings, Read 
& Mishkin, 2000 ) have a series of reports on the emergence of artistic talents in 
patients aff ected by frontotemporal lobar degeneration. As the name implies, the 
most devastated part of the brain in the course of frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration are the frontal and temporal lobes. Th ere are three main syndromic types 
to frontotemporal lobar degeneration; progressive nonfl uent aphasia (impacting 
dominant hemisphere frontotemporal regions), behavioral variant frontotempo-
ral dementia (impacting nondominant hemisphere frontotemporal regions), and 
semantic dementia (impacting the bilateral anterior temporal lobes predomi-
nantly). Additionally, the logopenic variant of primary progressive aphasia [also 
referred to as logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA)] is the most recently identifi ed 

Creativity
375
variant of primary progressive aphasia. Th is disorder, characterized by a unique 
speech and language profi le, occurs due to damage to the left  temporo-parietal 
junction (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004). 
 Several of the patients described by Miller (1998–2000) started drawing or 
painting around the time they had the symptoms and signs of dementia or at the 
time when the disease was just beginning. It is remarkable that these patients in 
spite of their progressive dementia continued to paint and some even improved 
their artistic skill. While it can be debated whether these types of dementias actu-
ally enhance creativity and abstraction as opposed to releasing productivity with 
increasing distortion of works as the dementia progresses, that they could create 
works of art at all is amazing. 
 It is important to note that the left  hemisphere in right-handed individuals is 
almost always dominant for language and primarily mediates verbal activities, 
whereas the right hemisphere (“nondominant”) appears to be more important 
for aff ective, spatial, and musical skills. Miller noted that brain atrophy in these 
patients who developed artistic activities had a predominance in the left  frontal 
and temporal lobes, relatively sparing the right side of the brain, possibly sparing 
their creative skills in nonverbal activities. 
 An important question is what eff ect does frontotemporal lobar degenera-
tion have on people who have already acquired the skills of an artist? Th e fi rst 
case report to address this question was by  Mell (2003). who reported a woman 
who had been trained as an artist long before the onset of her disease. Th ere was 
continued art production through the course of her disease, and an increasing 
trend towards more “abstract” works, though in the late stage of her disease her 
art began to show severe degradation and signs of hemispatial neglect.  Finney & 
Heilman (2007) conducted a study in another patient with progressive nonfl uent 
aphasia and used an artistic quality rating tool to quantify the diff erences in her 
artwork before and aft er the onset of dementia, having independent judges rate 
the art works. Th e qualities assessed included novelty, aesthetics, representation, 
technique, and closure. Interestingly, during the period for which art was avail-
able, in this already trained artist, no changes in skill were noted, and even though 
the raters did not know the order of the paintings, they rated those done latest in 
the course of the disease as the least novel. It should be noted that the patient did 
show lightening of her color palett e, simplifi cation of her details, and distortion of 
angles in her artwork. 
 Drago et al. (2006) conducted a similar investigation by studying 40 paintings 
of an artist aff ected by semantic dementia. Th eir fi ndings were consistent with pre-
vious studies, showing an increase of some visual artistic skills over time. To help 
explain why brain dysfunction can result in the emergence of a new or improved 
skill, Kapur (1996) suggested that facilitation of a function might be induced by 
a lesion that destroys an inhibitory circuit (i.e., a “paradoxical functional facilita-
tion”). Miller and his coworkers (1998 and 2000) suggested that perhaps a similar 

376
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
phenomenon was occurring in their patients and the left  anterior temporal lobe 
degeneration “contributed to the unexpected emergence of talent in our patients.” 
 Th e aforementioned studies are interesting and provide important insights 
concerning visuospatial ability and visual artistic skills in patients aff ected by 
FTD, and some would suggest they also illuminate the systems subsuming cre-
ativity. It is important to mention all those studies indicating the eff ects of brain 
damage on the capacity to produce visual art. 
 Th e eff ects of brain damage on the capacity to produce visual art contrast 
sharply with many other human capacities. Disease of the brain commonly 
impairs our ability to speak or comprehend language, to coordinate movements, 
and to recognize objects. By contrast, while diseases of the brain can certainly 
alter the ability to produce art, in many cases, it is not so clear that the results 
are “impaired.” Paradoxically, on some cases, patients’ creativity is enhanced and 
their art seems to improve (Chatt erjee, 2006).In a paper about “conferring capac-
ity,” Chatt erjee (2006) argues that in these cases and in those of autism (Selfe, 
1977) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (Lythgoe, 2005), the issue is a change in 
personality that produces obsessive compulsive disease characteristics, predis-
posing individuals to produce art. Caution is needed to discuss the “enhancing” 
eff ects of brain damage on artistic production; it not at all clear if it is “creative” 
in the true sense. 
 Support for the hypothesis that the nondominant  (typically right) hemi-
sphere is important in creativity comes from several sources. One prominent 
view of creativity is that it is based on the processing of remote or loose asso-
ciations between ideas ( Mednick, 1962 ). Recent research implicates the brain’s 
right hemisphere in the processing of remote associates and the left  hemi-
sphere in the processing of close association (for a review, Jung-Beeman, 2005). 
 Asari (2008) examined unique perception using functional MRI by having 68 
healthy participants view 10 ambiguous fi gures from the Rorschach inkblot test 
( Rorschach, 1921 ) and state what they thought the fi gures looked like. Th ere 
was greater activity in the right temporopolar region at times when partici-
pants gave a unique response when compared to times of frequent responses. 
 Carlsson (2000) found that cerebral blood perfusion diff ered between high and 
low creativity individuals during the alternate use of object task, with bilateral 
frontal activation response seen in the high creativity individuals, but only 
left  (presumably dominant) frontal activation response in low creativity indi-
viduals. Th is may be due to more effi  cient but less extensive processing in the 
less creative individuals. It may also refl ect that there is a specifi c role for the 
non-dominant hemisphere. 
 Drago et al. (2009) studied an artist with Parkinson’s disease who subsequently 
had a left  deep brain stimulator (DBS) implanted. DBS can induce activation in 
one or both hemispheres. Based on the hypothesis of a “paradoxical functional 
facilitation,” the study sought to learn if DBS of the left  hemisphere, presumably 

Creativity
377
inducing left  hemisphere activation, would impact the creativity of a professional 
artist and her ability to judge art. Th e patient completed a test of creativity with 
the stimulator on and then with it off . Th e patient was also asked to judge the 
artwork of others in both the on and off  stimulation states. Th e results suggested 
the possibility that left  ventral STN/SNr (subthalamic nuclei/substantia nigra 
reticular) DBS reduced creativity as well as appreciation of art. Th e reason for 
this might be related to enhanced activation of the left  hemisphere and recipro-
cal deactivation of the right hemisphere which mediates both visuospatial skills 
and global att ention, both of which might be important in artistic creativity and 
appreciation of art. 
 Th e hemispheric lateralization model grew in the 1970s. Researchers espous-
ing this model postulated that the nondominant hemisphere was specialized 
for creative activities such as holistic patt ern recognition, art, and music. At the 
beginning of the chapter when creativity was defi ned, we discussed the concept of 
“fi nding the thread that unites” and “fi nding unity in what appears to be diversity” 
(Bronowski, 1972). Th e nondominant right hemisphere is thought to be more 
important in global than local processing ( Robertson et al., 1988 ) and if a key 
component to creativity is the ability to unify disparate elements, then a global 
approach may be important in “fi nding the thread that unites.” Th e nondominant 
right hemisphere is also thought to be important in mediating visual-spatial func-
tions ( Benton & Tranel, 1993 ), which may be important for a number of creative 
endeavors. Th e hemispheric lateralization model suggests nondominant right 
hemisphere mediates functions that are important for creative processing. An 
EEG study conducted by  Jausovec (2000) recorded the EEGs of 115 healthy indi-
viduals during resting, “eyes open” and “eyes closed” condition and found that 
when they were stratifi ed by measures of creativity and intelligence, EEG coher-
ence (obtained during “rest” with eyes open) was signifi cantly related to creativ-
ity scores, particularly in the right hemisphere. 
 Coherence provides information about the cooperation of diff erent areas of 
the brain and functional relations between brain regions. Coherence measures 
may be sensitive to diff erences in intelligence and creativity  Haier’s (1992)  
cortical effi  ciency theory suggests that diff erences between individuals with 
good and poor achievements are indicated by the amount of neural activity 
required to sustain a given level of cognitive activity ( Reiterer, 2002 ). Th e 
concept originally introduced by  Ertl (1969) , was reintroduced by the group 
of Richard Haier by investigating the relationship between intelligence and 
brain glucose metabolism with the help of positron emission tomography 
(PET) (1992). Haier and his co-authors ( Haier et al., 1988, 1995 , 1992) found 
a negative correlation between intelligence measures and glucose consump-
tion. Th eir results have been interpreted as an expression of higher cortical 
effi  ciency in performance groups with higher intellect (“smarter brains burn 
less glucose”) and vice versa.  

378
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
 T H E ROL E OF T H E F RON TO-T E M POR A L LOBE S  
 Th omas Edison is commonly quoted as saying that being a creative genius 
required “ninety-nine percent perspiration and one percent inspiration” ( Beals, 
1996 ). To be successful, creative people oft en need to have perseverance and per-
sistence. Goal-oriented behaviors and volition rely predominantly on the frontal 
lobes. Patients with degeneration of the frontal lobes oft en present with a loss of 
initiative and drive (abulia). Th e ability to generate and maintain long-term goals 
and to suppress biological drives when they interfere with those goals, as well as 
the ability to persist and not be distracted, is what Heilman calls “frontal intel-
ligence” ( Heilman, 2004 ). Frontal intelligence as conceptualized by Heilman is 
probably one of the major factors underlying success in any profession, including 
those that require creativity. Additionally, the frontal lobe networks have another 
function that appears to be important for creativity, divergent thinking. 
 Divergent thinking as alluded to previously is the ability to take a diff erent 
direction from prevailing modes of thought or expression (Williams  James, 1890 ). 
 Zangwell (1966)  and  Milner (1984)  suggested frontal lobe dysfunction would 
disrupt divergent thinking. As previously mentioned, highly creative individu-
als possess higher baseline frontal lobe activity and greater increases in frontal 
lobe activity measured by regional cerebral blood fl ow while performing creative 
tasks ( Carlsson, 2000 ). Th ere is also evidence that transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation applied to the frontal lobes can increase creativity in healthy participants 
during drawing and writing tasks ( Snyder, 2004 ). Case reports of patients whose 
creativity increased aft er receiving subcortical deep brain stimulation with the 
electrodes placed near the nucleus accumbens, which has strong connections to 
the frontal and temporal lobes, have also been reported ( Flaherty, 2005 ; Gabriëls, 
2003). Th e dorsolateral prefrontal cortex supports the planning and organiza-
tion, while the cingulate cortex has been implicated in the modulation of drive 
and emotion. In addition, there is evidence suggesting that creative drive may be 
controlled through interactions among the frontal lobes, temporal lobes, and the 
limbic system ( Flaherty, 2005 ), with creative drive increasing with temporal lobe 
dysfunction and increasing dopaminergic activity. Creative block occurs with 
defi cits in frontal lobe activity or decreasing dopaminergic activity. 
 OT H ER GR AY M AT T ER S YST E MS I M PLIC AT ED 
I N CR E AT I V IT Y   
 Th e neurobiology of creativity has also been addressed using single photon emis-
sion computerized tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET), 
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Chavez et al. (2004) used 
SPECT to study 12 highly creative subjects while performing fi gural and verbal 
creative tasks. Th ese authors found a positive relationship between the creativity 

Creativity
379
index and cerebral blood fl ow in the right postcentral gyrus, bilateral rectus gyrus, 
right inferior parietal lobule, and right parahippocampal gyrus. Th ese fi ndings 
were interpreted as supporting a “highly distributed brain system” underly-
ing creativity (Chavez et al., 2004). PET was used to study normal subjects as 
they performed verbal creativity tasks, with signifi cant brain activation being 
observed in the left  parieto-temporal brain regions (Brodmann’s areas 39 and 
40), which are considered to be “crucial” to the creative process (Bechtereva et al., 
2004). An fMRI study att empted to localize creative story generation within the 
brains of a cohort of 8 normal subjects (Howard-Jones, 2005). Th e results indi-
cated that when creative story generation was contrasted to uncreative story gen-
eration, signifi cant activations were observed within bilateral medial frontal gyri 
(Brodmann’s areas 9 and 10) and the left  anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 32). Across 
all studies, no clear consensus has emerged as to whether frontal or more poste-
rior brain regions are more central to creative processes.  
 T H E ROL E OF W H IT E M ATT ER I N CR E AT I V IT Y   
 Given that creativity oft en draws on novel connections, it may require intra and 
interhemispheric communication between several brain systems. Works of sci-
entifi c or artistic creativity oft en require skills and knowledge known to be sub-
served by both cerebral hemispheres. For example, the sculptor must imagine 
the rotation of spatial images mediated by the nondominant right hemisphere, 
while at the same time he uses motor skills mediated by the dominant left  hemi-
sphere. Th us, intra- and interhemispheric communication could be crucial for 
integrating, especially in novel ways, knowledge and skills that depend on both 
hemispheres. Th e largest white matt er structure connecting the “independent” 
modular systems represented by the two hemispheres is the corpus callosum. 
 Lewis (1979) administered the Rorschach test to eight patients with drug resis-
tant epilepsy before and aft er cerebral commissurotomy. Disconnection of the 
two cerebral hemispheres tended to destroy “creativity” as measured by this 
test. Frederic Bremer suggested that the corpus callosum subserves the highest 
and most elaborate activities of the brain, including, conceivably, creativity. Th e 
corpus callosum is primarily comprised of myelinated axons whose cells bod-
ies are in the pyramidal layers of the cerebral cortex. Th e cerebral connections 
important for creativity, however, might not only be inter-hemispheric, but also 
intra-hemispheric. 
 In addition to the myelinated axons that carry information between the 
hemispheres, from the thalamus and basal ganglia to the cortex, and from 
the cortex to the basal ganglia, thalamus, brain stem, and spinal cord, these 
myelinated axons also carry information between cortical regions in the same 
hemisphere. Th ese intra-hemispheric connections facilitate intra-hemispheric 
communication, which also might be important for creative innovation because 

380
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
widespread connectivity allows creative people to combine the representations 
of ideas that have been previously isolated ( Heilman, 2003 ). In addition, these 
intra-hemispheric white matt er connections that include connections between 
the frontal lobes and the posterior association area in the temporal and parietal 
lobes might allow the selective activation or inhibition of cognitive modules. 
 Connectionist and parallel distributed processing (PDP) models are based 
on using processing units or nodes that are thought to be similar to the neurons 
found in the brain. PDP models strongly simulate the fundamental properties of 
neural networks. Information in PDP networks is stored in the strengths of con-
nections between units (as in the brain) and concepts are represented as patt erns 
of activity involving many units (as distributed representations) ( Rumelhart, 
1986 ). A large number of units linked by a set of connections defi ne a domain 
of knowledge from which any one of a large number of concepts can be gener-
ated. Psychological studies of priming eff ects on lexical decision latency tasks are 
a good demonstration of the ability of this model to account for empirical results. 
 Mednick (1962) suggested that in generating associative responses to a stimu-
lus, creative individuals are characterized by a broader associative hierarchy or 
network than less creative individuals. Hence, creative people might be able to 
activate broader, more highly distributed networks. 
 R EL A X AT ION, SE M A N T IC N ET WOR K ACT I VAT ION, 
A N D CR E AT I V IT Y   
 As previously noted, several scientists have reported solving diffi  cult scientifi c 
problems during sleep or during transitions from sleep to wake and vice versa. 
Th ese moments of insight appear to occur at times when people are relaxed or 
at rest.  Eysenck (1995)  suggested that during conscious problem solving, corti-
cal arousal is high and this high level of cortical arousal narrows the associative 
fi eld or semantic network and thus suppresses the ability to make remote associa-
tions, but that lowered arousal might allow these remote associations to emerge. 
Support for the theory that the level of arousal might determine the size of neu-
ral networks comes from some recent research by  Contreras and Llinas (2001) . 
Using high-speed optical imaging, they electrically stimulated subcortical white 
matt er in the slices of brain from a guinea pig to record the portion of the neo-
cortex activated by subcortical stimulation. Low-frequency stimulation cortical 
activation was limited at the beginning, and then, aft er a few milliseconds, the 
activation spread into nearby areas. High frequency stimulation, on the other 
hand, saw the excitation remain fi xed to a small column of neurons directly above 
the stimulating electrode. Intracellular recording from the neurons around the 
excited column during rapid stimulation actually revealed increased inhibitory 
synaptic activity that probably helped account for the inhibition of the spread of 
activation. 

Creativity
381
 Several researchers have investigated reports of depression and bipolar disor-
der in creative individuals ( Kraepelin, 1921 ,  Post, 1996 ). Th rough the study of 
biographies of composers, scientists, artists, and writers, a high incidence of aff ec-
tive disorders was identifi ed in this population and even their families. It would be 
reasonable to think that depression might facilitate creative innovation. However, 
the verifi cation and productivity portions of the creative process require a high 
level of arousal and focus, and thus, it might be that depressed individuals have 
very creative ideas but it would be very diffi  cult for them to produce creative 
products. 
 T H E ROL E OF DOPA M I N E I N CR E AT I V IT Y   
 Creative people have higher baseline arousal and heightened responses to sen-
sory stimulation ( Martindale, 1999 ). Dopamine raises baseline arousal and 
decreases latent inhibition, a behavioral index of the ability to habituate to sensa-
tion ( Ellenbroek et al., 1996 ;  Swerdlow et al., 2003 ). Th e focused aspect of cre-
ative drive may be driven by mesolimbic dopaminergic activity, though this drive 
system is known to be involved in other drive activities and is not specifi c to cre-
ativity. Dopamine also mediates reward-seeking activity, ranging from gambling 
and cocaine addiction to the appreciation of beautiful faces and music ( Aharon 
et al., 2001 ;  Breiter et al., 2001 ). However, as in many brain systems, too much 
dopamine may cause excessively focused, highly complex motor stereotypes, 
such as repeatedly disassembling and reassembling one’s motorcycle engine or 
performing obsessive painting ( Fernandez & Friedman, 1999 ; Chatt erjee et al., 
2006). Dopamine may also play a role in creative discovery through its eff ect 
on novelty seeking, possibly an element in curiosity. An allele of the D4 recep-
tors has been postulated somewhat controversially to increase novelty-seeking 
(Keltikangas-Jarvinen et  al., 2003;  Savitz & Ramesar, 2004 ).  Drago (2009) 
examined the performance on a test of creativity in a group of Parkinson’s dis-
ease patients. Patients were divided by side of onset, with the a priori hypothesis 
that patients with a right hemibody, and thus left  hemisphere, onset Parkinson’s 
disease would be more impaired in verbal creativity whereas patients with left  
hemibody (right hemisphere) onset would have more problems with a test of 
visuospatial creativity, as compared to healthy controls. Th e results indicated a 
decline in verbal creativity in the group of patients with right hemibody onset 
Parkinson’s disease compared to controls.  Foster (2008) also performed a study 
looking at dopamine levels and sematic networks in a population of Parkinson’s 
patients. Th ey sought to investigate the eff ects of Parkinson’s disease (PD), 
which is associated with dopamine depletion, on spreading activation in the lexi-
cal networks, looking at the average word frequency of the controlled oral word 
association test in Parkinson’s patients and controls. Th is measure was treated 
as an index of spreading activation. Th e PD patients exhibited a lower average 

382
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
word frequency, suggesting increased spreading activation, and a signifi cant rela-
tionship between the strength of the initial activation and subsequent extent of 
spreading activation. 
 Catecholamines are believed to modulate the size of neuronal networks as 
demonstrated in the priming study of  Kischka (1996) that used a lexical prim-
ing task with either real words or pseudowords fl ashed on screen; participants 
were instructed to press a computer key as quickly as possible when the word on 
the screen was real, but not to press the key if it was a pseudoword. Sometimes 
these real words and pseudowords were preceded by another word that served as 
a prime. Th e more the prime and the target word were associated (direct prim-
ing), the more rapid the recognition of the real target word. Th e less the two real 
words were related (indirect priming), the less the infl uence of the prime on word 
recognition and response time. When healthy participants were administered 
L-Dopa, the indirect priming eff ect decreased, suggesting that dopamine reduced 
the spread of semantic activation, which was the conclusion reached by Kischka 
et al. However, L-Dopa is a precursor not solely of dopamine, but also of norepi-
nephrine, and the administration of L-Dopa to these individuals may have also 
increased the level of norepinephrine, which could be constricting the spread of 
semantic activation seen in this experiment. 
 It has been suggested that all these diff erent states (such as relaxation, depres-
sion, resting, etc.) share an alteration of the brain’s neurotransmitt er systems, 
specifi cally a reduction of catecholamines including norepinephrine ( McCarley, 
1982 ) that might increase creative thinking.  
 I N H I BITORY EF FECTS OF NOR EPI N EPH R I N E 
ON CR E AT I V IT Y   
 To test the infl uence of norepinephrine on cognitive fl exibility,  Beversdorf (1999) 
tested participants with anagrams when taking either placebo, the pro-adrenergic 
drug ephedrine, or the beta-adrenergic blocker propanolol. Performance on the 
anagram task improved aft er participants took propanolol. Further support for 
the idea that high levels of adrenergic activity might reduce cognitive perfor-
mances comes from a study where students with test anxiety improved their score 
on the scholastic aptitude test when given the beta adrenergic blocker propanolol 
( Faigel, 1991 ).  Martindale (1973) found that during stressful conditions, when it 
would be expected that sympathetic tone would be elevated, performance on the 
remote association test declined. 
 Farah et  al. (2008) did a study looking at Adderall (mixed amphetamine 
salts) and creativity, to fi nd out whether Adderall impairs creativity in healthy 
young adults. Th eir preliminary evidence was consistent with the hypothesis 
that Adderall has an overall negative eff ect on creativity. Its eff ects on divergent 
creative thought cannot be inferred with confi dence from this study because of 

Creativity
383
the ambiguity of null results. Its eff ects on convergent creative thought appear 
to be dependent on the baseline creativity of the individual. Th ose in the higher 
range of the normal distribution may be unaff ected or impaired, whereas those 
in the lower range of the normal distribution experience enhancement (Farah 
et al., 2008). 
  Ghacibeh (2006) studied people with vagus nerve stimulators for medically 
intractable partial epilepsy, assessing its impact on creativity and cognitive fl ex-
ibility. He found that creativity and cognitive fl exibility were both reduced during 
stimulation, in keeping with the hypothesis that since vagus nerve stimulation 
could activate the neurons in the locus coeruleus (LC), resulting in increased 
release of norepinephrine, vagus nerve stimulation should reduce creativity and 
cognitive fl exibility. 
 Closure on Creativity 
 Th is chapter serves to introduce the concept, theories, investigation, and under-
standing of creativity. We are just beginning to understand the neuroanatomical 
and neurochemical correlates of creativity, and are still at an early stage in our 
understanding. How much of the observed diff erences in the brains of highly cre-
ative people is the source of their creativity or the result of that creativity remains 
to be seen. Creativity is a necessary and important part of living successfully in 
a world where we do not know all the answers, a world that we are still explor-
ing. Understanding the neurological underpinnings of creativity will allow us to 
identify and develop treatment and rehabilitation strategies for those who have 
diffi  culty engaging in creative activity. 
 Many of the greatest acts of creativity, or genius, were presaged by the simple 
act of relaxation. At the beginning of the 21st century, as information technology 
blurs the lines between work and recreation and relaxation, truly relaxed peri-
ods of time are in danger of disappearing. If we value creativity and set as a goal 
to increase creativity and innovation, we need to build into our lives and society 
protected time simply to be, and allow our brains to fi nd their own way to new 
heights of achievement that we otherwise may miss in our hectic day-to-day lives.    
 References 
 Aharon ,  I. ,  Etcoff  ,  N. ,  Ariely ,  D. ,  Chabris ,  C. F. ,  O’Connor ,  E. , &  Breiter ,  H. C. ( 2001 ).  Beautiful 
faces have variable reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence .  Neuron ,  32 ( 3 ),  537–551 . 
 Asari ,  T. ,  Konishi ,  S. ,  Jimura ,  K. ,  Chikazoe ,  J. ,  Nakamura ,  N. , &  Miyashita ,  Y. ( 2008 ).  Right tem-
poral activation associated with unique perception .  Neuroimage ,  41 ,  142–152 . 
 Barron ,  F. , &  Harrington ,  D. M. ( 1981 ).  Creativity, intelligence and personality .  Annual Review of 
Psychology ,  32 ,  439–476 . 

384
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Beals ,  G.   ( 1996 ).  Th omas Edison’s home page . Retrieved from www.thomasedison.com 
 Bechtereva, N. P., Korotkov, A. D., Pakhomov, S. V., Roudas, M. S., Starchenko, M. G., & Medvedev, 
S. V. (2004). PET study of brain maintenance of verbal creative activity.  International Journal 
of Psychophysiology, 53 (1), 11–20. 
  Benton ,  A. , &  Tranel ,  D. ( 1993 ). Visuoperceptual, visuospatial, and visuoconstructive disorders. 
In   K. M .  Heilman  , &   E.   Valenstein   (Eds.),   Clinical Neuropsychology  :   New  York :   Oxford 
University Press . 
   Beversdorf,   D. Q.  ,   Hughes,   J. D.  ,   Steinberg,   B. A.  ,   Lewis,   L. D.  ,   Heilman,  K.  M.   Noradrenergic 
modulation of cognitive fl exibility in problem solving. ( 1999 ).  Neuroreport ,  10 ( 13 ), 
 2763–2767 . 
  Binet ,  A. ( 1886 ).  La psychologie du raisonnement .  Paris ,  Alcan . (Published in English as Th e 
psychology of reasoning.  Chicago, IL :  Open Court ,  1896 ). 
   Breiter ,  H. C.  ,   Aharon ,  I.  ,   Kahneman ,  D.  ,   Dale ,  A.  , &   Shizgal ,  P.   ( 2001 ).  Functional imaging of 
neural responses to expectancy and experience of monetary gains and losses .  Neuron ,  30 ( 2 ), 
 619–639 . 
 Bronowski ,  J. ( 1972 ).   Science and Human Values  .  New York :  Harper & Row . 
 Carlsson ,  I. ,  Wendt ,  P. E. , &  Risberg ,  J. ( 2000 ).  On the neurobiology of creativity. Diff erences 
in frontal activity between high and low creative subjects .  Neuropsychologia ,  38 ,  873–885 . 
 Catt ell ,  R. B. ( 1963 ).  Th e theory of fl uid and crystallized intelligence: A critical experiment . 
 Journal of Educational Psychology , 54,  1–22.  
 Chatt erjee, A.  (2006). Th e neuropsychology of visual art:  conferring capacity.  International 
Review of Neurobiology, 74 , 39–49. 
 Chavez, R. A., Graff -Guerrero, A., Garcia-Reyna, J. C., Vaugier, V., & Cruz-Fuentes, C. (2004). 
Neurobiology of creativity: preliminary results from a brain activation study.  Salud Mental , 
 27 (3), 38–46. 
 Contreras ,  D. , &  Llinas ,  R. ( 2001 ).  Voltage-sensitive dye imaging of neocortical spatiotemporal 
dynamics to aff erent activation frequency .  Journal of Neuroscience ,  21 ( 23 ),  9403–9413 . 
   Csikszentmihalyi ,  M.   ( 1988 )  Motivation and creativity: Toward a synthesis of structural and 
energistic approaches to cognition .   New Ideas in Psychology ,  6 ( 2 ),  159–76 . 
  Csikszentmihalyi ,  M.   ( 1999 ) Implications of a Systems Perspective for the study of creativity. 
In  R. J .  Sternberg (Ed.),   Handbook of Creativity  (pp.  313–335 ).  New  York :   Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Csikszentmihalyi ,  M. ( 1996 ).   Creativity:  Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention  . 
 New York :  Harper Collins . 
 Drago, V., Foster, P. S., Trifi lett i, D., FitzGerald, D. B., Kluger, B. M., Crucian, G. P., & Heilman, 
K. M. (2006). What’s inside the art? Th e infl uence of frontotemporal dementia in art pro-
duction.  Neurology, 67 (7), 1285–1287. 
 Drago ,  V. ,  Foster ,  P. S. ,  Okun ,  M. S. ,  Haq ,  I. ,  Sudhyadhom ,  A. ,  Skidmore ,  F. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. 
( 2009 ).  Artistic creativity and DBS: A case report .  Journal of the Neurological Sciences ,  276 , 
 138–142 . 
 Drago ,  V. ,  Foster ,  P. S. ,  Skidmore ,  F. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 2009 ).  Creativity in Parkinson’s dis-
ease as a function of right versus left  hemibody onset .  Journal of the Neurological Sciences , 
 276 ( 1–2 ),  179–183 . 
  Ellenbroek ,  B. A. ,  Budde ,  S. , &  Cools ,  A. R. ( 1996 ).  Prepulse inhibition and latent inhibition: Th e 
role of dopamine in the medial prefrontal cortex .  Neuroscience ,  75 ( 2 ),  535–542 . 
 Ertl ,  J. &  Schafer ,  E. ( 1969 ).  Brain Response correlates of psychometric intelligence .  Nature , 223, 
 421–422 . 
  Eysenck ,  H. L. ( 1995 ).   Genius  .  New York and Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
  Faigel ,  H. C. ( 1991 ).  Th e eff ect of beta blockade on stress-induced cognitive dysfunction in ado-
lescents .  Clinical Pediatrics ,  30 ,  441–445 . 
  Flaherty ,  A. W. ( 2005 ).  Frontotemporal and dopaminergic control of idea generation and creative 
drive .  Journal of Comparative Neurology ,  493 ,  147–153 . 

Creativity
385
 Fernandez ,  H. H. , &  Friedman ,  J. H. ( 1999 ).  Punding on L-dopa .  Movement Disorders ,  14 , 
 836–838 . 
 Finney ,  G. R. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 2007 ).  Artwork before and aft er onset of progressive nonfl uent 
aphasia .  Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology ,  20 ,  7–10 . 
 Foster,  P. S .,  Drago,  V .,  FitzGerald,  D. B .,  Skoblar,  B. M .,  Crucian,  G. P .,  Heilman,  K. M . (2008). 
Spreading activation of lexical–semantic networks in Parkinson's disease.  Neuropsychologia , 
 46 ( 7 ),  1908–1914.  
 Gabriëls ,  L. ,  Cosyns ,  P. ,  Nutt in ,  B. ,  Demeulemeester ,  H. , &   Gybels ,  J. ( 2003 ).  Deep brain stimula-
tion for treatment-refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: Psychopathological and neu-
ropsychological outcome in three cases .  Preview.  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica ,  107 ( 4 ), 
 275–282 . 
 Ghacibeh ,  G. A. ,  Shenker ,  J. I. ,  Shenal ,  B. ,  Uthman ,  B. M. , &  Heilman ,  K. M. ( 2006 ).  Eff ect of 
vagus nerve stimulation on creativity and cognitive fl exibility .  Epilepsy and Behavior , 8( 4 ), 
 720–725 . 
 Goff  ,  K. , &  Torrance ,  E. P. ( 2002 ).   Abbreviated Torrance test for Adults Manual  .  Bensenville, 
IL :  Scholastic Testing Service .  
 Gorno-Tempini,  M. L. ,  Dronkers  NF ,  Rankin  KP ,  Ogar  JM ,  Phengrasamy  L ,  Rosen  HJ ,  Johnson  
 JK ,  Weiner  MW ,  Miller  BL ( 2004 )  Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary pro-
gressive aphasia .  Annals of Neurology ,  55 ,  335–346.  
 Guilford ,  J. P. ( 1950 ).  Creativity research: Past, present, and future .  American Psychologist ,  5 , 
 444–454 . 
 Guilford ,  J. P. , &  Christensen ,  P. W. ( 1973 ).  Th e one way relationship between creative potential 
and IQ .  Journal of Creative Behavior ,  7 ,  247–252 . 
 Haier ,  R. J. ,  Siegel ,  B. V. ,  Nuechterlein ,  K. H. ,  Hazlett  ,  E. ,  Wu ,  J. C. ,  Peak ,  J. ,  Browning ,  H. L. , & 
 Buchsbaum ,  M. S. ( 1988 ).  Cortical glucose metabolic rate correlates of abstract reasoning 
and att ention studied with Positron Emission Tomography .  Intelligence , 11,  199–218 . 
 Haier ,  R. J. ,  Siegel ,  B. V. ,  Maclachlan ,  A. ,  Soderling ,  E. ,  Lott enberg ,  S. ,  Buchsbaum ,  M. S. 
( 1992 ).  Regional glucose metabolic changes aft er learning a complex visuospatial/motor 
task: A positron emission tomographic study .  Brain Research , 570,  134–143 . 
 Haier ,  R. ,  Siegel ,  B. ,  Tang ,  Ch .,  Abel ,  L. ,  Buchsbaum ,  M. ( 1992 ).  Intelligence and changes in 
regional cerebral glucose metabolic rate following learning .  Intelligence , 16,  415–426 . 
 Haier ,  R. ,  Larson ,  G. ,  LaCasse ,  L. ,  Hazen ,  K. ( 1995 ).  Evaluation of a Mental Eff ort Hypothesis 
for Correlations between Cortical Metabolism and Intelligence .  Intelligence , 21,  267–278 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ( 2004 ).   Creativity and the Brain  .  New York :  Oxford . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. ,  Nadeau ,  S. E. ,  Beversdorf ,  D. O. ( 2003 ),  Creative Innovation: Possible Brain 
Mechanisms ,  Neurocase, 9,  369–379 . 
 Heilman ,  K. M. &  Valenstein  E. ( 2012 ).   Clinical Neuropsychology   (5th ed., pp.  637–654 ). 
 New York :  Oxford University press . 
 Helmholtz ,  H. ( 1826 / 1995 ). Vortrage und reden. In  H.  Eysenck (Ed.),   Genius. Th e natural history 
of creativity  .  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Herr, Edwin L., et  al. (1965). Creativity, intelligence, and values:  A  study of relationships. 
 Exceptional Children, 32 (2), 114–115. 
 Howard-Jones, P.  A., Blakemore, S.  J., Samuel, E.  A., Summers, I.  R., & Claxton, G.  (2005). 
Semantic divergence and creative story generation: An fMRI investigation.  Cognitive Brain 
Research ,  25 (1), 240–250. 
   Hutcheson ,  F.  , An Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue . . . ,  London :  J. 
Darby ,  1725 , 4/1738, Treatise I, section 2, in le Huray/Day, p.  24 . 
 James ,  W. ( 1890 ).   Th e Principles of Psychology  .  New York :  Dover . 
 Jausovec ,  N. , &  Jausovec ,  K. ( 2000 ).  Diff erences in resting EEG related to ability .  Brain 
Topography ,  12 ,  229–240 . 
 Kapur, N.  (1996). Paradoxical functional facilitation in brain-behavior research.  Brain, 119 , 
1775–1790. 

386
Th e Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience
   Keltikangas-Järvinen ,  L.  ,   Elovainio ,  M.  ,   Kivimäki ,  M.  ,   Lichtermann ,  D.  ,   Ekelund ,  J.  , &   Peltonen , 
 L. ( 2003 ).  Association between the type 4 dopamine receptor gene polymorphism and nov-
elty seeking .   Psychosomatic Medicine ,  65 ,  471–476 . 
   Kischka ,  U.  ,   Kammer ,  T.  ,   Maier ,  S.  ,   Weisbrod ,  M.  ,   Th imm ,  M. , &  Spitzer ,  M. ( 1996 ).  Dopaminergic 
modulation of semantic network activation .  Neuropsychologia ,  34 ,  1107–1113 . 
 Kraepelin ,  E. ( 1921 ).   Manic-depressive insanity   and paranoia ( R. M.  Barclay , trans.).  Edinburgh :  E. 
& S. Livingstone . 
 Kuhn ,  T. S. ( 1996 ).   Th e Structure of Scientifi c Revolutions  (3rd ed.).  Chicago :   University of 
Chicago Press . 
 Lewis ,  R. T. ( 1979 ).  Organic sign, creativity, and personality characteristic of patients following 
cerebral commissurotomy .  Clinical Neuropsychologist ,  1 ,  29–33 . 
 Lythgoe, M., Polak, T., Kalmus, M., de Haan, M., & Khean Chong, W. (2005). Obsessive, prolofi c 
artistic output following subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Neurology, 64 , 397–398. 
 Martindale ,  C. ( 1999 ). Biological bases of creativity. In  R. J .  Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of cre-
ativity (pp.  137–152 ).  New York, NY :  Cambridge University Press . 
   Martindale   C.  , &   Greenough ,  J.   ( 1973 ).  Th e diff erential eff ect of increased arousal on creative and 
intellectual performance .   Journal of Genetic Psychology ,  123 ,  392–335 . 
 McCarley ,  R. W. ( 1982 ).  REM sleep and depression: Common neurobiological control mecha-
nisms .  American Journal of Psychiatry ,  139 ,  565–570 . 
 Mednick ,  S. A. ( 1962 ).  Th e associative basis of the creative process .  Psychological Review ,  9 , 
 220–232 . 
 Mell,  J. C .,  Howard,  S. M .,  Miller,  B. L . ( 2003, May 27).  Art and the brain: the infl uence of fronto-
temporal dementia on an accomplished artist .  Neurology ,  60 ( 10 ),  1707–1710 . 
   Metcalfe ,  J.  , &   Wiebe ,  D.   ( 1987 ).  Intuition in insight and noninsight problem solving ,   Memory & 
Cognition ,  15 ,  238–246 . 
   Miller ,  B. L.  ,   Boone ,  K.  ,   Cummings ,  J. L.  ,   Read ,  S. L.  , &   Mishkin ,  F.   ( 2000 ).  Functional correlates 
of musical and visual ability in frontotemporal dementia .   British Journal of Psychiatry ,  176 , 
 458–463 . 
   Miller   B. L.  ,   Cummings   J.  ,   Mishkin ,  F.  ,   Boone   K.  ,   Prince   F.  ,   Poton ,  M.  , &   Cotman ,  C.   ( 1998 ). 
 Emergence of artistic talent in frontotemporal dementia.  Neurology ,  51 ,  978–982 . 
 Milner ,  B. ( 1984 ).  Behavioural eff ects of frontal-lobe lesions in man .  Trends in Neurosciences ,  7 , 
 403–407 . 
 Post ,  F.   ( 1996 ).  Verbal creativity, depression, and alcoholism. An investigation of one hundred 
American and British writers .  British Journal of Psychiatry ,  168 ,  545–555 . 
 Reiterer ,  S. M.   ( 2002 ). EEG coherence analysis and foreign language processing. Diff erences 
Between Language Students (English) and Students of Other Disciplines During the 
Processing of Natural Language Stimuli (TV texts) in British English, American English and 
German.  Dissertation zum Erlangen des Doktorgrades der Naturwissenschaft en an der Human 
und Sozialwissenschaft lichen Fakultät der Universität Wien in dem Studienfach Psychologie . 
   Robertson ,  L. C.  ,   Lamb ,  M. R.  , &   Knight ,  R. T.   ( 1988 ).  Eff ects of lesions of temporal parietal 
junction on perceptual and att entional processing in humans .  Journal of Neurosciences ,  8 , 
 3757–3769 . 
   Rorschach ,  H.   ( 1921 ). Psychodiagnostik: Methodik und ergebnisse eines wahrnehmungsdiag-
nostischen experiments.  Bern :  Ernst Bircher . 
 Rumelhart ,  D. E. , & Mc Clelland ,  J. L. ( 1986 ).   Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the 
Microstructure of Cognition  , Vols. 1 and 2.  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
   Savitz ,  J. B.  , &   Ramesar ,  R. S.   ( 2004 ).  Genetic variants implicated in personality: A review of the 
more promising candidates .   American Journal of Medical Genetics B Neuropsychiatric Genetics , 
 131B ( 1 ),  20–32 . 
 Shavinina ,  L. V. (Ed) ( 2003 ),   Th e International Handbook on Innovation  .  New  York, NY, 
US :  Elsevier Science . 
 Simonton ,  D. K. ( 1994 ).   Greatness: Who Makes History and Why?   New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Simonton ,  D. K. ( 1999 ).   Origins of Genius: Darwinian Prospective on Creativity  .  New York :  Oxford . 

Creativity
387
 Snyder ,  A. ,  Bossomaier ,  T. , &  Mitchell ,  D. J. ( 2004 ).  Concept formation:  “Object” att ributes 
dynamically inhibited from conscious awareness .  Journal of Integrated Neurosciences , 
 3 ,  31–46 . 
 Sternberg ,  R. J. , & O’ Hara ,  L. A. ( 1999 ). Creativity and intelligence. In  R. J.  Sternberg (Ed.), 
  Handbook of Creativity  (pp.  251–272 ).  New York :  Cambridge University Press . 
   Sternberg ,  R. J.   (Ed.). ( 1999a ).   Handbook of Creativity  .  New York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Swerdlow ,  N. R. ,  Stephany ,  N. ,  Wasserman ,  L. C. ,  Talledo ,  J. ,  Sharp ,  R. , &  Auerbach ,  P. P.  ( 2003 ). 
 Dopamine agonists disrupt visual latent inhibition in normal males using a within-subject 
paradigm .  Psychopharmacology (Berl) ,  169 ,  314–320 . 
 Torrance ,  E. P. ( 1974 ). Th e Torrance test of creative thinking.  Bensenville :  Scholastic Testing 
Service . 
 Wallas ,  G. ( 1926 ).   Th e Art of Th ought  .  New York :  Harcourt Brace . 
 Weisberg ,  R. W. ( 1986 ).   Creativity: Genius and Other Myths  .  New York :  W. H. Freeman . 
 Weisberg ,  R. W. ( 2006 ). Creativity:  Understanding Innovation in Problem Solving, Science, 
Invention, and Th e Arts.  Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley . 
 Zangwell ,  O. L. ( 1966 ).  Psychological defi cits associated with frontal lobe lesions .  International 
Journal of Neurology ,  5 ,  395–402 .  

388
 Afterword   
 Kenneth M.  Heilman,  Edward  Valenstein ,  and Robert T.  Watson  
 Note: Th e authors each knew Ken Heilman early in his neurology career. Ken was 
a year ahead of E.V. in the Neurology residency program at Boston City Hospital, 
and Ken later recruited him to join the faculty at the University of Florida (UF). 
R.T.W. began his neurology residency at UF on the same day that Ken joined the 
faculty. 
 Ken Heilman likes to tell of the customs offi  cer who, aft er questioning pas-
sengers on the line before him in detail to verify their citizenship, told Ken to pass 
right through. “Aren’t you going to even ask where I’m from?” Ken said. “You’re 
from Brooklyn! Now move on.” Aft er eight years at the University of Virginia, two 
years in Turkey, three years in Boston, and forty years in north central Florida, 
Ken still talks and acts as if he never left  Brooklyn. Th ere may have been some-
thing about the Borough Park/Bensonhurst neighborhood that fostered individ-
uality and academic success. Ken learned many years aft er he left  Brooklyn that 
Norman Geschwind, Mel Greer, and Arthur Benton had grown up in the same 
neighborhood. Each of them had a profound infl uence on Ken’s career.   
 A Litt le Early History 
 Ken’s early education in Brooklyn did not always presage his success. He failed 
to complete an early achievement test, and was labeled as a non-honors student, a 
label that his diffi  culty mastering the niceties of English tended to support. But he 
was resilient and persistent, an avid reader with talent in the sciences, so he even-
tually overcame the label, and gained admitt ance to the University of Virginia, 
where he spent his undergraduate and medical student years, and where he met 
Patricia Phillips, who later became his wife. 
 Ken graduated from the University of Virginia School of Medicine, and did 
his internship and a year of residency on the Cornell Medical service at Bellevue 

Aft erword
389
Hospital in New York. Aft er serving two years in the Army based in Turkey, he 
chose to do his neurology residency at the Neurological Unit of the Boston City 
Hospital under Derek Denny-Brown. During Ken’s fi rst year of residency, in 
1967, Denny-Brown suff ered a heart att ack, and retired from teaching and clini-
cal responsibilities to continue his research at the New England Primate Center. 
During the search for a new Chief of Neurology, Simeon Locke and then Flaviu 
Romanul served as Interim Directors. In 1969, in the middle of Ken’s second year 
of neurology residency, Norman Geschwind was appointed as the James Jackson 
Professor of Neurology to direct the neurological unit. 
 Neurology at the Boston City Hospital 
 Th e Harvard-associated neurological unit had been the premier training program 
in neurology in the middle of the 20th century (see  Vilensky, Gilman and Sinish, 
2004 ). Th e unit was founded in 1930, with Stanley Cobb as its fi rst director. In 
1934, Cobb was succeeded by Tracy Putnam, who with H. Houston Merritt  had 
developed an experimental model for epilepsy in cats and discovered that diphe-
nylhydantoin (phosphenytoin, Dilantin®) was eff ective in preventing experimen-
tally induced seizures. Putnam resigned in 1939 to become chair of neurology and 
neurosurgery at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University. 
Harvard President James Conant appointed Cobb to direct a search committ ee, 
and selected Derek Denny-Brown, who had established a reputation as a clini-
cal researcher in England, initially in Sherrington’s lab. Denny-Brown’s research 
accomplishments spanned the fi eld of neurology, with important discoveries 
in muscle histology, electromyography, the neurological control of micturi-
tion, and the cortical control of movement based on studies in humans and pri-
mates. Denny-Brown used the 10th fl oor of the Medical Building at Boston City 
Hospital to house his primates. Th e administrative offi  ces, library, EEG lab, and 
conference room were on the ninth fl oor, and the neurology wards were on fl oors 
seven and eight. Denny-Brown’s rigorous clinical training program and active 
research interests att racted some of the best physicians, many of whom became 
chairs of neurology at other institutions. His residents responded to his expecta-
tion that all residents would have a thorough command of their patients, includ-
ing compulsive neurological assessments. To present a patient with sensory loss 
to Denny-Brown without a detailed sensory map was risking public humiliation. 
 Denny-Brown was a hard act to follow, and EV recalls that several of 
Denny-Brown’s last residents did not think that Norman Geschwind would be up 
to the task of maintaining the stature of the neurological unit. Indeed, Geschwind 
had a very diff erent pedagogical approach. Whereas Denny-Brown was dictato-
rial and aloof, Geschwind was aff able and accessible. Every morning between 
work rounds and att ending rounds, Geschwind would join residents and students 

390
Aft erword
in a small room opposite the conference room on the ninth fl oor of the Medical 
Building, and shoot the breeze over coff ee, Cokes, and peanut butt er crackers. 
Th ese conversations were wide-ranging and always interesting, even more so 
when Ken was there. 
 While Geschwind’s easy manner and enthusiasm signaled a change in leader-
ship style, it became clear that his dedication to academics and to research was 
not less than Denny-Brown’s. Geschwind retained Denny-Brown’s primate facility 
(on the 10th fl oor of the Medical Building), and brought in Dee Pandya to con-
tinue his important anatomic investigations of cortical connectivity in primates. 
Geschwind had landed the job largely on the basis of his brilliant two-part treatise, 
“Disconnection Syndromes in Animals and Man” published in Brain in 1965. In 
this remarkable paper, Geschwind had reasserted the signifi cance of anatomical 
connections in the brain in the analysis of the most complex behaviors. He dem-
onstrated the relevance of animal studies to the understanding of human behavior, 
and had shown how hypotheses about cognitive activity could be tested scientifi -
cally. He was deeply schooled in the work of the classical neurologists, and res-
urrected syndromes that had been neglected for decades. For the young clinician 
att racted to neurology by the power of clinical analysis to localize pathology in 
the nervous system, expanding this to include the full range of cortical function 
was tremendously exciting. Geschwind’s achievements, his unbounded enthusi-
asm, and his interest in and support of any resident or student who expressed an 
interest, inspired residents to consider academic careers. Ken was fascinated by 
the phenomenon of hemispatial neglect, and with Geschwind’s encouragement, 
proposed to see if he could devise a primate model of this syndrome. With Dee 
Pandya’s generous support and assistance, Ken operated on rhesus monkeys, and 
demonstrated that monkeys with parietal and frontal lesions evidenced features 
similar to patients with unilateral neglect ( Heilman, Pandya, & Geschwind, 1970 ). 
 Ken realized that a host of questions about the neglect syndrome begged for 
additional studies both in animals and humans. But his experience working with 
monkeys, however productive, left  him with an abiding dislike of the primate lab. 
Although he later supported primate work, and was actively engaged in design-
ing experiments, he was careful to encourage others to perform the experiments. 
Th ere was, aft er all, plenty of research that needed to be done with humans. 
 Moving to the University of Florida 
 At the conclusion of his residency, Ken was off ered an instructorship at Harvard, 
but, with Geschwind’s encouragement, he decided to look at other opportuni-
ties. Geschwind knew Mel Greer, then chief of the division of eurology at UF, and 
recommended him to Ken. Ken’s visit to Gainesville was productive: he realized 
that Mel was a leader who would fully support his junior faculty. For his part, Mel 

Aft erword
391
immediately liked the young Dr. Heilman, and liked him even more when he heard 
Ken’s requirements for research start-up: “Time, paper, and a pencil.” What a deal! 
 Ken thrived at UF. Dr. Greer, known to all in the division of neurology as “the 
Chief,” provided an ideal environment for junior faculty. Th e Chief treated his 
faculty and residents as well as students and staff  as one big family; he created 
a safe environment in which everyone could focus on doing well. Not only did 
he shoulder the entire burden of administration; but he also took on himself the 
lion’s share of clinical work, enough to support not only his own salary, but also 
a signifi cant portion of his faculty’s salaries. Ken could therefore concentrate on 
his research without the threat of losing his protected research time. For Mel, this 
turned out to be a very good investment. In a few years, Ken had secured research 
grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and from the Veteran’s 
Administration (VA), and his program has enjoyed almost continual grant sup-
port ever since. Even more important, Gainesville soon became recognized as a 
center for behavioral neurology research and training. 
 Great program builders are likely to be deft  politicians and great adminis-
trators. Ken Heilman built an enduring behavioral neurology program at UF, 
but he does not have a political bone in his body, and he hates the bureaucratic 
demands of administration. Th e behavioral neurology program prospered prin-
cipally because of the enthusiasm he generated in faculty and, more signifi cantly, 
residents and students in various disciplines. He had an immediate impact on 
neurology residents, who theretofore had practically no instruction in behavioral 
neurology. R.T.W., who began his neurology residency on July 1, 1970, the same 
day that Ken joined the faculty, recalls one of his fi rst encounters with this new 
att ending physician: 
 An  early memory was calling him on a Saturday morning about a patient 
on the VA service, even though he was not the att ending physician. To 
my surprise, he drove in to see the patient with me. As I would come 
to learn and even expect, Dr. Heilman made the experience enjoyable; 
he used the opportunity to teach. His enthusiasm was uplift ing and the 
lessons learned enduring. Th ere was something about Dr.  Heilman’s 
teaching and enthusiasm that quickly aroused my interest in behavioral 
neurology. Th e way he could explain aphasia, neglect, apraxia, and other 
disorders could turn what previously had been just another unfortunate 
patient with a stroke into a magnifi cent mind opening learning experi-
ence. He suggested that I might enjoy reading Dr. Geschwind’s classic 
1965 articles in  Brain , “Disconnection Syndromes in Animals and Man.” 
Th ese articles were fascinating, and I  enjoyed discussing them with 
Dr. Heilman. He, in his classic Socratic method, encouraged me to some-
times see patients as “experiments of nature,” and to think about ways 
that these patients could help us understand how the brain functions. 

392
Aft erword
 It was also evident to graduate students in psychology and speech pathol-
ogy that behavioral neurology was a wide-open fi eld that leant itself to research, 
and that Ken Heilman could be an eff ective and enthusiastic mentor. Ken soon 
organized a weekly research meeting, and welcomed faculty from other disci-
plines: psychiatry, psychology, speech pathology, and experimental psychology, 
for starters. Th e interactions were mutually benefi cial. Paul Satz, a neuropsychol-
ogist, was an active participant, and Ken learned much from Paul about experi-
mental techniques and statistical analysis. 
 Later in his residency, R.T.W. decided that we needed a primate lab in which 
to test hypotheses about unilateral neglect. He described proposing this to Ken: 
 I thought it would be a great idea to utilize non-human primates to do behav-
ioral research. It seemed to me that if we could design appropriate experiments, 
then make specifi c lesions, that we might be able to expand our knowledge 
beyond “experiments of nature.” It would not be possible to describe how aghast 
Kenny was at the thought of working with “monkeys.” He told me that if I really 
wanted to do it that I could, but never expect to see him at the primate colony. It 
was with that understanding that we moved forward. Kenny and I would spend 
untold hours thinking about a study, lesion localization, and how to measure 
the eff ects of specifi c lesions. It would oft en get humorous since we both have 
right-left  confusion, which extended even to the diagrams we would sketch on his 
blackboard. With his encouragement, these experiments thrived and did add to 
our knowledge of higher cortical function. Even though he may never have seen 
one of the experimental subjects except on videotape, none of the ideas or experi-
ments could have happened without his wisdom and encouragement. 
 R.T.W. continued his primate research aft er residency, having joined the fac-
ulty. By 1974, four years aft er Ken had arrived in Gainesville, R.T.W. had been on 
the faculty for one year. Th ere was a well-run primate lab with a technician who 
treated the animals like pets, and there were several graduate students participat-
ing with Ken in human research. At that time, Fred Vroom, a fi ne clinical neu-
rologist and the institution’s sole electromyographer, left  the university, leaving 
only four full-time faculty members in the department: the Chief, B.J. Wilder (the 
epileptologist), R.T.W., and Ken. Even though two of the four were behavioral 
neurologists, the Chief was so pleased with Ken’s progress that he allowed him 
to travel to New Hampshire to persuade E.V. to move down from Dartmouth. 
He had to agree to do EMGs, and thus became a rare breed: a neurologist with 
expertise in both neuromuscular disease and cognitive neurology. Despite its 
size, neurology was profi table, and Mel was able to obtain departmental status 
in 1974. Mel remained chair of neurology until 2000. When he stepped down, he 
was the longest-serving head of neurology in the country. He had kept the depart-
ment small and focused: in 2000 the department had only 11 full-time neurolo-
gists: fi ve behavioral neurologists, four epileptologists, one electromyographer 
and the Chief. 

Aft erword
393
 In 1975, we decided at Ken’s suggestion to advertise to a national audience for 
a continuing education course. We had enough faculty members at UF in psychol-
ogy, speech and neurology to give most of the lectures, but Arthur Benton agreed 
to come from Iowa as a special guest. Because it was as much neuropsychology as 
neurology, we called it a Course in Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology. 
It was a great success, and under the sponsorship of the Florida Society of 
Neurology, it has been held annually ever since (the 35th Annual Course was 
presented in 2009). Most participants in all specialties were appreciative of the 
multidisciplinary nature of the course; but there were occasional persons who felt 
that we should not be att empting to venture outside the confi nes of our own pro-
fession. But we have always felt that reaching across disciplines was healthy and 
productive. Ken later sought Arthur Benton’s advice about developing a text, and 
it was with Arthur’s encouragement and help (he contributed two chapters) that 
the fi rst edition of  Clinical Neuropsychology was conceived in 1977 and published 
in 1979 (Heilman and Watson, 1979). 
 Ken decided to add a fellowship in 1977. Tom Van den Abell, Dawn Bowers 
(both psychologists) and Leslie Rothi, a speech pathologist, were early fellows. 
Subsequently, the fellowship att racted neurologists, psychologists, speech pathol-
ogists, and even one anthropologist. Many have contributed to this book. Ken 
could have had fellows earn their keep by seeing patients, but he wanted them to 
be learning and doing research. As the fellowship evolved, Ken got State support 
to run a memory disorder clinic each Wednesday aft ernoon. A psychiatrist and a 
social psychologist were also on its staff . One to three fellows (Ken was able to get 
research funding so that fellows could stay for two or more years) would see up 
to four patients each aft ernoon. Ken carefully examined each patient, and had a 
knack for fi nding new areas of interest. Many patients became case reports. When 
E.V. became Chair in 2000, he was under tremendous pressure from the admin-
istration to improve the department’s clinical effi  ciency. Ken was a good friend, 
but resisted all entreaties that he improve clinic throughput. In retrospect, he was 
right. Th e memory disorder clinic was a true academic exercise that benefi tt ed 
both patients and science. 
 Looking back, the 1970s seem almost idyllic. We were young and enthusiastic. 
Although each of us had clinical responsibilities— three or four months a year 
on the wards, which is nearly double our current schedule—clinical work paid 
well, and was much less intense than today and there seemed always to be time 
to talk over new ideas and plan new research projects. Research was also sim-
pler. Th e tools we used were easily comprehensible. Anatomic imaging was in its 
infancy; there was no functional imaging. Physiological studies were still largely 
non-digital. Th ere were also fewer bureaucratic impediments to research:  no 
institutional review boards, no institutional animal care and use committ ees. So 
there was litt le delay between the conception and the execution of many of our 
research projects. When R.T.W. came up with an idea to disentangle att entional 

394
Aft erword
and intentional aspects of neglect, it took a while, with their  combined right-left  
disorientation, to realize that it really made sense. It was really simple: you gave 
the monkey a tactile stimulus on one side of the body and trained it to respond 
with the opposite hand. Th e monkey lab was up and running, so Barbara Haws, 
our great lab technician, was soon training the monkeys. When Ken came up with 
the idea that some apraxics may have lost the concepts of correct praxic move-
ments, while others may still have the concepts, but could not execute them, he 
and E.V. took 8mm movies under the live oak trees in the medical school park-
ing lot of each of us making correct and incorrect movements, to create a test of 
praxis comprehension. To test grammatical comprehension, we drew stick-fi gure 
pictures illustrating reversible sentences. 
 Over the years, of the three of us, Ken has changed the least. While R.T.W. was 
becoming a national fi gure in medical education, and E.V. was assuming more 
clinical and administrative responsibilities, Ken has remained focused on behav-
ioral neurology research, teaching, and mentoring a long and increasingly illus-
trious line of residents and fellows. At 70, he is as energetic and productive as he 
was in his 30s. Th e only diff erence is that now, every couple of years, Ken pub-
lishes a monograph. When E.V. and Kenny were on call together at Boston City 
Hospital, Ken would regale E.V. with stories of his early schooling—like his tak-
ing a bathroom break in the middle of an achievement test, that resulted in his 
being grouped with the slower learners in his class—his experiences in Turkey, 
how he dealt with bullies, and the like, but sometimes he would just sit and write. 
E.V. recalled that Ken told him he was writing a novel; but it turns out he was writ-
ing notes on his experiences in internship. He just recently published a book of 
them ( Heilman, 2009 ). He has published a fascinating monograph on creativity 
( Heilman, 2005 ), and he is currently working on additional monographs. 
 Ken’s behavioral neurology program has also stayed faithful to its original 
conception to study brain-behavior relationships. As an example, in the 1980s, 
an engineer who was working on a prototype magnetoencephalogram suggested 
that we might want to use this technique to study behavior. It was att ractive, 
because magnetoencephlography off ered a window on physiological events not 
restricted to the surface of the brain, like conventional electroencephalography. 
Ken resisted the temptation, reasoning that it would be largely a distraction, 
with more time spent in validating the technique than learning about the brain. 
Similarly, although interested in dementia, and skilled in its diagnosis and man-
agement, he did not gravitate toward disease-oriented research or clinical trials, 
even when funding sources favored this kind of research. But he encouraged two 
of his former fellows (now both professors of neurology), Leslie Gonzalez-Rothi 
and Steve Nadeau, to branch into neurorehabilitation research, and he is happy to 
use validated new techniques to further his research. 
 Kenny Heilman is a person of many interests, but he lives to be creative, to 
understand how the brain works. R.T.W. oft en told him that nothing seemed to 

Aft erword
395
excite him more than a good idea. Nothing seemed to give him as much plea-
sure as a paper being published showing fruition of that idea. Kenny and I have 
laughed about what I might say if I delivered his eulogy, particularly that I’m sure 
he would walk up to God and whisper in his ear, “Okay God, you can tell me now, 
how does the brain work?” 
 Dr. Heilman is one of the greatest teachers we have ever known. He has that 
rare ability, one he shared with Dr. Geschwind, of being able to teach anyone, 
and feeling that any interested person should receive his complete att ention. 
Interestingly, he needs to teach using nothing but a blackboard or a fl ip chart. 
Somehow slides distract his stream of thinking. R.T.W. recalls the fi rst of his talks 
that he att ended at an Academy of Neurology meeting: Kenny was using slides, 
but they seemed to break his train of thought. R.T.W. suggested that he not use 
slides, and he never or rarely used slides (note that this should be “slides”, not 
“slide”)in subsequent presentations. Just last year, Kenny gave a talk to fi rst year 
medical students without using slides. Students loved it: “Awesome! A lecture 
without PowerPoint!” 
 Kenny is usually a terrifi c speaker, but he can get inarticulate, particularly when 
describing mundane details. He once gave a talk on neglect of non-touch, a diffi  -
cult concept, and during his talk he compounded the diffi  culty by gett ing right 
and left  confused. R.T.W. was sitt ing behind three women during his talk and at 
the conclusion of his talk; Kenny asked if there were any questions. One of the 
women turned to another and whispered, “Can you repeat the entire talk?” Kenny 
was later told about this, and found it hilarious. R.T.W. comments, “His teaching 
ability is so amazing that whenever my wife, Carolyn, and Kenny’s wife, Patricia, 
went to a meeting where Kenny was giving a talk, both wives would att end the 
talk. My wife, who has no background in neurology, would sit enthralled and talk 
excitedly about his talk later in the day. When my daughter, Mary, had a chance to 
spend time in clinic with Dr. Heilman as a fourth year medical student, she later 
wrote me an email lett ing me know that Dr. Heilman was the “greatest” teacher 
she had ever seen. Even though I agreed with her, I admit to being a litt le off ended 
since I had tried many times to teach her myself.” 
 Th ere are very few people in one’s life that are so special. Special because of the kind 
of person they are, their love of family, tradition, creativity, and joy in helping others 
learn. We have had the good fortune of knowing many fi ne and productive people 
both within academics and in other arenas. Th ere is no one as special as Dr. Kenneth 
Martin Heilman. He stands alone as a thinker, innovator, teacher, and friend. 
 *Dr. Edward Valenstine died on March 8, 2013 aft er a long batt le with cancer. 
Dr. Heilman and I continue to profoundly miss Ed. As I edit this last chapter that 
Ed and I worked on together it brings back so many memories of Ed as a friend, 
colleague and exemplary person. In some way this fi nal book chapter that Ed and 
I wrote has special meaning. 

396
Aft erword
 References 
 Heilman,  K. M. ( 2005 ).   Creativity and the Brain.   New York :  Psychology Press . 
 Heilman,  K. M. ( 2009 ).   Postgraduate Year One:  Lessons in Caring  .  New  York :   Oxford 
University Press.  
 Heilman,  K. M. ,  Pandya,  D. N. , &  Geshchwind,  N. ( 1970 ).  Trimodal inatt ention following pari-
etal ablations .  Transactions of the American Neurological Association,  95 ,  259–261 . 
   Heilman,   K. M. , &  Valenstein,   E.   ( 1979 ) (Eds.).   Clinical Neuropsychology  .  New York :  Oxford 
University Press .  
 Vilensky,  J. A. ,  Gilman,  S. , &  Sinish,   P. R. ( 2004 ).  Denny-Brown, Boston City Hospital, and the 
history of American neurology .  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,  47 ,  505–518 .  

397
acetylcholine, 294, 320
achromatopsia, 351, 356
acoustic knowledge center, in Kussmaul’s model, 29
acoustic-phonological center, disruption in 
connections with auditory areas, 26
acoustic phonological lexicon, 22
actions, spontaneous vs. intentional, 32
action semantics, 76, 191
AD. See Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
adaptation, in hierarchical model of representative 
factors, 245
Adderall, 382–383
Adelmann, P.K., 260
Adolphs, R.H., 263
adult
case for neurological stasis in, 335–338
investigations in support of neuroplasticity 
in, 338–341
AED. See antiepileptic drugs (AED)
aesthetic experience, components, 362
aff ective disorders, in creative individuals, 381
aff erent dysgraphia, 98
age
antiepileptic drug eff ects at extremes, 274–275
and praxis performance evaluation, 203
and useful fi eld of view constriction, 343–344
agnosia, 33, 39–45
agraphias, 89, 93, 94–96
Alexander, M.P., 246
alexias, 89, 90–94
allographic store, 99
Altmann, L.J.P., 80
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
in artists, 357, 360–361
cholinergic dysfunction and, 294
and conceptual apraxia, 69, 211
semantic agraphia in, 96
semantic processing and, 69
unitary semantic theory and, 72
American Psychological Association, 48
American Sign Language, 200
amnesia, 53–54
experimental studies, 54–60
impairment of new semantic learning in, 59
lessons learned, 61–63
amygdala, 286f, 309
Andersen, E.S., 80
Angwin, A.J., 291
animals, reports of spatial neglect in, 173
Annals of Neurology, 1–2, 3, 4
Annoni, J., 357
anomalies, observation of, 4–5
anomia, 30
anosodiaphoria, 138
anosognosia, 138, 237
anterior cingular gyrus, and arousal systems, 162n2
anterior intraparietal sulcus, apraxic agraphia 
and, 98
anterior temporal cortex (ATC), 116f, 122f
anterior temporal lobe (ATL)
damage, and person recognition disorders, 115
and semantic processing, 68
anterograde amnesia, 53
Anthropological Society, 13, 19
antiepileptic drugs (AED), 271–275
case descriptions, 269–270
cognitive eff ects of older, 272f
comparative cognitive eff ects of newer, 274t
eff ects at age extremes, 274–275
neurodevelopmental eff ects of in utero exposure, 
275–277
newer vs. placebo, 274t
teratogenic risks, 278
aphasia, 5, 14
from connections disruption, 26
language defi cits, 21
Liepmann on, 37–39
optic, 72–73
primary progressive (PPA), 70
therapy for, 343
I N DE X

398
Index
aphasic alexia, 89, 92
aphemia, 14, 27
apperceptive agnosia, 39, 43, 354
apperceptive prosopagnosia, 111
apraxia, 30–39, 187
case of Mr. T, 31–33
cognitive-motor types, 194t
conceptual, 35, 69, 209–211
connecting to neuroanatomical substrates, 35–37
defi nitions, 31
disconnection model of, 189–190
explanations for, 33
kinematics and motor control in, 193–197
lesion location and severity, 209f
Liepmann defi nition of subtypes, 34
Liepmann’s processing model, 33–35
Liepmann’s vertical schema, 37f
localization of, 204
modality-specifi c and supra-modal mechanisms, 
211–213
multi-modal model of, 190–191
periventricular white matt er in, 208
rostral-caudal and vertical gradient of 
severity, 210f
severity relationship with dependency, 214
spatiotemporal characteristics of gestural 
movements, 213
and speech diffi  culty, 38
apraxia of speech, 27, 37–39
apraxic agraphia, 98
ARA S. See ascending reticular activation system 
(ARA S)
Archimedes, 373
arcuate fasciculus, 23
arousal
cold pressor stimulation (CPS) for increasing, 
159–160
infl uence of processes on magnitude estimation, 
158–160
in neglect theory, 134–136
perceptual order, 139–146
stimulus intensity perception and, 161
arousal systems, 143–145
art. See visual art
Asari, T., 376
ascending reticular activation system (ARA S), 
143, 145
asomatognosia, 239, 245–246
Assessment of Art Att ributes (AAA), 358, 360–361
associations
assessing priming of, 57
distributed knowledge network of, 26
associative agnosia, 39, 43, 354
associative connections, misplacement of, 44
associative network, 44
associative prosopagnosia, 111
assumptions, in PDP models, 307–308
asymmetric kinesis, 180
asymmetry of localization, 16–17
ataxic speech, 27
ATC. See anterior temporal cortex (ATC)
ATL. See anterior temporal lobe (ATL)
att ention, 325
horizontal gradient, 326
intensity aspects of, 135
in neglect theory, 133
att ention defi cit disorder, 287
att ractor basins, 305–330
alteration by context eff ects, 328
alterations in, 327
context eff ects, 324–325
reduction in depth from impaired att ention, 327
slope, 321
sub-basin eff ects, 323–324
att ractor trench, 312, 317
atypicality, 312, 318
impact on lexical decision, 315
role in perception, 321
Aubertin, E., 13
auditory areas, disruption in connections with 
acoustic-phonological center, 26
auditory input, modularity-specifi c aphasias for, 74
auditory modality, stimulus unawareness in, 176
autism, 287
in artist, 355
children with, 353
noradrenergic system and, 288
autoassociator network, 308, 311
autobiographical knowledge, Conway’s general 
events level of, 63
automatic functions, 20
autotopagnosia, 226
avoidance, 177–178
awareness, disorders of, 138
Baillarger, J., 18
barbiturates, adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
Barrett , A.M., 177
Barron, F., 371
Barsalou, L.W., 81
basal ganglia, damage to, 254
basal-ganglia-frontal circuits, 2
bean-counter mentality, 4
Beauvois, M.F., 73, 74, 75, 95
Beeman, M., 373
behavioral neurology, vii
alternative perspectives of brain organization, 
46–48
golden era, 1860–1950, 11–50
behavioral studies, 305
behaviorism, 48
Bennett , E., 339
Benson, D.F., 89, 91, 92
Benton, A., 393

Index
399
benzodiazepines, adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
Berndt, R.S., 72
beta-gamma oscillations, 163n8
Beversdorf, D.Q., 382
bidirectional networks, spatial cognitive 
information processing and, 181
Binet, A., 370
biology, eff orts to discover laws in, 17
Bisiach, E., 134
Blanke, O., 360
blended unitary semantic model, 82f
Blonder, L.X., 254, 257, 262
Bloom, R., 261
Boca’s aphasia, 225
bodily self, disorders of, 237–239
body form representation, 230–231
body image, 221–222, 225
body-part-as-tool, 197, 200
body postural representation, 231–232
body representations, 221–233
current account, 229
group study, 226–229
neuroimaging for anatomic bases, 228–229
primary somatosensory representations, 
229–230
relationship to other accounts, 233
types, 221–222
body schema, 221, 222–224, 226–227, 228
body structural description, 221–222, 
225–226, 227
Boiyadjiev, Z., 357, 359–360
Borod, J.C., 256, 257, 262
Bouillaud, F., 13, 15
Bouvier-Peyrou, M., 246
Bowers, D., 259, 393
Braille, 340
brain
alternative perspectives, 46–48
anatomy, apraxia and, 35
disorders of, 5
eff ect of gene on knowledge stored in, 306
hemispheric specialization, 16–25
nondominant hemisphere importance in 
creativity, 376
plasticity impact, 341
praxis networks and hemispheric diff erences, 
204–207, 205f
regeneration, 337
regions involved in semantic dementia, 309
specialization of hemispheres, 18–19
structure and function, 337
theories on language location, 12
tumors, 341–342
See also left  hemisphere; right hemisphere
Brain, 2, 4
brain-behavior networks, spatial cognitive systems 
in, 171
brain damage
eff ects on artistic production, 351
lacking homogeneity criteria, 7
and visual art production, 376
brain injury
achromatopsia aft er, 356
and face recognition loss, 105
spatial cognitive systems and, 171
stylistic changes in art from, 357
Bramwell, B., 27
Breasted, J.H., 12
Bremer, F., 379
Brennan, I., 353–354
Broca, P.P., 5, 12–16, 336
on asymmetry of language localization, 19–20
criticism of work, 15–16
personality, 15
Broca’s aphasia, Wernicke on, 22
Broca’s area, 22, 29
Brodmann’s Area, 152, 205f
bromodeoxyuridine, 340
Bronowski, J., 369
Brownell, H.H., 72
Bruce, V., 107
buccal hemineglect, neglect syndrome and, 161
buccofacial apraxia, sound recognition 
impairment, 212
Buck, R., 256
Burdach, K.F., 17
Burgess, P.W., 246
Cajal, S.R. y, 337
calcium, increases in intracellular, 320
Calhoun, J., 327
caloric vestibular stimulation (CVS), 158–159
Caltagirone, C., 256
Cancelliere, A.E., 253, 255
Capgras syndrome, 120, 238t, 240, 242, 246
Capitani, E., 75, 76–77
Caramazza, A., 6, 7, 72, 73, 75, 77, 78, 80
carbamazepine, adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
caregiver assistance, limb apraxia and, 214
Carlsson, I., 376
Carr, L., 261
case reports, 1–9
criticism of, 2, 3
defi nition, 2
eff orts to reduce in journals, 8
management, 277–279
statistics in, 3
and training of clinical investigators, 7–8
catecholamines, 382
categorization, in face recognition, 106–110, 121–122
category-level processing of faces, and false 
recognition, 119
Catt ell, R.B., 371
central alexias, 92

400
Index
cerebral artery infarction, 155f
cerebral cortex
functional mapping, 336
infl uence of, 329
cerebral symmetry, pathological conditions 
and, 17–18
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), and semantic 
memory impairment, 68–69
chameleon eff ect, 260
chaotic systems, 305–306
Charcot-Wilbrand syndrome, 40
Chatt erjee, A., 81, 326, 327, 328
Chavez, R.A., 378
children
with autism, 353
cognitive AED eff ects, 275, 275t
learning to speak, 23
mimicry in learning speech, 24
cholinergic eff ects, on cognition, 294–296
cholinergic pathways, 295f
cholinesterase inhibitors, 294
Christensen, P.W., 370
Cimino, C., 261
cingulate cortex, 378
citations, for measuring article importance, 4
Clark, M.A., 196
clinical investigators, training of, 7–8
clinical-pathological method, 12–16
clonazepam, prenatal exposure to, 276
Cobb, S., 389
cocaine withdrawal, 287
cognition and neuropsychopharmacology, 284–297
cholinergic eff ects on, 294–296
dopaminergic eff ects on, 291–294
neurotransmitt er systems in, 296–297
noradrenergic eff ects on, 285–290
stress eff ects on, 285
cognitive defi cits
epilepsy and, 270–271
in hierarchical model of representative factors, 
243–244
cognitive mechanism models, 70
cognitive neuroscience, vii
beginnings, 46
misconceptions, ix
Cohen, L., 91
cold pressor stimulation (CPS), 159–160
Cole, J., 231
color, inability to apprehend, 351
coma, 143
commonality, 330n
compound remote association test, 373
Conant, J., 389
concept representations, 308
conceptual apraxia, 35
and Alzheimer’s disease, 69, 211
and tool knowledge, 209–211
conceptual priming, 55
conceptual visual perseveration, 44
conduction aphasia, 23
conduit d’approche, 23
connectionistic approach, of Wernicke, 25
consciousness, walking states of, 134
conscious perception, basis for, 145
Constraint-Induced Aphasia Th erapy, 343
Constraint-Induced Movement Th erapy, 340
constructional agraphia, 98
content mistakes, 35
content-specifi c delusions, 238t, 239
context-dependent movements, 206
contextual bias, 137–138, 142
Contreras, D., 380
convergent thinking, and creativity, 369–370
Conway, M.A., general events level of 
autobiographical knowledge, 63
Cooper, W., 254
Corbett a, Maurizio, 341
Corinth, Lovis, 356, 360
corpus callosum, 379
and apraxia, 188
lesions of, 36, 92
cortex, movement from stimulation, 21
cortical effi  ciency theory, 377
cortical network
att ractor basins dynamics defi ned by, 323–324
relationship between magnitude estimation 
and, 322
corticothalmic fi bers, 144
Coslett , H., 225
Cramer, P., 243, 245
creativity, 367–383
closure on, 383
defi nitions, 5, 367–370
and dopamine, 381–382
gray matt er systems and, 378–379
and intelligence, 370–371
neurobiology of, 374–383
nondominant hemisphere importance in, 376
as novelty, 7
prerequisites, 370
and relaxation, 380–381
stages, 371–374
as unity in diversity, 369
white matt er role in, 379–380
Critchley, M., 239
critical period for plastic reorganization, 338
cross-domain associations, 57
cross-modal matching, 140
crossover eff ect, 137
crystallized intelligence, 371
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 368
Cubelli, R., 98
Cubelli-Della Sala model, 192–193
cueing, 328

Index
401
Cummings, J.L., 361
Cushing, H., 336–337
CVS (caloric vestibular stimulation), 158–159
Damasio, H., 5, 81, 99
Danly, M., 254
Darley, F.L., 255
Dax, G., 18
Dax, M., 18
declarative knowledge systems, 67
deep alexia, 93–94
deep brain simulator (DBS), 376
deep dysphasia, 28
defense, in hierarchical model of representative 
factors, 245
defensive functions, 243
degenerative disorders, face memory impairments 
from, 105
Déjerine, J.J., 47, 91
DeKooning, W., 357–358
delta oscillations, 163n7
delusional companions, 240
delusional companion syndrome, 238t
delusional misidentifi cation syndromes (DMS), 
238t, 239–241
dementia
language impairment and, 16
with Lewy bodies, 294, 295
semantic, 60, 70
See also Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
denial through fantasy, 243
Dennis, M., 225
Denny-Brown, D., 389
De Renzi, E., 191
De Renzi tests of ideomotor and ideational 
apraxia, 200
Derouesné, J., 95
Devlin, J.T., 80
diagram makers, 25
diaschisis, from brain injury, 7
diazepam, prenatal exposure to, 276
dictation, writing to, 96–97
disconnection model of apraxia, 189–190
disposition to produce art, 352–353
dissociation apraxia, 35
distraction, abnormalities of, 177
divergent thinking, 369–370, 378
domain-general hypothesis, 123
domain-specifi c hypothesis, 124
domain specifi c semantic structure, 74f
Donoghue, J., 339
dopamine, and creativity, 381–382
dopamine-depletion models, 180
dopaminergic eff ects, on cognition, 291–294
dopaminergic pathways, 291f
dopaminergic system, cognitive eff ects, 292
dorsal visual processing, vs. spatial processing, 181
dorsal visual stream processing, 172, 173
dorsolateral frontal cortex, and arousal systems,  
162n2
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 378
Drago, V., 375, 376, 381
dual route model, 94
Duff y, R.J., 256
Dumont, C., 72
dysphagia, 138
and neglect, 161
symptoms, vs. neglect, 160
Eastman syndrome, 225
Edison, T., 378
education, and praxis performance evaluation, 203
Egger, M.D., 339
egocentric space, position of lines in, 327
ego disequilibrum theory, 242–243
Egyptian Surgical Papyrus, 12
Ehrsson, H.H., 230–231
Einstein, A., 373
Ekman, P., 259
elderly, susceptibility to AED cognitive eff ects, 278
Ellis, A.W., 27, 98
embodied representations, 80–82, 82f
emotional expression, 252–263
channels, 252–253
facial expression, 256–260
ephedrine, 287, 382
epilepsy
cognitive defi cits, 270–271
face memory impairments from, 105
episodic memory, 6
interaction with semantic, 62–63
vs. semantic, 58–60, 67
error types, LHD vs. RHD stroke patients, 206
Ertl, J., 377
Esquirol, J., 17
executive system, damage, and false face 
recognition, 119–120
explicit memory, vs. implicit, 54–58
expressivity, change in, 356–358
extradimensional set-shift ing, 289
extrastriate visual cortex, facial information 
processing, 112
Eysenck, H.L., 380
face memory network, 122f
face recognition, 105–124
cognitive model of, 106–110, 107f
false and misidentifi cation, 117–121
neuropsychological disorders of, 110–121
perceptual breakdown, 132–139
person recognition disorders, 114–117
Facial Action Coding system, 259
Facial Aff ect Coding System, 256
facial aff ect perceptual disorders, 263

402
Index
facial aff ect processing, 260–261
facial expression, 256–260
false recognition errors, 124
familiarity, judgments of, 55
Farah, M.J., 382
Feinberg, T.E., 246
felbamate, adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
Feldman, L., 254
FFA (fusiform face area), 112, 122f
Finney, G.R., 375
Fisk, J.D., 193
Fleming, A., 372
Flourens, P., 12–13
fl uid intelligence, 371
focal hand dystonia, in musicians, 342
Ford Motor Company, 1
Fornazzari, L.R., 361
Franz, S.I., 47
Frégoli syndrome, 238t, 240, 243
frequency ranges, 318
Freud, S., 28, 44
Freudian psychology, 48
Freund, C.S., 72–73
Friesen, W.V., 259
Fritsch, G., 21
frontal intelligence, 378
frontal neglect, 175
fronto-temporal dementias (FTD), and disposition 
to produce art, 352
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, 374
frontotemporal lobe, role in creativity, 378
functional imaging studies, 305
functional neuroimaging, ix
fusiform face area (FFA), 112, 122f
gabapentin, 272, 275
Gage, P., Harlow report on, 5
Gainesville VAMC Geriatric Research and 
Educational Clinical Center (GRECC), 2
Gall, F.J., 12
Broca refutation of skull topography, 14–15
Gardner, H., 354
Garrels, G., 358
genes, eff ects on knowledge stored in brain, 306
Gersh, F., 99
Gerstmann, J., 239
Geschwind, N., 48–49, 89, 91, 92, 189–190, 208, 
305, 389–390
Gestalt psychologists, 48
gestural movements of apraxic patients
assessing, 199t
spatiotemporal characteristics, 213
gestural processing, 191
Ghacibeh, G.A., 383
glucose consumption, intelligence measures 
and, 377
goal-directed behaviors, 187
Gogol, N., 187
Goldstein, K., 47–48
Gombrich, E., 355
Gonnerman, L.M., 80
Gonzalez-Rothi, L., 394
Goodale, M.A., 193
Goodglass, H., 190, 200
Gott lieb, L., 40–45
grapheme units, 312
graphemic buff er, 97–98
Gratiolet, L.P., 19
gray matt er systems, creativity and, 378–379
Greer, M., 390–391
grounded cognition theory, 81
Guilford, J.P., 369, 370
Haaland, K.Y., 193, 195–196, 204
habituation, abnormalities of, 177
Haier, R., 377
handedness, 20, 203, 375
hand laterality task, by left  hemisphere stroke 
patients, 224
Harlow, J.M., 5
Harrington, D.L., 193, 204, 371
Hart, J., 68
Hatfi eld, F.M., 95
Hauser, S.L., 1, 3
Haws, B., 394
Head, H., 38, 47, 221, 231
head injury
face memory impairments from, 105
language dysfunction from, 12
Hebb, D., 338–339
Th e Organization of Behavior, 339
Heilman, K.M., viii, 2, 134, 171, 173, 177, 178, 180, 
181, 182, 192, 253, 254, 369, 372, 375
on action semantics, 76
authors’ connections with, 388
early personal history, 388–389
on frontal intelligence, 378
interests, 394–395
model for spatial att ention, 133
neurology at Boston City Hospital, 389–390
and OUCH model, 73
on stimulus unawareness in the auditory 
modality, 176
at University of Florida, 390–395
on writing issues, 98, 99
Heilman-Rothi praxis model, 192, 197
Heilman-Rothi-Roy-Cubelli model, 195f
Heller, W., 356
Helmholtz, H., 21, 371, 373
hemiagraphia, 99
hemialexia, 89, 92
hemianopsia, 32
hemiparesis, post-stroke, 36, 343
hemiplegia, unawareness of, 237

Index
403
hemispatial neglect, 325–329
hemispheric lateralization model, 377
hemispheric specialization, 16–25
Henry, M.L., 96
Henschen, S.E., 38
Herder, J.G., 17
herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE), 69
and category-specifi c semantic impairments, 75
face memory impairments from, 105
Herr, E.L., 371
higher-level functions, modularity of, 12–16
Hillis, A.E., 68–69, 72, 94
hippocampus, 58
cross-domain associations and, 61
and semantic memory task, 59–60
Hitzig, E., 21
H. M. (patient), 6
Hodges, J.R., 80
Holland, H., 17
Holmes, G., 221, 231
homophones, spelling for irregular, 96
Horn, C., 361
Hou, C., 361
Hubel, D., 338
Hughes, L., 356
human body, internal representation of, 221
Hutcheson, F., 369
hypergraphia, 352
hypersomnia, 135, 162n1
hypoarousal, 135
hypometria, 181
hypothesis testing, vii
ideational (conceptual) apraxia, 35, 188
ideational errors, 35
ideokinetic (ideomotor) apraxia, 34, 35, 188, 214
illumination stage in creativity, 372–374
imaginary person, 240, 243
immunofl uorescent marker, for dividing cells, 340
impact factors, of journals, 4
implicit memory
vs. explicit, 54–58
and neural network changes, 324
incubation stage in creativity, 372
individuation, in face recognition, 106–110, 
121–122
inferior frontal gyrus, in network of mirror 
neurons, 261
inferotemporal visual cortex, damage, and face 
recognition impairment, 112
information processing model, and connectionistic 
framework, 45–46
intelligence
and creativity, 370–371
crystallized vs. fl uid, 371
intention, in neglect theory, 133–134
internal capsule, 144
internal “where” representations, 178
intradimensional set-shift ing, 289
intra-hemispheric connections, 379–380
intransitive gestures, 198
intraparietal sulcus, 98, 204
in utero exposure, neurodevelopmental eff ects of 
antiepileptic drugs, 275–277
Jackson, J.H., 7, 20, 46, 47
Jacobs, S., 196
James, W., 338
Japanese language, 94
Jausovec, N., 377
Jenicek, M., 4, 8
Jewell, G., 153
Joanett e, Y., 72, 254
Johnston, C., 1, 3
journals, impact factors of, 4
Judd, T., 354
Kan, I.P., 64
Kaplan, E., 189, 190, 200
Kapur, N., 375
Katsikitis, M., 258
Kazandjian, S., 256
Kekulé, F.A., 373
Kennard, M., 338
Kent, R., 254
Kertesz, A., 253, 255
apraxia subtest, 200
disconnection model of apraxia, 208
Kilgard, M.P., 319
kinematics, in apraxia, 193–197
kinetic memories, 34
Kinsbourne, M., 133, 341
Kischka, U., 291, 382
Kitazawa, S., 232
Klein, R., 211
Knight, R.T., 204
knowledge, 319
semantic dementia as case for neural 
representation of, 310
underlying other domains of language, 315–317
knowledge domain, simple computational model 
of, 308
Kodsi, M.H., 177
Kooistra, C.A., 176
Kounios, J., 373
Krakauer, J., 328
Kuhn, A., 356
Kuhn, T., Th e Structure of Scientifi c Revolutions, 5
Kuhn, T.S., 4, 372
Kussmaul, A., 26, 27, 29, 30f
Lackner, J.R., 222
Laiacona, M., 75
Laine, M., 98

404
Index
lamotrigine, 273, 275, 278
Langer, S.L., 257, 262
language
knowledge underlying other domains, 315–317
lateralization, 16–25
PDP models in processing, 307–308
vs. speech ability, 13–14
Lashley, K., 48
laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LTN), 144
law of mass action, 12–13
Lazar, R.M., 328
L-dopa, 291, 292, 382
learned skill movement, 197, 207
learning, 64
and neural network changes, 324
theory of synaptic basis for, 339
Leborgne (patient), 5
left  brained, 19–20
left -handedness, 20, 203
left  hemisphere, 38
injury, and apraxia, 190–191
injury, and neglect, 133
lesions, and body structural description 
disorders, 229
and magnitude estimation, 154–156
praxis systems in, 204
and right hand, 35
specialization of language, 16–25
left -sided apraxia, 36–37
left  temporal region, damage, and semantic 
memory, 82–83
Leischner, A., 89–90, 94
Leitungsaphasie, 23
Leitungsunterbrechung, 36
Lelong (Broca patient), 13
Lélut, L.F., 18
Leon, S.A., 255
Leonard, C.L., 256
lesion-case study method, 7
lesion method, vii
Leslie, K., 261
“levels of processing” framework, 60
Levenson, R.W., 260
Leventhal, H., 263
levetiracetam, 273, 278, 279
Lewis, R.T., 379
Lewy body dementia, 294, 295
lexical agraphia, 95
lexical decision, writt en forced choice, 315–316
lexical decision tasks, associative priming and, 57
lexicality, 91
lexical processing, unitary semantic model, 71f
lexical representations, 225
Lichtheim, L., 5, 23, 25–28, 38, 70
on internal speech, 28
model criticisms, 28–30
model schematic, 26f
Liepmann, H.K., 30, 47, 99, 188–189
on apraxia, 191
apraxia processing model, 33–35
defi nition of apraxia subtypes, 34
Praxis Process Model, 188f
limb apraxia, 187–215
anatomy, 205f
cognitive-process models of, 187–197
Heilman-Rothi dual component model, 192
real world eff ects, 213–215
sound recognition impairment, 212
subcortical brain structures in, 207–209
limb apraxia assessment, 197–204
error types and operational defi nitions, 
201–202t
gestures, 199t
standardized batt eries, 200–204
subtests and error types, 198–200
limb-kinetic apraxia, 35, 188
Linguisitic Inquiry and Word Count soft ware, 257
linguistic agraphias, 94
linguistic alexias, 90–91, 92
linguistic knowledge, conformation of, 317–319
Lissauer, H., 45, 70
Llinas, R., 380
lobectomy, temporal, 6
localization
of apraxia, 204
asymmetry of, 16–17
locus coeruleus (LC), 144, 286, 286f, 289
logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA), 374–375
long-term memory, forms of, 61
Lucchelli, F., 191
Lugaro, E., 338
Lythgoe, M., 352
Maas, O., 99
Magnani, F., 352
magnetoencephalography, 340, 394
magnitude estimation, 140–142, 162n4, 321
alteration aft er unilateral stroke, 147–153, 148t
arousal processes infl uence on, 158–160
exponent of power function, 322–323
functional and anatomical architecture of, 147
left  and right hemisphere injuries and, 156–157
left  cerebral hemisphere and, 154–156
neuropsychology of, 142–143
power function exponents, 323t
relationship between cortical network structure 
and, 322
right hemisphere injury and, 149–150, 151f
magnitude production, 140
Mahon, B., 75, 78, 80
Mammucari, A., 256
Marie, P., 15, 47
Marsden, C.D., 207
Marshal, J.C., 92

Index
405
Marshall, R.S., 328
Martindale, C., 382
Mass, O., 189
maturational hypothesis for asymmetric 
specialization, 19
Maurer, K., 361
Mayes, A., 57
McCarthy, R., 75, 76
McClung, J.S., 80
Meador, K., 178
medial temporal lobes (MTL), 122f
amnesia from damage to, 53
mediation, 58
Mednick, S.A., 380
Mell, J.C., 375
Melodic Intonation Th erapy, 343
memory
absence of one-to-one mapping, 61
episodic, 6
episodic and semantic, 62–63
forms of long-term, 61
implicit vs. explicit, 54–58
loss for familiar faces, 114–117
paradigmatic shift  in understanding, 6
semantic, 309–315
See also semantic memory
memory disorder clinic, 393
Mennemeier, M.S., 177, 328
mental function, dispute on localization of, 14
Merritt , H.H., 389
Merzenich, M., 319, 339
mesencephalic reticular formation, and neglect, 133
Mesulam, M.M., 253
metathetic perceptual continua, 139, 153
Metcalfe, J., 373
methylphenidate, 269
Meynert, T., 16, 22
midbrain reticular formation, bilateral damage to 
neurons, 143
middle cerebral artery, lesions causing phonological 
alexia, 93
middle frontal gyrus (MFG), limb apraxia lesions 
and, 204
migraines, eff ect on art, 354
Miller, B., 361, 375
Miller, R.F., 352
Milner, B., 6, 378
mind
disorders of, 5
psychodynamic model, 48
mind blindness, 39, 40, 44
mirror box illusion, 231
mirror circuitry, 260–261
Mishkin, M., 173
misidentifi cation of unfamiliar faces, 117–121
Mizuno, T., 181
Mobes, J., 255
modafi nil, 158, 158f
Mogilner, A., 340
Molaison, H., viii
Monakow, C. von, 7, 23
Monnot, M., 254, 255
monothematic delusions, 238t
Monrad-Krohn, G., 253
Montreys, C.R., 257, 262
motivation, in hierarchical model of representative 
factors, 245
motor agraphias, 95
motor aprosody, 253
motor control
vs. action semantics, 191
in apraxia, 193–197
motor execution disorder, 32
motor-intentional “aiming,” 179–181
motor planning, defi cits, 212
movement formula, 34
MTL. See medial temporal lobes (MTL)
Mueller, J., 21
Mullis, K., 373
Munk, H., 39
muscarinic receptors, 294
Nadeau, S.E., 176, 394
Nadia, 353, 355
nadolol, 287
naming, isolated defi cit in, 30
naming errors, 310
naming latency, 314
narrative self, disorders of, 237, 241
Naturphilosophie school, 17
neglect
anatomy, 132–136
and body schema disruption, 223
chronic unilateral, 153
and comorbidity, 138–139
countercurrents to spatial theories, 
136–137
defi cits in prothetic and metathetic peceptual 
continua, 153–154, 154f
and dysphagia, 160, 161
frontal, 175
hemispatial, 325–329
hypoarousal in, 135
nonsensory, 175
spatial, 173
neglect phenomenology, 132
neglect syndrome, 131
Neisser, U., concept of episodic memory, 63
network performance, graceful degradation, 312
neural networks
PDP properties of, 306
transiently altered, 324–325
neural systems, knowledge of, 305
neuroaesthetics, 349

406
Index
neuroanatomical substrates, connecting apraxia to, 
35–37
neurogenesis, disbelief in post-natal, 338
neuroleptics, 294
neurological conditions
face memory impairments from, 105
and improved art production, 352
neurologists, vs. surgeons, hospital perspective 
on, 2
neurology, at Boston City Hospital, 389–390
neuropathologies of the self, 237–247, 238t
bodily self disorders, 237
ego boundaries and neuroanatomy, 246–247
ego disequilibrum theory, 242–243
hierarchical model of representative factors, 
243–246, 244f
narrative self disorders, 241
relational self disorders, 239–241
neuropeptides, 296–297
neuroplasticity, 334
implications for neurologically-impaired, 
341–344
investigations in support of adult, 338–341
neuropsychology, vii
of art, 358
of magnitude estimation, 142–143
neuropsychopharmacology, and cognition, 
284–297
neurotransmitt er systems, in cognition, 296–297
new-associative priming, 57
Newcombe, F., 92
new patients, as research projects, 7
Newsome-David, J., 2
Newton, I., 373
nondominant hand, writing ability, 99
nondominant hemisphere importance in creativity, 
376, 377
nonrepresentational movements, 198
nonsensory neglect, 175
non-verbal communication of emotion, 252–253
nonverbal primacy hypothesis, 258
noradrenergic eff ects, on cognition, 285–290
noradrenergic pathways, 286f
norepinephrine, 382
alpha-2 adrenergic agonists and, 290
L-dopa as precursor, 292
novelty, in creativity, 5, 7, 368
nucleus basalis, 319
nurturing syndrome, 238t, 240–241
object-naming impairment, 73
object recognition, disturbance of, 40, 42
objects, hierarchically organized, 309–310
obsessive-compulsive traits, and art production, 
352, 353
occipital face area (OFA), 112, 122f
occipito-temperal lesions, 113f
Ochipa, C., 73, 76
O’Hara, L.A., 370
optic aphasia, 72–73
oral language, development of, 90
Th e Organization of Behavior (Hebb), 339
Organized Unitary Content Hypothesis (OUCH), 
73, 77, 78
orthography, 91
oscillations, 163n7
oxcarbazepine, 273
oxytocin, 296–297
Paillard, J., 231
Pandya, D., 390
Papagno, C., 207
Papez, J., 6
paradigmatic shift , 4, 5, 6
parallel distributed processing (PDP), 305–306
breakdown of semantic knowledge in 
models, 311
models, 307–308, 380
paraphasic errors, from tiredness, 46
parietal lobe, agraphias from lesions of, 89–90
parietal-occipital lobule
and apraxia, 188
junction with posterior angular gyrus, 95
Parkinson’s disease, 2, 255
case, 290
and creativity, 381
emotional dysfunction and, 259–260
expressionless face in, 258–260
Parson, L.M., 227
Pascual-Leone, A., 340
Pasteur, L., 3, 372
patient studies, ix, 172
patt ern associator networks, 312–314
Patt erson, K., 317
PDP. See parallel distributed processing (PDP)
pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN), 144
Peele, J.E., 81
Pell, M.D., 256
Penfi eld, W., 337
Pentland, B., 256, 260
perception, 319
of art, 362–363
role of atypicality in, 321
perceptual continua, 163n5
perceptual priming, 55
performance anxiety, 285
peripheral agraphias, 97
peripheral alexias, 90
perisylvian region, 96, 100
periventricular white matt er, in apraxic 
patients, 208
personal confabulation, 241
person identity nodes (PINs), 107
person recognition disorders, 114–117

Index
407
Pett igrew, L.C., 257
PFC. See prefrontal cortex (PFC)
Phantom Boarder Syndrome, 238t
phantom limb, 222–223
phenobarbital, prenatal exposure to, 276
phenytoin, 273, 274, 278
adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
prenatal exposure to, 276
phonological agraphia, 93, 95, 96
phonological alexia, 93
phonological input lexicon, 22
phonological working memory, 28
phonology, 90, 91
phrenological program, 12
Physical Self-Maintenance Scale (PSMS), 214
physiological models, 21
Pick, A., 221, 226, 231
Pilowski, I., 258
Pinel, P., 143
Pinocchio Illusion, 222, 230
plasticity, 334–345
case for neurological stasis in adult, 335–338
use of term, 335
Plaut, D.C., 312
Poincare, H., 372
Poizner, H., 2, 196
population studies, vs. case reports, 3
Posner, M.I., 133
postcentral gyrus, apraxic agraphia and, 98
posterior angular gyrus, junction with parietal-
occipital lobule, 95
posterior dorsal lateral frontal lobe, 98
posterior left  temporal lobe, fusiform gyrus, and 
pure alexia, 91
posterior parietal cortex (PPCL), injury to, 2
posterior parietal lobe, in network of mirror 
neurons, 261
postt raumatic stress disorder, 290
Pott s, L., 361
power function
in logarithmic terms, 327
parameters, 149, 150f, 151f
relationships, 136–137
PPN (pedunculopontine nucleus), 144
Pramstaller, P.P., 207
praxis, 30–39
Praxis Cognitive-Process Model, 195f
praxis networks, and hemispheric diff erences, 
204–207, 205f
praxis production system, 192
praxis reception system, 192
precentral gyrus, and apraxia, 188
prefrontal cortex (PFC), 122f, 289
dopaminergic projecting fi bers and, 291
lesions, and false facial recognition, 118f
preparation stage in creativity, 372
primary progressive aphasia (PPA), 70
primary somatosensory representations, 229–230
priming, fl uent processing and, 56
primitive contagion, 260
prism adaptation training, 343
processing fl uency, 55–56
production, and creativity, 368
progressive disease, and writt en language disorders, 89
propositional language, 20
propranolol, 285, 287, 288, 382
proprioceptive feedback, 231, 263
prosody, 253–257
prosopagnosia, 111–114, 113f
prothetic, 147
prothetic perceptual continua, 139, 153
Prvulovic, D., 361
pseudowords, 92, 94
PSMS (Physical Self-Maintenance Scale), 214
psychodynamic model of mind, 48
psychophysical power law, 131, 139–140, 141f
psychophysics, 319–325
qualifi cations, 322
pure alexia, 91–92
pure meaning deafness, 27
Putnam, T., 389
Quadfasel, F., 49
quality of care, 8
quasi-regular domain, 329n
Rakic, P., 338
randomness, and creativity, 368
raph nucleus (RN), 144
Rapp, B.C., 72
Rapscak, S., 206, 263
RA S. See reticular activating system (RA S)
ratio production, 140
ratio scaling, 139–140, 140–142, 162n4
Raymer, A.M., 200
reading, 92, 316–317
recognition errors, 43–44
reduplicative paramnesia, 238t
reference frames, internal, 178
regularization errors, 93, 95
rehabilitation, predicting hospital falls during, 160
Reilly, J., 81
relational self, disorders of, 237, 239–241
relaxation, and creativity, 380–381
remote semantic memory, 58
repetition priming, 54
representation, in neglect theory, 134
representational gestures, 198
reticular activating system (RA S)
principal cell groups, 143–144
unilateral lesions of, 134
retinal image, activating visual memory, 40
retrograde amnesia, 53
reverse inferences, ix

408
Index
Ricci, R., 327, 328
right hemisphere
damage in artists, 356
injury, and apraxia, 191
injury impact on magnitude estimation, 
149–150, 151f
and left  hand, 35
lesion subtraction analysis, 152f
nondominant role in creativity, 374–377
role in learned skilled movement, 206
stroke, and swallowing problems, 161
verbal emotional expression impairment from 
disorder of, 261
right hemisphere dominance model for spatial 
att ention, 133
RN (raph nucleus), 144
Robertson, I.H., 153
Roeltgen, D.P., 95
Rogers, T.T., 81, 315
Romani, C., 72
“rooms in a house” model, 308
Rosenbek, J.C., 254, 255
Rosenzweig, M., 339
Ross, E.D., 253, 254, 255
rostral-caudal and vertical gradient of apraxia 
severity, 210f
Rothi, L.J., 73, 76, 98, 192, 200, 393
Rothi-Heilman comprehensive Florida Apraxia 
Batt ery, 202
Rothwell, J., 2
Roy, E.A., 192–193
rubber band illusion, 231
rufi namide, 273
Rumelhart, D., 308, 311
Rush, B., 17
Ryalls, J., 254
Ryan, L.R., 59–60
Sacks, O., 356
Saillant, B., 73
Sanes, J., 339
Satz, P., 392
Schwartz, R.L., 68
Scott , S., 255, 258
Scoville, W.B., 6
SEA (strength estimation accuracy), 156, 157f
Seidenberg, M.S., 80
self. See neuropathologies of the self
Selfe, L., 353
self-image, 225
self-related defi cits, in hierarchical model of 
representative factors, 244–245
semantic agraphia, in Alzheimer’s disease, 96
semantic dementia, 60, 70, 309
and body knowledge, 225
case for neural representation of knowledge, 310
pathology of, 317
semantic fi eld (Begriff e), 26
semantic memory, 67–83, 309–315
conceptual structure account, 79–80, 79f
vs. episodic, 58–60
impairments, 67–68
interaction with episodic, 62–63
neural correlates of impairment, 68–70
organization of representations, 78
structure, 70–72
semantic network activation, and creativity, 
380–381
semantic processing models, 69
category-specifi c impairments, 75
domain specifi c hypothesis, 76–78
modality-specifi c, 74–76
unitary model, 72–74
semantic representations, 80–82, 82f, 225
semantics
and aphasia, alexia, and agraphia analysis, 90
and art, 355
sensorimotor integration, defi cits, 212
sensory aphasia, 22
Sensory/Functional hypothesis, 74f
sensory perceptual defi cits, 162n3
serotonergic pathways, 297f
serotonergic system, 296
Shallice, T., 75, 95
Shamay-Tsoory, S.G., 261
Shanks, M.F., 240
Shapiro, B., 254
Sharma, R., 328
Shelton, J.R., 77, 78, 225
Sherwood, K., 349, 350f, 357, 359–360
Silveri, M.C., 98
Simonton, D.K., 371
simple reaction time, 135
single photon emission computerized tomography 
(SPECT), 378–379
Sirigu, A., 221, 224, 227
size perception, 147
Ska, B., 72
skill, and creativity, 368
skull topography, 14–15
sleep spindles, 163n7
sleep-wake rhythms, 144–145
SMG (supramarginal gyrus), 188
Smith, M.C., 259
SN (substantia nigra), 291f
Socrates, 371
somatoparaphrenia, 222–223, 238t, 239, 240, 
246–247
somatosensory representations, primary, 
229–230
sound-producing actions, mapping, 212
spacial att ention, right hemisphere dominance 
model for, 133
spasticity, 342

Index
409
spatial cognition
general description, 172–173
internal “where” representations, 178
modular, Heilman on, 173–175
motor-intentional “aiming,” 179–181
relevance to functional and anatomic theory, 
181–183
“where” perceptual att ention, 175–178
spatial dysfunction, types of, 179t
spatial neglect, 173
in artist, 351
training to reduce, 343
spatial neglect theories
countercurrents to, 136–137
power function relationships in, 137
spatial processing, vs. dorsal visual processing, 181
spatial syntactic defi cit, 179
specialization, of brain hemispheres, 18–19
SPECT (single photon emission computerized 
tomography), 378–379
speech
acoustic quantifi cation, 254
coordinating movements for, 13
diffi  culty, apraxia and, 38
impairment of sound execution, 27
production model, 22
speech-language information processing model, 5
spelling, 316–317
spinal cord injury, 342
spindle oscillations, 163n7
spontaneous writing, 96
Spurzheim, J., 12
statistics, in case reports, 3
Staton, R.D., 246
Steinthal, H., 21, 33, 187
Sternberg, R.J., 370
Stevens, S.S., 321–322
Stevens’ power law, 319–325
stimulus intensity
arousal and perception of, 161
mechanism for conscious perception of, 
145–146
perception of, 131, 139–140
strangers, facial information to classify, 108
strength estimation accuracy (SEA), 156, 157f
stress, eff ects on cognition, 285
striatum, and neglect, 133
stroke
in artist, 349
defi cits in prosody, 253
face memory impairments from, 105
functional and anatomical architecture of 
magnitude estimation, 147
hemiparesis from, 36, 343
permanence of disability, 335–336
and semantic memory impairment, 68–69
and writt en language disorders, 89
Th e Structure of Scientifi c Revolutions (Kuhn), 5
subcortical brain structures, in limb apraxia, 
207–209
subcortical left  frontal lesion, 98
substantia nigra (SN), 291f
substitution, doctrine of, 20
Sundet, K., 213
superior temporal cortex, damage, and word 
comprehension, 69
superior temporal sulcus, in network of mirror 
neurons, 261
supernumerary limbs, 222–223
superordinate errors, 310
supramarginal gyrus (SMG), 188
surface alexia, 93
surgeons, vs. neurologists, hospital perspective 
on, 2
Suzuki, K., 225
symbolic representations of personal 
experiences, 241
symbolic thinking, 20
synaptic basis for learning, theory of, 339
syntax, and aphasia, alexia, and agraphia 
analysis, 90
T., Mr., case, 31–33
tactile apraxia, 211
tactile thermal application, 161
Tanzi, E., 338
Taub, E., 340
Taylor-Clarke, M., 230
temporal binding, generation of, 146f
temporal lobe, agraphias from lesions of, 89–90
temporal lobectomy, 6
temporal-parietal junction (TPJ), and semantic 
processing, 68
temporal polar cortex, 309
Terman, L., 370
test anxiety, 285, 382
testing hypotheses, vii
Test of Oral and Limb Apraxia (TOLA), 200
test of upper limb ideomotor apraxia (TULIA), 202
thalamocortical fi bers, 144
thalamocortical projections systems, bursting 
activity within, 146f
thalamocortical rhythms, normal, 144
thalamus, 133, 286f
tiagabine, 273
tinnitus, 342
TOLA (Test of Oral and Limb Apraxia), 200
tool-use knowledge, ability to access, 210–211
topiramate, 273, 279
Torrance, E.P., 370
Torres, F., 2, 340
TPJ (temporal-parietal junction), and semantic 
processing, 68
transcortical motor aphasia, 26

410
Index
transcortical sensory aphasia, 26
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), 231, 232
trans-disorder process, altered perception of 
stimulus intensity as, 160–161
transitive gestures, 198
translation, in spatial cognitive model, 182
Trousseau, A., 14, 18
Troxler eff ect, 177
Tucker, D.M., 253
TULIA (test of upper limb ideomotor apraxia), 202
Tulving, E., 67
Tyler, L.K., 79
typicality, 330n
Ungerleider, L.G., 173
unitary semantic model, 72–74
unity in diversity, creativity as, 369
useful fi eld of view (UFOV), aging and constriction 
of, 343–344
user-dependent plasticity, 335
Utermohlen, W., 357, 360–361
Valenstein, E,, 133, 134, 171, 173, 182, 192, 395
validity, 7–8
valproate, 274
adverse cognitive eff ects, 272
prenatal exposure to, 276
value, in creativity, 368–369
Van den Abell, T., 393
Venneri, A., 240
verbal aff ect production, tabulation, 257
verbal emotional expression, 252, 261–263
verb past tense, 316–317
verifi cation stage of creativity, 374
vigabatrin, 273, 276
visual agnosia, 39–45, 351, 354
visual art, 349–363
art perception, 362–363
art production changes, 358–361
quantifi cation in neuropsychology of, 358
visual art, paradoxical facilitation of, 351–358
changed expressivity, 356–358
descriptive accuracy, 354–355
disposition to produce art, 352–353
visual vocabulary, 353–354
visual images, inability to imagine, 40
visually-derived semantic codes, for faces, 108
visual memory, loss of, 39
visual perceptual-att entional system, managing 
bott om-up and top-down processing, 177
visual perseveration, conceptual, 44
visual recognition, model for, 42
visual unawareness, 176
Visual Word Form Area (VWFA), 91, 292
visuo-spatial agraphia, 98
voluntary functions, 20
voxel-based lesion mapping, 68
voxel-lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM), 362
Vroom, F., 392
wakefulness, cortical desynchrony of, 143
walking states of consciousness, 134
Wall, P., 339
Wallas, G., 371, 373
Walsh, V., 143
Wapner, W., 354
Warrington, E.K., 75, 76
Watkins, E., 356
Watson, H., 17, 99, 133, 134, 253
Watson, R.T., 171, 173, 182
Weibe, D., 373
Weisberg, R.W., 373
Wernicke, K., 5, 16, 70
“Th e Aphasia Symptom Complex,” 21–22
on conceptual knowledge, 81
infl uence of Lissauer’s model on information 
processing scheme, 45
model of refl ex arc, 23–26, 24f
Wernicke-Lichtheim model, 25–28
Wernicke’s aphasia, 5, 25, 47
Wernicke’s area, 27, 29
Western Aphasia Batt ery, 200
Westphal, C., 21
“where” perceptual att ention, 175–178
white matt er, role in creativity, 379–380
Wiesel, T., 338
Wilbrand, H., 39–40, 44
within-domain associations, 57
women, and praxis performance evaluation, 203
word comprehension, superior temporal cortex 
damage and, 69
word deafness, 26
word-meaning deafness, 30
words, function of articulating, 21
working memory
and neural network changes, 324
storage system, 97–98
writing errors, evaluations of, 99
writt en forced choice lexical decision, 315–316
writt en language
disorders of. See agraphias; alexias
as human cognitive ability, 90
models of, 97–99, 97f
X, Mr., of Charcot, 40
Yamamoto, S., 232
Yerkes-Dodson function, 131, 139, 161, 162
Young, A.W., 107
Zajonc, R.B., 260
Zangwell, O.L., 378
Zarit, J.M., 361
zonisamide, 274, 279

VISUAL
ANALYSIS
SOCIAL
STEREOTYPES
PERSON
IDENTITY
NODES
EXECUTIVE
SYSTEM
FACE
RECOGNITION
UNITS
Individuation
Categorization
Recognition Decision
+
–
FACE
CATEGORY
PROTOTYPES
Figure 6.1 Cognitive model of face recognition memory. Recognition performance 
is the integrated product of individuation and categorization and involves distinct 
visual, (blue), semantic (yellow), and executive (magenta) operations.

1
2
3
4
5
(c)
(a)
(b)
L
R
Figure 6.2 Bilateral (a) and unilateral right-sided (b) occipito-temporal lesions 
in patients with prosopagnosia following PCA strokes. Lesion overlap map of five 
patients with prosopagnosia due to unilateral right occipito-temporal damage 
(c). The area of maximum damage (red) includes right mid-fusiform cortex 
corresponding to the location of the fusiform face area (FFA) in functional 
neuroimaging studies.

L
R
4
2
0
Figure 6.4 Right prefrontal cortex (PFC) lesions in patients with false facial 
recognition (top). Damage involves a ventrolateral frontal lobe region that shows 
activation during face recognition performance in normal subjects (bottom).

Neglect
Exponent
Constant
A
B
C
D
A
B
A
B
Figure 7.7 Results of a lesion subtraction analysis for 17 patients with right hemisphere 
lesions. Th e top row of pictures (Neglect) shows subtraction of RHL- from RHL+ 
scans. Brighter red areas indicate lesions common to RHL+ but not RHL-. Brighter blue 
indicates the opposite. Figure A shows brighter red areas—one involving white matt er 
beneath BAs 6, 4 and 3 and another involving BA 38/21 in the anterior temporal lobe – 
and one area of brighter blue centered on the putamen. Crosshairs in fi gure B show the 
center of these areas, respectively. Figure C shows area of red overlap involving BA 39 
with corresponding crosshair in Figure D. Th e bott om row of pictures (Exponents) 
show scans of RHL patients with normal or high power function exponents subtracted 
from those with decreased exponents and (Constants) of patients with normal or low 
constants subtracted from those with high constants. Figure A under exponent shows 
a brighter red area centered on the anterior limb of the internal capsule. [Similar 
involvement of the thalamic radiations was observed in higher slices (not shown).] 
Figure A under constant shows a brighter red area centered on the anterior limb and 
genu of the internal capsule.

LC
amyg
thal
to hippocampus
Figure 14.1 Noradrenergic pathways. The locus coeruleus (LC) projects 
posteriorly to the cerebellum and up to the thalamus (thal) and amygdala (amyg), 
as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating 
posteriorly at the hippocampus (Heimer, 1995). The descending fibers to the spinal 
cord are also shown. Not shown is the lateral tegmental noradrenergic system which 
also projects to the amygdala and down to the spinal cord.
striatum
amyg
V S
T N
A
Figure 14.2 Dopaminergic pathways. Projections from the substantia nigra (SN) to the 
striatum are demonstrated, as are projections from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to 
the amygdala (amyg), ventral striatum, and frontal cortex (Heimer, 1995). Not shown 
are the tuberoinfundibular and posterior hypothalamic dopaminergic systems.

hippocampus
basal
forebrain
Figure 14.3 Cholinergic pathways. Cortical projections from the basal forebrain are 
demonstrated to the cingulate, and pericingulate cortex, as well as the mesial frontal 
cortex along a mesial pericingular tract, and laterally through the external capsule and 
claustrum to the capsular region and lateral neocortex (Selden et al., 1998).
amyg, hippo
thal
to hippocampus
DRN
striatum
Figure 14.4 Serotonergic pathways. Th e dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) project posteriorly 
to the cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and up to the thalamus (thal), with 
projections also to the amygdala (amyg), hippocampus (hippo), hypothalamus, 
olfactory and entorhinal cortices, then to the ventral striatum as well as throughout the 
neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating posteriorly at the hippocampus 
(Heimer, 1995). Not shown is the caudal raphe nuclei, which also project to the 
cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and down to the spinal cord.

(a)
Figure 17.1 Examples of Katherine Sherwood’s paintings. Permission obtained 
from Katherine Sherwood. a) Test Sites, painted before her stroke b) The Cart 
Before the Horse, painted after her stroke.

(b)
Figure 17.1 (Continued)

