The fast-paced word 
game for 2 to 6 players
Ages 6+/Grades 1+
EI-2985
Instruction Guide
Contents: 30 tricolored TRI-TILES, 1 TRI-DIE, 
1 two-minute timer, storage tin
Object of the Game:
Players try to score the most points by making words from randomly
drawn TRI-TILES (the 5-sided triangular pieces) consisting of letters
and WILDCARDS (designated by stars).
Before you begin:
1.
Decide on the number of TRI-TILES to be used by each player:
2 - 3 players: 5 to 8 tiles each
4 - 5 players: 5 to 6 tiles each
6 players:
5 tiles each
2.
Decide how to end the game. The game may end when one player 
has accumulated 100 points, when 10 (or any number of) rounds are
completed, or after a designated amount of time.
TELL EDUCATIONAL INSIGHTS: We welcome your comments or questions about our products or service.
CALL: (800) 995-4436 toll-free Monday-Friday 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. CST
WRITE TO: Educational Insights Customer Service, 2206 Oakland Parkway, Columbia, TN 38401-9901 (USA)
EMAIL: service@edin.com
OR VISIT OUR WEBSITE: www.educationalinsights.com
© 2004  P. Joseph Shumaker, Jr./New Hope Products Company, Inc. Distributed by Educational Insights, Inc.,
Rancho Dominguez, CA. 90220 (USA).All rights reserved. Made in China. Conforms to: ASTM F 963.
Please retain this information.
Tri-Words Game Variations
Here are three more fun ways to play Tri-Words:
Words, Words, Words
This variation is perfect for younger players. The object of this game
is to form as many 4-letter words as possible using 4 TRI-TILES.
Before the game begins, give each player a pencil and sheet of paper.
Then have each player draw 4 TRI-TILES from the pile.
1.
Turn over the timer.
2.
Players begin forming 4-letter words with the TRI-TILES. As each 
word is formed, the player writes it down on the sheet of paper. 
3.
When the timer runs out, players put down their pencils.
4.
Count up the points for each player. One point is scored for each 
4-letter word formed. Play 5 rounds and then add up the scores for 
all 5 games. WILDCARD “stars” can be substituted for any letter. 
The player with the high total is the winner.
Variations: This game can be played with 3, 5, or 6 TRI-TILES,
depending on the number of players in the game.
Tri-Word Challenge
The object of this challenging game (maximum 3 players) is to form
the longest word you can using 10 TRI-TILES. Before the game
begins, each player draws 10 TRI-TILES from the pile. Turn over the
timer. Each player begins making a word. When the timer runs out,
players show their words to each other. The person with the longest
word scores one point for each letter in the word (for example, a
player with a 7-letter word such as CRANIUM would score 7 points).
Play 5 rounds and then add up the scores for all 5 games. The player
with the highest total is the winner.
Tri-Words Alphabet Chain
This variation is for one player. The object of the game is to place
all the TRI-TILES of one color in order from A to Z before the timer
runs out. No WILDCARD “stars” can be used in this game.

Playing the Game
1.
Place all of the TRI-TILES on the table. Each player selects the 
predetermined number of tiles for that round.
2.
One player rolls the TRI-DIE to determine the NUMBER of words 
each player should make for that round (one or two) and the COLOR
of the TRI-TILE that will give the most points (yellow, green, or orange). 
3
All players immediately start forming their word(s) with their 
TRI-TILES. As players form words, keep these scoring rules in mind:
• Players score the most points by forming their word(s) 
in the specific TRI-DIE COLOR.
• Players score more points by making the exact NUMBER 
of words specified on the TRI-DIE.
• WILDCARD “stars” may be substituted for any letter.
4.
The first player to finish flips over the timer. All other players must 
finish before the timer runs out.
5.
Players show their solutions, add up their points, and record their 
scores. Note: A suspicious word may be challenged, but if the 
word is valid, the challenger loses 5 points. Unless players decide 
otherwise, slang, abbreviations, and proper nouns are not valid 
words.
6. All TRI-TILES are placed back in the tin and mixed up again for the 
next round.
Scoring a Round (points for WORDS)
• DOUBLE the total word score if a player uses ALL of his/her 
TRI-TILES, in any colors, including WILDCARD “stars.”
• TRIPLE the total word score if a player uses ALL of his/her 
TRI-TILES, (including WILDCARD “stars”) in the TRI-DIE color.
Scoring a Round (points for LETTERS)
• Receive 2 points each..........letters in the specified TRI-DIE color
• Receive 1 point each............letters in either of the other two colors
• Receive 0 points...................WILDCARD “stars” in any color
Sample Game and Scoring
Four players draw 5 TRI-TILES each. The TRI-DIE is rolled, specifying
the TRI-COLOR as YELLOW and the number of words to make as
TWO. Players begin to make words using their tiles.
TRI-TILE Colors and Symbols
Players who have difficulty distinguishing the colors of the tiles can use
the symbols on the bottom of each TRI-TILE to identify like colors. 
• Each orange TRI-TILE has a dashed line along the bottom of the tile.
• Each green TRI-TILE has a dotted line along the bottom of the tile.
• Each yellow TRI-TILE has a solid line along the bottom of the tile.
Player 1 makes 2 words (both in TRI-DIE color).
2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 10 x 3 = 30 points 
Player 2 makes 2 words using 3 colors and 1    .
11 ++ 11 ++ 11 ++ 00 ++ 11 == 44 xx 22 == 88 ppooiinnttss    
Player 3 makes 2 words using 2 colors.
1 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 9 x 2 = 18 points 
Player 4 makes one word (doesn't use all tiles).
2 + 2 + 0 + 2 = 6 points 
score
30 points
score
8 points
score
18 points
score
6 points
orange
green
yellow

