Chapter 2 
Surface Shape from the Deformation of 
Apparent Contours 
2.1 
Introduction 
For a smooth arbitrarily curved surface - especially in man-made environments 
where surface texture may be sparse - the dominant image feature is the apparent 
contour or silhouette (figure 2.1). The apparent contour is the projection of the 
locus of points on the object - the contour generator or cxtremal boundary - 
which separates the visible from the occluded parts of a smooth opaque, curved 
surface. 
The apparent contour and its deformation 
under viewer motion are poten- 
tially rich sources of geometric information for navigation, object manipulation, 
motion-planning 
and object recognition. 
Barrow and Tenenbaum 
[17] pointed 
out that surface orientation along the apparent contour can be computed 
di- 
rectly from image data. Koenderink 
[120] related the curvature of an apparent 
contour to the intrinsic curvature of the surface (Gaussian curvature); the sign 
of Gaussian curvature is equal to the sign of the curvature of the image contour. 
Convexities, concavities and inflections of an apparent contour indicate, respec- 
tively, convex, hyperbolic and parabolic surface points. Giblin and Weiss [85] 
have extended this by adding viewer motions to obtain quantitative estimates 
of surface curvature. 
A surface (excluding concavities in opaque objects) can 
be reconstructed 
from the envelope of all its tangent planes, which in turn are 
computed 
directly from the family of apparent contours/silhouettes 
of the sur- 
face, obtained under motion of the viewer. By assuming that the viewer follows 
a great circle of viewer directions around the object they restricted the problem 
of analysing the envelope of tangent planes to the less general one of comput- 
ing the envelope of a family of lines in a plane. Their algorithm was tested on 
noise-free, synthetic data (on the assumption that extremal boundaries had been 
distinguished from other image contours) demonstrating the reconstruction of a 
planar curve under orthographic projection. 
In this chapter this will be extended to the general case of arbitrary non- 
planar, curvilinear viewer motion under perspective projection. The geometry 

14 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
Figure 2.1: A smooth curved surface and its silhouette. 
A single image of a smooth curved surface can provide 31) shape information f~vm 
shading, surface markings and texture cues (a). However, especially in artificial 
environments where surface texture may be sparse, the dominant image feature 
is the outline or apparent contour, shown here as a silhouette (b). The apparent 
contour or silhouette is an extremely rich source of geometric information. The 
special relationship between the ray and the local differential surface 9eometry 
allow the recovery of the surface orientation and the sign of Gaussian curvature 
from a single view. 

2.2. Theoretical framework 
15 
of apparent contours and their deformation under viewer-motion are related to 
the differential geometry of the observed objeet's surface. In particular it is 
shown how to recover the position, orientation and 3D shape of visible surfaces 
in the vicinity of their contour generators from the deformation of apparent 
contours and known viewer motion. The theory for small, local viewer motions 
is developed to detect extremal boundaries and distinguish them from occlud- 
ing edges (discontinuities in depth or orientation), surface markings or shadow 
boundaries. 
A consequence of the theory concerns the robustness of relative measure- 
ments of surface curvature based on the relative image motion of nearby points 
in the image - parallax based measurements. Intuitively it is relatively difficult 
to judge, moving around a smooth, featureless object, whether its silhouette is 
extremal or not -- that is, whether curvature along the contour is bounded or 
not. This judgement is much easier to make for objects which have at least a 
few surface features. Under small viewer motions, features are "sucked" over the 
extremal boundary, at a rate which depends on surface curvature. Our theoret- 
ical findings exactly reflect the intuition that the "sucking" effect is a reliable 
indicator of relative curvature, regardless of the exact details of the viewer's mo- 
tion. Relative measurements of curvature across two adjacent points are shown 
to be entirely immune to uncertainties in the viewer's rotational velocity. 
2.2 
Theoretical framework 
In this section the theoretical framework for the subsequent analysis of apparent 
contours and their deformation under viewer motion is presented. We begin 
with the properties of apparent contours and their contour generators and then 
relate these first to the descriptions of local 3D shape developed from the differ- 
ential geometry of surfaces and then to the analysis of visual motion of apparent 
contours. 
2.2.1 
The 
apparent 
contour 
and its contour 
generator 
Consider a smooth object. For each vantage point all the rays through the van- 
tage point that are tangent to the surface can be constructed. They touch the 
object along a smooth curve on its surface which we call the contour genera- 
tor [143] or alternatively the extremal boundary [16], the rim [120], the fold [21] 
or the critical set of the visual mapping [46, 85] (figure 2.2). 
For generic situations (situations which do not change qualitatively under 
arbitrarily small excursions of the vantage point) the contour generator is part 
of a smooth space curve (not a planar curve) whose direction is not in general 
perpendicular to the ray direction. The contour generator is dependent on the 

16 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
spherical perspective image 
v(t 0) 
apparent contour q (s,to) 
r(so,t) 
contour generator r(S,to) 
Figure 2.2: Surface and viewing geometry. 
P lies on a smooth surface which is parameterised locally by r(s, t). For a given 
vantage point, v(t0), the family of rays emanating from the viewer's optical 
centre (C) that touch the surface defines an s-parameter curve r(s, to) - the 
contour generator from vantage point to. The spherical perspective projection of 
this contour generator - the apparent contour, q(s, to) - determines the direction 
of rays which graze the surface. The distance along each ray, CP, is A. 

2.2. Theoretical framework 
17 
local surface geometry and on the vantage point in a simple way which will be 
elucidated below. Moreover each vantage point will, in general, generate a dif- 
ferent contour generator. Movement of the viewer causes the contour generator 
to "slip" over the visible surface. 
The image of the contour generator - here called the apparent contour but 
elsewhere also known as the occluding contour, profile, outline, silhouette or 
limb - will usually be smooth (figure 2.2). It may however not be continuous 
everywhere. As a consequence of the contour generator being a space curve, 
there may exist a finite number of rays that are tangent not only to the surface 
but also to the contour generator. At these points the apparent contour of a 
transparent object will cusp. For opaque surfaces, however, only one branch of 
the cusp is visible and the contour ends abruptly (see later, figure 2.5) [129, 120]. 
2.2.2 
Surface 
geometry 
In the following, descriptions of local 3D shape are developed directly from the 
differential geometry of surfaces [67, 76, 122]. 
Consider a point P on the contour generator of a smooth, curved surface in R 3 
and parameterised locally by a vector valued function r(s,t). The parametric 
representation can be considered as covering the surface with two families of 
curves [134]: r(s, t0) and r(s0,t) where so or to are fixed for a given curve in 
the family. For the analysis of apparent contours and their deformation with 
viewer motion it is necessary to choose the one-parameter family of views to be 
indexed by a time parameter t, which will also parameterise viewer position for 
a moving observer. The s and t parameters are defined so that the s-parameter 
curve, r(s,t0), is a contour generator from a particular view to (figure 2.2). A 
t-parameter curve r(s0, t) can be thought of as the 3D locus of points grazed by 
a light-ray from the viewer, under viewer motion. Such a locus is not uniquely 
defined. Given a starting point s = so, t = to, the correspondence, as the viewer 
moves, between "successive" (in an infinitesimal sense) contour generators is 
not unique. Hence there is considerable freedom to choose a spatio-temporal 
parameterisation of the surface, r(s, t). 
The local surface geometry at P is determined by the tangent plane (surface 
normal) and a description of how the tangent plane turns as we move in arbitrary 
directions over the surface (figure 2.3). This can be specified in terms of the basis 
{r~, rt} for the tangent plane (where for convenience r8 and rt denote Or/Os and 
Or/cgt - the tangents to the s and t-parameter curves respectively) 1; the surface 
1Subscripts denote differentiation with respect to the subscript parameter. Superscripts 
will be used as labels. 

18 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
.o~ 
r 
r 2:to  / 
s-parameter cuive (th~ contour generator) 
Figure 2.3: The tangent plane. 
Local surface geometry can be specified in terms of the basis {rs, rt} for the 
tangent plane (where rs and rt denote the tangents to the s and t-parameter 
curves respectively and are not in general orthogonal) and the surface normal n 
(a unit vector). In differential surface geometry the derivative of these quantities 
with respect to movement over the surface is used to describe surface shape. 

2.2. Theoretical framework 
19 
normal, (a unit vector, n) defined so that 
r~.n 
= 
0 
(2.1) 
rt.n 
-- 
0 
(2.2) 
and the derivatives of these quantities with respect to movement over the surface. 
These are conveniently packaged in the first and second fundamental forms as 
follows. For a tangent plane vector at P, w, the first fundamental form, I(w, w), 
is used to express the length of any infinitesimal element in the tangent plane 
([67], p.92 ): 
~(w, w) = w.w. 
(2.3) 
It can be represented by a matrix of coefficients, G, with respect to the basis 
{r,, rt} where 
G= [ r~.r~ r~.rt ] . 
(2.4) 
rt ,rs 
rt .rt 
The second fundamental form, II(w,w), quantifies the "bending away" of 
the surface from the tangent plane. It is defined by ([67], p.141): 
ii(w, w) = -w.L(w) 
(2.5) 
where L(w) is the derivative of the surface orientation, n, in the direction w. 
L is in fact a linear transformation on the tangent plane. It is also called the 
Shape operator [166] or the Weingarten Map [156]. In particular for the basis 
vectors {re, rt}: 
L(r,) 
= 
ns 
(2.6) 
L(rt) 
= 
nt 
(2.7) 
and the coefficients of the second fundamental are given by matrix D where 
rts .n 
rtt.n 
The geometry of the surface is completely determined locally up to a rigid 
motion in R a by these two quadratic forms. It is, however, sometimes more 
convenient to characterise the surface by normal curvatures in specific directions 
in the tangent plane 2. The normal curvature in the direction w, ~n, is defined 
by [76]: 
~n _ It(w, W) 
I(w,w) " 
(2.9) 
2The normal curvature is the curvature of the planar section of the surface through the 
normal and tangent vector. 

20 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
The maximum and minimum normal curvatures are called the principal curva- 
tures. The corresponding directions are called the principal directions 3 
It will now be shown how to make these quadratic forms explicit from image 
measurable quantities. This requires relating the differential geometry of the 
surface to the analysis of visual motion. 
2.2.3 
Imaging 
model 
A monocular observer can determine the orientation of any ray projected on 
to its imaging surface. The observer cannot however, determine the distance 
along the ray of the object feature which generated it. A general model for 
the imaging device is therefore to consider it as determining the direction of an 
incoming ray which we can chose to represent as a unit vector. This is equivalent 
to considering the imaging device as a spherical pin-hole camera of unit radius 
(figure 2.2). 
The use of spherical projection (rather than planar), which has previously 
proven to be a powerful tool in structure-from-motion [123] [149], makes it fea- 
sible to extend tile theory of Giblin and Weiss [85] to allow for perspective. Its 
simplicity arises from the fact that there are no special points on the image sur- 
face, whereas the origin of the perspective plane is special and the consequent 
loss of symmetry tends to complicate mathematical arguments. 
For perspective projection the direction of a ray to a world point, P, with 
position vector r(s,t), is a unit vector on the image sphere p(s,t) defined at 
time t by 
r(s,t) = v(t) q- A(s,t)p(s,t), 
(2.10) 
where A(s, t) is the distance along the ray to the viewed point P and v(t) is the 
viewer's position (figure 2.2). 
For a given vantage position to, the apparent contour, q(s, to), determines 
a continuous family of rays p(s, to) emanating from the camera's optical centre 
which touch the surface so that 
p.n = 0 
(2.11) 
where n is the surface normal. Equation (2.11) defines both the contour gener- 
ator and the apparent contour. 
3These are in fact the eigenvalues and respective eigenvectors of the matrix G-1D. The 
determinant of this matrix (product of the two principal curvatures) is called the Gaussian 
curvature, K. It determines qualitatively a surface's shape. A surface patch which is locally 
hyperbolic (saddle-like) has principal curvatures of opposite sign and hence negative Gaussian 
curvature. Elliptic surface patches (concave or convex) have principal curvatures with the 
same sign and hence positive Gaussian curvature. A locally flat surface patch wilt have zero 
Gaussian curvature. 

2.3. Geometric properties of the contour generator and its projection 
21 
The moving monocular observer at position v(t) sees a family of apparent 
contours swept over the imagesphere. These determine a two-parameter family 
of rays in R 3, p(s,t). As before with r(s,t), the parameterisation is under- 
determined but that will be fixed later. 
2.2.4 
Viewer and reference 
co-ordinate 
systems 
Note that p is the direction of the light ray in the fixed reference/world frame for 
R 3. It is determined by a spherical image position vector q (the direction of the 
ray in the camera/viewer co-ordinate system) and the orientation of the camera 
co-ordinate system relative to the reference frame. For a moving observer the 
viewer co-ordinate system is continuously moving with respect to the reference 
frame. The relationship between p and q can be conveniently expressed in terms 
of a rotation operator R(~) [104]: 
p ---- R(t)q. 
(2.12) 
The frames are defined so that instantaneously, at time t -- 0, they coincide 
p(s, 0) -- q(s, 0) 
(2.13) 
and have relative translational and rotational velocities of U(t) and f/(t) respec- 
tively: 
U 
= 
vt 
(2.14) 
(F/Aq) 
= 
Rtq 
(2.15) 
The relationship between temporal derivatives of measurements made in the 
camera co-ordinate system and those made in the reference frame is then given 
by (differentiating (2.12)): 
Pt = qt -b N A q 
(2.16) 
where (as before) the subscripts denote differentiation with respect to time and 
A denotes a vector product. 
2.3 
Geometric properties of the contour gener- 
ator and its projection 
We now establish why the contour generator is a rich source of information 
about surface geometry. The physical constraints of tangency (all rays at a 
contour generator are in the surface's tangent plane) and conjugacv (the special 
relationship between the direction of the contour generator and the ray direction) 
provide powerful constraints on the local geometry of the surface being viewed 
and allow the recovery of surface orientation and the sign of Gaussian curvature 
directly from a single image of the contour generator, the apparent contour. 

22 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
2.3.1 
Tangency 
Both the tangent to the contour generator, rs (obtained by differentiating (2.10)) 
rs = Asp Jr ~Ps 
(2.17) 
and the ray, p, must (by definition) lie in the tangent plane of the surface. From 
the tangency conditions 
rs.n 
---- 
0 
p.n 
= 
0 
and (2.17), we see that the tangent to the apparent contour also lies in the 
tangent plane of the surface 
ps.n = 0. 
(2.18) 
This allows the recovery of the surface orientation n (defined up to a sign) 
directly from a single view p(s, to) using the direction of the ray and the tangent 
to the apparent (image) contour 
paps 
(2.19) 
n-ip 
A 
ps------ ]. 
This result is also valid for projection on to the plane. It is a trivial general- 
isation to perspective projection of the well-known observation of Barrow and 
Tenenbanm [16, 17]. 
2.3.2 
Conjugate 
direction 
relationship 
of ray and contour 
generator 
The tangency conditions constrain the contour generator to the tangent plane of 
the surface. In which direction does the contour generator run? The direction 
is determined by the second fundamental form and the direction of the ray. In 
particular the ray direction, p, and the tangent to the contour generator, rs, are 
in conjugate directions with respect to the second fundamental form [125, 120]. 
That is, the change in surface normal (orientation of the tangent plane) for an 
infinitesimal movement in the direction of the contour generator is orthogonal to 
the direction of the ray. This is intuitively obvious for orthographic projection 
since the normal will continue to be orthogonal to the line of sight as we move 
along the contour generator. 
This is immediately apparent in the current framework for perspective pro- 
jection sincc the second fundamental form has the property that 
II(p, rs) 
-- 
-p.L(rs) 
= 
-p.n8 
(2.20) 

2.4. Static properties of apparent contours 
23 
which, by differentiating (2.11) and substituting (2.18), is zero. 
p.n, = 0. 
(2.21) 
The ray direction, p, and the contour generator are not in general perpendicular 
but in conjugate directions 4. 
We will demonstrate the conjugacy relationship by way of a few simple ex- 
amples. Let 0 be the angle between the ray direction p and the tangent rs to 
the extremal contour. In general -7r/2 < 0 < lr/2. 
. 0 = ~r/2 
If the ray p is along a principal direction of the surface at P the contour 
generator will run along the other principal direction. Principal directions 
are mutually conjugate. Similarly at an umbilical non-planar point, e.g. 
any point on a sphere, the contour generator will be perpendicular to the 
ray (figure 2.4a). 
. -7r/2 < 0 < 7r/2 
At a parabolic point of a surface, e.g. any point on a cylinder, the conjugate 
direction of any ray is in the asymptotic direction, e.g. parallel to the axis 
of a cylinder, and the contour generator will then run along this direction 
and have zero normal curvature (figure 2.4b). 
. 0=0 
The special case /9 = 0 occurs when the ray p lies along an asymptotic 
direction on the surface. The tangent to the contour generator and the ray 
are parallel - asymptotic directions are self-conjugate. A cusp is generated 
in the projection of the contour generator, seen as an ending of the apparent 
contour for an opaque surface[129] 
(figure 2.5). 
Conjugacy is an important relation in differential geometry and vision. As 
well as determining the direction of a contour generator, it also determines the 
direction of a self-shadow boundary in relation to its light source [122]. 
2.4 
Static 
properties 
of apparent 
contours 
It is now well established that static views of extremal boundaries are rich sources 
of surface geometry [17, 120, 36, 85]. The main results are summarised below 
followed a description and simple derivation. 
4 Since, generically, there is only one direction conjugate to any other direction, this property 
means that a contour generator will not intersect itself. 

(b) 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
(a) 
24 
Figure 2.4: In which direction does the contour generator run? 
(a) An example in which the direction of the contour generator is determined by 
the direction of the ray. For any point on a sphere the contour generator will 
run in a perpendicular direction to the ray. 
(b) An example in which the direction of the contour generator is determined by 
the surface shape. For any point on a cylinder viewed fro m a generic viewpoint 
the contour generator will run parallel to the axis and is independent of the 
direction of the ray. 

2.4. Static properties of apparent contours 
25 
(b) 
Figure 2.5: Cusps and contour-endings. 
The tangent to the contour generator and the ray are parallel when viewing along 
an asymptotic direction of the surface. A cusp is generated in the projection of 
the contour generator, seen as an ending of the apparent contour for an opaque 
surface. The ending-contour will always be concave. It is however diI~cult to 
detect and localise in real images. A synthetic image of a torus (a} and its edges 
(b} are shown. The edges were detected by a Marr-Hildreth edge finder [78]. 

26 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
1. The orientation of the tangent plane (surface normal) can be recovered 
directly from a single view of an apparent contour. 
2. The curvature of the apparent contour has the same sign as the normal 
curvature along the contour generator 5 
. For opaque surfaces, convexities, inflections and concavities of the appar- 
ent contour indicate respectively elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic surface 
points. 
2.4.1 
Surface normal 
Computation of orientation on a textured surface patch would usually require 
(known) viewer motion to obtain depth, followed by spatial differentiation. In 
the case of a contour generator however, the tangency condition (2.11) means 
that surface orientation n(s, t0) can be recovered directly from the apparent 
contour p(s, to): 
pap, 
(2.22) 
n(s, t0) -- [pAp, i. 
The temporal and spatial differentiation that, for the textured patch, would have 
to be computed with attendant problems of numerical conditioning, is done, for 
extremal boundaries, by the physical constraint of tangency. 
Note that the sign of the orientation can only be determined if it is known on 
which side of the apparent contour the surface lies. This information may not be 
reliably available in a single view (figure 2.5b). It is shown below, however, that 
the "sidedness" of the contour generator can be unambiguously determined from 
the deformation of the apparent contour under known viewer-motion. In the 
following we choose the convention that the surface normal is defined to point 
away from the solid surface. This arbitrarily fixes the direction of increasing 
s-parameter of the apparent contours so that {p, p,, n} form a right-handed 
orthogonal frame. 
2.4.2 
Sign of normal 
curvature 
along the contour 
genera- 
tor 
The relationship between the curvature of the apparent contour and the cur- 
vature of the contour generator and the viewing geometry is now derived. The 
curvature of the apparent contour, ~P, can be computed as the geodesic curvature 
5Note the special case of a cusp when the apparent contour has infinite curvature while the 
contour generator has zero normal curvature. This case can he considered in the limit. 

2.4. Static properties of apparent contours 
27 
6 of the curve, p(8, to), on the image sphere. By definition: 7 
~p 
pss.n 
iwl2. 
(2.23) 
It is simply related to the normal curvature of the contour generator, gs, by: 
~P 
(2.24) 
- 
sin 2 0 
where (as before) 0 is the angle between the ray and the contour generator, 
r~ 
(2.25) 
cosO= P'lrsl 
and x ~ is the normal curvature along the contour generator defined by (2.9): 
.n 
rs .rs 
Since surface depth A must be positive, the sign of ~ must, in fact, be the 
same as the sign of gP. In the special case of viewing a parabolic point, tr s = 0, 
and an inflection is generated in the apparent contour. 
Derivation 2.1 The derivation of equation (2.24)follows directly from the equa- 
tions of perspective projection. Rearranging (2.17) we can derive the mapping 
between the length of a small element of the contour generator its ] and its spher- 
ical perspective projection ]p~ [. 
Iwl 
Ir~l (1- [ 
r~ ~2~ 1/2 
_ 
tp 
) ) 
(2.27) 
= 
lrs--] sin0. 
(2.28) 
A 
Note that the mapping from contour generator to apparent contour is singular 
(degenerate) when 0 is zero. The tangent to the contour generator projects to a 
point in the image. As discussed above this is the situation in which a cusp is 
generated in the apparent contour and is seen as a contour-ending (figure 2.5). 
6The geodesic curvature of a curve on a sphere is sometimes called the apparent curvature 
[122]. It measures how the curve is curving in the imaging surface. It is equal to the curvature 
of the perspective projection onto a plane defined by the ray direction. 
7The curvature, a, and the Frenet-Serret normal, N, for a space curve "y(s) are given by 
([76], p103): aN = ('Ys A "Yss) A "Ys/ ["Is[ 4, The normal curvature is the magnitude of the 
component of teN in the direction of the surface normal (here p since p(s, to) is a curve on 
the image sphere); the geodesic curvature is the magnitude of the component in a direction 
perpendicular to the surface normal and the curve tangent (in this case Ps). For a curve on a 
sphere this direction is parallel to the curve normal (n or apparent contours). 

28 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
Differentiating (2.17) and collecting the components parallel to the surface 
normal gives 
r88.n 
(2.29) 
Pss.n - 
A 
Substituting (2.27) and (2.29) into the definition of apparent curvature (2.23) 
and normal curvature (2.26) we obtain an alternative form of (2.24): 
gP= [1-(P.lr-~)2] " 
(2.30) 
A similar result was derived for orthographic projection by Brady et al. [36]. 
2.4.3 
Sign of Gauss[an 
curvature 
The sign of the Gauss[an curvature, K, can be inferred from a single view of 
an extremal boundary by the sign of the curvature of the apparent contour. 
Koenderink showed that: 
...from any vantage point and without any restriction on the 
shape of the rim, a convexity of the contour corresponds to a convex 
patch of surface, a concavity to a saddle-shaped patch. Inflections of 
the contour correspond to flexional curves of the surface [120]. 
In particular he proves Marr wrong: 
In general of course, points of inflection in a contour need have 
no significance for the surface [144]. 
by showing that inflections of the contour correspond to parabolic points (where 
the Gauss[an curvature is zero) of the surface. 
This follows from a simple relationship between the Gauss[an curvature, K; 
the curvature tr t of the normal section at P containing the ray direction; the 
curvature t~p of the apparent contour (perspective projection) and the depth A 
[120, 122]: 
/,gp/~ t 
K- 
A 
(2.31) 
The sign of tr t is always the same at a contour generator. For P to be visible, the 
normal section must be convex s at a contour generator - a concave surface point 
can never appear on a contour generator of an opaque object. Distance to the 
contour generator, A, is always positive. Hence the sign of gP determines the sign 
of Gaussian curvature. Convexities, concavities and inflections of an apparent 
contour indicate, respectively, convex, hyperbolic and parabolic surface points. 
8If we define the surface normal as being outwards from the solid surface, the normal 
curvature will be negative in any direction for a convex surface patch. 

2.5. The dynamic analysis of apparent contours 
29 
Equation (2.31) is derived in section 2.6.4. An alternative proof of the rela- 
tionship between the sign of Gaussian curvature and the sign of nP follows. 
Derivation 2.2 Consider a tangent vector, w, with components in the basis 
{p, rs} of (a, j3). Let the normal curvature in the direction w be n". From (2.9) 
its sign is given by: 
sign(t~ n) 
= 
-sign(w.L(w)) 
= 
-(a)Usign(g t) - 2aj31rslsign(p.L(rs) ) - (/31rsl)2sign(n s) 
= 
-(a)2sign(n t) - (/3]rs D2sign(n s) 
(2.32) 
since by the conjugacy relationship (2.21), p.L(rs) = O. Since the sign of nt 
is known at an apparent contour - it must always be convex - the sign of n ~ 
determines the sign of the Gaussian curvature, If: 
1. If n s is convex all normal sections have the same sign of normal curvature 
- convex. The surface is locally elliptic and K > O. 
2. If n~ is concave the sign of normal curvature changes as we change direc- 
tions in the tangent plane. The surface is locally hyperbolic and K < O. 
3. If n ~ is zero the sign of normal curvature does not change but the normal 
curvature can become zero. The surface is locally parabolic and K = O. 
Since the sign of n ~ is equal to the sign of n p (2.24), the curvature of the apparent 
contour indicates the sign of Gaussian curvature. 
As before when we considered the surface normal, the ability to determine 
the sign of the Gaussian curvature relies on being able to determine on which 
side of the apparent contour the surface lies. This information is not readily 
available from image contour data. It is however available if it is possible to 
detect a contour-ending since the local surface is then hyperbolic (since the 
surface is being viewed along an asymptotic direction) and the apparent contour 
must be concave at its end-point [129]. Detecting cusps by photometric analysis 
is a non-trivial exercise (figures 2.5). 
2.5 
The dynamic analysis of apparent contours 
2.5.1 
Spatio-temporal parameterisation 
The previous section showed that static views of apparent contours provide useful 
qualitative constraints on local surface shape. The viewer must however have 
discriminated apparent contours from the images of other surface curves (such as 

30 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
surface markings or discontinuities in surface orientation) and have determined 
on which side of the image contour the surface lies. 
When the viewer executes a known motion then surface depth can, of course, 
be computed from image velocities [34, 103]. This is correct for static space 
curves but it will be shown that it also holds for extremal contour generators 
even though they are not fixed in space. Furthermore, if image accelerations 
are also computed then full surface curvature (local 3D shape) can be computed 
along a contour generator. Giblin and Weiss demonstrated this for orthographic 
projection and planar motion [85] (Appendix B). We now generalise these results 
to arbitrary non-planar, curvilinear viewer motion and perspective projection. 
This requires the choice of a suitable spatio-temporal parameterisation for the 
image, q(s, t), and surface, r(s, t). 
As the viewer moves the family of apparent contours, q(s,t), is swept out 
on the image sphere (figure 2.6). However the spatio-temporal parameterisation 
of the family is not uniquc. 
The mapping between contour generators, and 
hence between apparent contours, at successive instants is under-determined. 
This is essentially the "aperture problem" for contours, considered either on the 
spherical perspective image q(s,t), or on the Gauss sphere n(s,t), or between 
space curves on the surface r(s,t). 
The choice is arbitrary since the image 
contours are projections of different 3D space curves. 
2:5.2 
Epipolar parameterisatlon 
A natural choice of parameterisation (for both the spatio-temporal image and 
the surface), is the epipolar parameterisation defined by 
rt A p = 0. 
(2.33) 
The tangent to the t-parameter curve is chosen to be in the direction of the ray, 
p. The physical interpretation is that the grazing/contact point is chosen to 
"slip" along the ray. The tangent-plane basis vectors, r8 and rt, are therefore in 
conjugate directions. The advantage of the parameterisation is clear later, when 
it leads to a simplified treatment of surface curvature and a unified treatment 
of the projection of rigid space curves and extremal boundaries. 
A natural correspondence between points on successive snapshots of an ap- 
parent contour can now be set up. These are the lines of constant s on the image 
sphere. Differentiating (2.10) with respect to time and enforcing (2.33) leads to 
a "matching" condition 
(UAp) Ap 
Pt - 
i 
(2.34) 
The corresponding ray in the next viewpoint (in an infinitesimal sense) 
p(s0,t + St), is chosen so that it lies in the plane defined by (U A p) - the 

2.5. The dynamic analysis of apparent contours 
31 
spherical perspective image at t 
spherical perspective image at t+St 
~~__ 
, ...... 
~,, 
,
,
~
 
.
.
.
.
 
~ 
/ ' ? : . ~  .,~// 
v (t +6tjS~/' 
"'" 
1/ 
r(s0,t) 
/~ 
{ 
II 
\ ~ t )  
Figure 2.6: Epipolar parameterisation. 
A moving observer at position v(t) sees a family of contour generators r(s,t) 
indexed by the time parameter t. 
Their spherical perspective projections are 
represented by a two parameter family of apparent contours q(s,t). 
For the 
epipolar parameterisation t-parameter curves (r(so, t) and q(so,t)) are defined 
by choosing the correspondence between successive contours to be in an epipolar 
plane which is determined by the translational velocity and the direction of the 
ray. 

32 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
epipolar plane. The t-parameter curve on the surface, r(s0, t), will also be in the 
same plane (figure 2.6). 
This is the infinitesimal analogue to epipolar plane matching in stereo [14, 34]. 
For a general motion, however, the epipolar plane structure rotates continuously 
as the direction of translation, U, changes and the space curve, r(s0, t), generated 
by the movement of a contact point will be non-planar. 
Substituting (2.16) into (2.34), the tangents to the t-parameter curves on the 
spatio-temporal image, q(s0, t), are defined by 
(UAq) Aq 
a A q. 
(2.35) 
qt-- 
Note that qt is equal to the image velocity of a point on the projection of a static 
space curve at depth )~ [149]. This is not surprising since instantaneously image 
velocities are dependent only on depth and not surface curvature. Points on 
successive apparent contours are "matched" by searching along epipolar great 
circles on the image sphere (or epipolar lines for planar image geometry) defined 
by the viewer motion, U, ~2 and the image position q. This induces a natural 
correspondence between the contour generators from successive viewpoints on 
the surface. 
The contact point on a contour generator moves/slips along the line of sight 
p with a speed, rt determined by the distance and surface curvature. 
r, 
(p,.n) 
(2.36) 
---- k tgt /P 
where ~t is the normal curvature of the space curve, r(so,t): 
~t_ rtt.n. 
(2.37) 
rt .rt 
Derivation 2.3 Substituting the matching constraint of (2.3~,) into the time 
derivative of (2.10) we obtain: 
rt = (At + p.U)p. 
(2.38) 
Differentiating (2.38) with respect to time and substituting this into (2.37) we 
obtain the relationship between surface curvature and viewer motion. 
~t _ 
Pt .n 
(At + p.U)' 
(2.39) 
Combining (2.39) and (2.38) gives the required result. 
The numerator of (2.36) is analogous to stereo disparity (as appears below in 
the denominator of the depth formula (2.40)) and depends only on the distance 
of the contact point and the "stereo baseline". The denominator is the curvature 

2.6. Dynamic properties of apparent contours 
33 
(normal) of the space curve generated as the viewer moves in time. The speed 
of the contact point is therefore inversely proportional to the surface curvature. 
The contour generator "clings" to points with high curvature and speeds up as 
the curvature is reduced. This property will be used later to distinguish surface 
markings or creases from extremal boundaries. 
2.6 
Dynamic properties of apparent contours 
The choice of a suitable (although arbitrary) spatio-temporal parameterisation 
permits us to make measurements on the spatio-temporal image, q(s,t), and 
to recover an exact specification of the visible surface. This includes position, 
orientation and 3D shape as well as qualitative cues such as to which side of the 
image contour the occluding surface lies. 
2.6.1 
Recovery 
of depth 
from image velocities 
Depth A (distance along the ray p -- see figure 2.2) can be computed from the 
deformation (Pt) of the apparent contour under known viewer motion (transla- 
tional velocity U)[34]: From (2.34) 
V.n 
A = - 
. 
(2.40) 
pt.n 
This formula is an infinitesimal analogue of triangulation with stereo cameras 
(figure 2.6). The numerator is analogous to baseline and the denominator to 
disparity. In the infinitesimal limit stereo will, in principle, correctly determine 
the depth of the contour generator. 
Equation (2.40) can also be re-expressed in terms of spherical image position 
q and the normal component of image velocity qt.n: 
U.n 
A = 
(2.41) 
qt.n + (a A q).n" 
Clearly absolute depth can only be recovered if rotational velocity Ft is known. 
2.6.2 
Surface 
curvature 
from 
deformation 
of the apparent 
contour 
Surface curvature (3D shape) is to be expressed in terms of the first and second 
fundamental forms, G and D (2.4 and 2.8), which in the epipolar parameteri- 
sation and for unit basis vectors can be simplified to: 
[ 
co 0] 
G = 
cosO 
1 

34 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
0 ] 
(2.43) 
D = 
0 
~t 
, 
where gt is the normal curvature of tile t-parameter curve r(s0, t) and a s is the 
normal curvature of the contour generator r(s,t0) at P. Equivalently x t is the 
curvature of the normal section at P in the direction of the ray, p. 
Note that D is diagonal. This is a result of choosing, in the epipolar param- 
eterisation, basis directions, {re,rt} that are conjugate. From (2.21) it is easy 
to show that the off-diagonal components are both equal to zero 
rt~.n = -rt.n~ = -[rt]p.n~ = 0. 
Itow, in summary, can the components of G and D be computed from the 
deformation of apparent contours under viewer motion? 
1. Angle between ray and contour generator, O(s,to) 
First 0(s, to) can be recovered from the contour generator r(s, to) which is 
itself obtained from image velocities along the apparent contour via (2.41). 
This requires the numerical differentiation of depths along the contour 
generator. From (2.17) and simple trigonometry: 
tan0- 
"~IP.,I 
A~ 
(2.44) 
2. Normal curvature along the contour generator, x ~ 
Then normal curvature along the contour generator, g~, is computed from 
the curvature gP of the apparent contour. Rearranging (2.24): 
~P sin 2 0 
n ~ 
- 
-
-
 
(2.45) 
A 
3. Normal curvature along the line of sight, gt 
Finally the normal curvature gt, along the line of sight, which can be 
recovered from image accelerations, as explained below. 
The normal curvature at P in the direction of the ray p, gt can be computed 
fi'om the rate of deformation of the apparent contour under viewer motion. 
From (2.39) and (2.40) 
U.n 
~t = 
A(~t +p.U)" 
(2.46) 
Since ~t depends on At, it is clear from (2.41) that x t is a function of 
viewer acceleration (Ut and ~2t) and the second derivative of image posi- 
tion, qtt, that is, image acceleration. By differentiating (2.41) and substi- 
tuting (2.46) we find that the normal component of image acceleration at 

2.6. Dynamic properties of apparent contours 
35 
an apparent contour is determined by viewer motion (including transla- 
tional and rotational accelerations) in addition to a dependency on depth 
and surface curvature: 
qtt.n 
-- 
(A)3 
- 2 
(A)2 
A 
(at Aq).n 
2(q.U)(a/x q).n 
(a A U).n 
+ 
+ (a.n)(a.n)(2.47) 
A 
A 
The details of equation (2.47) are not important. It merely demonstrates 
that the recovery of at requires knowledge of viewer motion (including 
translational and rotational accelerations) together with measurement of 
image accelerations. In section 2.7 it will be shown how to cancel the 
undesirable dependency on viewer accelerations and rotations. 
Note two important points: 
As a result of the conjugacy relationship between the contour generator and 
the ray, surface curvature at a contour generator is completely determined 
by the normal curvatures in these two directions and the angle between 
them, 0. Compare this to a general surface point which requires the normal 
curvatures in three directions. 
Determining surface curvature usually requires the computation of second- 
order spatial derivatives of depth, A. At extremal boundaries, however, 
only first order spatial derivatives, As, and temporal derivatives, At, need 
be computed. 
One derivative is performed, effectively, by the physical 
system. This is also the case with specularities [26]. 
2.6.3 
Sidedness 
of apparent 
contour 
and contour 
generator 
In the static analysis of the apparent contour it was assumed that the "sidedness" 
of the contour generator - on which side of the image contour the obscuring 
surface lies - was known. Up to now in the dynamic analysis of apparent contours 
an arbitrary direction has been chosen for the s-parameter curve (and hence the 
image tangent Ps) and the surface orientation, n, has been recovered up to an 
unknown sign from (2.19). The actual sign can now be determined from the 
deformation of the apparent contour. Equation(2.46) determines both a sign 
and magnitude for normal curvature along the ray, gt. This must, however, 
be convex and so its sign given by equation (2.46) allows us to infer the correct 
orientation of the tangent plane. This is an important qualitative geometric cue. 
The distinction between free space and solid surface is extremely useful in visual 
navigation and manipulation. 

36 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
2.6.4 
Gaussian 
and mean 
curvature 
Although the first and second fundamental forms completely characterise the 
local 3D shape of the surface, it is sometimes more convenient to express the 
geometry of the surface by its principal curvatures and their geometric and 
arithmetic means: the Gaussian and mean curvature. 
The Gaussian curvature, K, at a point is given by the product of the two 
principal curvatures [67]. With the epipolar parameterisation, Gaussian curva- 
ture can be expressed as a product of two curvatures: the normal curvature ~t 
and the curvature of the apparent contour, ~P scaled by inverse-depth. 
t~P ~ t 
K- 
A 
(2.48) 
This is the well known result of Koenderink [120, 122] extended here to recover 
the magnitude as well as the sign of Gaussian curvature. 
Derivation 2.4 In general the Gaussian curvature can be determined from the 
determinant of G-1D or equivalently the ratio of the determinants of the ma- 
trices of coefficients of the second and first fundamental forms: 
K- 
IDI 
IGl" 
(2.49) 
From (2.42) and (2.43) it is trivial to show that Gaussian curvature can be 
expressed by 
t~tl~ s 
K - sin~ 0' 
(2.50) 
Substituting (2.23) for ~'~ allows us to derive the result. 
Tile mean curvature, H, and the principal curvatures t~l,X 2 can similarly be 
expressed by: 
1 
[_~ 
] 
H = -~ 
+ t~tcosec20 
(2.51) 
~1,2 = H 4- X/~- 
K. 
(2.52) 
2.6.5 
Degenerate cases of the epipolar parameterisation 
In the previous section we introduced the epipolar parameterisation and showed 
how to recover the 3D local shape of surfaces from the deformation of apparent 
contours. 
There are two possible cases where degeneracy of the parameterisation arises. 
These occur when {r,, rt} fails to form a basis for the tangent plane. 

2.7. Motion parallax and the robust estimation of surface curvature 
37 
1. rtz0 
The contour generator does not slip over the surface with viewer motion 
but is fixed. It is therefore not an extremal boundary but a 3D rigid space 
curve (surface marking or discontinuity in depth or orientation). 
An important advantage of the epipolar parameterisation is its unified 
treatment of the image motion of curves. The projections of surface mark- 
ings and creases can be simply be treated as the limiting cases of apparent 
contours of surfaces with infinite curvature, t~ t (from (2.36)). In fact the 
magnitude of the curvature, ~t, can be used to discriminate these image 
curves from apparent contours. The parameterisation degrades gracefully 
and hence this condition does not pose any special problems. 
Although the space curve r(s, to) can still be recovered from image veloci- 
ties via (2.41) the surface orientation is no longer completely defined. The 
tangency conditions ((2.11) and (2.18)) are no longer valid and the surface 
normal is only constrained by (2.17) to be perpendicular to the tangent to 
the space curve, leaving one degree of freedom unknown. 
2. rs Art = 0 and rt • 0 
Not surprisingly, the parameterisation degenerates at the singularity of the 
surface-to-image mapping where r: and rt are parallel on the surface. From 
(2.27) IP:I = 0 and a cusp is generated in the projection of the contour 
generator. For generic cases the image contour appears to come to a halt 
at isolated points. 
Although the epipolar parameterisation and equations (2.19) and (2.40) 
can no longer be used to recover depth and surface orientation at the 
isolated cusp point this in general poses no problems. By tracking the 
contour-ending it is still possible to recover the distance to the surface at 
a cusp point and the surface orientation [84]. 
2.7 
Motion parallax and the robust estimation 
of surface curvature 
It has been shown that although it is feasible to compute surface curvature from 
the observed deformation of an apparent contour, this requires knowledge of the 
viewer's translational and rotational velocities and accelerations. Moreover the 
computation of surface curvature from the deformation of apparent contours is 
highly sensitive to errors in assumed ego-motion. This may be acceptable for a 
moving camera mounted on a precision robot arm or when a grid is in view so 
that accurate visual calibration of the camera position and orientation can be 

38 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
Figure 2.7: Mot:ion parallax as a robust cue for surface curvature at apparent 
contours. 
(a) A sample of monocular image sequence showing the image motion of apparenl 
contours with viewer motion. 
(b) Three images of the sequence (magnified window) showing the relative motion 
between the appaw.nt contour and a nearby surface markings when the viewer 
moves from left to right. The relative image accelerations as the features move 
away from the extremal boundary can be used for the robust estimation of surface 
curvature. 

2.7. Motion parallax and the robust estimation of surface curvature 
39 
Figure 2.8: Motion parallax as a robust cue for surface curvature at a specularity. 
(a) Sample from a monocular image sequence showing motion of specularities 
(highlights) across the curved surface of a Japanese cup with viewer .~otion (left 
to right). 
(b) Three images of the sequence (magnified window) showing the relative motion 
(parallax) of a point specularity and nearby surface marking. Parallax measure- 
ments can be used to determine the surface curvature and normal along the path 
followed by the specularity as the viewer moves. A more qualitative measure is 
the sign of the epipolar component of the parallax measurement. 
With viewer 
motion the specularity moves in opposite directions for concave and convex sur- 
faces [220]. In the example the specularity moves with the viewer indicating a 
convex section. 

40 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
~meter 
curve 
~ 
- iiiii', 
, " ',, \~i(S0,t) 
r (s ,t) 
contour generators 
viewer at time t 
q l(t ~ t/~q 2 (t -~ t) 
viewer at time t+St 
Figure 2.9: Motion parallax. 
Consider the relative displacement between a point on an apparent contour and 
the image of a nearby surfacc fcature (shown as a cross): 5 = q(2) _ qO) The 
rate of change of relative image position - parallax, 6t - has been shown to be 
a robust indicator of relative depth. In this section we show that its temporal 
derivative - the rate of parallax 5tt -- is a robust geometric cue for the recovery 
of surface curvature at extremal boundaries. 

2.7. Motion parallax and the robust estimation of surface curvature 
41 
performed [195]. In such cases it is feasible to determine motion to the required 
accuracy of around 1 part in 1000 (see Chapter 3). However, when only crude 
estimates of motion are available another strategy is called for. In such a case, 
it is sometimes possible to use the crude estimate to bootstrap a more precise 
visual ego-motion computation [93]. However this requires an adequate number 
of identifiable corner features, which may not be available in an unstructured 
environment. Moreover, if the estimate is too crude the ego-motion computation 
may fail; it is notoriously ill-conditioned [197]. 
The alternative approach is to seek geometric cues that are much less sensi- 
tive to error in the motion estimate. In this section it is shown that estimates 
of surface curvature which are based on the relative image motion of nearby 
points in the image - parallax based measurements - have just this property. 
Such estimates are stable to perturbations of assumed ego-motion. Intuitively 
it is relatively difficult to judge, moving around a smooth, featureless object, 
whether its silhouette is extremal or not -- whether curvature along the con- 
tour is bounded or not. This judgement is much easier to make for objects 
which have at least a few surface features. Under small viewer motions, features 
are "sucked" over the extremal boundary, at a rate which depends on surface 
curvature (figure 2.7). 
The theoretical findings of this section exactly reflect the intuition that the 
"sucking" effect is a reliable indicator of relative curvature, regardless of the 
exact details of the viewer's motion. It is shown that relative measurements of 
curvature across two adjacent points are entirely immune to uncertainties in the 
viewer's rotational velocity. This is somewhat related to earlier results showing 
that relative measurements of this kind are important for depth measurement 
from image velocities[123, 138, 121], or stereoscopic disparities [213] and for 
curvature measurements from stereoscopically viewed highlights [26] (figure 2.8). 
Furthermore, it will be shown that, unlike the interpretation of single-point 
measurements, differences of measurements at two points are insensitive to errors 
in rotation and in translational acceleration. Only dependence on translational 
velocity remains. Typically, the two features might be one point on an extremal 
boundary and one fixed surface point. The surface point has infinite curvature 
and therefore acts simply as a stable reference point for the measurement of 
curvature at the extremal boundary. The reason for the insensitivity of relative 
curvature measurements is that global additive errors in motion measurement 
are cancelled out. 
2.7.1 
Motion 
parallax 
Consider two visual features whose projections on the image sphere (figure 2.9) 
are q(si,t), i = 1, 2 (which we will abbreviate to q(i), i = 1, 2) and which have 

42 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
image velocities given by (2.35): 
['] 
ql i) = [(U A q(i)) A q(i)] ~ 
_ f~ A q(i). 
(2.53) 
Clearly depth can only be recovered accurately if rotational velocity ~2 is known. 
The dependence on rotational velocity is removed if, instead of using raw image 
motion qt, the difference of the image motions of a pair of points, q0)q(2), is 
used. This is called parallax [99]. 
The relative image position 6 of the two points is 
5(t) = q(2) _ q0). 
(2.54) 
Parallax is the temporal derivative of 5, St. [f instantaneously the two points 
project to the same point on the image sphere, so that 
q(1) (0) = q(2)(0) = q, 
then, from (2.53), the parallax 5t depends only on their relative inverse-depths 
and on viewer velocity. It is independent of (and hence insensitive to errors in) 
angular rotation ~2: 
a, = [(u A q) A q] 
9 
The use of "motion parallax" for robust determination of the direction of trans- 
lation U and relative depths from image velocities was described by Longuet- 
ttiggins and Prazdny [138] and Rieger and Lawton [182]. 
2.7.2 
Rate 
of parallax 
Following from the well-known results about motion parallax, we derive the cen- 
tral result of this section -- that the rate of parallax is a robust cue for surface 
curvature. The direct formula (2.47) for normal curvature a t in terms of image 
acceleration was sensitive to viewer translational acceleration and rotational ve- 
locity and acceleration. If, instead, differences of image accelerations are used, 
the undesirable sensitivity vanishes. 
The relationship between image acceleration and normal curvature for points 
q(1), (t(2)can be expressed as 
2(U.q(1))(t2 A q(i)).n 
(fl A U).n 
+ 
+ (fLq(i)) (~2.n) (2.56) 
)~(i) 
~(i) 

2.7. Motion parallax and the robust estimation of surface curvature 
43 
The important point is that the two copies of this equation for the two positions 
i = 1, 2 can be subtracted, cancelling off the undesirable dependency on ~2, t2t 
and on Ut. 
Think of the two points as being the projection of extremal contour genera- 
tots, which trace out curves with (normal) curvatures ~tl and Et2 as the viewer 
moves. Let us define the relative inverse curvature, AR, of the feature pair by 
1 
1 
AR = ~t2 
~tl' 
(2.57) 
Note that it is simply the difference of the radii of curvature of the normal 
sections. 
Rt i 
1 
xt i 
i 
1,2. 
(2.58) 
Consider the two features to be instantaneously spatially coincident, that 
is, initially, q(sl, 0) = q(s2,0). Moreover assume they lie at a common depth 
A, and hence, instantaneously, q~l) _- -~t"(2). In practice, of course, the feature 
pair will only coincide exactly if one of the points is a surface marking which 
is instantaneously on the extremal boundary (figure 2.9). The effect of a small 
separation is analysed below. Now, taking the difference of equation (2.56) for 
i = 1, 2 leads to the following relation between the two relative quantities 6tt 
and AR: 
5tt.n - 
(U'n)2 AR. 
(2.59t 
Aa 
From this equation we can obtain relative inverse curvature, AR, as a function of 
depth 3,, viewer velocity U, and the second temporal derivative of 5. Dependence 
on viewer motion is now limited to the velocity U. 
There is no dependence 
on viewer acceleration or rotational velocity. Hence the relative measurement 
should be much more robust. (Computationally higher derivatives are generally 
far more sensitive to noise.) 
In the case that q0) is known to be a fixed surface reference point, with 
1/t~ tl = 0, then AR = 1/t~ t2 so that the relative curvature AR constitutes an 
estimate, now much more robust, of the normal curvature ~t2 at the extremal 
boundary point q(~). Of course this can now be used in equations (2.311, (2.42) 
and (2.43) to obtain robust estimates of surface curvature. This is confirmed by 
the experiments of Chapter 3. 
Note that the use of the epipolar parameterisation is not important in the 
above analysis. It can be shown that the normal component of the relative 
image acceleration 5tt.n between a distinct feature and an apparent contour is 
independent of viewer motion and can be determined completely from spatio- 
temporal measurements on the image (Appendix C). 

44 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
2.7.3 
Degradation 
of sensitivity 
with separation 
of points 
The theory above relating relative curvature to the rate of parallax assumed 
that the two points q(1) and q(2) were instantaneously coincident in the image 
and at the same depth, A (1) : 
A (2). In practice, point pairs used as features 
will not coincide exactly and an error limit on curvature (or, more conveniently, 
its inverse) must be computed to allow for this. The relative curvature can be 
computed from the rate of parallax by taking into account an error, 
R t(2) - R t(i) = AR + R err~ 
(2.6o) 
where (as before) 
Aa 
~XR= 
(U.n)~ 5tt.n. 
(2.61 / 
Tile error in inverse normal curvature, R e''~ 
consists of errors due to the 
difference in depths of the two features, AA; the finite separation in the image, 
Aq and the differences in tangent planes of the two features An. The magnitude 
of these effects can be easily compute(] from the difference of equation (2.56) for 
the two points (Appendix D). For nearby points that are on the same surface 
and for fixation (U = At2 A q) the dominant error can be conveniently expressed 
as: 
3 
latl 
vt.n 
(2.62) 
!Re'r~ 
9Alal +A" tSl~ 
+ AIAAt (U.----n-y u. 
ParMlax-based measurements of curvature will be accurate and insensitive to 
errors in viewer motion if the separation between points oil nearby contours 
satisfes 
At{ 
151 << 9--Y 
(2.63) 
Equation (2.62) can also be used to predict the residual sensitivity to trans- 
lational and rotational accelerations. The important point to notice is that sen- 
sitivity to viewer motion is still reduced. As an example consider the sensitivity 
of absolute measurements of surface curvature along the ray to error in viewer 
position. Think of this as adding an unknown translational acceleration, Ut. 
For absolute measurements (2.56) the effect of this unknown error is amplified 
by a factor of A=/(U.n) 2 when estimating surface curvature. From Appendix 
D and (2.62) we see that for parallax-based measurements the sensitivity is re- 
duced to a factor of 2AA/A of the original sensitivity. This sensitivity vanishes, 
of course, when the features are at the same depth. A similar effect is observed 
for rotational velocities and accelerations. 
The residual error and sensitivity analysis can be used to provide an error 
interval for computed curvature. This is also useful as a threshold for the test 
(see below) for labelling extremM boundaries -- that is, to tell how close to zero 

2.8. Summary 
45 
the inverse normal curvature 1/~; t must lie to be considered to be on a surface 
marking or a crease edge rather than an extremal boundary. 
2.7.4 
Qualitative 
shape 
Further robustness can be obtained by considering the ratio of relative curva- 
tures. More precisely this is the ratio of differences in radii of curvature. Ratios 
of pairs of parallax based measurements can, in theory, be completely insensitive 
to viewer motion. This is because the normal component of the relative image 
acceleration 5tt.n can be shown to be independent of the viewer motion and 
can be determined from spatio-temporal measurements on the image for a dis- 
tinct point and apparent contour pair (Appendix C). This is surprising because 
the epipolar parameterisation has a hidden dependence on viewer velocity in 
the "matching" condition (equation(2.34)). This result is important because it 
demonstrates the possibility of obtaining robust inferences of surface geometry 
which are independent of any assumption of viewer motion. 
In particular if we consider the ratio of relative curvature measurements for 
two different point-pairs at similar depths, terms depending on absolute depth 
A and velocity U are cancelled out in equation (2.59). This result corresponds 
to the following intuitive idea. The rate at which surface features rush towards 
or away from an extremal boundary is inversely proportional to the (normal) 
curvature there. 
The constant of proportionality is some function of viewer 
motion and depth; it can be eliminated by considering only ratios of curvatures. 
2.8 
Summary 
This chapter has: 
Related the geometry of apparent contours to the differential geometry of 
the visible surface and to the analysis of visual motion. 
Shown how the geometric properties of tangency and conjugacy allow the 
recovery of qualitative properties of the surface shape from a single view. 
These include surface orientation and the sign of Gaussian curvature. 
Shown how a moving monocular observer can recover an exact and com- 
plete description of the visible surface in the vicinity of a contour generator 
from the deformation of apparent contours. This requires the computation 
of spatio-temporal derivatives (up to second order) of the image and known 
viewer motion. The epipolar parameterisation of the spatio-temporal im- 
age and surface was introduced. Its advantages include that it allows all 
image contours to be analysed in the same framework. Image velocities 

46 
Chap. 2. Surface Shape from the Deformation of Apparent Contours 
allow the recovery of the contour generator while image accelerations allow 
the computation of surface curvature. A consequence of this is that the 
visual motion of curves can be used to detect extremal boundaries and 
distinguish them from rigid contour generators such as surface markings, 
shadows or creases. 
9 Shown how the relative motion of image curves (parallax-based measure- 
mcnts) can be used to provide robust estimates of surface curvature which 
are independent (and hence insensitive tO) the exact details of the viewer's 
motion. 

