 
 
Radio Galaxies Return from the Dead
Author(s): Govert Schilling
Source: Science, New Series, Vol. 289, No. 5476 (Jul. 7, 2000), pp. 28-29
Published by: American Association for the Advancement of Science
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3077440
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:19 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
American Association for the Advancement of Science is collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Science
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:19:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 NEWS OF THE WEEK
 which of several possible gene variants oc-
 curs on a given chromosome. The difficulty
 arises because each cell contains two copies
 of each chromosome, one from the mother
 and one from the father. At any location
 along the chromosome, geneticists can tell
 whether the two chromosome copies are
 identical-that is, whether they contain the
 same chemical letter-or different. But
 when the chromosomes differ-that is, con-
 tain a SNP-the researchers can't readily
 tell which letter belongs on which chromo-
 some. And the exact spelling of each chro-
 mosome is essential information, because it
 may change a gene into a disease-causing
 form, says Housman.
 Currently, explains Andrew Collins, a ge-
 neticist at Southampton University in the
 United Kingdom, researchers do family
 studies to look for disease genes. If they
 can't find suitable families, they look at the
 frequency with which different SNPs pop up
 in many individuals and then resort to statis-
 tical methods to infer the likely exact
 spelling of each chromosome. But this pro-
 cess is "prone to error," he says.
 The nanotube-based AFM may change
 that by enabling researchers to forgo statis-
 tics and observe the SNPs on a chromosome
 directly. The researchers borrowed an idea
 from the standard sequencing method,
 which reveals the DNA's four chemical let-
 ters in living color by linking a different flu-
 orescent dye molecule to each of them. But
 here, instead of using a fluorescent signal,
 the researchers added an oligonucleotide-a
 short strand of DNA designed to bind to a
 single complementary DNA fragment, in
 this case one surrounding a known SNP lo-
 cation. Each oligo was engineered to stick
 only when the SNP harbored a particular ge-
 netic letter-G, for example. To this oligo
 they hitched a reporter compound. As the
 AFM marched along the atomic hills and
 valleys of the DNA, when it hit the reporter
 compound the researchers knew they had
 found their G SNP. By adding several oligo-
 reporter combinations, then simply reading
 down a section of a gene of interest, they
 could readily decipher whether a series of
 SNPs of interest were present on the same
 chromosome. Says Collins: "That's a very
 useful thing to have."
 For now the Harvard researchers are
 looking at DNA strands around 1000 genet-
 ic letters long. That's on the short side for
 many geneticists trying to associate combina-
 tions of SNPs with disease. But Lieber says
 there's no reason the technique shouldn't
 work with sequences perhaps as long as
 100,000 letters. Furthermore, by borrowing
 data-storage techniques, geneticists may be
 able to create arrays of hundreds of AFM
 tips working in parallel to carry out ultrafast
 haplotyping. If so, says Robert Waterston, a
 geneticist who heads the genome sequenc-
 ing center at Washington University in St.
 Louis, Missouri, "[this] could be the start of
 something impressive."
 -ROBERT F. SERVICE
 p- xm M
 Italian Scientists Seek
 To Reverse Budget Cuts
 PARIS-The closing session of the XIII In-
 ternational AIDS Conference in Durban,
 South Africa, next week will be a proud mo-
 ment for Italy. That's when Italian researcher
 Stefano Vella becomes president of the In-
 ternational AIDS Society (IAS), which orga-
 nizes these biennial conferences. But even
 AIDS Funding Takes a Fall
 14
 12
 10,
 m 10
 co
 ~E 6
 E* 4
 4-
 2-
 0 L
 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
 Fiscal Year
 'Adjusted to reflect June 2000 currency exchange rates.
 Reduced effort. New cuts continue down-
 ward slide of AIDS funding.
 as the Durban meeting highlights Italy's
 prominence in the AIDS community, the
 Italian government is gutting the country's
 national AIDS program.
 The cuts, for the 2000 fiscal year begin-
 ning 1 July, mean a 36% reduction in fund-
 ing for extramural grants from the current
 year. They continue a trend begun in 1997
 (see chart). Italian AIDS researchers have
 known about the latest round of cuts for sev-
 eral months. But it is only after the appoint-
 ment in late April of a cancer researcher,
 Umberto Veronesi, as Italy's new health
 minister and in the run-up to the Durban
 meeting that they have begun to speak out
 about their harmful effect.
 "The national AIDS program is one of
 Italy's big success stories," says Vella, who
 directs the AIDS clinical research program
 at the Istituto Superiore de Sanita (ISS) in
 Rome, the agency that provides nearly all
 extramural funds for AIDS research. "We
 don't want everything we have accom-
 plished to be lost." Their pleas have at-
 tracted international support. "Italian sci-
 entists are very important players in the
 global AIDS research effort," says Antho-
 ny Fauci, director of the U.S. National In-
 stitute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
 in Bethesda, Maryland.
 The 13-year-old Italian AIDS program
 first ran into trouble in 1997, when
 then-health minister Rosy Bindi froze
 AIDS funding for several months. The
 freeze was part of a government reordering
 of priorities that placed more emphasis on
 applied research (Science, 11 April 1997, p.
 191). When the dust settled, the $13.6 mil-
 lion extramural program had been reduced
 to just over $10 million. And the decline
 has continued: The proposed budget for
 2000-01 is only $6.3 million. "This will
 have a major impact," says AIDS re-
 searcher Guido Poli of the San Raffaele
 Scientific Institute in Milan, who depends
 on ISS grants for about 80% of his lab's
 funding. "I will have to severely reduce
 many of my current projects, and it will af-
 fect our ability to pay young researchers
 and to participate in meetings."
 Italian AIDS researchers are now hoping
 that Veronesi, who replaced Bindi when a
 new Italian government took office this
 spring (Science, 5 May, p. 791), will be more
 sympathetic to their cause. Now that Veronesi
 has had time to get settled into his job, Vella
 and his colleagues say they are hoping to
 meet with the minister to discuss how to re-
 verse the funding cuts. Veronesi was unavail-
 able for comment.
 If the cuts are not restored, the election of
 an Italian as IAS president may turn out to
 be a hollow reward. Says Fauci: "If [Italian
 researchers] are unable to pursue their scien-
 tific activities at full speed because of a lack
 of resources, the entire global AIDS re-
 search effort will suffer."
 -MICHAEL BALTER
 Radio Galaxies Return
 From the Dead
 Even for deep-space objects, radio galaxies
 are odd beasts-so odd that scientists have
 trouble explaining why they exist at all.
 Now astronomers in the Netherlands have
 deepened the mystery by discovering that
 some radio galaxies live twice.
 The hallmark of a typical radio galaxy
 is a double blaze of radio energy, which
 erupts when thin jets of ionized matter
 shooting in opposite directions slam into
 intergalactic atoms at enormous speed, mil-
 lions of light-years from the galactic core.
 The origin of the jets is still unknown.
 Most astronomers suspect that they stream
 from the poles of a whirling supermassive
 black hole, which sucks in nearby gases
 and spews part of them out again as plas-
 ma. But just how the black hole's engine
 28 7 JULY 2000 VOL 289 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:19:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 NEWS OF THE WEEK
 Born again. Radio galaxy B1834+620 shows an outer pair of
 lobes-evidence of an earlier incarnation.
 works is anybody's guess.
 The plot thickened when Arno Schoen-
 makers of the Netherlands Foundation for
 Research in Astronomy in Dwingeloo and
 colleagues found evidence that the jetmak-
 ing machinery can shut down and fire itself
 up again after millions of years. In the 21
 June issue of the Monthly Notices of the
 Royal Astronomical Society, they report
 finding what they call double-double radio
 galaxies-classic double-lobed galaxies
 sporting a second, older pair of radio lobes
 much farther out than the first.
 "Apparently, it's a very rare phe-
 nomenon,?' Schoenmakers says. So far, he
 and his colleagues have turned up just eight
 examples: three in a large radio survey of
 the northern sky, carried out with the
 Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope in
 the Netherlands, and five others in the astro-
 nomical literature. All are enormous, with
 outer lobes stretching 2.5 million to 8 mil-
 lion light-years apart-dozens of times the
 diameter of our Milky Way. By studying the
 energy distribution of the radio waves (high-
 er energies fade faster than lower energies),
 the astronomers estimate that the outer lobes
 are 100 million years old, give or take a fac-
 tor of 2 or so. There is no trace of a jet be-
 tween the older and younger lobes; evidently
 the polar geysers stayed dormant for mil-
 lions of years before erupting again.
 What could give jets a new lease on life?
 Without a good theory of how jets form in
 the first place, astronomers can only specu-
 late. According to David Merritt of Rutgers
 University in Piscataway, New Jersey, the
 jump-start might occur when two galaxies
 collide. "A merger could be responsible for
 the second jet," he says, "since mergers tend
 to bring gas into the center where they can
 fuel the 'engine' that drives the jet."
 But Schoenmakers thinks that scenario
 is unlikely. Because mergers can occur at
 any time in a galaxy's history, he says, at
 least some merger-driven double-doubles
 would be expected to be smaller and
 younger than the lobes he observes.
 "There seems to be a rela-
 tion with age," he says.
 "Something happens to the
 core when it has been active
 for a very long time."
 Schoenmakers's favorite
 theory is that the central
 black hole is running out of
 fuel. Perhaps, after pulling a
 steady stream of gas into it-
 self for millions of years,
 the black hole simply starts
 to exhaust the supply. "It's
 like your car is running out
 of gas," he says; "and the
 engine starts to sputter." If
 so, the radio galaxy's re-
 incarnation may be a temporary hiccup be-
 fore a final death.
 If the sputtering model is correct, the
 depths of space might hold radio galaxies
 with three sets of radio lobes-triple-
 doubles. "That would be a major discov-
 ery," Schoenmakers says.
 -GOVERT SCHILLING
 Neighborhood Gamma
 Ray Burst Boosts Theory
 Titanic explosions that emit powerful flashes
 of energetic gamma rays are one of astrono-
 my's hottest mysteries. Now an analysis of
 the nearest gamma ray burst yet detected has
 added weight to the popular theory that they
 are expelled during the death throes of su-
 permassive stars.
 Very large stars die spectacular deaths at
 a relatively young age. Some explode as
 brilliant supernovas; the most massive stars
 probably collapse into black holes. Comput-
 er simulations suggest that the birth of a
 black hole can be accompanied by the re-
 lease of tremendous amounts of energy, so
 these "collapsars" are prime candidates for
 the source of gamma ray bursts. If so, the
 bursts should occur in star-forming regions,
 as massive stars die before
 they are able to escape from
 their cosmic cradle. Unfortu-
 nately, most galaxies where
 gamma ray bursts originate are
 billions of light-years away, so
 even the keen-eyed Hubble
 Space Telescope can't tell if
 gamma ray bursts occur in
 star-forming regions.
 On 25 April 1998, however,
 a relatively faint gamma ray
 burst was detected much closer
 to home-in a galaxy just 140
 million light-years away.
 Moreover, the burst coincided
 with a supernova, suggesting a
 link between gamma ray bursts and the
 deaths of massive stars (Science, 19 June
 1998, p. 1836). Stephen Holland of the Dan-
 ish Center for Astrophysics with the Hubble
 Space Telescope in Aarhus and his col-
 leagues observed the host galaxy of this
 gamma ray burst in June with the Hubble.
 The Hubble images of the galaxy, known
 as ESO 184-G82, show that the burst indeed
 occurred in a giant star-forming region. Ac-
 cording to Holland's team, which released
 the images on 27 June, part of the light at
 the exact burst position may be the fading
 glow of the supernova, but the surrounding
 bright objects are either young star clusters
 or very hot, massive stars.
 The Hubble evidence would be even
 stronger, astronomers say, if the explosion
 in ESO 184-G82 weren't such a peculiar
 event. The supernova was much more pow-
 erful than average, but the gamma ray burst
 was only a fraction of a percent as intense
 as a normal burst. Team member Jens
 Hjorth of the University of Copenhagen in
 Denmark says he believes that "normal"
 gamma ray bursts also occur in star-forming
 regions. By analyzing light from the host
 galaxy of a more typical burst, which
 reached Earth on 23 January 1999, Hjorth
 and colleagues found evidence of knotlike
 structures that look like star-forming re-
 gions. But that galaxy was billions of light-
 years away-too far to get direct evidence
 of what lay inside it.
 Titus Galama of the California Institute
 of Technology in Pasadena, who in 1998
 discovered the supernova that accompanied
 the gamma ray burst of 25 April, says the
 Hubble observations are "not surprising.
 This is where you expect [gamma ray
 bursts] to occur." Hjorth agrees. "But we've
 had so many surprises in this field," he says,
 "that it's good to see that something we ex-
 pect is actually happening."
 -GOVERT SCHILLING
 Govert Schilling is an as-
 tronomy writer in Utrecht,
 the Netherlands.
 . I,
 R
 t
 0
 o
 z
 0
 0
 -
 I
 z
 3
 m
 Ii
 www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 289 7 JULY 2000 29
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:19:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

