See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326188489
ES-Port: a Spontaneous Spoken Human-Human Technical Support Corpus for
Dialogue Research in Spanish
Conference Paper · May 2018
CITATIONS
3
READS
83
3 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
SUMAT (An Online Service for Subtitling by Machine Translation) View project
SAVAS European Project View project
Laura García-Sardiña
Avature
10 PUBLICATIONS   34 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Manex Serras
Seedtag
20 PUBLICATIONS   97 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Arantza del Pozo
Vicomtech
37 PUBLICATIONS   218 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Laura García-Sardiña on 04 July 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

ES-Port: a Spontaneous Spoken Human-Human Technical Support Corpus for
Dialogue Research in Spanish
Laura Garc´ıa-Sardi˜na, Manex Serras, Arantza del Pozo
Speech and Natural Language Technologies, Vicomtech
Mikeletegi Pasealekua 57, 20009 Donostia-San Sebasti´an
{lgarcias, mserras, adelpozo}@vicomtech.org
Abstract
In this paper the ES-Port corpus is presented. ES-Port is a spontaneous spoken human-human dialogue corpus in Spanish that consists
of 1170 dialogues from calls to the technical support department of a telecommunications provider. This paper describes its compilation
process, from the transcription of the raw audio to the anonymisation of the sensitive data contained in the transcriptions. Because
the anonymisation process was carried out through substitution by entities of the same type, coherence and readability are kept within
the anonymised dialogues. In the resulting corpus, the replacements of the anonymised entities are labelled with their corresponding
categories. In addition, the corpus is annotated with acoustic-related extralinguistic events such as background noise or laughter and
linguistic phenomena such as false starts, use of ﬁller words or code switching. The ES-Port corpus is now publicly available through the
META-SHARE repository, with the main objective of promoting further research into more open domain data-driven dialogue systems
in Spanish.
Keywords: spontaneous dialogue corpus, human-human dialogue, technical support, transcription, anonymisation, named enti-
ties
1.
Introduction
Dialogue systems, often referred to as conversational
agents or chatbots, are becoming increasingly popular as
they allow users to directly interact with a wide range of in-
formation systems in a natural way. Customer support is an
application scenario with a strong interest in dialogue sys-
tem development, driven by the promise of intelligent digi-
tal assistants available 24x7 to resolve customer requests in
a fast, cost-effective and consistent manner (Guzm´an and
Pathania, 2016).
Data-driven approaches to dialogue system development
have shown to be more robust than rule-based techniques
to variability in user behaviour, the performance of speech
and language processing subcomponents and the dynamics
of the task domain (Meena, 2015). Despite their promis-
ing results in recent years (Young et al., 2013; Wen et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2017), most practical dialogue systems are
still built by human experts through signiﬁcant manual en-
gineering. In most currently deployed systems, rule-based
dialogue managers (DM) are combined with statistical nat-
ural language understanding (NLU) models capable of clas-
sifying intents and their related entities (Williams et al.,
2015). In the customer support domain, this limits their
application to frequent use cases in speciﬁc areas where
solutions are well known, predictable and where scripted
answers can be developed (Guzm´an and Pathania, 2016).
Lack of annotated corpora is the main problem for the de-
velopment of data-driven systems (Serban et al., 2015).
To overcome this issue, it is usual to develop rule-based
baselines or to employ the Wizard of Oz (WOZ) technique
(Benedı et al., 2006; Rieser and Lemon, 2008) in which
a human mimics the intended dialogue system, in order
to gather interactions with real users. Although this kind
of human-machine data is constrained by the employed
baseline systems or the scenarios deﬁned in the followed
WOZ approaches, it is useful to bootstrap goal-driven di-
alogue systems whose policies can be optimised through
user simulation and adaptive learning (Schatzmann et al.,
2007; Gaˇsi´c et al., 2013; Serras et al., 2017).
On the
other hand, human-human dialogue corpora contain uncon-
strained and unscripted natural dialogue interactions ex-
hibiting traits different from human-machine dialogue (i.e.
richer turn-taking and more common grounding phenom-
ena) (Doran et al., 2003), which are more suitable to train
more open domain dialogue systems. Human-human cus-
tomer support corpora would allow progress towards the
development of large-scale data-driven dialogue systems
capable of handling a wider amount of customer queries.
A considerable amount of corpora are available for build-
ing data-driven dialogue systems (Serban et al., 2015). Un-
fortunately, because customer support interactions occur in
commercial settings, most customer support datasets are
proprietary and not released to the public due to privacy and
data protection reasons. In practice, there are only a couple
of publicly available technical support datasets (Lowe et al.,
2015; Uthus and Aha, 2013) derived from the Ubuntu IRC
channels1, used to receive technical support for issues re-
lated to the Linux-based operating system. Although some
data is available from the support channels in other lan-
guages, most of the compiled resources are in English.
In this paper, the Spanish Technical Support (ES-Port)
Corpus is presented, a compilation of spontaneous spoken
human-human dialogues from the technical customer sup-
port service of a Spanish telecom operator for companies.
The corpus has been directly transcribed from call record-
ings, annotated at various linguistic and acoustic-related ex-
tralinguistic levels, and anonymised in order to comply with
data protection legislation. Its release is intended to fos-
ter further research into more open domain data-driven di-
1These logs are available from 2004 to 2018 at http: //ir-
clogs.ubuntu.com/
781

alogue systems in Spanish, capable of achieving more nat-
ural interactions in the technical support domain.
2.
Compilation Process
The raw corpus was provided by an independent telecom
operator, dedicated to providing tailor made cloud data cen-
tre, ﬁxed voice, IP or mobile telephony and Internet con-
nectivity solutions to companies. In order to serve their
clients, they offer 24/7 customer support: 24 hours a day, 7
days a week, 365 days a year. Despite having a multichan-
nel customer service and also providing support through
web forms and email, the majority of the clients still prefer
calling. Thus, the corpus provided consisted of raw audio
recordings of such calls.
2.1.
Transcribing the Audio
The ﬁrst step of the corpus compilation process involved
transcribing the provided raw audio data. Details regarding
the characteristics of the audio and the followed transcrip-
tion process are given next.
2.1.1.
Audio characteristics
The recorded calls contain both speech and other back-
ground sounds, such as channel-associated noises or back-
ground music. The type of speech used is spontaneous, and
so it includes phenomena such as false starts, mispronunci-
ations, non standard forms, overlapping segments between
speakers, unﬁnished sentences and, in general, speech more
focused on conveying the message than on taking care of its
form. The audio data consisted of a total of 40 hours , with
an average length of 2 minutes per dialogue.
2.1.2.
Transcription process
The provided recordings were transcribed using the Tran-
scriber 1.5 annotation tool (Barras et al., 2001). In addition
to the orthographic transcriptions, the following phenom-
ena were also annotated:
• speaker turns
• non-speech events (e.g. coughing and laughter) and
background acoustic conditions (e.g. noise and music)
• overlapping speech
• false starts, repetitions, unﬁnished words and non-
words
• mispronunciations, lengthening in pronunciation, and
typical spoken Spanish shortening of words (e.g. pa
instead of para) or dropping of intervocalic d in ﬁnal
syllables (e.g. demasiao* for demasiado, entrao* for
entrado)
• continuers and ﬁller words (e.g. o sea, eh, hala, mhm,
etc.)
• words in a language other than Spanish (when pro-
nounced correctly)
Given the more challenging spontaneous and telephone na-
ture of the data, attempts to follow incremental automa-
tion methodologies such as those described in (Pozo et al.,
2014) to make the transcription process more productive
were not feasible. The word error rates (WER) of generic
large vocabulary continuous speech recognition (LVCSR)
systems turned out too high to provide any time savings
(77.21% in test set).
In the end, the transcription process was carried out fully
manually and took a linguist six months working full-time
to complete.
2.2.
Anonymising the Dialogues
In order to comply with the European data protection leg-
islation (Art29WP, 2014) and not to compromise the right
to conﬁdentiality of the individuals involved, the personal
information contained in any dataset must be neutralised
before releasing the data open to the public in order to be
exploited for other purposes.
Data anonymisation is the process of treating personal data
in such a way that it can no longer be used to identify the
individuals involved, while preserving the value and useful-
ness of the original format.
2.2.1.
Anonymisation practices and standards
Despite European legislation does not prescribe any par-
ticular anonymisation technique, randomisation and gen-
eralisation approaches are usually employed to anonymise
structured datasets in the form of tables or graphs:
• Randomization: involves alteration of the data without
losing its value and includes techniques such as noise
addition and permutation.
• Generalisation: implies diluting or reducing the gran-
ularity of the data and comprises techniques such as
aggregation and K-anonymity.
For unstructured text, such as the transcriptions of the tech-
nical support recordings in the ES-Port corpus, the follow-
ing methods have also been proposed in (Dias, 2016):
• Suppression: the element to be anonymised is replaced
by some neutral indicator, e.g. ’XXXXX’.
• Tagging: the element to be anonymised is replaced by
a label which can refer to its class or identiﬁer, e.g.
’ORGANISATION123’.
• Substitution: the entity to be anonymised is substi-
tuted by another entity, e.g. ’Juan’ for ’Pedro’. The
choice of the new entity can be random from a dic-
tionary, swapped with another entity within the doc-
ument, ’intelligently’ substituted by an entity sharing
the same features, or applying a generalisation tech-
nique to the item (e.g. replacing ’University of the
Basque Country’ by ’University’).
The technique chosen to anonymise the ES-Port corpus was
substitution because readability and coherence are kept and
the result is a natural anonymised text. The process is de-
scribed in Section 2.2.3..
782

Table 1: NER and NERC Precision (Pr), Recall (Rc), and
F1 scores for the three taggers on our test set.
NER
NERC
Pr
Rc
F1
Pr
Rc
F1
IXA Pipes
0.32
0.62
0.42
0.26
0.50
0.34
FreeLing
0.36
0.65
0.47
0.24
0.54
0.33
CoreNLP
0.47
0.96
0.63
0.36
0.99
0.53
2.2.2.
Identifying the features to be anonymised
The ﬁrst step in the anonymisation process is to identify the
type of elements in the dataset that refer to personal infor-
mation or that could possibly be used in any way to identify
the people involved, endangering their right to conﬁden-
tiality. Considering the nature of the information given in
the ES-Port corpus, we decided to anonymise the following
types of elements:
• Elements referring to individuals’ basic personal in-
formation: names, surnames, name diminutives or
nicknames, personal identiﬁcation numbers.
• Contact information and digital trace elements: phone
numbers2, IP addresses, user names and numbers,
email addresses, postal addresses, web domains.
• Workplace and organisation-related elements: names
of organisations, NIFs (tax identiﬁcation number) and
CIFs (tax code), easily linkable names of products and
services, prices.
• Other elements: card numbers and bank accounts,
dates, locations, trouble ticket numbers, dispatch
notes, passwords, spellings of any of the previous ele-
ments.
2.2.3.
Anonymisation process
Once the types of elements that needed to be anonymised
were identiﬁed, the anonymisation process was carried out
in a semi-automatic way.
First, the items to be anonymised were selected and cate-
gorised. We tried to automate the selection process by us-
ing different Named Entity Recognition and Classiﬁcation
(NERC) tools available for the Spanish language, namely
IXA Pipes (Agerri et al., 2014), FreeLing (Carreras et al.,
2004) and Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014). Al-
though these taggers have reported good results on planned
written language such as news texts, trial tests on a small
dataset of our spontaneous spoken technical support corpus
were too poor to automate the process of selecting and cat-
egorising the items to be anonymised, as their use would
still require considerable manual revision and correction.
Results for the three taggers on the test set both consid-
ering entity recognition alone (NER) and entity classiﬁca-
tion as well (NERC) are presented in Table 1. In addition,
none of the taggers covered all types of items that had to be
anonymised, as is the case of numbers, months and individ-
ual letters in spellings.
The next step was automatic and consisted in randomly
substituting the selected items for an element of the same
2Some preﬁxes were kept if relevant to the conversation.
Table 2: Entity tags used in the anonymisation process.
Utterance
Replacements
Tags
”Soy B´arbara de
B´arbara
female name
Cincode”
Cincode
organisation
”Arturo Noriega arroba
Arturo
male name
Hotmail punto es,
Noriega
surname
tengo que poner?”
Hotmail
mail
”te la digo, es M de
M
letter
Madrid,”
Madrid
place
”el ´ultimo registro es del
veintisiete
number
veintisiete de septiembre.”
septiembre
month
”Inexistent punto com.”
Inexistent
domain
”tiene que entrar= a
CompDNS”
CompDNS
product/
service
characteristics according to its type (organisation, number,
male/female name, etc.). Once an item was anonymised, its
substitution was kept throughout the whole dialogue in or-
der to maintain coherence, but not across dialogues so as to
prevent possible linkability issues. New names provided for
organisations and domains are made up and did not corre-
spond to any existing entity at the time the anonymisation
was carried out. The ﬁnal step involved manual revision
of the results and correction of coherence errors (e.g. non
matching spellings).
The named entity categories of the elements anonymised
following the process described above have been kept in the
compiled corpus. As a result, ES-Port also includes named
entity annotations. However, these were anonymisation-
oriented and therefore the number of classes and speciﬁcity
of the tags are more granular than in the typical NERC
approaches.
Nevertheless, the tags used are easily gen-
eralisable to the usual four (PERSON, LOCATION, OR-
GANISATION, MISCELANEA) or six (plus NUMBER
and DATE) NERC classes. The tags used and real exam-
ples of their usage are shown in Table 2.
Overall, the described anonymisation process took a lin-
guist eight months working part-time to complete.
3.
The Compiled Corpus
This section describes the gathered corpus quantitatively
and qualitatively.
3.1.
The corpus in numbers
Table 3 summarizes the basic statistics of the ES-Port cor-
pus regarding its number of dialogues, turns and overlaps,
its vocabulary and its amount of ﬁller and foreign words.
Table 3: Corpus Characteristics
Num. Dialogues
1170
Vocabulary size
11221
Num. Turns
65239
Labelled Filler Words
37
Avg. Turns per Dialogue
55.76
Filler Words Freq.
26574
Avg. Turn Length
8.20
Foreign Words Freq.
3294
Num. Overlap Turns
11329
English Words Freq.
3017
As can be seen, the corpus presents attributes typical
of spontaneous spoken human-human interaction such as
overlapping turns (around 17% of the turns) and rich use of
783

Table 4: Excerpt from a dialogue, including turn index (T),
speakers (S) and the actual annotated and anonymised ut-
terance transcription (U).
T
S
U
29
spk1
De todas formas
spk2
esto
30
spk1
si has +enviado el correo estate tranquilo
porque <se=> se para.
31
spk2
(*EVENT*: noise-rire)
spk2
<%mm> Es <lom-> <i-> incluso si lo
<envi-> <%aver> <su-> supuestamente
hasta las cinco y media, no?
32
spk1
S´ı.
33
spk2
(*EVENT*: noise-rire)
spk2
Y si lo env´ıo a las cinco y diez se cancela?
34
spk1
S´ı, s´ı.
35
spk2
Ay, dios (*EVENT*: pronounce-ch)
36
spk1
<%mhm>
37
spk2
Ay, mi madre (*EVENT*: pronounce-ch)
spk2
no puedo largarme de aqu´ı digamos.
38
spk1
<%eh> si quieres
spk2
<%eh>
39
spk1
llamar un poquillo m´as tarde y te
intento pasar con ´el de nuevo.
40
spk2
Es que no hay ninguna forma de que,
ning´un n´umero que yo pueda=
41
spk1
No, no.
spk2
llamarles
42
spk2
a ellos o
43
spk1
No, <%osea>
spk2
algo?
44
spk1
que le estoy llamando yo y no me
responde.
45
spk2
(*EVENT*: noise-nontrans)
spk2
<ueh->
spk2
okay (*LANGUAGE*: en)
spk2
<%pues> muchas gracias.
46
spk1
<%venga> a ti.
continuers and ﬁller words (approximately 5% of total word
occurrences). It is interesting to note that since the corpus
is gathered from an IT domain, English foreign words are
quite common, reaching up to 91.59% of all foreign words
occurrences and constituting around 3.24% of the vocabu-
lary.
3.2.
Sample data description
In order to give an idea of the type of information and phe-
nomena present in the ES-Port corpus, Table 4 shows an
excerpt of one of its dialogues.
Different types of speech and non-speech events and back-
ground acoustic conditions occur often along the corpus.
We ﬁnd instances in turns 35 and 37, where the event tags
indicate that the utterance was whispered, and in turn 45,
indicating that the speech was unintelligible and could not
be transcribed. Other instances can be found in turns 31 and
33, where the speaker laughs before continuing talking.
Overlapping speech is also common. Examples can be seen
in turns 29, 41, and 43, where two different speakers inter-
vene within the same turn. Speech, extralinguistic phenom-
ena, or a combination of both can be overlapped.
False starts, repetitions, incomplete words, and nonwords
are very common. False starts and repetitions are tagged
simply using <word>, as in turn 30, while incomplete
words and other nonwords are tagged as <nonword-> and
can be found in turns 31 and 45 of the excerpt.
Deviations from the standard pronunciation take place reg-
ularly in the corpus. An instance dropping the intervocalic
phoneme /d/ in a ﬁnal syllable can be found in turn 30,
marked with a + symbol. Lengthening examples appear
in turns 30 and 40, marked with an = symbol.
The words tagged following the pattern <%word> corre-
spond to a set of 37 ﬁller words (e.g. o sea, ’I mean’) and
continuers (e.g. mhm) frequently used in the corpus. Some
instances of these can be found in turns 31, 36, 38, 43, 45,
and 46.
Finally, words from a language other than Spanish appear
quite often, especially in English. The language event in
turn 45 indicates that a foreign word was used, in this case
from English.
3.3.
Potential Applications
The ES-Port corpus is a source of annotated spontaneous
spoken human-human dialogues which may be valuable for
several research tasks and applications. In this section, a
few of them are mentioned.
Our main objective is to promote more open and natural di-
alogue interactions in Spanish customer support. Although
it does not yet include dialogue act annotations, the cor-
pus as is could be used to explore unsupervised approaches
to dialogue system development in Spanish.
These ap-
proaches include modelling the language of the system to
generate more human-like prompts, modelling the language
of the user to better detect the nuances of human-human
communication or analysing the turn-taking dynamics for
incremental dialogue processing.
The corpus annotated at the current level can also be ex-
ploited to develop supervised approaches for spontaneous
LVCSR in Spanish (including automatic capitalization and
punctuation) or to develop NERC tools that work better on
dialogue text.
Finally, linguistic research in Spanish may use this data to
study a wide range of issues, such as the use of discourse
markers and ﬁller words in conversation, their meaning in
context, and how they inﬂuence the dialogue, or the strate-
gies used for turn-taking and self-correction, among others.
Other interesting phenomena for study are code switching
and the abundant use of words from the English language
in the IT domain.
3.4.
Data sharing
The current version of the ES-Port dialogue corpus is avail-
able via META-SHARE3 in the repository of the University
3The raw audio corpus cannot be released for public access,
since it contains sensitive data which falls under the European
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
784

of the Basque Country UPV/EHU4 under the name of ES-
PORT.
4.
Conclusions and Future Work
A spontaneous spoken human-human technical support
dialogue corpus in Spanish has been transcribed and
anonymised.
At this point, the corpus contains annota-
tions referring to linguistic and acoustic-related extralin-
guistic phenomena such as music, laughter, use of ﬁller
words and code switching in conversation. Named entities
anonymised using the substitution technique are also anno-
tated. The ES-Port corpus is now publicly released so it can
be used for dialogue research or the adaptation of LVCSR
and NERC systems to spontaneous dialogue. Future work
includes dialogue act annotation of the corpus.
5.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the telecom operator who
has kindly provided the raw technical support call record-
ings. We would also like to thank Aholab, the Signal Pro-
cessing Laboratory of the University of the Basque Coun-
try, for granting us access to their META-SHARE node to
share our corpus.
6.
Bibliographical References
Agerri, R., Bermudez, J., and Rigau, G.
(2014).
Ixa
pipeline: Efﬁcient and ready to use multilingual nlp
tools. In LREC, volume 2014, pages 3823–3828.
Art29WP.
(2014).
Article 29 data protection working
party: Opinion 05/2014 on anonymisation techniques.
Barras, C., Geoffrois, E., Wu, Z., and Liberman, M. (2001).
Transcriber: development and use of a tool for assist-
ing speech corpora production. Speech Communication,
33(1):5–22.
Benedı, J.-M., Lleida, E., Varona, A., Castro, M.-J.,
Galiano, I., Justo, R., L´opez, I., and Miguel, A.
(2006). Design and acquisition of a telephone sponta-
neous speech dialogue corpus in spanish: Dihana. In
Fifth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pages 1636–1639.
Carreras, X., Chao, I., Padr´o, L., and Padr´o, M. (2004).
Freeling: An open-source suite of language analyzers.
In LREC, pages 239–242.
Dias, F. M. C.
(2016).
Multilingual automated text
anonymization.
Doran, C., Aberdeen, J., Damianos, L., and Hirschman,
L., (2003).
Comparing Several Aspects of Human-
Computer and Human-Human Dialogues, pages 133–
159. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
Gaˇsi´c, M., Breslin, C., Henderson, M., Kim, D., Szummer,
M., Thomson, B., Tsiakoulis, P., and Young, S. (2013).
On-line policy optimisation of bayesian spoken dialogue
systems via human interaction. In Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 8367–8371. IEEE.
Guzm´an, I. and Pathania, A. (2016). Chatbots in customer
service. Accenture Interactive.
4http://aholab.ehu.es/metashare/repository/search/
Li, X., Chen, Y.-N., Li, L., and Gao, J. (2017). End-to-
End Task-Completion Neural Dialogue Systems. ArXiv
e-prints, March.
Lowe, R., Pow, N., Serban, I., and Pineau, J. (2015). The
ubuntu dialogue corpus: A large dataset for research
in unstructured multi-turn dialogue systems.
CoRR,
abs/1506.08909.
Manning, C. D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J.,
Bethard, S. J., and McClosky, D. (2014). The Stan-
ford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) System
Demonstrations, pages 55–60.
Meena, R. (2015). Data-driven Methods for Spoken Di-
alogue Systems. Ph.D. thesis, KTH, Royal Institute of
Thechnology.
Pozo, A. D., Aliprandi, C., ´Alvarez, A., Mendes, C., Neto,
J. P., Paulo, S., Piccinini, N., and Raffaelli, M. (2014).
Savas: Collecting, annotating and sharing audiovisual
language resources for automatic subtitling. In Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Ice-
land, May.
Rieser, V. and Lemon, O. (2008). Learning effective multi-
modal dialogue strategies from wizard-of-oz data: Boot-
strapping and evaluation. In ACL, pages 638–646.
Schatzmann, J., Thomson, B., Weilhammer, K., Ye, H.,
and Young, S. (2007). Agenda-based user simulation
for bootstrapping a pomdp dialogue system. In Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics; Companion Volume, Short Papers,
pages 149–152. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Serban, I. V., Lowe, R., Henderson, P., Charlin, L.,
and Pineau, J.
(2015).
A survey of available cor-
pora for building data-driven dialogue systems. CoRR,
abs/1512.05742.
Serras, M., Torres, M. I., and Del Pozo, A., (2017). On-
line Learning of Attributed Bi-Automata for Dialogue
Management in Spoken Dialogue Systems, pages 22–31.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Uthus, D. and Aha, D. (2013). The ubuntu chat corpus for
multiparticipant chat analysis.
Wen, T.-H., Vandyke, D., Mrksic, N., Gasic, M., Rojas-
Barahona, L. M., Su, P.-H., Ultes, S., and Young, S.
(2016). A Network-based End-to-End Trainable Task-
oriented Dialogue System. ArXiv e-prints, April.
Williams, J., Kamal, E., Ashour, M., Amr, H., Miller, J.,
and Zweig, G. (2015). Fast and easy language under-
standing for dialog systems with microsoft language un-
derstanding intelligent service (luis). In Proceedings of
2015 SIGDIAL Conference, Prague. ACL – Association
for Computational Linguistics, September.
Young, S., Gasic, M., Thomson, B., and Williams, J. D.
(2013). Pomdp-based statistical spoken dialog systems:
A review. In Proceedings of the IEEE, volume 101(5),
pages 1160–1179.
785
View publication stats

