VOLUME XXXII 
NUMBER 3 
BOTAN 
ICAL 
GAZETTE 
SEPTEMBER, 
1901 
GAMETOGENESIS 
AND FERTILIZATION 
IN ALBUGO. 
CONTRIBUTIONS 
FROM THE 
HULL 
BOTANICAL 
LABORATORY. 
XXIX. 
FRANK 
LINCOLN 
STEVENS. 
(WITH 
PLATES 
I-IV) 
[Continued from p. 98.] 
II. PHYLOGENETIC. 
THIS study of Albugo has established 
a series of forms 
showing advances in certain respects and a marked reduction in 
others. 
The species are closely related, and the difference 
between two consecutive 
members of the series is not great, 
although the extremes are widely divergent. 
There are four 
prominent structures or conditions connected with the series, 
namely, the coenocentrum, the receptive papilla, the mode of 
zonation, and the number of functional nuclei. 
Arranged in the 
order of these characters the species may be listed as A. Poriu- 
lacae, A. Bliti, A. Tragopogonis, and A. candida. 
In this series 
the coenocentrum constantly increases in complexity of structure 
and perfection of function, the receptive papilla becomes less 
conspicuous, the number of functional nuclei decreases, and the 
mode of zonation varies in the last two species. 
These condi- 
tions are graphically represented in the accompanying 
figure 
which is self explanatory. 
We may consider the series as a 
possible expression 
of the phylogeny 
of the genus. 
Which 
conditions are likely to be primitive ? 
'57 

158 
BOTANICAL 
GAZETTE 
[SEPTEMBER 
The coenocentrum increases as the receptive papilla decreases; 
either one or the other must be retrograding. 
From a study of 
these two structures alone it might be difficult to determine the 
true history, but a consideration of the manner in which the 
A. Bliti and A. Portulacae. 
A. Tragopogonis. 
A. candida. 
0 
000 
000 
0 
o 
0 0 
000 
000 
Many 
Many potential and 
Several potential and 
functional. 
functional. 
one functional. 
NUMBER 
OF FUNCTIONAL 
NUCLEI 
DIMINISHING 
A. B/i/i and A. Por/ulacae. 
A. Tragopogonis. 
A. candida. 
Large. 
Small. 
Smaller. 
RECEPTIVE 
PAPILLA 
DIMINISHING. 
A. Bliti and A. Por/u/acae. 
A. Tragopogonis. 
A. candida. 
Small. 
Large, nutritive. 
Larger, nutritive and 
strongly chemotactic. 
COENOCENTRUM 
ADVANCING 
IN STRUCTURE 
AND FUNCTION. 
oosphere of A. Tragopogonis attains the uninucleate condition 
shows that this structure in its ontogeny passes through a stage 
identical with that reached by A. Portulacae and A. Bli/i in their 
full maturity, thus giving an excellent illustration of the biogenetic 
law. 
Both the antheridia and oospheres of A. Tragopogonis are 
multinucleate 
in their earlier stages, and the development 
is 

I90I] 
GAME TOGENESIS AND FERTILIZATION 
IN ALBUGO 
159 
strictly comparable to that of A. Portulacae and A. Bliti, stage 
for stage. 
Later the supernumerary oospheric nuclei are elimi- 
nated, leaving only one female pronucleus to function. 
It seems 
necessary, therefore, to regard the supernumerary oospheric 
nuclei in this species as potential gameto-nuclei, and to regard 
the uninucleate condition in A. Tragopogonis as due to the sup- 
pression of the many and the survival of only one gameto-nucleus. 
In the light of this behavior A. Portulacae must be regarded as 
the primitive form, and A. candida the most highly developed. 
In view of the great functional importance of the coenocentrum 
in A. candida and A. Tragopogonis, it is also rational to regard 
the coenocentrum as an advancing structure. 
The reverse is 
true, however, in reference to the receptive papilla, as there is 
no indication of its present utility, and everything indicates that 
it is a vestigial structure. 
The difference in the mode of zona- 
tion between A. Tragopogonis, where the protoplasm aggregates 
into preliminary centers which finally coalesce into one, and A. 
candida, where one central region is formed directly by a reces- 
sion of the protoplasm from the oogonial wall, may well be 
regarded as an outcome of the reduction of A. candida to a 
uninucleate condition of the oosphere, and may be taken as 
further evidence indicative of the highly developed rather than 
the primitive condition 
of A. candida. 
It is hardly conceiv- 
able that evolution could have proceeded in the reverse direc- 
tion, that is from the type of oogenesis in A. candida to that of 
A. Tragopogonis, A. Bliti, and A. Portulacae. 
The serial evi- 
dence from the coenocentrum, the receptive papilla, the mode of 
zonation, and the number of functional nuclei concurs in point- 
ing to the multinucleate conditions shown in A. Portulacae and 
A. Bli/i as primitive, and the uninucleate oosphere of A. candida 
as derived. 
The conditions are almost precisely the same as those in the 
Fucaceae studied by Oltmanns (i889), 
with the exception that 
in Albuginaceae and Peronosporaceae a coenocentrum plays an 
important role in the reduction of the number of functional 
nuclei to its ultimate expression. 
It is not difficult to imagine 

16o 
BOTANICAL GAZETTE 
[SEPTEMBER 
that the process of evolution of one form from another may 
have been very rapid after the development 
of the nutritive 
region, the coenocentrum. 
In A. Portulacae and A. Bliti the 
struggle between sister gameto-nuclei is possibly close, but the 
conditions are quite different in forms possessing a highly devel- 
oped trophoplasmic 
area in the center of the oosphere, for it 
becomes a matter of much importance which nucleus is the first 
to reach and avail itself of the nutrition. 
The determining 
factors may be the position of the nucleus, its orientation, or its 
sensitiveness to chemotactic influences. 
In any event, a nucleus 
which gains more nutrition will contribute its substances to a 
larger fusion nucleus, and consequently leave stronger descen- 
dants to the next generation. 
Moreover, this action of natural 
selection, aside from furnishing stronger descendants, will foster 
exactly those characters which enabled the parent nucleus to 
prevail in the mother oosphere. 
In short, a condition obtains 
here which can easily be conceived as one that would conduce to 
a rapid evolution from a multinucleate to a uninucleate oosphere 
through the action of natural selection. 
It is a manifestation of 
what Klebahn (I899-I900) 
has termed "Streben nach Einkernig- 
keit der Sexualzellen, " under such conditions that it is possible 
to recognize the cause of the "tendency." 
A peculiarity, probably a consequence, of the uninucleate 
condition of the oospore of A. Tragopogonis and A. candida 
is the division of its fusion nucleus before the spore passes 
into the winter condition. 
A series of mitoses rapidly con- 
verts the spore from a uninucleate to a multinucleate struc- 
ture. 
The division here, as in many of the higher plants, 
may be regarded as the initial step in germination. 
In the 
species with multinucleate oospores no mitoses occur until the 
long resting period, normally in this case the winter, is passed. 
In such forms, presumably the primitive ones, the intrasporal 
evidence of germination appears when the spore ruptures its 
coat and manifests externally the new activities. 
It is clear 
that the inception of division in one case is homologous with 
that in the other, and in both it constitutes the commencement 

190I] 
GAME TOGENESIS AND FERTILIZATION 
IN ALBUGO 
i6i 
of germination. 
It matters not that in one instance it is before 
and in the other after the resting period. 
The divisions which 
in primitive multinucleate 
forms come after the resting period 
have in A. candida and A. Tragopogonis been transferred to a 
time before the winter rest. 
The condition is very similar to 
that presented in the spermatophytes, where intraseminal ger- 
mination immediately following fertilization is the rule, although 
many orchids retain their one-celled condition indefinitely. 
Although the division of the fusion nucleus is the first step 
in germination, the time of this mitosis is subject to variation 
in different types. 
The division is delayed in the forms of 
Albugo having multinucleate oospheres, in Peronospora parasitic 
(Wager i900), 
in Saprolegnia and Achlya (Trow I895 
and 
I899). 
The division occurs soon after fusion in species of 
Albugo having uninucleate oospheres, and in the Peronospo- 
raceae (Berlese I898). 
It appears from the consideration 
of 
these species that it is not simply a disproportion between the 
volume of the cytoplasm and the number of nuclei that induces 
division, for this disproportion is as great in the case of Perono- 
spora parasitica, Achlya, and Saprolegnia, as in A. Tragopogonis. 
Wager (i900) 
has already indicated that in these species, in 
which the retardation of the fusion is most marked, the incep- 
tion of division is also most delayed. 
He says (pp. 275-276): 
Peronostora jfarasitica 
is at present the only member of the group with 
retarded nuclear fusion ... 
. 
In this species it is delayed until the thick 
zygote membrane has been partly formed. 
The ripe oospore of P. Parasitica 
is uninucleate ... 
. In all the other species of Peronospora which have 
been examined the ripe zygote is multinucleate. 
Similarly, Trow (i895, 
p. 648, and I899, 
p. 175) 
finds that 
fusion is slow in Achlya 
and Saprolegnia, and likewise the 
division of the fusion nucleus does not occur until after the 
oospore has passed the resting period. 
This association of 
retardation in fusion with delay in division suggests that after 
the act of fusion is completed, so far as the microscope can give 
evidence, there may be further changes which the elements of 
the pronuclei must undergo before fusion is really completed. 

I62 
BOTANICAL GAZETTE 
[SEPTEMBER 
The delay of division in species like Saprolegnia, P. parasitica, 
and Spirogyra (Chimelewsky 
i888) 
may be due to a delay on 
the part of the nuclei in completely preparing for fusion, and 
to slowness in the act of fusion itself, an act which is not com- 
pleted when the mere fusion made visible by our present powers 
of magnification is effected. 
In this connection Wager (I899, 
p. 578) makes this suggestion: 
This difference in the behavior of the nucleus during the maturation of 
the oospore is probably connected with the mode of germination. 
DeBary 
has already pointed out that in Cystopus and some other species the oospore 
on germination 
produces 
at once a mass of zoospores. 
In Peronos 5ora 
Valerianellae and others the oospore at once develops a germ-tube. 
It may 
be, therefore, that the uninucleate condition of the zygote indicates germina- 
tion by a germ-tube, and the multinucleate 
condition germination 
by the 
formation of zoospores. 
Apart from the relationships within the group which stand 
out with more or less clearness, the cytological 
phenomena 
emphasize 
strongly 
the 
affinity between 
the Albuginaceae, 
Peronosporaceae, and Saprolegniaceae. 
Peronospora parasitica, 
according to the research of Wager (i900), 
has a uninucleate 
oosphere, which is fertilized by the entrance of one antheridial 
nucleus. 
In oogenesis the nuclei divide simultaneously while 
passing to the periphery, as in Albugo, and then one returns to 
the ooplasm. 
A highly developed 
coenocentrum 
is present, 
and exerts an attractive influence upon the nuclei even as they 
lie in the periplasm. 
All of these conditions, together with the 
presence of the receptive papilla, clearly attest a relationship 
between the Albuginaceae and Peronosporaceae. 
The highly 
developed 
coenocentrum 
and the presence of a uninucleate 
oosphere indicate that the Peronosporaceae are the more highly 
developed group. 
Their ancestors may have been some forms 
possessing a uninucleate oosphere, similar to that of A. candida, 
from which one of the mitoses has later been suppressed as super- 
fluous. 
Merely from the evidence of oogenesis, the Peronospo- 
raceae might be regarded as an offshoot from the Albuginaceae 
after the uninucleate condition had been attained; that is, they 
may represent a further development of the condition illustrated 

I9OI] 
GAME TOGENESI.S AND FERTILIZATION 
IN ALBUGO 
i63 
in A. candida. 
But certain peculiarities of the asexual organs 
make such a view improbable. 
The Albuginaceae and Perono- 
sporaceae may both have attained the uninucleate condition of 
oosphere 
independently, 
each being derived from ancestors 
having multinucleate oospheres. 
The probability of the multi- 
nucleate condition being the primitive one discredits the validity 
of Fischer's position (1892, 
pp. 223, 
224) 
regarding the deriva- 
tion of the Peronosporaceae 
and Saprolegniaceae 
from the 
Chytridiaceae. 
Oogenesis 
in the Saprolegniaceae 
resembles 
that in the 
Albuginaceae in having a multiplication of nuclei through a 
mitosis, followed by a degeneration of the superfluous nuclei, 
thus presenting very closely the condition seen in A. Trago- 
pogonis. 
Trow, Hartog, and Humphrey (I892) 
failed to report 
a coenocentrum, but Dangeard (i890) 
has described a structure 
in both Saprolegnia and Peronospora which may prove to be the 
same (cf. Wager I896, pp. 308 and 322). 
From my own studies, Pythium closely resembles Albugo in 
its oogenesis. 
There is a withdrawal of the protoplasm from 
the oogonial wall, differentiating a vacuolate periplasm, clearly 
homologous with that of Albugo. 
Cytological 
knowledge 
of 
the events of oogenesis in this genus will have great value 
in determining 
whether 
its 
relationship 
is closest 
to the 
Peronosporaceae 
or Albuginaceae. 
The present indications 
favor the Peronosporaceae, 
where it was placed by DeBary 
(I88I). 
Two diametrically opposed processes of oogenesis occur in 
the single-egged 
(eineiig) Albuginaceae 
and the many-egged 
(vieleiig) 
Saprolegniaceae. 
In the first there is a massing of 
protoplasm in the center, forming the rudimentary oosphere; in 
the second a peripheral accumulation of protoplasm leaves the 
central region comparatively free. 
There is in Peronospora, 
however, a movement toward the periphery rather than away 
from it, resembling in this respect Saprolegniaceae. 
It is con- 
ceivable that Pythium may represent a transitional condition 
between oogonia with single eggs and those with several, which 

I64 
BOTANICAL GAZETTE 
LSEPTEMBER 
would accord with the theory of Debary that the Saprolegni- 
aceae evolved through the Peronosporaceae. 
The origin of the Peronosporaceae and Saprolegniaceae from 
lower forms is far from clear. 
Before the discovery of the 
multinucleate oosphere in .A. Bliti, a relation to some type like 
Vaucheria seemed probable. 
In Vaucheria many nuclei pass 
into the rudimentary oogonium, after which, as in A. candida, the 
superfluous nuclei retreat from the cytoplasmic region which is 
destined to become the oosphere. 
The essential difference is 
that in Vaucheria the formation of the wall at the base of the 
oogonium is delayed until the superfluous nuclei pass back into 
the parent branch. 
In the Peronosporaceae the wall is formed 
when the nuclei are still in the oogonium, thus prohibiting their 
retreat. 
The result must be either a multinucleate oosphere or 
a degeneration of superfluous nuclei. 
Oltmanns (I895, 
p. 414) 
has justly remarked that the condition in Vaucheria is very like 
that in Fucaceae, presenting only such differences as are neces- 
sitated by the presence of cell walls between the oogonium and 
the parent branch. 
The remark applies with equal force to the 
Albuginaceae. 
The probability that the ancestors of the Peronosporaceae 
and Saprolegniaceae had multinucleate oospheres removes these 
groups from Vaucheria-like forms. 
If there is any relationship 
the connection must have been at a time in the ancestry of 
Vaucheria before the abandonment of the multinucleate condi- 
tion of its oogonium. 
As Oltmanns ( i895) says, the passage of 
many nuclei into the rudimentary oogonium in Vaucheria is 
most readily explicable on the assumption that it once produced 
many gametes instead of the one that is now habitually found, a 
view that must meet quite general acceptance, as may be seen 
from the recent paper of Blackman (i900) 
and the literature 
there cited. 
Mycologists 
generally acknowledge 
the close relationship 
between the Peronosporaceae, Saprolegniaceae, and Mucorineae. 
The presence of a multinucleate oosphere and antheridium, and 
the fusion of two multinucleate 
masses of protoplasm, quite 

1901] 
GAME TOGENESIS AND FERTILIZATION 
IN ALBUGO 
I65 
naturally suggest a possible derivation of the two former groups 
through the latter. 
However, as Schr6ter ( 1893) has remarked, 
' Durch das vollstandige Fehlen von Schwarmsporenbildung, das 
oft rein fadige Mycel, die fast nur an der Luft terminal gebildeten 
Sporen entfernen sich die M. immer weiter von den Algen ;" 
and it is difficult to regard the Mucorineae ancestral to these 
other Phycomycetes. 
The manner in which the Mucorineae 
may have arisen from ancestral algae has been discussed by 
Davis (1900, 
P. 308), who has indicated the similarity between 
the coenogametes 
of Mucorineae and those of A. Bliti. 
Not- 
withstanding this similarity it does not seem advisable to regard 
the Mucorineae as a line productive of such forms as the Per- 
onosporaceae and Saprolegniaceae 
for the reasons expressed 
above. 
The similarity of the vegetative 
body, however, is 
sufficient to indicate the possibility, even probability, that the 
Siphoneae, Mucorineae, Peronosporaceae, and Saprolegniaceae 
constitute three distinct lines of development 
from a common 
parent stock. 
Since transition stages in the evolution of these groups are 
not known, the phylogeny 
of the coenogamete 
is little more 
than a matter for speculation. 
Two modes of origin are con- 
ceivable; either the coenogamete 
arose from a gametangium 
producing numerous gametes through the failure of the gametes 
to separate and become completely individualized; 
or it may be 
regarded as a structure, originally multinucleate, which arose 
and attained sexual differentiation through a line of ancestry 
composed of multinucleate zoospores. 
According to the first view the coenogamete 
is morpholog- 
ically a gametangium or physiologically 
a compound gamete. 
Each nucleus is the nucleus of a gamete. 
According to the latter 
view the coenogamete itself is homologous with a gamete, being 
a multinucleate gamete. 
Arguments in support of either view 
must be based upon such fragmentary evidence as is afforded by 
the present existing species (which may be made to stand for 
stages in phylogeny), 
or the partial repetition of phylogeny 
through ontogeny. 
Unfortunately, 
very little evidence can be 

I66 
BOTANICAL GAZETTE 
[SEPTEMBER 
expected from ontogeny, since the conditions prevailing during 
oogenesis are such that any vestigial attempt to individualize 
gametes from the nuclei would be at once obliterated. 
Naturally 
the individualization of gametes would without doubt become 
quickly eliminated from ontogeny 
after fertilization en masse 
became a fixed habit. 
Perhaps some one of the other eight 
species of Albugo may exhibit in the oogonium vestigial traces 
of older conditions 
and a more perfect individualization 
of 
gametes, as the conidia 
in many Peronosporineae 
develop 
zoospores which later merge their individuality into a common 
mass of protoplasm when the conidium germinates by means of 
a tube. 
If the multinucleate sex cells were primitively multi- 
nucleate, if there has been an independent line of development 
starting with multinucleate zoospores and leading through multi- 
nucleate isogamous gametes to the coenogamete, it might be 
expected that some structures indicative of such evolution would 
now be found among living plants. 
But there are no stages of 
such a character known, nor is there any group among the algae 
or fungi which promises to supply them. 
Possibly the most sug- 
gestive group is the Monoblepharadineae, which has recently been 
investigated by Lagerheim (i899), 
who finds only one nucleus 
in the rudimentary oogonium, and as many nuclei in the antherid- 
ium as there are sperms to be formed. 
There is much evi- 
dence, however, to support the hypothesis that the coenogamete 
is homologous with many gametes, which have failed to separate. 
This hypothesis postulates an origin from uninucleate, swarming 
gametes, generally present in coenocytic algae, as Hydrodictyon 
(Artari 
i890), 
Dasycladus 
(Berthold 
i880), 
Acetabularia 
(DeBary and Strasburger 
i877), 
Protosiphon 
(Klebs 
i896), 
not Botrydium (Rostafinski and Woronin i877) as is so often 
erroneously cited,' thus showing the prevalence of this mode of 
sexuality among the algae that are usually looked to for the 
ancestry of the Phycomycetes. 
The elongation of the sperm 
nuclei as they lie in the antheridial tube may also be regarded 
as indicative of an ancestry in which each nucleus was the 
I For the most recent work on these species see Iwanoff, i898. 

1901] 
GAMA TOGENESIS AND FER TJLIZA 7 ION IN ALB UGO 
I67 
nucleus of an individual gamete. 
The fact that Phycomycetes, 
in conidia and oospores, sometimes lose the ability to individ- 
ualize their units has an important bearing on the problem. 
It is well known that the contents of conidia and oospores 
ordinarily separate into as many regions as there are nuclei, 
and that these develop into zoospores, each unquestionably an 
individual. 
However, if these spores, by a change of external 
conditions, are induced to germinate by means of a tube, the 
zoospores do not emerge as individuals. 
Not merely is there 
a failure to resolve the protoplasm into individuals, but there is 
an actual surrender of individuality after it has been attained. 
Not only does this occur in ontogeny, 
but it is a very generally 
accepted belief that it likewise occurred in the phylogeny 
of 
this group. 
In the more primitive forms which germinate by 
zoospores individualization 
is not abandoned but is merely 
delayed, since in germination each fusion nucleus or each of its 
immediate descendants develops its own plasmoderma and begins 
independent life. 
In such form the phenomenon is comparable 
to delayed wall formation in endosperm, with the remarkable 
exception that in Albugo fertilization occurs during the period 
of delay. 
Pyronema (Harper i900) 
may be regarded as an excellent 
illustration of a condition 
in which the individuality 
of the 
sexual nuclei habitually finds expression 
only through their 
behavior in the act of fertilization. 
The manner in which the 
fusion nuclei wander away immediately after fertilization, and 
the absence of units in the cytoplasm, are strikingly similar to 
Albugo, as are also the mitoses of the nuclei during oogenesis, 
the marshaling of the nuclei into a hollow sphere, the participa- 
tion of the oogonium in the dissolution of the wall adjacent to 
the antheridium; even the trichogyne resembles in many respects 
the receptive papilla of Albugo. 
While certain Ascomycetes 
resemble the Florideae more 
than they do the Phycomycetes, the points of similarity men- 
tioned above between the Phycomycetes, Albugo, and Pyronema, 
are sufficient to justify careful scrutiny of all features before 

168 
BOTANICAL GAZETTE 
[SEPTEMBER 
abandoning the view held by DeBary (I884) 
concerning the 
relationship of these two latter groups. 
Zoosporangia have not 
yet been studied cytologically 
with the completeness 
they 
deserve, and it is unwise to deny the possibility of relationship 
between the ascus and the sporangium until both cell and cilia 
formation in the Phycomycete zoosporangium is understood. 
As the conidia in phylogeny and ontogeny stand for zoospo- 
rangia, it is clear that they represent masses of potential zoo- 
spores, and are consequently synplasts in the sense in which 
that word was used by Hanstein ( I 880). 
The vegetative coeno- 
cyte that develops from the spore is also a synplast, which in 
phylogeny (and often in ontogeny) goes back to a time when 
each nucleus governed a definite region of cytoplasm. 
The multi- 
nucleate condition of this vegetative body results from a retarda- 
tion of cell division, similar to that in the embryo sacs, particularly 
well illustrated in the gymnosperms, and in the eggs of insects 
(Hertwig I892). 
In the latter forms the delay is not maintained 
long in ontogeny. 
Cell division follows soon after nuclear 
division. 
In the coenocytic algae there is failure to individual- 
ize during a whole generation. 
Existing forms show that the 
vegetative body was coenocytic long before the gamete became 
so. 
In Albugo, the multinucleate condition of the female sex- 
ual cell may be regarded as the result of pushing the synplast 
habit one step further in ontogeny. 
The sexual cells were the 
last to give up their individuality, the vegetative cells the first. 
The synplast in the Phycomycetes differs from that of most 
spermatophytes in many ways, most strikingly, however, in the 
mobility of its potential units. 
While it is phylogenetically 
equivalent to many cells, a compound of potential cells, in the 
sense that Hertwig (I892) 
uses the expression, the phycomycete 
synplast, both in sexual and asexual parts, must be regarded 
as a morphological unit. 
The potential units have lost their 
definite limitations and so their morphological value. 
Discus- 
sion regarding the nature of the vegetative coenocyte 
may be 
found in numerous texts, as Strasburger ( i 88o, pp. 372, and I 893), 
Zimmermann (I896, 
p. io), 
Haberlandt 
(I896, 
pp. I2-62), 

I90I] 
GAMEJTOGENI?SIS AND FER7ILIZA TION IN ALBUGO 
I69 
Verworn (1897, 
pp. 74-78), 
Pfeffer (1897, 
pp. 49-5I). 
It is 
unnecessary to quote these authors or repeat familiar discussion 
here, further than to state that they agree in general with the 
statement of Pfeffer (1897, 
p. 51), 
"Auch derartige Erwdg- 
ungen zwingen dazu, zunachst den veilkernigen Protoplasten als 
eine morphologische und physiologische 
Einheit anzusehen." 
There is but little in common between the coenogamete, 
which is a structure of high physiological 
efficiency, and such 
structures as have been described by Golenkin 
(i900) 
and 
Klebahn (i899) 
in Sphaeroplea, which, as Klebahn remarks, 
resemble cases of polyspermy. 
They seem to indicate a patho- 
logical rather than a normal condition. 
The strict maintenance of the individuality of the nuclei and 
their characteristic behavior in fertilization adds another strong 
argument to the evidence, which is becoming cumulatively great, 
that these structures are the bearers of hereditary characters. 
The apparent ease with which one nucleus can usurp the cyto- 
plasm of many is an argument against the energid theory of 
Sachs. 
[To be concluded.] 
BOTANICAL 
INSTITUTE, 
BONN. 

