
View
Online 
Export
Citation
CrossMark
Artificial photosynthesis: A pathway to solar fuels 
Taking inspiration from nature and from the success of photovoltaic solar conversion, scientists
are developing foundations for sunlight-driven synthesis of fuels, chemicals, and materials.
Harry A. Atwater
Physics Today 76 (12), 32–39 (2023);
https://doi.org/10.1063/PT.3.5360
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

32  PHYSICS TODAY | DECEMBER 2023
LIQUID SUNLIGHT ALLIANCE
Artificial
photosynthesis:
A pathway to
A pathway to    
A pathway to
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

DECEMBER 2023 | PHYSICS TODAY  33
Harry Atwater is the Howard Hughes Professor of Applied 
Physics and Materials Science and director of the Liquid 
Sunlight Alliance, a Department of Energy  solar- fuels hub 
project, at Caltech in Pasadena, California.
Taking inspiration from nature and from the 
success of photovoltaic solar conversion, scientists 
are developing foundations for  sunlight- driven 
synthesis of fuels, chemicals, and materials.
T
he urgent need to address climate change has moti-
vated an international eff ort to rapidly decarbonize 
our world’s energy systems. In its most recent report,1
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change out-
lined the challenges we face. It articulates a two-part 
strategy: First, move away from reliance on fossil fuels as soon as 
possible, primarily by the electrifi cation of large sectors of our econ-
omy. Second, capture carbon from the atmosphere to mitigate the 
warming associated with greenhouse gas emissions. During that 
eff ort, large sectors of the economy will likely remain diffi  cult to 
decarbonize. For example, future long- haul aviation will continue 
to require hydrocarbon fuel.2 For such sectors, a circular carbon 
economy will need to be established, in which the use of hydro-
carbon fuels is balanced by carbon capture and conversion.
Harry A. Atwater
   solar fuels
   sola
solar fuels
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

34  PHYSICS TODAY | DECEMBER 2023
ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Nature is remarkably adept at carbon capture and conver-
sion through the photosynthesis of plants, algae, plankton, and 
other organisms that make up the biosphere. As scientists in-
vestigate new mechanisms for large-­scale conversion processes 
to meet the needs of our energy transition, an important path-
way to explore is that of artificial photosynthesis, which seeks 
to emulate nature’s example by using engineered photoelectro-
chemical systems to synthesize solar fuels, chemicals, fertiliz-
ers, and other materials. Artificial photosynthesis thus has the 
exciting potential to create most of the chemical products re-
quired by our industrial civilization through using the ultimate 
source of abundant, renewable energy—­our sun.
Energy-­conversion landscape
Solar-­fuel systems use photoexcitation, chemical transforma-
tion, and transport processes to produce fuel.3 A typical system 
includes light absorbers integrated with oxidation and reduc-
tion catalysts, membrane separators, and water-­based electro-
lytes. Three central chemical reactions are involved in the arti-
ficial photosynthesis of carbon-­containing products: the 
oxygen-­evolution reaction, the hydrogen-­evolution reaction, 
and the carbon dioxide–­reduction reaction, as described in the 
box on page 35.
Each component must be designed so that the system effi-
ciently uses the sunlight’s energy to cause a reaction of water 
and CO2 that produces fuel. The two primary types of solar-­
fuel systems are those generating H2 as the fuel4 and those 
reducing CO2 to gaseous, liquid, or oxygenated hydrocarbons, 
such as ethanol,5 as depicted by the green path in figure 1. Al-
though they share common features, the two types have dis-
tinct advantages and challenges. The H2-generating system 
consumes only water and produces a single fuel (H2), but it 
requires corrosive electrolytes to achieve high efficiency.
In natural photosynthesis, plants use sunlight to convert 
water and CO2 into sugars and carbohydrates. That process, 
however, is not efficient: Plants convert only about 1% of sun-
light energy into stored fuel as plant biomass. Plants can also 
propagate themselves and use low CO2 levels in the atmo-
sphere. To be viable alternatives, nonbiological systems must 
achieve an efficiency of at least 10% by directly producing 
useful fuels rather than bulky biomass, because they cannot 
repair or replicate themselves.
Solar-­fuel systems must be capable of operating outdoors for 
years, which requires that their active components be durable 
and withstand daily temperature and seasonal weather changes. 
Corrosion at the liquid–­solid interface can be a problem caused 
by the acidic or basic conditions inherent in the electrolyte or 
generated by reactions at the electrode. Potential-­dependent 
corrosion of the catalyst or light absorber can also occur.
The water-­splitting process—­the production of hydrogen 
gas from the decomposition of water—­which is crucial for the 
systems, demands two catalysts: one for oxygen evolution, 
which produces O2 molecules and protons, and another for 
hydrogen evolution, which assembles H2 molecules from pro-
tons. Oxygen evolution usually occurs in either acidic or basic 
environments, but catalysts for the process tend to be unstable 
in highly acidic environments, except for those based on the 
rare precious metals iridium and ruthenium.
Storage and distribution of H2 are challenging, because it 
must be carefully separated from the byproduct oxygen (O2) 
gas to avoid forming an explosive mixture. On the other hand, 
CO2-consuming generators can operate with less-­corrosive 
electrolytes and produce a fuel much like existing fossil fuels, 
such as natural gas and petroleum. That advantage allows en-
gineers to leverage existing energy storage, distribution, and 
utilization infrastructure.
The reaction of CO2 with water results in a mixture of dif-
ferent products and has low energy-­conversion efficiency be-
H
H
Artiﬁcial photosynthesis
Solar hydrogen 
generation
Electrocatalytic
synthesis
Photovoltaics or
concentrating
solar power
Electrolysis
Liquid-fuel
synthesis
Solar energy
Electricity
Hydrogen from water
Liquid solar fuel
Increasing energy density
FIGURE 1. PATHWAYS for ­sunlight-­driven chemical transformations of water and carbon dioxide into fuels. The green arrow indicating a 
direct pathway via artificial photosynthesis represents a ­single-­step process for generating ­liquid-­hydrocarbon and oxygenated fuels. The 
blue arrows indicate indirect pathways that can be combined to achieve liquid fuels. The processes include photoelectrochemical 
hydrogen generation, solar thermochemical hydrogen generation, photovoltaic or concentrating solar power for electricity production, 
electrolysis of water to make hydrogen, electrocatalytic synthesis of fuels using electricity, and ­liquid-­fuel synthesis by chemically 
combining hydrogen and CO2. (Courtesy of Liquid Sunlight Alliance.)
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

DECEMBER 2023 | PHYSICS TODAY  35
cause of low reactant concentrations and the complexity of the 
reaction mechanisms. The main technical challenges lie in 
achieving either high solar- to-fuel effi  ciency with multiyear 
durability or high product selectivity using CO2. 
Electrochemical conversion reactions can be coupled to sun-
light indirectly— for example, by combining photovoltaics and 
electrolysis6—which optimizes the light- harvesting and catalytic 
processes that produce liquid fuels. They can also be directly 
coupled using integrated artifi cial photosynthetic systems, with 
the advantages those systems off er for integrated design, chem-
ical control, and direct use of energy from sunlight.7
In many direct solar- fuel systems, bulk semiconductors ab-
sorb light and generate the photovoltage needed to drive fuel- 
forming electrochemical reactions. The photovoltage required 
to split water or drive the CO2-reduction reactions at high 
(greater than 10%) solar- to- fuel effi  ciencies can be achieved 
using multiple photoabsorbers in a series- connected tandem 
confi guration.8 With their exceptionally high photovoltages, 
multijunction III–V semiconductors have been a popular choice 
for more than two decades. Silicon, which is dominant in the 
microelectronics and photovoltaic industries, has also found 
extensive use. Some of the earliest work on photoelectrochem-
ical systems involved metal chalcogenides and chalcopyrite- 
and kesterite- type semiconductors because of their tunable 
bandgaps, which are ideal for solar- fuel generation.9
Computation, high- throughput synthesis, and data mining 
have accelerated the discovery and development of new semi-
conductor materials for solar fuels.10 Those semiconductors, 
however, still suff er from excessive corrosion in aqueous elec-
trolytes when they’re used as photocathodes, and that corro-
sion limits their durability.11 Semiconductor photoelectrodes 
can be protected using inert overlayers such as titanium di-
oxide,12 though fl aws in the coatings can reduce their effi  cacy. 
The fundamental science underlying photocorrosion reactions 
and kinetics— and how to control them— is an important re-
search area for artifi cial photosynthesis because of the need for 
durable materials, as I’ll discuss later.
Water splitting
The fi rst demonstration of direct solar- driven synthesis of fuels 
was reported in 1972 by Akira Fujishima and Kenichi Honda, 
who generated hydrogen by photoelectrochemical water split-
ting using a TiO2 crystal as a semiconductor absorber.13 Their 
device also oxidized water on the TiO2 surface and generated 
Energy conversion in natural 
and artificial photosynthesis
Natural photosynthetic systems, such as 
chlorophyll, use two  light- harvesting 
centers, photosystem 1 and photosystem 
2, in a tandem configuration to create the 
chemical energy needed to produce aden-
osine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotin-
amide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH), two key sources of energy used 
by life at the cellular level. By analogy, 
efficient artificial photosynthetic systems 
like the one shown here can also use a 
tandem  light- absorbing system consisting 
of two  series- connected semiconductor 
photoelectrodes. The absorptions of 
photons (yellow) produce the photo-
voltage needed to drive the  fuel- forming 
 reactions— either water splitting (the 
production of hydrogen by the decom-
position of water) or carbon dioxide 
reduction.
Alternatively, one can design a simpler 
but less efficient system (not pictured 
here) that uses a single semiconductor 
photoelectrode with a wider energy gap 
to absorb sunlight and produce the 
1.23 V potential required for water split-
ting. Artificial photosynthetic systems 
also use either heterogeneous or mo-
lecular catalysts integrated onto the 
photoanode and photocathode sur-
faces to perform the oxidation and re-
duction reactions, respectively, needed 
for fuel formation. Although photo-
electrochemical water splitting has only 
two  fuel- forming reactions, various path-
ways exist to produce fuel in CO2 reduc-
tion, thanks to the richness of carbon 
chemistry. 
Copper is the most important hetero-
geneous catalyst for CO2 reduction be-
cause of its ability to produce multi carbon 
products. It typically produces them with 
little chemical selectivity, though. Thus a 
key challenge in  solar- fuel systems de-
signed for CO2 reduction is achieving the 
required chemical selectivity to produce 
a single product with high yield rather 
than many products. 
Electron energy
Higher
Lower
2 H2O
4 H+ + O2
4 photons
Photosystem 2
4e−
4e−
Pheophytin
Electron-transport chain
Electron-transport chain
ATP
4 photons
Photosystem 1
Ferredoxin
2 NADPH
1.23 V
H2O/O2
H2O/H2
Artiﬁcial photosynthesis
Natural photosynthesis
OER
catalyst
HER
catalyst
n
p
Hydrogen-evolution reaction (HER)  
2H+ + 2e−                H2(g)
CO2-reduction reactions
CO2 + H2O         HCOOH + ½O2
CO2 + H2O         HCHO + O2
CO2 + 2H2O         CH4 + 2O2
CO2 + 2H2O         CH3OH + 3⁄2O2
Oxygen-evolution reaction (OER)
H2O                 ½O2(g) + 2H+ + 2e−
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

36  PHYSICS TODAY | DECEMBER 2023
ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS
hydrogen gas with a separately wired platinum electrode. In 
1983 Melvin Calvin, a chemistry professor at the University of 
California, Berkeley, published a groundbreaking paper estab-
lishing conceptual links between natural and artificial photo-
synthesis. In that work, he likened the components of a solar-­
fuel system to the components of biological systems containing 
micelles and vesicles.14
Over the past 15 years, researchers have made tremendous 
progress designing the architecture for photoelectrochemical, 
water-­splitting solar-­fuel generators. Modeling of solar-­fuel 
prototypes has also been critical for guiding materials devel-
opment because it defines the operational conditions and con-
straints for various cell designs. Researchers have used chem-
ically selective membranes to develop strategies for stabilizing 
systems while ensuring greater than 10% solar-to-­hydrogen 
conversion efficiency. The durability of photoelectrodes—­in 
particular, their resistance to photo-­induced degradation 
processes—­was enhanced by the development of interfacial 
protection layers and hybrid composite coatings to prevent 
corrosion in acidic or basic electrolyte environments.
The advances in each of those areas, together with predictive 
models for design, have enabled researchers to make rapid prog-
ress increasing the efficiency of photoelectrochemical water-­
splitting devices. Figure 2 illustrates the result of that research: a 
device with a demonstrated 19% solar-to-­hydrogen efficiency.15
Advanced water-­splitting prototypes combine photonic 
design, transparent-­catalyst synthesis, semiconductor band 
engineering, and protective antireflective coatings. Tailored 
multifunctional crystalline TiO2 interphase layers provide cor-
rosion protection, with favorable band alignment between the 
semiconductor conduction band and the energy level for water 
reduction, which facilitates electron transport at the cathode–­
electrolyte interface. Under a standardized level of simulated 
solar irradiation, solar-to-­hydrogen efficiencies of 19.3% and 
18.5% were obtained in acidic and neutral electrolytes, respec-
tively. Such systems can now reach a value of 85% of the theo-
retical limit for photoelectrochemical water splitting.
CO2 reduction
The architecture of the solar-­fuel generator directly affects the 
product selectivity and activity for CO2-reduction catalysis. In a 
water-­splitting cell, the concentration of water is 55 molar; the 
reactant concentration thus poses no limitation on the reaction 
rate. But the low solubility of CO2 in liquid-water-­based electro-
lytes (30–40 millimolar, typically) constrains the reaction rate in 
a reduction system. Thus solar-­fuel generators for CO2 reduction 
typically use vapor-­phase environments rather than liquid-­
electrolyte ones. Gas-diffusion-­electrode (GDE) and membrane-
electrode-­assembly (MEA) architectures feature porous conduc-
tive membrane architectures like the one shown in figure 3; they 
can overcome not only the CO2 solubility issue but also the in-
herent ohmic losses associated with liquid layers.16
Cells with liquid between the electrodes are labeled as di-
agnostic in figure 3 because they allow researchers to explore 
specific physical phenomena in laboratory experiments. To 
reach higher current densities and exploit the other benefits of 
vapor feed—for example, low water concentrations and the use 
of CO as an alternative reactant feed gas—high-­efficiency cells 
are advantageous. Typically, MEA and GDE cells use a copper 
or silver heterogeneous catalyst, and the CO2-reduction reac-
tion occurs at a gas-solid-­liquid interface in the membrane 
layer. Such CO2 conversion devices have been able to produce 
chemical products that are dominated by dicarbon-­containing 
molecules, such as ethylene and ethanol, and high current den-
sities are possible at relatively low cell potentials.
Integration of all those components in a structure as com-
plex as a GDE can introduce significant variations in the elec-
trode’s activity, selectivity, and durability, even for well-­studied 
catalysts such as copper. Mass-­transfer effects and the local 
environment can lead to changes in the product distribution 
that could be incorrectly attributed to catalyst deactivation—a 
common concern in such studies. Further progress in develop-
ing next-­generation architectures will likely require a combi-
nation of multiphysics modeling and measurements of local 
pH and reactant species under reaction conditions. Such mod-
eling and experimental studies reveal the importance of the 
local chemical environment.
The voltage efficiency of a solar-­driven electrochemical cell 
depends on the physical properties of its components—­namely, 
catalysts, the electrolyte, and the membrane; operating condi-
tions, which are the CO2’s flow rate and pressure and the current 
density; and the cell’s physical dimensions. To make progress 
designing complex reactors, scientists have developed multi­
dimensional models for GDE and MEA electrochemical CO2-­
reduction cells—­more specifically, for cells that simulate elec-
trocatalysis for CO2 reduction and oxygen evolution, ionic 
transport, and chemical acid–­base reactions in liquid- or ion-­
conducting polymer electrolyte layers.
The ion-­transporting membranes in such devices are situated 
close to the gas–­solid interface. Thus hydrating the membrane 
H2
O2
Rh
TiO2
AlInP
GaAs
RuOx
GaInAs
GaInP
FIGURE 2. A ­SOLAR-­FUEL GENERATOR splits water to produce 
hydrogen gas from sunlight at an efficiency that exceeds 19%. 
Sunlight strikes a ­front-­facing tandem GaInP/GaAs photoelectrode 
that is functionalized with a rhodium catalyst to trigger the 
hydrogen-­evolution reaction and with a ruthenium oxide catalyst 
to trigger the ­oxygen-­evolution reaction. A titanium dioxide 
coating on the GaInP photocathode serves as a chemical protective 
layer and antireflection coating. The ­blue–­green part of the solar 
spectrum is absorbed in the GaInP photoelectrode and the ­red-­IR 
portion of the spectrum is absorbed in the GaAs photoelectrode. 
(Figure adapted from ref. 15.) 
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

DECEMBER 2023 | PHYSICS TODAY  37
with liquid water is an important concern because the liq-
uid- and ion-­containing exchange solutions help to lower 
the cell voltage. An important area for future research is to 
assess and evaluate the CO2 utilization efficiency in those 
complex chemical environments. It can be low in the ex-
change solutions because of CO2 pumping across the anion-­
conducting membrane.
Making liquid solar fuels from CO2
Compared with water splitting, CO2 reduction requires 
addressing a much more complex set of issues related to 
the transport and interfacial reactivity of reactants, inter­
mediates, and products. When the solar-­fuel community 
was primarily focused on water splitting, the appropriate 
scientific approach was to address mechanistic questions 
related to processes, such as reactions around a catalytic 
center or charge-­carrier generation and transport. And 
researchers largely focused on processes occurring in a 
single sunlight-­driven microenvironment, such as a 
photoabsorber-­catalyst cathode interface.
Such approaches generated small-­molecule gaseous 
fuel products, such as molecular hydrogen or carbon monox-
ide, for which small numbers of electron and proton transfers 
are needed. Most of the effort in the solar-­fuels arena has pre-
viously addressed conditions in which concentrated feed-
stocks are present. They include liquid water as a source for 
generating hydrogen or pure CO2 as a source for generating 
related products of CO2.
The ultimate goal of direct solar generation of liquid fuels, such 
as multicarbon reduced products of CO2 using dilute sources, 
however, is a far greater challenge that requires a conceptually 
different approach. To control the complex interplay of sequential 
or coupled transfers of multiple electrons, protons, and photons 
needed for liquid solar fuels requires a rethinking of the micro-
environments that bring reactants to the reaction center.
Designing solar-­fuel systems as assemblies of micro­
environments is a new paradigm. Previous advances in solar 
fuels have led to success in building single microenvironments 
suited to water splitting and CO2 reduction to two-­electron 
products on the one hand and electrocatalysis to multicarbon 
products on the other. Until recently, though, the design of 
microenvironments for direct, efficient, and selective sunlight-­
driven generation of multicarbon or nitrogen-­containing fuel 
products has been out of reach.
A new focus for solar-­fuels research is to couple multiple 
microenvironments with an integrated or cascaded format—­
that is, to directly use sunlight to create liquid multicarbon fuel 
products in a precisely tailored manner and over a broad range 
of scales and ambient operating conditions. The microenviron-
ment assemblies include photocatalysts, CO2 capture media, 
membrane and porous media for ion and molecular transport, 
media for proton and cation management, and molecular and 
inorganic photo- and electrochemical reaction centers.
An example of such a coupled microenvironment architec-
ture is illustrated in figure 4, which shows a tandem cascade 
of a photoelectrochemical reactor for CO2 reduction to eth-
ylene, coupled with a sunlight-­driven thermochemical reactor 
that synthesizes ethylene-­based fuel products. The mixture has 
a carbon concentration in the C4 to C17 range, which resembles 
the typical molecular weight distribution of jet fuel.
The goal is to demonstrate how the coupling of photo­
electrochemical and photothermal reactors produces a liquid 
fuel from sunlight, CO2, and water vapor. To date, that coupled 
microenvironment reactor has synthesized butene and hexene 
with high efficiency.
Selective synthesis of multicarbon products
A key requirement for complex product synthesis in solar-­fuel 
systems is the precise synthesis of a single product with high 
selectivity and the suppression of minor or undesired prod-
ucts. Achieving that catalytic selectivity could in principle 
eliminate the need for separations, which is one of the costliest 
steps in any chemical synthesis process. A key advance in the 
past few years has been to apply molecular additive layers and 
ionomer coatings during the synthesis in order to tune the 
product distribution. The tuning is achieved, in turn, by con-
trolling the availability of CO2 and water at the reaction inter-
face. Fortunately, molecular additives, such as pyridinium 
and Nafion ionomer coatings, can control the chemical micro­
environment at the CO2-reduction cathode interface.
Mechanistic studies are helping researchers understand 
how nitrogen-­substituted pyridinium films can tune the rich 
profile of CO2-reduction products on copper and silver elec-
trodes. Silver surfaces catalyze primarily the CO2-to-CO con-
version in aqueous electrolytes, with the concomitant produc-
tion of H2 and a small amount of formate (HCOOH), depending 
on the potential that’s applied. Whereas copper produces multi­
carbon products, silver typically produces only CO and H2 in 
Diagnostic cells
Eﬃciency cells
Catalyst 
nanoparticle
Carbon 
powder
Carbon 
ﬁber
Liquid
electrolyte
Catalyst layer
(1~10 µm) 
Diﬀusion medium
(100~500 µm)
Current 
collector
Gas
chamber
Microporous 
layer
Gas-diﬀusion
layer
Planar cell
Aqueous GDE
Full MEA
Exchange MEA
H2O
OH−
e−
CO2
CO2
Anolyte
Catholyte
Membrane
Gas-diﬀusion
layer
FIGURE 3. A ­GAS-­DIFFUSION ELECTRODE (GDE) with different 
­membrane-­electrode-­assembly (MEA) cell designs. The top panel 
depicts an aqueous liquid electrolyte that supplies protons to the 
catalyst, which is in contact with a porous ­gas-­diffusion medium 
that facilitates the transport of carbon dioxide gas to the catalyst 
layer. The bottom panels illustrate (at left) a liquid electrolyte 
(planar) cell and a GDE used to characterize the voltage in the 
cell. At right are ­membrane-­electrode assemblies, whose layer 
thicknesses and configurations are tailored to optimize the 
device efficiency. (Adapted from L. -C. Weng, A. T. Bell, A. Z. 
Weber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 16973, 2018.)
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

38  PHYSICS TODAY | DECEMBER 2023
ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS
electrocatalysis of CO2 reduction. Silver thus off ers a simpler 
system for understanding chemical processes.
Certain nitrogen- substituted pyridinium additives on silver 
foils produce CO with extremely high selectivity by inhibiting 
proton reduction— that is, hydrogen evolution— but not CO re-
duction. The data from electrokinetic studies suggest that hydro-
gen production was selectively inhibited by the growth of hydro-
phobic organic layers on the silver surface that limits proton 
transport but not CO2 transport. Although the situation is more 
complex for CO2 reduction on copper, researchers have found that 
selected pyridinium molecular additive fi lms suppress hydrogen 
evolution and certain CO2-reduction products, such as methane, 
and favor the formation of ethylene and ethanol instead. The data 
point to proton transfer as the rate- determining step in catalysis 
instead of the commonly observed electron- transfer step, for ex-
ample, in the case of planar silver electrodes. 
Durability
The performance demands for generating liquid solar fuels are 
signifi cant. They require that generators operate effi  ciently and 
stably for up to 100 000 hours under real- world conditions. 
Despite substantial research on artifi cial photosynthesis over 
the past several decades, a major bott leneck in designing long- 
lasting systems for liquid solar fuels is the durability of com-
ponents. Corrosion is well recognized as a failure mechanism, 
but litt le is understood about the myriad other processes that 
can infl uence the photocatalyst or reaction- center micro-
environment and thus drive changes in performance over time.
Researchers need to understand the fundamental chemical 
and physical mechanisms that cause degradation and compro-
mise the function of photocatalysts, membranes, and coatings. 
If such an understanding could be achieved, a set of tools 
would likely emerge for designing components for both stabil-
ity and performance in photo- driven microenvironments. 
Knowing the corrosion mechanisms, the operational limits of 
durability, and details about the evolution of catalyst shapes 
will provide feedback for such models and enable predictive 
design of future systems.
Several approaches have been taken to understand and 
control corrosion in solar- fuel systems. Quantitative methods 
for studying corrosion rates were developed by detecting deg-
radation products in the electrolyte or by measuring the mass 
loss of the component. In situ observation of corrosion pro-
cesses by scanning probe techniques is also possible, and when 
combined with theory, it can reveal underlying mechanisms. 
Many anode and cathode materials are metastable under 
water- splitt ing or CO2-reduction conditions, and their resis-
tance to corrosion can be incorporated as a selection criterion 
in computational and experimental searches for new materials 
for CO2-reduction photocathodes.
Photocorrosion is not the only process that can lead to per-
formance loss. Photocathodes that drive CO2 reduction usually 
incorporate a cocatalyst that favors CO2 reduction over hydro-
gen evolution and controls product selectivity. Often the co-
catalysts are metal nanoparticles; copper is used in many stud-
ies because it is the only metal catalyst that facilitates the C–C 
coupling reactions necessary to form C2+ products.
It is well known that nanocrystalline, copper- based CO2- 
reduction catalysts can change shape or sinter during operation 
and lose their selectivity. Identifying the mechanisms responsible 
for that performance degradation might allow researchers to de-
sign systems resistant to those eff ects. The corrosion mechanism 
involves coupled charge and atom transfer from a solid interface 
into solution. Theories have been extended to include proton- 
coupled electron transfer, which is central to water oxidation. 
They do not, however, address the processes that initiate corrosion 
in the fi rst place or help identify corrosion- resistant materials.
Another major gap in the science of solar fuels and electro-
chemical systems is understanding the rare events that cause 
material instability or passivation. During macroscopic corro-
Products: C4H8, C6H12, ...
Selective solar 
absorber
Quartz 
viewpoint
Vacuum-
insulated
layer
Copper 
block
CO2 in
Catholyte in
Anolyte in
Catholyte out
Anolyte out
Sunlight
Photothermal 
oligomerization reactor
Photoelectrochemical 
reactor
FIGURE 4. REACTORS IN TANDEM synthesize liquid fuel. This microenvironment features two reactors situated in a cascaded 
confi guration: A photoelectrochemical reactor (at right) takes in sunlight to electrochemically reduce carbon dioxide to ethylene, and then 
a solar photothermal reactor (at left) uses harvested sunlight to heat a thermal heterogeneous catalyst, which then transforms the 
ethylene into alkene products. (Courtesy of Liquid Sunlight Alliance.)
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

sion, the rare events occur orders of magnitude faster than 
researchers can observe them. To correct that problem, re-
searchers are starting to explore model systems with in situ
time- resolved experiments.
A path to scaling up
Engineers have now developed photovoltaic energy systems 
up to the terawatt  scale, and their manufacture is supported by 
comprehensive supply chains, distribution networks, and a 
worldwide infrastructure. An important question is whether 
solar fuels can follow a similar trajectory to large- scale produc-
tion. Most conceptual work on the scalability of solar- fuel sys-
tems has focused on water splitt ing. To date, solar- fuel re-
searchers have developed prototype systems at the 100 m2
scale17 and produced a detailed description of a hypothetical 
1 GW hydrogen plant that generates 220 000 metric tons of H2
per year with a photoelectrochemical generator design.18
Materials, initial energy requirements, and estimates of the 
annual net energy for the plant came from an initial study. A 
key fi nding was that the most signifi cant factors aff ecting the 
energy returned on energy invested are the solar-to- hydrogen 
effi  ciency and panel lifetime. That study and similar ones point 
to the importance of ensuring high effi  ciency and a long lifetime 
for sustainable photoelectrochemical hydrogen production.
Signifi cant advances have been made in solar- fuel research 
in the past decade for both water splitt ing and CO2 reduction. 
Although no manufacturing industry currently exists, solar 
fuels have the potential to contribute to a sustainable circular 
carbon economy in a climate- stable world. Researchers in the 
fi eld can take inspiration from the example of photovoltaics, 
which has undergone a millionfold expansion in production 
capacity over the past 30 years. If many of the same manufac-
turing methods and infrastructure resources that are now 
available for photovoltaics can be reused for solar fuels, they 
may off er a pathway for rapid acceleration of this important 
renewable- energy technology.
REFERENCES
  1.  H. Lee et al., Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report, H. Lee, J. Romero, 
eds., Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2023). 
  2.  A. Gonzalez- Garay et al., Energy Environ. Sci. 15, 3291 (2022).
  3.  N. Roy et al., Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 92, 178 (2019).
  4.  M. G. Walter et al., Chem. Rev. 110, 6446 (2010).
 5.  Report of the Basic Energy Sciences Roundtable on Liquid Solar Fuels, 
US Department of Energy (2019): technical report available at 
htt ps://www.osti.gov/biblio/1615599, factual document available 
at htt ps://science.osti.gov/-/media/bes/pdf/reports/2020/Liquid_
Solar_Fuels_RT_Factual_Document.pdf.
  6.  J. Jia et al., Nat. Commun. 7, 13237 (2016).
  7.  I. D. Sharp, H. A. Atwater, H.-J. Lewerenz, eds., Integrated Solar 
Fuel Generators, Royal Society of Chemistry (2019).
  8.  K. T. Fountaine, H. J. Lewerenz, H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun. 7, 
13706 (2016).
  9.  J. Feng et al., Nano Today 30, 100830 (2020).
10.  Q. Yan et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 3040 (2017).
11.  M. T. Spitler et al., Sustain. Energy Fuels 4, 985 (2020).
12.  M. T. McDowell et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 15189 (2015).
13.  A. Fujishima, K. Honda, Nature 238, 37 (1972).
14.  M. Calvin, Photochem. Photobiol. 37, 349 (1983).
15.  W.-H. Cheng et al., ACS Energy Lett . 3, 1795 (2018).
16.  E. W. Lees et al., Nat. Rev. Mater. 7, 55 (2022).
17.  H. Nishiyama et al., Nature 598, 304 (2021).
18.  R. Sathre et al., Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 3264 (2014).  
PT
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) 
Department of Physics invites applications for a tenure-
track assistant professor in theoretical quantum information 
science, broadly defined, to begin in or before August 2024. 
Exceptional candidates at the associate professor level will also 
be considered. Research interest in areas related to quantum 
cybersecurity is desirable. Candidates should have a PhD in 
Physics. We seek candidates who have the capacity to establish 
a vigorous, externally funded research program and who will 
also contribute to the diversity and excellence of the department 
in teaching, mentoring, and service. This position is part of a 
multi-year, campus-wide, and state-supported hiring initiative 
to develop the UMBC Cybersecurity Institute (UCI). UCI-affiliated 
faculty members will have a tenure-track appointment in their 
respective home department but are expected to collaborate 
across disciplines as part of a cohort of new faculty members 
with complementary expertise in the rapidly growing field of 
cybersecurity. Application instructions can be found on the 
Interfolio website at http://apply.interfolio.com/131555. 
Applications submitted by January 15, 2024 will receive full 
consideration.
Assistant Professor in Theoretical 
Quantum Information Science
Physics Today 
Webinars
Watch Now at
physicstoday.org/webinars
Encounter A Wide Variety of 
Engaging Topics on Leading 
Research
 09 January 2024 02:05:40

