Quenching an active swarm: Effects of light exposure on collective motility
in swarming Serratia marcescens colonies
Alison E Patteson,a,‡ Junyi Yang,b Paulo E Arratiac and Arvind Gopinath,d,†
Swarming colonies of the light responsive bacteria Serratia marcescens grown on agar exhibit robust ﬂuctuating large-scale collective
ﬂows that include arrayed vortices, jets, and sinuous streamers. We study the immobilization and quenching of these large-scale
ﬂows when the moving swarm is exposed to light with a substantial ultra-violet component. We map the response to light in terms of
two independent parameters - the light intensity and duration of exposure and identify the conditions under which mobility is affected
signiﬁcantly. For small exposure times and/or low intensities, we ﬁnd collective mobility to be negligibly affected. Increasing exposure
times and/or intensity to higher values temporarily suppresses collective mobility. Terminating exposure allows bacteria regain motility
and eventually reestablish large scale ﬂows. For long exposure times or at high intensities, exposed bacteria become paralyzed, with
macroscopic speeds eventually reducing to zero. In this process, they form highly aligned, jammed domains. Individual domains
eventually coalesce into a large macroscopic domain with mean radial extent growing as the square root of exposure time. Post
exposure, active bacteria dislodge exposed bacteria from these jammed conﬁgurations; initial dissolution rates are found to be
strongly dependent on duration of exposure suggesting that caging effects are substantial at higher exposure times. Based on our
experimental observations, we propose a minimal Brownian dynamics model to examine the escape of exposed bacteria from the
region of exposure. Our results complement studies on planktonic bacteria and inform models for pattern formation in gradated
illumination.
Keywords: Bacterial swarms, Active jamming, Light-response of bacteria, Active matter
1
Introduction
Swarming motility is a ﬂagella driven mode of bacterial sur-
face migration that is widespread in both gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria and enables rapid colonization of environ-
ments1–8. Swarming is typically initiated when free-swimming
(planktonic) bacteria grown in ﬂuids are then transferred to soft
wet agar gels5. The transfer triggers a change in phenotype; in-
dividual cells become signiﬁcantly elongated and the number of
ﬂagella increases, sometimes to 10–1001,7. At high densities, the
highly mobile expanding colony develops complex, long-range
intermittent collective ﬂow features that involving multiple bac-
teria traveling in rafts or ﬂock-like clusters. Speeds are usually
high near the edge of the expanding colony with intensity (mag-
nitudes) decreasing away from the propagating edge2,4,5,9 and
towards of center of the colony. Recent studies10–12 demonstrate
that swarming confers multiple beneﬁts including enhanced colo-
nization rates and elevated resistance to antibiotics. Swarming is
also found to be co-regulated with virulence, and also implicated
in infectiousness and ﬁtness of pathogenic bacterial species3,7.
Healthy bacterial cells - in both planktonic as well as collec-
tively moving states - sense spatiotemporally distributed cues,
continuously process these inputs and transduce them to varia-
tions in motility and other responses1,4,9,13. For instance, sin-
gle bacteria are observed to respond to chemical and mechanical
stimuli by modulating and controlling the molecular motors un-
derlying ﬂagellar motion14–18. Intense light with wavelengths in
the range 290-530 nm encompassing the ultraviolet (UV) range
aDepartment of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY.
bDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California Merced, CA.
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
dDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California Merced, CA.
† Email: agopinath@ucmerced.edu, ‡ aepattes@syr.edu
is known to trigger changes in the motility of planktonic chemo-
tactic bacteria19,19–21. Prolonged exposure to high-intensity light
results in progressively slow swimming with paralysis occurring
eventually19,20 due to irreversible motor damage. Striking vari-
ations in motility associated with modulation in the functioning
of the MotA - MotB pair and FliG comprising the rotary motor
complex in the ﬂagella - are also observed in chemotactic bacte-
ria. The net result is a change in the swimming gait - speciﬁcally,
tumble length and tumble frequency15,17 as for instance seen in
Escherichia coli and Streptococcus20,22. Connecting and relating
these single cell responses to variations and changes in swarm-
ing bacterial systems however poses signiﬁcant challenges and
remains a topic of active research.
From a medical perspective, light treatments employing UV-A,
UV-B and UV-C radiation are emerging as attractive alternatives
to antibiotic treatment of pathogenic bacteria.
Light exposure
is known to inhibit cell growth and induce gene damage23 in
marine organisms (alphaprotobacteria and bacterioplankton,24),
airborne bacteria25, as well in bacterial bioﬁlms26,27. Irradiation
of surfaces using blue light and phototherapy that activates en-
dogenous or exogenous photosensitizers13,28,29 has been shown
to sterilize and disinfect bacteria laden surfaces and swarming
bacteria.
Intense light is also known to promote wound heal-
ing29,31 with visible light recently approved to treat bacterial in-
fections such as acne32. Given these promising studies and the
timeliness of light treatments, understanding the connection be-
tween motility, infectiousness and light exposure is particularly
important.
Here, we report on the effects of wide-spectrum light with
signiﬁcant UV components on the collective motility of swarm-
ing Serratia marcesens. In collectively-moving swarms, individual
self-propelling cells are inﬂuenced by steric and hydrodynamic in-
teractions with their neighbors4–6,33–35. These interactions result
1–11 | 1

in complex features including ﬂuctuating regions of high vorticity
and streamers. We ﬁrst discuss statistics of our base state - that is
features of collective motility in unexposed bacterial swarms. Fol-
lowing this, we report and analyze the drastic variations in mo-
bility evident when localized regions of the swarm are exposed to
wide-spectrum light. As a part of this process, using two orthog-
onal parameters - the light intensity and duration of exposure -
we identify the conditions under which mobility is affected sig-
niﬁcantly. Interestingly, this quenching of activity may happen in
either reversible or irreversible manner.
For low intensities or
short exposure times, bacteria recover their motility, reestablish
collective ﬂows, and erode the passive domain from within when
exposure is terminated. For long exposures or high intensity light,
actively generated collective motion ceases slowly and the passive
region grows with time until saturation due to the ﬁnite extent
of the light ﬁeld. As this quenching progresses, dense strongly
jammed domains of immobile cells form and hinder the penetra-
tion of unexposed bacteria into the region, thereby localizing the
damage in the colony. Post-exposure, swarming cells penetrate
into the previously passive domain; associated emergent ﬂows
dislodge and then convect immobile bacteria away with the initial
dissolution rate dependent on the duration of light exposure. We
hypothesize that this dependence comes from the highly jammed
and aligned conﬁgurations of the paralyzed bacteria attained for
long exposure times.
To complement our experiments and to investigate how sub-
populations of exposed bacteria may be able to extricate them-
selves and escape the light, we propose and analyze a minimal
agent based Brownian dynamics model for a illuminated test cell.
By incorporating the effects of light exposure through changes
in the rotational and translational diffusivity of this model cell,
we demonstrate that variations in bacterial spreading distances
may arise in a population comprising cells featuring a distribu-
tion of self-propulsion speeds. Subpopulations of exposed bacte-
ria corresponding to the fastest moving cells may escape from the
exposed region; signiﬁcantly however, the dense packing in col-
lective swarms may alleviate this effect suggesting that exposure
time is as important as light intensity.
2
Experimental methods
Swarms of Serratia marcesens (strain ATCC 274, Manassas, VA)
were grown on agar substrates, prepared by dissolving 1 wt%
Bacto Tryptone, 0.5 wt% yeast extract, 0.5 wt% NaCl , and 0.6
wt% Bacto Agar in deionized water. Melted agar was poured into
petri dishes, adding 2 wt% of glucose solution (25 wt%). The
bacteria were then inoculated on solidiﬁed agar plates and incu-
bated at 34oC. Colonies formed at the inoculation sites and grew
outward on the agar substrate from the inoculation site.
These spreading swarms were studied and imaged 12-16 hours
after inoculation. The bacteria were imaged with the free surface
facing down with an inverted Nikon microscope Eclipse Ti-U us-
ing either a Nikon 10x (NA = 0.3) or 20x (NA = 0.45) objective.
Images were gathered at either 30 frames per seconds (fps) with
a Sony XCD-SX90 camera or at 60 fps with a Photron Fastcam
SA1.1 camera. We used videos of the swarm and PIVLab soft-
ware36 to extract the velocity ﬁelds of the bacteria with particle
Fig. 1 Characteristics of swarming and expanding colony: Snapshot
of a Serratia marcescens colony on an agar substrate, during exposure
to high-intensity light from a mercury lamp source; PIV derived veloc-
ity ﬁelds are overlaid in color. Swarming motion is pronounced approx-
imately 50 microns from the expanding colony front. The inset shows
pre-exposure bacterial alignment and density 150 µm from the colony
front.
image velocimetry (PIV) techniques. Particle image velocimetry
determines velocity ﬁelds by calculating local spatial-correlations
between successive images. Here, the images are of bacteria (ei-
ther active or passive) such that PIV yields the bacterial velocity
ﬁelds directly and not the velocity ﬁeld of the ambient ﬂuid. We
sampled the velocity ﬁeld at 3 µm spatial intervals in the images,
checking the frame rate for accurate resolution. All the analysis of
the data extracted from the videos was done using freely available
object-oriented Python software.
To mimic the exposure of bacteria to naturally occurring high
intensity light, we used a wide spectrum mercury vapor lamp37.
Standard microscope optical components were used to focus the
light on the swarm. The bare unﬁltered maximum intensity (mea-
sured at 535 nm) of the lamp I0 was reduced to lower, ﬁltered
(maximum) intensities I using neutral density ﬁlters. Both I0 and
I depend on the objective and this effect was taken into account
in all experiments by calibrating for the exposure intensity. Using
a spectrophotometer (Thorlabs, PM100D), we measured maxi-
mum intensities I0 = 980 mW/cm2 (at 535 nm) for the 10x and
I0 = 3100 mW/cm2 (at 535 nm) for the 20x objectives. Note that
the actual intensity of light I⇤(r,t) as measured in the swarm is
spatiotemporally varying due to bacterial motion and also due
to the associated point spread distribution as the light passes
through the aperture.
Typically, the maximum intensity corre-
sponds to that measured at the center (r = 0) of the focused light
beam.
3
Results and Discussion
Figure 1 is a snapshot of the expanding colony, a region of which
(white area) is exposed to high-intensity light from a mercury va-
por lamp37 using an octagonal aperture. The swarm is expanding
from left to right; the colony edge is indicated in white in the ﬁg-
2 |
1–11

Fig. 2 Phase space for collective motility after exposure: (a) Changes in collective ﬂows (relative to the unexposed state) in swarming Serratia
marcescens depend strongly on intensity and duration of light exposure. We use a wide spectrum mercury lamp (bare intensity I0 = 980 mW/cm2 at
535 nm) with ﬁlters to selectively expose regions of the swarm to a ﬁltered maximum intensity I. From subsequent PIV analysis of bacterial velocities,
the response can be classiﬁed into one of three types - (I) always active, (II) temporarily passive, and (III) always passive. The yellow (dashed) and
pink (dotted) curves are phase boundaries predicted by equation 1. (b) Velocity ﬁelds taken 10 s post exposure are shown for each phase. Colors
reﬂect speed with the arrows denoting polar orientation. Collective motility of temporarily immobile bacteria is recovered in approximately 15 seconds
past exposure. (c) We plot the average speed of the swarm in the central region, highlighted by the box in (b) for times encompassing pre-exposure,
exposure (yellow band), and post-exposure. Pre-exposure, the average swarm speed ﬂuctuates between 25 to 50 µm/s. For case (I), the bacteria
brieﬂy slow down during exposure, but recover in 6 s. In (II), the swarm speed approaches zero during exposure and recovers in 12s. In (III), the
collective swarm speed drops to and remains zero.
ure. Bacteria swim in a thin layer above the agar substrate (inset,
Figure 1, see also SI Movie 1). While we are unable to directly
quantify the thickness of the dwarming layer, we expect the thick-
ness of the swarm to vary with distance from the leading edge.
Studies on E. coli38 swarming on agar substrates showed that
cells form a monolayer over a signiﬁcant region close to the lead-
ing edge, beyond this cells can form multi-layered regions. The
same features can be anticipated on the experiments described
here as well; consequently, we choose to illuminate the region of
the swarm that is within the thin region.
Overlaid on the image in Fig. 1 are bacterial velocity ﬁelds
gathered from PIV; the image is taken after 80 seconds of expo-
sure. Outside of the exposed region, the velocity ﬁeld exhibits
long-range collective ﬂows. Unexposed bacteria move fastest ap-
proximately 100-400 µm from the colony edge (maximum speeds
⇠80 µm/s, average speed ⇠30 µm/s). In contrast, inside the ex-
posed region, the bacterial motility is signiﬁcantly impaired. This
is evident in SI Movie 2; as swarming bacteria are exposed to
light, they slow down and are eventually trapped within the ex-
posed region. This feature is reﬂected in the trajectories of the
small tracer-like particles as they slow down and eventually stop
moving when trapped amongst the passive bacteria. The inter-
phase boundary between the unexposed (passive) domain and
the unexposed (active) part of the swarm features strong vortices,
jets, and streamers, extending up to just a few microns away from
the exposed domain.
3.1
Collective motility: Phase-space for reversible and irre-
versible quenching
The quenching (passivation) of collective mobility of the initially
active bacteria is not immediate and can be reversible or irre-
versible depending on the intensity of light and the duration of
exposure suggesting that the net dosage of light controls the re-
sponse. This is consistent with previous studies at the single bac-
teria level. Based on these observations, we explore two features
of the response to high intensity light: (i) the reversible versus
irreversible nature of the bacterial response and (ii) the effects of
exposure time and light intensities on the passive domain growth
rate during exposure and dissolution rate post-exposure.
Figure 2 illustrates the three modes of bacterial response to
light; our classiﬁcation is based on averages obtained from time-
dependent swarm velocity ﬁelds: exposed cells either (i) retain
mobility with negligible effects, (ii) transiently stop moving and
then regain motility at the single cell and collective level (re-
versible), or (iii) permanently stop moving (irreversible).
To
quantify the response, the behavior was mapped onto a phase
diagram with exposure time t and light intensity I (varied from
1–11 | 3

Fig.
3 Thresholding using intensity ﬂuctuation ﬁelds: (a) We cal-
culate an intensity ﬂuctuation map |I⇤(r,t + Dt) −I⇤(r,t)|, with Dt = 0.1
seconds. Intensity ﬂuctuations are low (black, third tile from left) in the
regions where the swarm is not moving. The map when thresholded al-
lows us to identify the boundary position (blue contours). The passive
phase shrinks as time goes by as shown at t = 1 sec (top) and t = 40
sec (bottom) post-exposure (Exposure duration t = 80 sec, Intensity is 3
W/cm2 measured at wavelength 535 nm). (b) PIV derived bacteria veloc-
ity ﬁelds conﬁrm the boundary location obtained from the intensity ﬂuctu-
ation maps. A mathematically deﬁned diffuse boundary may be obtained
from phase ﬁeld proﬁles 39 using order parameters 33; here however, we
use simple thresholding.
the bare value I0 using neutral density ﬁlters) as variables. For
sufﬁciently small exposure times (t ⇠20 −40 s) and intensities
(I < 220 mW, at 535 nm), exposed cells remain always active.
Conversely, for large exposure times (t > 60 s) and sufﬁciently
high intensities (I > 220mW, at 535 nm), the bacteria are perma-
nently passive (over the duration of the experiment). As seen in
Fig. 2(a), between these two phases lies the temporarily passive,
reversible case.
The differences between the three (collective) motility regimes
are highlighted in Fig. 2(b) and (c); these show PIV-derived ve-
locity ﬁelds taken 10 seconds past exposure (Fig 2b) and the av-
erage bacterial speed hvci - in the exposed region - over time (Fig
2c). Here, hvci is the average speed of the velocity ﬁelds in a
22⇥22 µm2 area, located at the center of the exposed region. In
case (i), exposed cells remain motile and continue to exhibit long-
range collective motions; the speed decreases but does not fully
reach zero during exposure. The speed recovers to pre-exposure
levels approximately 5 seconds after exposure. In case (ii), bacte-
ria stop moving during exposure, yet spontaneously start moving
again ⇠1-10 s after the light is switched off. The cell speed hvci
takes longer to recovers to pre-exposure levels than case (i), and
the recovery occurs heterogeneously with cells moving within the
temporally-quiescent region (Fig. 2(b)-ii). This process super-
ﬁcially resembles the heterogeneous, disconnected melting of a
large frozen domain. In case (iii), cells stop moving during ex-
posure and do not regain their motility afterward for the whole
duration of the experiment (20-300 s). Unlike case (ii), cells in
the exposed region here do not spontaneously regain their motil-
ity (Fig. 2(b)-iii). We ﬁnd that, in this case, the passive domain
evolves solely due to its interaction with the active swarm at its
boundary. The active swarm convects passive bacteria away from
the boundary and the passive phase is dismantled entirely; the
speed hvci eventually increases (Fig. 2(c)-iii) as the swarm recap-
tures the quenched area.
Similar responses have been observed earlier in studies on
E. coli and S. typhimurium19. Speciﬁcally, prolonged exposure
to unﬁltered light in both bacterial species resulted in constant
tumbling, and eventual paralysis. S. typhimurium was found to
responds instantaneously to exposure with recovery of normal
motility in 2 s or less upon cessation of exposure provided the
duration of exposure was less than 5s. Similarly, E. coli recovered
normal motility in 1 to 10 s after cessation of exposure. Sustained
exposure that ultimately results in paralysis was however found
to be irreversible (with no recovery of motility even after 15 min-
utes) for both species.
The regimes in the phase-plot Figure 2(a) can be rationalized
by assuming the existence of a lower threshold for the intensity
Imin below which bacteria are not affected.
We note that the
curves separating these regions of phase space do not correspond
to a single or unique value of the light dosage (intensity mul-
tiplied by exposure time) or net power.
The response to light
involves changes to the motor complex and possibly involves a
cascade of biochemical events. At the same time, while active
swarming bacteria swim in and out of the exposed region close to
the edge; in the interior of the exposed region they are caged in by
their neighbors. To interpret Figure 2, we treat these independent
motility affecting mechanisms in an approximate phenomenologi-
cal way using a lumped time approximation. We invoke an intrin-
sic time scale t⇤that determines the internal organismal response
to light (here quantiﬁed using the maximum of the ﬁltered in-
tensity) resulting in either temporary (t⇤= ttemp) or permanent
(t⇤= tperm) passivation. The curves that separate the different
responses in Figure 2(a) may then be ﬁt by
I(t)
I0
= Aexp(−t
t⇤
)
⇣
1+ t⇤
t
⌘
+Imin
(1)
where the constants (A,Imin,ttemp) are (0.2,0.23,62) for the yellow
(dashed) curve and (A,Imin,tperm) are (0.33,0.23,100) for the pink
(dotted) curve. The bare (unﬁltered, maximum) intensity I0 =
980 mW/cm2 at 535 nm. As expected, ttemp < tperm.
The recovery of collective motility when sustained exposure is
not maintained has signiﬁcant implications. In patterned or lo-
calized light ﬁelds, fast cells have a higher chance of escaping the
exposure region prior to complete paralysis. While swarming bac-
teria can reorient by run and tumble movements, motility driven
by close bacteria-bacteria interactions dominate in a swarm. Thus
slower cells are impacted more; ﬁrst, because of longer exposure
to the light and second, because they are more easily caged in
and trapped by already paralyzed cells. In periodic ﬁelds, these
persistence bacteria may also completely recover by the time they
encounter the next exposed region.
4 |
1–11

Fig. 4 Thresholding using PIV derived ﬁelds allows for identiﬁcation of edge of quenched region: (a) (Top) PIV derived bacterial velocity ﬁelds
before (1) and during (2-5) light exposure. We note from plate (5) that as the exposure is continued, the paralyzing effects persist only a short distance
into the active unexposed region as evident from the vortical structures seen near the edge. (b) The azimuthally averaged velocity hvi highlights the
creation of an immobile quenched domain within the exposed region. When the light is switched off, the active bacteria from the unexposed regions
penetrate into the quenched domain, eroding it away. The ﬁltered maximum intensity = 500 mW/cm2. We note the brief lag after the light is switched
on (at ton), the gradual increase to a ﬁnite size as t ! toff and the rapid erosion and mixing with the grey interphase region t > toff. The radial extent
obtained by thresholding the intensity ﬂuctuations also follows the square root dependence. (c) Increasing the area used to smoothen the intensity
plots yields smoother but less sharp contours. We varied the smoothing box and Dt so as to obtain convergent results.
Fig. 5 Growth, shape and dissolution of the quenched domain: (a) Interface shapes of the quenched (passive) region obtained from thresholding
intensity ﬂuctuation ﬁelds; we deﬁne reff. Pink, red and green curves correspond to exposure times of 10, 20 and 100 seconds (aperture size 60 µm,
20x objective). (b) The effective size of the quenched region grows during exposure, stabilizes while illuminated asymptotes to a constant and then
decreases to zero once the light is switched off. We calculate the effective radius of the quenched region r⇤deﬁned by the locus of points satisfying
hvi(r⇤) = 10 µm/s and examine its dependence as a function of time. When the light source is turned on at ton, this radius increases from zero only after
an apparent lag time tlag ⇡50s. Lowering the threshold velocity yields a noisier initial growth region with shorter lag. The initial growth has a square
root dependence with time (red dashed curve). We observe deviations of around 5−10 µm in these curves due to variations in the velocity ﬁeld. The
aperture size used here is 120 µm. (c) The maximum effective size of the passive phase Rmax increases with exposure duration t and asymptotes to a
constant that is less than the aperture size.
1–11 | 5

3.2
Form and growth of the quenched region
To determine the extent of the quenched passivated domain, we
use two threshold-based methods: the ﬁrst is based on analysis
of image intensity ﬂuctuations40,41 and the second utilizes PIV
derived velocity ﬁelds. Our experiments were for the most part
(unless stated otherwise) conducted at a ﬁltered intensity of 3100
mW/cm2 (measured at 535 nm37); exposure times t were varied
from 10-300 seconds.
The ﬁrst method to extract the boundary of the quenched re-
gion uses point-wise ﬂuctuations of the spatially varying intensity
|DI⇤(r,t,Dt)| = |I⇤(r,t +Dt)−I⇤(r,t)|,
(2)
where I⇤(r,t) is the two-dimensional image intensity at pixel posi-
tion r and Dt is the time step. To reduce noise in the system (due
to pixel resolution, short-range ﬂuctuations, and background light
ﬂuctuations), we ﬁlter pixel-wise |DI⇤(r,t,Dt)| by smoothing over
3x3 µm2 areas. We then varied Dt to obtain results that resulted
in well resolved domains. We found that using Dt = 0.1 sec, which
corresponds to the time in which a swarming Serratia cell swim-
ming at 50 µm/s moves roughly a body distance (5 µm) provided
good results; variations in Dt around this value (0.05 s < Dt < 0.3
s) resulted in only small variations in results. As shown in Fig. 3,
the intensity ﬂuctuations allow us to clearly identify and distin-
guish two domains, the immobile domain where values of |DI⇤|
are relatively small and the motile domain where |DI⇤| are rela-
tively large. Thresholding |DI⇤| then yields the locus of points that
deﬁnes the boundary of the active and passive phases.
In the second method, the boundary position was obtained
from coarse-grained spatially-averaged bacterial velocity ﬁelds
from PIV (Fig. 3(b)); again, the exact boundary was deﬁned using
a threshold criterion33. The locations of the active and passive
domains, as well as their relative sizes such as area, match be-
tween the two methods, although the intensity ﬂuctuations iden-
tiﬁes smaller features of the boundary compared to that from
PIV. These metrics capture complimentary aspects of the swarm’s
motility: the intensity ﬂuctuations are a scalar measure of den-
sity ﬂuctuations and PIV yields vectorial velocity ﬁelds that quan-
tify instantaneous polarity ﬁelds. In summary, simple threshold-
ing using the intensity ﬂuctuations and/or PIV derived velocity
ﬁelds, yields physically meaningful boundary positions that sep-
arates the quenched region from the swarm. This approach can
be formalized using phase-ﬁeld approaches in order to extract the
location and width of the interface33,39.
We next analyze the role of the exposure time t that together
with I determines the total light dosage, on the shape, size, and
dissolution rate of the passive domain that is surrounded by the
active swarm. Phenomenologically, exposure to light here is akin
to quenching with activity modiﬁed and in a sense removed from
our system. That is, exposure reduces the activity or energy in the
system by removing the ability of bacteria to self-propel and in-
hibiting and eventually preventing large scale collective motions.
Furthermore, as the bacteria slow down cell-cell steric interac-
tions result in tightly jammed clusters with distinct aligned do-
mains (Figure 3(a)).
In order to quantify additional features, we reduce variables to
coarse-grained one-dimensional proﬁles. For instance, a typical
measure of the bacterial speed hvi is obtained by averaging over
the azimuthal angle. This yields a ﬁeld that is a solely a function
of the radial distance r from the center of the exposed region
where we expect the light intensity to be a maximum.
When the light source is turned on, the bacterial speeds in the
exposed region decreases non-uniformly, diminishing the most in
the center of the exposed region (Fig. 4a). The two dimensional
velocity ﬁelds (snapshots in time) suggest that bacteria stop mov-
ing in multiple sub-domains, each of which continuously inter-
act with active bacteria that are still moving. It takes approx-
imately 50 seconds of exposure for a spatially-uniform passive
domain to develop. In the swarming state, the motion of indi-
vidual Serratia marcescens may be decoupled into a mean veloc-
ity (with long range correlations arising from collective motions)
and a diffusion-like term dependent on bacterial diffusivity and
on steric cell-cell interactions. We hypothesize that the delay we
observe time in going from the temporarily passive to fully im-
mobile phase is a consequence of slow and differing time scales
over which collective speeds and diffusivities decrease. Both these
trends result in the slowly deactivating bacteria experiencing in-
creasing jammed situations with local ﬂocks aligning. Performing
a radial average allows us to obtain a reduced map of the bac-
terial speeds hvi over time t as shown in Fig 4(b) and 4(c). The
exposed (quenched) domains appear as the dark region where
the bacterial speeds are negligible. Once this initial quenched do-
main forms (after the initial lag time tlag), the size of the passive
domain increases monotonically with time t. Fluctuations in the
calculated extent of the quenched domain may arise physically
due to variations in the (averaged) heterogeneous, ﬂuctuating
velocity ﬁelds during exposure (Fig. 4(a), tiles 2-5) that result
in momentum boundary layers at the edge.
When the light is turned off, active bacteria penetrate the pas-
sive phase and convect passive bacteria away.
The advancing
swarm intermingles with the passivated bacteria as it propagates
inward. In approximately 100 seconds post exposure, the active
swarm recaptures the exposed domain. We note that the bound-
ary layer (grey region intermediate between the black and white
regions) at the edge of the rapidly eroding quenched domain is
larger than when the domain is being formed.
Note an (instantaneous) two dimensional boundary separating
the exposed and unexposed regions may be obtained by using
a cut-off speed for the two dimensional velocity ﬁeld. From Fig
5(a) (aperture size 60 µm), it is clear that the passivated domains
that form can be irregular and asymmetric domains. As the ex-
posure time is increased, the domains become larger (eventually
comparable to the aperture size) and more regular. The maxi-
mum intensity of light is at the center of the aperture and so the
quenching starts there with the boundary propagating outward.
Nonetheless, as time progresses, the irregularity in the shape re-
duces as formerly separated mini-domains combine and form a
single larger quenched domain. After this initial phase, the use of
a one-dimensional speed ﬁeld is justiﬁed. To obtain a quantita-
tive estimate of the effective size of the quenched domain in Fig.
4(b); we threshold hvi. Varying the thresholding value, we ﬁnd
an optimum of 10 µm/s that yields physically meaningful results.
6 |
1–11

Fig.
6 (a) The effective extent of the quenched, passive domain de-
creases over time t at rates that depend on the exposure duration t.
Longer exposure times prolong erosion by the active swarming bacteria,
increasing the time it takes for the passive phase to disappear (at time
t0). For each t, the effective size reff follows reff ⇡pt0 −t (grey dashed
curves) with t0(t) being the time for complete dissolution. (b) The aver-
age initial dissolution velocity hvinti decreases signiﬁcantly with t. Data is
the average calculated from four experiments with standard deviation as
error bars (Intensity ⇡3 W/cm2).
Note that this value is much less than the average speed of the ac-
tive region (40 µm/s) while large enough to average over small
ﬂuctuations.
Adjusting for the lag time, we ﬁnd that the radius of the
quenched region r⇤⇡
p
T - shown in Fig 5(b) - where T =
t −(tlag + ton) with ton being the time when the light source is
turned on. Large variations in r⇤are a consequence of asymmetric
formation of the passive domain. We note that the calculated ex-
tent of the quenched region obtained from using the velocity ﬁeld
is ⇡5 µm less than that obtained from using the intensity ﬂuctu-
ation ﬁelds - this difference could arise due to two reasons: ﬁrst,
from the asymmetric irregular domains that are present and have
to be thresholded and second, from the differences between the
variables being averaged (density ﬂuctuations vs velocity ﬁelds).
Nevertheless, the square root dependence on time approximately
holds for both estimates. Since the azimuthally averaging process
essentially ignores variations in motility inside the domain and its
irregular shape, it is difﬁcult to directly assign a physical mecha-
nism behind the square root growth of the exposed domain.
In our experiments on the swarm, quenching due interaction
between the bacteria and the light ﬁeld effectively extracts ac-
tively generated energy of the swarm by degrading the ability of
the bacteria to move and self-propel. If the mean velocity of the
swarm arising due to the propagation of the swarm front is ig-
nored, then one can treat the ﬂuctuating swarm velocities, v, as
time-varying ﬁelds with a zero mean when suitably averaged. The
dyadic tensor vv then encodes information about the energy con-
tent of the swarm. Averaging over times scales long enough to en-
compass multiple vortex and streamer lifetimes, and then averag-
ing azimuthally about the polar angle in the swarming plane, al-
lows us to derive a radially dependent scalar ﬁeld Y(r,t) ⌘
p
h|v|2i
that encodes the time-averaged energy density. In principle, the
evolution of this quantity will necessarily be coupled to the po-
sition dependent light ﬁeld.
While additional experiments are
require to tease out the phenomenological form of the equation
governing Y(r,t), it is interesting to compare the dynamics we ob-
serve with that in a much simpler, albeit similar physical problem
- the one-dimensional freezing of a domain due to a heat sink at
the origin that also yields a square root dependence in time for
the boundary of the frozen domain (see also SI - §I).
3.3
Exposure time determines spatial extent of quenched
domain
Next, we examine how varying the time of exposure while keep-
ing the incident intensity ﬁeld is ﬁxed changes the size of the
quenched domain.
To adjust the viewing window, the 60 µm
aperture experiments are done with a 20x objective and the 120
µm aperture with a 10x objective (we take into account the higher
value for the intensity for the 60 µm aperture case at 20x). To
quantify the mean and variance of the data, we plot the average
from four experiments with corresponding to the standard devi-
ation shown as error bars. Aiming to obtain an upper bound on
the extent of the swarming domain that is impacted, we choose to
use intensity ﬂuctuation ﬁelds rather than the PIV derived veloc-
ity ﬁelds.Tracing un-averaged boundary positions rI(t) from the
image intensity ﬂuctuations |DI⇤| using Equation 2, we then esti-
mate the effective size of the quenched region reff by calculating
its radius of gyration following
reff(t) =
rZ
Passive |rI −r|2 dr
(3)
where r is the center of mass at time t. The maximum extent of
the passive phase Rmax is equal to reff(t = toff); here the time at
which exposure is terminated is toff.
From our experiments with two different aperture geometries,
we ﬁnd that rmax increases with t and asymptotes to a constant
that is slightly less than the aperture size (Fig. 5(c)); the asymp-
tote is approximately 58 µm for the 60 µm aperture. For aperture
size 120 µm, we ﬁnd the limiting asymptote to be ⇡109 µm. The
data in Fig. 5(c) ﬁts the functional form
rmax = rF

1−b
rF
exp
⇣
−t
tc
⌘'
,
(4)
with rF = 58 µm, b = 18 µm, and tc = 33.5 s for the 60 µm
aperture and rF = 109 µm, b = 169 µm, and tc = 37.3 s for the
120 µm aperture.
3.4
Caging and jamming in quenched region
An unexpected feature seen in Fig 5(b) is that after exposure is
terminated and the active bacteria invade and disrupt immotile
bacteria, the size of the eroding region also roughly follow a
1–11 | 7

square root dependence until the domain disperses completely.
We examined if this feature was controlled by exposure time,
t (Figure 6a). The time complete dissolution, as expected, in-
creases with exposure time. Surprisingly however, we ﬁnd that
the square-root scaling hold for both small as well as long ex-
posure times.
In our active, far-from equilibrium system, the
passive domain is eroded by single bacteria-bacteria interactions
(displacements originating from steric and self-propulsive mecha-
nisms) as well as by collective highly non-equilibrium ﬂow struc-
tures that form near the surface. Elucidating the origin of this
scaling requires a consideration of the coupling between interface
shape, interface speed and interface ﬂow ﬁelds33.
Finally, we also measure the initial boundary dissolution speed
by calculating hvinti =
(
reff(toff)−reff(toff +Dt)
)
/Dt, where Dt = 10
seconds. We ﬁnd that hvinti varies signiﬁcantly with exposure time
- as shown in Fig 6(b) - decreasing from 10 µm/s to 0.1 µm/s
as t increases from 10 to 300 seconds. The decrease in speed
is not monotonic, rather we observe a peak (inset) that is not
ascribable to experimental variations. For long exposure times or
high intensities, as the exposed bacteria are slowly paralyzed and
slow down, they form jammed, highly aligned domains. Thus the
time for complete erosion will be larger due to both the larger
extent to be eroded as well as the aligned caged conﬁgurations of
paralyzed bacteria.
4
Discussion and Perspectives
Previous work has highlighted the effect of light exposure - espe-
cially UV light on bio-molecular and biochemical mechanisms un-
derlying propulsion in free swimming planktonic bacteria. Here,
we presented work that complements these single cell experi-
ments by analyzing the effects of light exposure on collective
motility in swarming Serratia marcescens. In the absence of ex-
posure, the swarming bacteria exhibit collective ﬂows with sig-
niﬁcant vorticity (with a characteristic lifetime and frequency of
formation) interspersed with streaming motions (with character-
istic mean speeds)33. At low exposure levels, swarms are unaf-
fected by light and maintain long-range collective motions. For
sufﬁciently intense exposures, bacteria are rendered immobile
and paralyzed, an effect that is either reversible or irreversible,
depending on the exposure level. The permanently immobilized
passive domain occurs for critical values of illumination power, re-
quiring a minimum exposure time to appear. In the process, they
form highly aligned, jammed domains whose size grows roughly
as the square root of exposure time. Post exposure, active bac-
teria dislodge exposed bacteria from these caged conﬁgurations
with initial dissolution rates strongly dependent on duration of
exposure.
Interacting, high aspect ratio passive polar rods in the dense
passive phase can organize into stable as well as metastable
highly ordered states through thermal motions with additional
steric interactions42 or other weakly aligning interactions43 - the
degree of alignment governed by the relative strength of aligning
interactions to the disordering random noise. Here, while activity
leads to self-emergent collective ﬂows, the slowing of individual
bacteria, disruption of their self-propulsion and the further orient-
ing affects of local shearing ﬂows and tangentially acting steric in-
teractions due to neighboring bacteria may allow the same mech-
anisms to operate resulting in the formation of strongly aligned
and jammed phases.
Small regions of immobile bacteria can block space accessible
to swarms, as well as trap motile bacteria and preventing them
from escaping the light. Bacterial populations in nature include
cells with a distribution of self-propulsion speeds.
This raises
the possibility that the subpopulations of exposed bacteria cor-
responding to the fastest moving cells or bacteria that are pre-
disposed to UV resistance may escape from the exposed region.
Reestablishing collective motility, and upon subsequent cell di-
visions, these cells may eventually result in emergence of resis-
tant strains. Conversely, our experiments indicate that activity
enhances alignment of neighboring cells. In collective swarms,
these fast cells may surprisingly end up in jamming due to the
preference to align. For bacteria with ﬁxed propulsion and re-
sponse at the organismal level, this implies that the time of ex-
posure controls the fraction of cells immobilized as well as the
degree of alignment. We thus hypothesize that the role of motil-
ity is subtle than is evident at ﬁrst sight; and the exposure time is
as important as light intensity in determining the degree of align-
ment in the exposed region. This in turn impacts the ability of the
active bacteria to erode the boundary, enter the quenched region
and dislodge the paralyzed cells.
Our experimental setup was suited to study the dynamics of
the interphase region and the ﬂows in its vicinity; thus we were
able to study the time scales involved in the growth and initial
erosion of the quenched region. Our experimental protocols can-
not however examine a related interesting question - when can
small sub-domains of bacteria can escape the exposed region be-
fore they are completely immobilized and trapped? It is intuitive
to expect bacteria with low self-propulsion will be trapped; how-
ever, since the large scale complex ﬂows are collective, adjacent
adjacent that exhibit a velocity contrast can still move together
due to the slow paralysis induced by light exposure and deactiva-
tion.
To complement our experimental observations, we propose and
analyze a minimal (lumped) Brownian dynamics model to in-
vestigate the competition between propulsion speed and light-
induced jamming underlying the ability of a test cell (mimick-
ing a real cell-cluster) to escape from exposed regions. Working
within the framework of an extended Langevin-like dynamics for
the test cell (details in SI-§II), we assume that total light expo-
sure increases the effective rotational diffusivity of the test cells;
this may arise for instance from increased tumbling. At the same
time, as the test cell moves in a mean ﬁeld of its co-deactivating
neighbors, its translational diffusion is hindered due to crowd-
ing and alignment. To include the effect of light on rotational
diffusion, we turn to our experimental results and also previous
studies on effects of light on Bacillus subtilis30. Experiments show
that that as bacterial cells become sluggish, the tendency to form
ﬂocks and large packs reduces and instead smaller clusters are
observed. The overall reduction in cluster size and a less ordered
motion within individual clusters gives rise to decreased correla-
tion lengths with swarming eventually reverting to random mo-
tion in the presence of photodynamic effects. During exposure,
8 |
1–11

Fig. 7 Dynamics of self-propelled and diffusing particles (N = 104) interacting with a constant, unbounded light ﬁeld (F(r) = 1, RL = •). Light exposure
modiﬁes the translational and rotational diffusivities, but not the self-propulsion speed. Cells are released at the origin r = 0 and trajectories integrated
for a dimensionless time interval TF = 10 with Dt 2 (4⇥10−4,10−3). (a) Examination of the ensemble averaged MSD(t) shows that trajectories becoming
denser and compact yielding a plateau in the MSD corresponding to localization and paralysis of the particles. Changes in rotational diffusivities are
required for this to happen since the self-propulsion speed is assumed to be constant; this effect is exacerbated as A2 becomes larger. Note that as
A1 increases, the longer the particles typically travel before exposure effects dominate. (b) MSD (t = TF) as a function of A2 for various values of A3
(from top to bottom: 0.1, 0.5, 1 and 2) with A1 = 1. Consistent with (a), we observe saturation for A2 > 3. (Inset) Shown are the (x,y) locations of the
particles for parameters corresponding to points 1, 2 and 3 marked on the plot at TF = 10. Examination of the corresponding number distribution plots
(right tiles) shows the peak shifting to lower values of radial distance r, and signiﬁcant changes to the tail end of the distribution function. Since the light
ﬁeld is unbounded, all particles are eventually affected. For particles with low Peclet number (low activity), the exposure time determines how far they
can travel before becoming deactivated.
Fig. 8 Effects of an imposed (dimensionless) length scale RL using a ﬁnite extent light ﬁeld F(r) = 1 8r 2 (0,RL) and zero elsewhere. We integrate
trajectories of 104 particles using Dt = 4⇥10−4 up to ﬁnal times TF. (a) First effects of ﬁnite light extent. The dimensionless MSD is shown as a function
of time for RL = 100. Solid curves are results for A1 = 5 while dashed curves are for A1 = 1. We see that as A3 increases from 0.2 to 1.0, MSD saturates
rapidly. (Inset) Sample trajectories for A1 = 1 for 0 t 20 demonstrating localization for t > 6. (b) Decreasing RL from 100 to 10 brings out the role
of Peclet number in enabling escape. We show cell positions at t = TF = 10 (note that cells outside of this domain are not shown). (c) The fraction
of 104 trajectories that start at r = 0 and are located at r > RL at T = 10. Note that some of these trajectories may end up reentering the domain in
the simulation but not in the experiment due to the dense, jammed domains that prevent reentry. The curves are shown as a function of the rotation
diffusion parameter A3.
1–11 | 9

the collective swarm velocity decays, a feature that can be recov-
ered after exposure. Guided by these previous students and our
experiments, we assume that light exposure increases the tum-
bling frequency and the rotational diffusion coefﬁcient (the com-
plementary case is also treated in the appendix). Note that bac-
teria also exhibit anisotropic translational diffusivities due to the
different environments perpendicular and normal to the propul-
sion direction.
Ignoring this anisotropy as well as changes to
the self-propulsion speed (reduction in the self-propulsion speed
alone is sufﬁcient to immobilize the cell and so we do not pursue
this), we ﬁnd that the time evolution of trajectories is controlled
by three dimensionless parameters: the Peclet number A1 charac-
tering the self propulsion, and two deactivation parameters, A2
and A3, quantifying light induced changes in translational and
rotational diffusion respectively. Salient results summarized in
Figures 7 and 8 show that the Peclet number controls how far par-
ticles can travel before losing mobility in an unbounded as well
as bounded light ﬁelds. We are currently studying the quenching
process using detailed agent based simulations that account for
the rod geometry of the bacteria, hydrodynamic interactions by
modeling the bacteria as force dipoles and excluded volume in-
teractions via the Maier-Saupe potential. These studies will also
shed light on the mixing of paralyzed bacteria in the active region.
A natural extension of our experiments would be to system-
atically isolate the effects of light on aspects of cell-cell interac-
tion and communication that determine swarm survival and viru-
lence including individual cell motility, collective motion and ac-
tive/passive particle interactions44. Experiments using ﬁlters that
allow for wavelength dependent immobilization at the single cell
level will allow us to further understand how to collective motility
and light exposure are related.
Competing interests
Authors have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We thank Ed Steager and Elizabeth Hunter for providing the cells
and for experimental assistance. AEP was supported by an NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship.
PEA acknowledges funds from
NSF-DMR-1104705 and NSF-CBET-1437482. AG acknowledges
startup funds from the University of California, Merced and fund-
ing from UC 2018 Senate Award program.
Author Contributions
AEP, PA and AG conceived the study.
AEP and AG designed
and performed the experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the
manuscript. AG designed the simulation model and analyzed re-
sults. JY performed simulations of the model. All authors gave
ﬁnal approval for submission.
Data availability
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Corre-
spondence and requests for materials should be addressed to AG
(agopinath@ucmerced.edu) or to AEP (aepattes@syr.edu).
All
relevant data are available from the authors upon request.
References
1 L. Alberti and R. M. Harshey, Journal of bacteriology, 1990,
172, 4322.
2 R. M. Harshey, Annual Reviews in Microbiology, 2003, 57, 249.
3 N. Verstraeten, Trends in microbiology, 2008, 16, 496.
4 M. F. Copeland and D. B. Weibel, Soft matter, 2009, 5, 1174.
5 N. C. Darnton et al. Biophysical journal, 2010, 98, 2082.
6 L. Turner, R. Zhang, N. C. Darnton and H. C.. Berg, Journal of
bacteriology, 2010, 192, 3259.
7 D. B. Kearns, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 634.
8 R. M. Harshey and J. D. Patridge, Journal of molecular biology,
2015, 427, 3683.
9 E. B. Steager, C. B. Kim and M. G. Kim, Physics of Fluids, 2008,
20, 073601.
10 M. T. Butler, Q. Wang and R. M. Harshey, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences., 2010, 8, 3776.
11 D. Roth et al, Environmental microbiology, 2013, 15, 2532.
12 S. Lai, J. Trembley and E. Deziel, Environmental microbiology,
2009, 11, 126.
13 C. Chen, S. Liu, X. Shi, H. Chate and Y. Wu, Nature, 2017,
542, 210.
14 H. C. Berg and D. A. Brown, Nature, 1972, 239, 500.
15 H. C. Berg, E. coli in Motion. 2008, Springer.
16 G. H. Wadhams and J. P. Armitage, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.,
2004, 5, 1024.
17 H. C. Berg and R. A. Anderson, Nature, 1973, 245, 380.
18 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath, M. Goulian and P. E. Arratia,
Scientiﬁc Reports, 2015, 5, 15761.
19 B. L. Taylor and D. E. Koshland Jr., Journal of bacteriology,
1975, 123, 557.
20 S. Wright et. al., Journal of bacteriology, 2006, 188, 3961.
21 E. Steager et. al., Applied Physics Letters, 2007, 90, 26.
22 M. P. Conley and H. C. Berg, Journal of bacteriology, 1984,
158, 832.
23 V. Kodoth and M. Jones, http://medicalmate.gr/img/cms/UVC,
2015, 1.
24 L. Alonso-Saez, J. M. Gasol, T. Lefort, J. Hofer and R. Som-
maruga, Appl Environ Microbiol., 2006, 72(9), 5806.
25 D. G. Sharp, J. Bacteriol., 1940, 39(5), 535.
26 M. B. Said, S. Khefacha, L. Maalej, I. Daly and A. Hassen,
African J. of Microbiol. Res., 2011, 5(25), 4353.
27 B. Li and B. E. Logan, Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces, 2005, 41(2-
3), 153.
28 C. M. Abana et. al., Microbiologyopen., 2017, 6(4), e00466.
29 T. Dai, M. S. Vrahas, C. K. Murray and M. R. Hamblin, Expert
review of anti-infective therapy, 2012, 10, 185.
30 S. Lu, W. Bi, X. Wu, B. Xing and E. K. L. Yeow, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
2013, 111, 208101.
31 T. Dai et. al., Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 2013,
57, 1238.
32 S. Pei, A. C. Inamadar, K. A. Adya and M. M. Tsoukas, Indian
Dermatol Online J., 2015, 6, 145.
10 |
1–11

33 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath and P. E. Arratia, Nature Commu-
nications, 2018, 9, Article number: 5373.
34 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath and P. E. Arratia, Current Opinion
in Colloid & Interface Science, 2016, 21, 86.
35 S. Bensity E. Ben-Jacob, G. Ariel and A. Be’er, Phy. Rev. Lett.,
2015, 114, 018105.
36 W. Thielicke and E. Stamhuis, Journal of Open Research Soft-
ware, 2014, 2, 1.
37 http://zeiss-campus.magnet.fsu.edu/print/lightsources/
mercuryarc-print.html
38 Y. Wu and H. C. Berg, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 2011, 109, 4128.
39 A. Gopinath, R. C. Armstrong and R. A. Brown, J. Cryst.
Growth, 2006, 291(1), 272.
40 R. Cerbino and V. Trappe, Physical Review E, 2008, 80,
031403.
41 L. G. Wilson et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 018101.
42 A. Gopinath, R. C. Armstrong and R. A. Brown, J. Chem. Phys.,
2004, 18, 028102.
43 A. Gopinath, L. Mahadevan and R. C. Armstrong, Phys. Fluids,
2006, 121 (12), 6093.
44 A. E. Patteson, A. Gopinath, P. K. Purohit and P. E. Arratia,
Soft Matter, 2016, 12(8), 2365.
45 H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jaeger, Conduction of heat in solids,
1959, Oxford Science, 2nd edition.
46 G. Barenblatt, Scaling, Self-similarity, and Intermediate Asymp-
totics:
Dimensional Analysis and Intermediate Asymptotics,
1996, Cambridge University Press.
47 G. Volpe, S. Gigan and G. Volpe, Am. J. Physics, 2014, 82, 659.
1–11 | 11

