Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
 
 
V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
 
TRANSLANGUAGING FOR EPISTEMIC ACCESS TO COMPUTER 
SCIENCE CONCEPTS: A CALL FOR CHANGE 
Vimbai Mbirimi-Hungwe & Taurai Hungwe 
Sefako Makgatho University of Health Sciences.   
 
Multilingual education has seemingly been relegated to English and academic literacy 
lecturers in South African universities. This paper reports on the use of translanguaging in a 
multilingual second-year computer science class. Using descriptive statistical analysis as well 
as qualitative analysis, results showed that students perceived translanguaging to be a helpful 
pedagogical strategy that could be used to assist them to gain deeper meaning and 
understanding of difficult concepts in their field of study. The research also showed and 
proved that, for translanguaging to become relevantly useful to the students, all members of 
the faculty should be involved in using this pedagogical strategy in the classroom. Therefore, 
we argue that, through collaborative efforts by using translanguaging among lecturers from 
different faculties, students will be able to acquire deeper meaning and understanding of 
subject material, especially in content-based courses or modules. 
 
Keywords: translanguaging, multilingualism, pedagogical purposes, collaboration 
INTRODUCTION 
Academic failures, poor reading comprehension and reading skills have been among major 
complaints by lecturers in institutions of higher learning worldwide (Crabtree & Silver, 2004). 
South African universities are no exception in this matter. According to a study conducted by 
the Council for Higher Education (CHE) in 2009, 70% of undergraduate students drop out or 
are excluded at the end of the first year. In addition to the dropouts, many students fail one or 
more courses or pass marginally. This suggests that many students lack an adequate grasp of 
their areas of study (Scott, 2009). In South African universities, a significant factor 
responsible for the high failure rate is the perceived poor basic education. This culminates in 
low literacy levels in the language of learning, which is predominantly English for most 
students (Ngcobo, 2014 : 124).  In addition to English being their second or third language, 
these students are expected to read, understand and perform academic tasks in English. This 
shows that there is a problem that needs to be redressed.  
The purpose of this paper is to explore student perceptions about the use of translanguaging as 
a strategy to help students to understand computer science concepts. 
Recently, translanguaging has been seen as the ‘possibility model’ (Harfenick & Wiant, 2012) 
of encompassing multilingual students into the academia. The ‘possibility model’ emanates 
from the need to reject the ‘deficit model’ of bringing remedial strategies to multilingual 
students. Rather, it is important to use translanguaging as a vehicle to ensure student success.  
By definition, translanguaging is a pedagogical practice where students are asked to alternate 
languages for the purpose of receptive or productive use (Williams, 1996 :45). Wei (2016 :3) 
further describes translanguaging as a pedagogical practice where students receive 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
98 
 
information through the medium of a different language (e.g., English) and give information 
through another language (e.g., Sepedi) in order to maximise their learning and understanding 
of concepts. Thus, translanguaging is a pedagogic practice not meant to be utilised by English 
lecturers only; rather, lecturers from all faculties can use it productively in multilingual 
classrooms to help students gain a deeper understanding of concepts in various areas of study.  
In addition, translanguaging is concerned with ensuring that students are able to make 
meaning and attain a deeper understanding of learned material through the utilisation of all 
languages at their disposal (Garcia, 2009a; Garcia & Wei, 2014; Makalela, 2015; Wei, 2016). 
Thus, translanguaging posits a student-centred approach to teaching to ensure that students 
understand and make meaning out of learned material. 
The multilingual nature of South African universities is entrenched in the constitution, where 
11 most-spoken languages were adopted as official languages. A number of official policy 
documents and government documents outline the status and role of various languages in 
South Africa. In particular, legislation in higher education recommends that higher education 
institutions (HEIs) should promote the use of African languages. This is an acknowledgement 
of the multilingual nature of South African universities. In addition, the policy requires all 
HEIs to advance the official South African languages. The Language Policy of Higher 
Education (Department of Education, 2002) recommends that universities make provisions to 
assist students who speak languages other than those used for tuition to develop academic 
literacy (Department of Education, 2002). The recommendation is due to acknowledgement 
by the Department of Education that language should not act as a barrier to equity of access 
and success. Consequently, the policy also mandates South African universities to develop 
and nurture all South African languages so that they can be formally used in all academic 
disciplines. Furthermore, in order to acknowledge the importance of using and nurturing all 
South Africa languages in HEIs, the policy recommends the development of multilingual 
dictionaries and other teaching and learning materials in order to promote all 11 official 
languages. The policy provides recommendations that point to the need for a comprehensive 
development of African languages for the academic benefit of students speaking languages 
other than the language of teaching and learning. This consideration is also due to the fact that 
African languages have not developed to become academic languages, but the majority of 
students entering into university are not fully proficient in English – they require the use of 
their home languages to understand some academic concepts (Van Der Walt, 2004 :141). 
Despite the clear policy of multilingualism, a tacit policy of monolingualism is still in place, 
especially in historically black universities (Kotze, 2013; Makalela, 2014). Makalela and 
McCabe’s (2013) findings on the University of Limpopo’s language policy indicated that the 
university had not made noticeable progress in terms of putting in place a firm language 
policy. Neither had there been an attempt to use any of the dominant languages spoken by 
students. Makalela and McCabe (2013) found that, despite the university’s enrolment of 
predominantly black students who speak Xitsonga and Sepedi, the university had not put in 
place measures to ensure the use of these languages academically. This was also the case with 
Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, where Sepedi and Setswana students were in 
the majority. However, Makalela and McCabe (2013 :408) argue that multilingualism is an 
available resource that universities need to utilise effectively in order to increase multiple 
competencies inherent in the discourses of the students.     
HEIs have generally argued that global competitiveness is best served by an education that is 
conducted in English, which is the language of the global market (Hibbert & Van der Walt, 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
99 
 
2014:7). This argument neglects the fact that most students who enter university come from 
educationally disadvantaged backgrounds and English is not their first language. The students 
have low academic reading proficiency for them to cope with the academic linguistic 
demands. It is also at this point important to note that, in addition to students being 
academically ill-prepared, they come from different linguistic backgrounds, hence the need 
for a multilingual pedagogy in South African HEIs. Thus, the imposition of monolingualism 
is no longer relevant in the current academic landscape. Harfenick and Wiant (2012) 
emphasise the need for lecturers to reject the assumption that the ‘norm’ on university 
campuses should be a monolingual English speaker. Instead, they, argue for the need for a 
new vision and new strategies for integrating multilingual students into academia. 
Research in South Africa and internationally has shown the cognitive and academic benefits 
of using translanguaging in multilingual classrooms (Boakye & Mbirimi-Hungwe, 2015; 
Garcia & Kleyn, 2016; Lewis, Jones & Baker, 2012; Madiba, 2014; Makalela, 2014). 
Moreover, research has also shown that students do use translanguaging as a strategy to 
negotiate understanding, co-construct meaning and to include others (Canagarajah, 2011; 
Garcia, 2009b; Hibbert & Van der Walt, 2014; Mashiyi, 2013; Van der Walt & Dornbrack; 
2011; Van der Walt, Mabule & De Beer; 2001). Mbirimi-Hungwe (2016) reports on a study 
that was conducted at the University of Limpopo where summary writing using 
translanguaging was proved to be a measure of reading comprehension. Evidently, 
translanguaging is a useful pedagogical strategy that can be used to propel students’ academic 
abilities by enhancing the deeper meaning of content material and critical thinking (Lewis, 
Jones & Baker, 2012). In this regard, Canagarajah (2006) emphasises the need for lecturers to 
respect and value the linguistic peculiarities students may display rather than suppressing 
them for the benefit of the students.   
Available evidence through research has shown English language teachers taking the 
initiative to use translanguaging in multilingual classrooms to enhance students’ deeper 
understanding of the subject material (Harfenick & Wiant, 2012). In South Africa, lecturers in 
language departments have been actively involved in using translanguaging with students 
from other departments. Madiba (2014) reports on a research on concept literacy using 
translanguaging with Economics students. Makalela (2014) reports on a research conducted at 
the University of the Witwatersrand School of Education in the languages department. 
Although these initiatives are commendable, there is a need for lecturers from other faculties 
to also use translanguaging in their classrooms. This assertion is based on a study conducted 
by Lopez, Guzman-Orth and Turkan (2014), which showed how students benefitted when 
they were allowed to use both English and Spanish in a mathematics examination. The results 
showed that translanguaging of this nature allowed students to utilise their full linguistic 
repertoire to answer the questions and demonstrate their knowledge in mathematics even 
though their English was still developing. This research was conducted in the United States 
where Spanish migrant students were allowed to use both Spanish and English to understand 
mathematical concepts. 
Thus, translanguaging should not be a tool solely used by English language lecturers.  Other 
faculties need to collaborate with colleagues from English language departments and utilise 
translanguaging in their teaching, as all content subjects undoubtedly have concepts that 
students struggle to understand in English. Consequently, if students are allowed to use 
translanguaging, they will have a deeper understanding of such concepts. With this in mind, 
this paper reports on research conducted by one computer science lecturer and a lecturer from 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
100 
 
the English department. The aim was to establish the effectiveness of using translanguaging to 
assist students to understand computer science concepts.  
RESEARCH CONTEXT 
This research was prompted by a discussion between two colleagues – a lecturer in the 
computer science department and a lecturer in the English department at a South African 
university. One of the colleagues was finding it difficult to help his students doing BSc 
Computer Science to grasp concepts in one of the courses that he was teaching. The course 
had many technical and abstract terms that were difficult for students to understand. This 
lecturer pointed out the difficulties students faced in understanding the computer science 
terms, as well as the fact that the students were not first-language speakers of the English 
language and were consequently not proficient in the English language.  
Research conducted by Oyoo and Semeon (2015 :42) suggests that the struggle in science 
subjects for South African students begins at school level. This is evidenced by poor 
performance by South African students on global and international platforms. Oyoo and 
Semeon (2015:44) point out that Grade 12 students struggle to understand non-technical terms 
in science, which results in students performing dismally in science. They further point out 
that most learners are not English first language speakers; therefore, they need support to 
succeed in their studies.  
In addition to the challenges of learning through a language in which they are not proficient, 
the scientific discourse poses a challenge for students in that it contains many unfamiliar 
technical words (Probyn, 2015:218). Moreover, conventional words have specialised 
scientific meanings in computer science. For example, the word ‘pipelining’ has a different 
meaning from the commonly known noun ‘pipeline’. Therefore, learning science involves a 
cognitive shift from the common understanding of the world to a scientific view of the world 
(Probyn, 2015).  
With this background, the lecturer from the English department took the opportunity to 
introduce translanguaging to her colleague. After much discussion, we embarked on a 
research to find out the effectiveness of using translanguaging to help computer science 
students experience a deeper understanding of concepts. 
THE STUDY 
The aim of the study was to find out whether the use of glossaries through translanguaging 
would help students to understand difficult concepts. In addition, the study aimed at 
investigating student perceptions about the use of translanguaging to understand concepts. 
THE CONTEXT AND PARTICIPANTS 
The study was conducted among second-year BSc Computer Science students at a South 
African university. These students take a module called Computer Organisation and 
Architecture at second-year level. This module requires students to have taken prerequisite 
modules at first-year level. This means that the second-year module builds on content from 
the first-year modules where some of the concepts were introduced. Despite these students 
being taught the background knowledge in first-year modules, they still struggle to understand 
some of the concepts at the second-year level.  

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
101 
 
The major hurdle that confronts these students is the understanding of the technical 
components of this module. Oyoo and Semeon (2015) define technical components as words 
specific to the subject. Thus, the technical components in this module are related to computer 
organisation and architecture. Words such as ‘pipelining’ and ‘branch prediction’ (Null & 
Lobur, 2015; Stallings, 2016) are among the most commonly used terminology, and they also 
require deep understanding in order for the students to succeed in the module. In addition to 
the technical component of the module, students are exposed to non-technical words. These 
are words that have different meanings when used in a science context (Oyoo & Semeon, 
2015). In this module, students are exposed to words such as ‘function’, ‘memory’ and 
‘shells’ (Null & Lobur, 2015; Stallings, 2016); therefore, students need to be contextually 
proficient for them to understand and grasp the meaning of such words.  
Students are given a course outline at the beginning of the semester and topics to be covered 
are outlined weekly as per lecture. The outline helps to guide and provide information about 
content that will be covered every week during lectures. In this study, students were required 
to identify the key terms used in computer architecture. The lecturer provided the meaning 
and use of these terms in English. In order for students to show their understanding of the 
terms and concepts, they would write the meanings of these keywords and concepts in their 
home languages. Students were allowed to use examples of what they knew in their language 
that related to the meaning of the terms. To further help students to understand the concepts, 
students were asked to present their understanding of concepts in class. This was done in their 
home languages. However, English was also allowed to be used in the discussion whenever 
the need arose. 
RESEARCH DESIGN  
A questionnaire with a four-point Likert-scale section and an open-ended question section 
was used for the study. There were 10 questions in the four-point Likert scale section, with 
responses ranging from strongly agree (1) to strongly disagree (4), and three questions in the 
open-ended section. Before conducting the research, a pilot study was conducted. The pilot 
study was used to identify the shortcomings of the instrument and these were corrected in the 
actual study. 
DATA COLLECTION  
Students were divided into groups based on their home languages. A total of 11 languages 
were spoken by the students, namely: Afrikaans, English, IsiNdebele, IsiXhosa, IsiZulu, 
Sepedi, Setswana, Shona, Siswati, TshiVenda and Xitsonga. Students identified computer 
science technical terms that were to be used in the module. The lecturer provided a column 
with English descriptions/explanations of the terms. Another column was left for the students 
to provide explanations in their language practices. They were allowed to provide examples in 
their own languages that would enhance their understanding of the terms as well. They were 
expected to present their understanding of the terms in their languages to the rest of the class. 
This was done during lecture times. 
The questionnaire was distributed to 40 students to respond, and 39 students responded to the 
questionnaire in the research. The data were analysed quantitatively using descriptive 
statistical analysis for the closed-ended responses, and qualitative analysis was used for the 
open-ended responses using recurrent themes. Figure 1 provides a summary of the languages. 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
102 
 
 
Figure 1: Percentage of students per language spoken 
Results from the closed-ended questions 
The closed-ended section asked for participants’ linguistic profile. The first question required 
participants to state all the languages they could speak. Table 1 provides a summary of the 
number of languages the participants indicated that they could speak. 
Table 1: Number of languages spoken by students 
Number of languages 
Number of students 
2 
10 
3 
9 
4 
9 
5 
4 
6 
5 
7 
2 
11 
1 
 
From the summary, it can be suggested that participants in this research could speak at least 
two languages. Results also showed that 75% of students who participated in this research 
possessed more than two languages in their repertoire. In this regard, it should be emphasised 
that multilingualism should be used as an advantage for students to understand concepts. A 
possibility model of multilingualism should be adopted in the current academic landscape (( 
Harfenick and Wiant, 2012:18).    
The closed-ended section of the questionnaire had 10 questions with which participants were 
required to either agree or disagree. The questions mainly asked participants’ perceptions of 
the use of translanguaging for learning purposes.  
The trend for all the closed questions, which are given as V1 (variable 1) to V10, was that the 
students agreed or disagreed about the intervention that was used. The results showed that 
students agreed mostly with the benefits they noticed from using translanguaging as a 
pedagogical practice for them to understand computer science concepts.  As an example, V4 
sought to find out whether participants agreed that, even though their home languages may 
Number  of speakers % 
Sepedi
Setswana
Xitsonga
Isizulu
Shona
Afrikaans
Other

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
103 
 
not have the vocabulary for most computer science concepts, they still understood these 
concepts better by using their home languages to explain. Results showed a high number 
(85%) of participants agreeing that they benefitted from this intervention. Thus, this calls for a 
shift in lecturers’ perceptions. Lecturers need to consider including a translingual approach in 
their teaching. A student-centred approach needs to be adopted as opposed to matching world 
English standards. We emphasise that it is important for students to understand concepts using 
their full linguistic repertoires. 
In addition, V6 asked participants whether they could still understand concepts in English 
even though they used their home language to explain the key terms. Many of the students 
(79%) affirmed that they could understand the terms fully in English when they read from the 
textbook. From this example, it can be seen that using translanguaging does not disrupt 
students’ learning in English, which is the language of teaching and learning at university. 
Rather, using students’ linguistic repertoires to understand concepts actually supports 
proficiency in the target language, which is English (Lewis et al., 2012 :657). In this regard, 
we argue that lecturers should allow students to utilise the linguistic resources that they 
possess to support deep understanding of concepts as well as scaffolding their proficiency in 
English. A monolithic bias towards English will result in an unending outcry among lecturers 
about students’ poor academic performance. It is important for lecturers to view the students’ 
language practices as assets that can propel their learning propensities.  
V8 asked whether the opportunity to explain concepts in their own languages made the 
respondents feel confident. The majority of respondents (79%) agreed with this notion. It is 
important for lecturers to note that, as long as students’ full linguistic repertoires are silenced 
in favour of English, social injustice is being done to the students. We refer to ‘fluidity’ and 
the ‘fuzzy’ boundaries of languages, where multilingual beings have languages fluidly 
accommodated in their repertoires (Garcia, Flores & Woodley, 2012; Makalela, 2014; Wei, 
2016). Silencing some language practices possessed by students by insisting on the use of 
English only for learning purposes results in social injustice and a disregard for students’ 
linguistic identity. This disadvantages students’ learning potential.    
Figure 2 presents the aggregated data on respondents’ agreement and disagreement with the 
10 variables. The figure shows that there were more students who agreed with the 
translanguaging strategy than those who disagreed. 
 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
104 
 
 
Figure 2: Aggregated agreement vs disagreement  
With the Likert-scale collapsed to show both ‘strongly agree’ and ‘agree’ responses as 
‘agree’, while using ‘disagree’ for both ‘disagree’ and ‘strongly disagree’ responses, a 
minimum of 69% were in agreement with the use of translanguaging, as captured in Figure 2 
above. 
Results from the open-ended questions 
Four themes were identified from the open-ended questions and they are presented as such.  
Three open-ended questions were used to get respondents’ perceptions of using 
translanguaging to enhance their understanding of computer science concepts. The questions 
were as follows: 
 Question 15: How do you feel when you are allowed to use your mother tongue (and 
not English only) to express and explain ideas and concepts to your classmates? 
 Question 16: Do you think the use of mother tongue for discussion after reading a text 
helped you to understand concepts better? Please explain why. 
 Question 17: Do you think the development of your own glossary of keywords in 
computer science helps you to understand concepts better? Please explain why. 
Using responses to these open-ended questions, the following themes emerged: 
Theme 1: Acknowledgement that deeper meaning and understanding was enhanced 
through the use of translanguaging 
This theme emerged from the majority of the responses to the questions. A total of 25 out of 
the 39 respondents indicated that using their mother tongue to explain concepts helped them 
to understand the concepts. Many respondents expressed feelings of joy, excitement and relief 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Agree (SA & A)
33
31
32
33
31
31
28
31
27
29
Disagree (D & SD)
5
8
6
6
8
9
11
7
10
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Number of Students 
Aggregated Agreed vs Disagreed 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
105 
 
at the opportunity they got to use the languages at their disposal in order to explain concepts.  
Below are extracts from some of the respondents: 
Respondent 2: 
Yes. Some words in English are difficult they have hidden explanations but my Mother 
Tongue made things easier to understand.  
Respondent 5: 
It did. Now I can understand several concepts without checking for meaning in the 
textbook. It feels great because I am going to pass Architecture with better marks than 
any other Computer Science module I did this semester. 
Respondent 9: 
 I feel I have been given an opportunity to understand and explain better the concepts. 
The opportunity brings a sense of confidence that though the computer is developed in     
foreign languages I can understand it in my language. 
Respondent 12: 
YES. WE ARE NOT WALKING DICTIONARIES. Some English words are too deep 
especially scientific terms so using your Mother Tongue helps us to understand the 
concepts better. 
Respondent 14: 
Yes. When I develop my own glossary in my mother tongue I do not cram the words I 
deeply understand the whole meaning of the concepts. 
My own glossary exposes me to everyday words which I never forget. 
Respondent 25: 
Yes using my own language made it easier to understand the concepts in class. I can 
use objects I know from my language to make me understand the concepts better. 
Using the responses from the participants, it can be affirmed that students find 
translanguaging as a pedagogic strategy to enhance meaning and deeper understanding of 
concepts in English (Garcia, 2009a). The computer science students who participated in this 
research were able to express confidence in themselves because of being allowed to use their 
languages to understand concepts. This confirms the importance of allowing students to 
propel their linguistic repertoires for learning and meaning-making (Hopewell, 2011). It is 
then important for lecturers from all faculties in universities to note that, if students are 
allowed to use their funds of knowledge by using their full linguistic repertoires, 
understanding and meaning are enhanced, thereby helping the students to succeed in their 
academic endeavours.  
In some instances, students found themselves in situations where they had to ‘cram’ content 
just to pass tests and exams, yet understanding would not have taken place. One respondent in 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
106 
 
this study acknowledged that, when developing a glossary in a translingual manner, a deep 
understanding of the terms is developed. 
When I develop my own glossary in my mother tongue I do not cram the words I 
deeply understand the whole meaning of the concepts. 
It is therefore important to heed to Paxton’s (2009) warning that refusing students to utilise 
their full linguistic repertoires for purposes of learning results in ‘rote’ learning, which is not 
beneficial to the students. In addition, it is crucial for lecturers to consider and take note of the 
need to adopt multilingualism as a resource that can be used to assist students to deeply 
understand and make meaning out of difficult academic concepts that they might encounter. 
In the same vein, lecturers should desist from regarding students’ knowledge and use of their 
mother tongue as a deficit; rather, they should view it as an advantage that can assist 
multilingual students to understand concepts (Canagarajah, 2006, 2011). 
It is important for lecturers to note that, when students are allowed to use their entire 
linguistic repertoire (translanguaging), they are able to bring knowledge based on their 
experiences in their home languages and culture which in turn helps them to understand 
concepts in the target language (English) (refer to Respondent 25). In addition, students 
possess what Garcia and Kleyn (2016) refer to as translanguaging corriente. That is, the use 
of home language practices for learning purposes is an undercurrent present in multilingual 
students. Students always refer to what they know and understand in their language for 
meaning-making of concepts. In the same manner, Wei (2016 :5) refers to ‘translanguaging 
instinct’. This means that using their home language is inevitable among multilingual students 
when situations arise for them to do so, especially when they need to understand and make 
meaning of difficult academic concepts. Thus, not allowing students to utilise their mother 
tongue for meaning-making and understanding of concepts stifles their learning potential 
(Boakye & Mbirimi-Hungwe, 2015). 
Based on the majority of responses, students benefited from the use of the languages at their 
disposal for meaning making and deeper understanding of concepts.  
Theme 2: Acknowledgement of the help from using translanguaging, but preference for 
monolingual use of English for learning 
From the sample of students who participated in this research, a few (6 out of 39) indicated 
that they found the use of translanguaging useful and helpful in enhancing their understanding 
of concepts. However, there was a belief among these students that English should be the only 
language used for teaching and learning. Below are extracts from some responses: 
Respondent 13: 
It did in a sense because using my Mother Tongue made the concept to be stored in 
the permanent memory. It’s something that I would not consider endeavouring in. I 
have been speaking my home language for years; I enjoy the ability to use English 
than my Mother Tongue for my improvement of my English. 
Respondent 16: 
It feels good though not beneficial because English Is the most used language in the   
world familiarising myself with it instead of my Mother Tongue is suitable. 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
107 
 
It is a fact that English has been accorded a superior status to other languages worldwide. In 
the academic context, students have been acculturated to believing that English carries the 
promise of a job, economic progress and social mobility (van der Walt & Hibbert, 2014). In 
addition, English is the language of business globally, so it is reasonable for students to want 
to associate with the English language more than with their home languages. However, it is 
important to note that there is research available that shows that understanding of concepts is 
enhanced when one uses one’s full linguistic repertoire to engage with the material. 
According to Lewis, Jones and Baker (2012), one of the cognitive advantages of using 
translanguaging for pedagogical purposes is that all languages accessible in a multilingual’s 
repertoire are crucial for meaning-making and understanding in the target language (English).  
It is also important to note that, even though English may be the target language required for 
use worldwide, research has shown that when bi- or multilinguals speak or utilise their 
cognitive abilities, all languages are active in their minds (Garcia & Wei, 2014). Thus, 
insisting on the monolingual use of English is ignoring the reality of being bi- or multilingual. 
Rather, it is better to utilise all the languages at one’s disposal for meaning-making and 
understanding of concepts, as translanguaging is concerned with enhancing the understanding 
of concepts and meaning-making. In addition, translanguaging does not advocate for the 
elimination of English for teaching and learning purposes. Rather, translanguaging challenges 
the language boundaries that have been instituted culturally and politically, resulting in 
languages becoming bound entities restricted to certain cultures and races (Wei, 2016). In 
essence, translanguaging transcends language boundaries and advocates the use of all 
languages fluidly, as long as meaning is made and understanding of concepts is the end result 
(Lewis et al., 2012). Therefore, lecturers need to acknowledge that students should not be 
restricted to using English based on the status it is accorded in the society but rather focus on 
encouraging students to utilise their language practices (English included) for meaning-
making and understanding of concepts. What is required in this regard is to sensitise and 
advocate for the importance of all languages for teaching and learning purposes.     
Theme 3: Not wanting to use their mother tongue because of a lack of proficiency in the 
mother tongue 
Worth noting is that a group of respondents indicated that they did not want to use their 
mother tongue because they lacked the required proficiency to be able to understand concepts 
(4 out of 39). Some of the responses are as follows: 
Respondent 17: 
Partly maybe with time and if I spoke my Mother Tongue frequently. 
Respondent 21: 
No. Personally I do not understand my mother tongue. 
These respondents indicated that, though they were multilingual, they had not developed the 
proficiency required for them to understand concepts in their mother tongues. A further 
enquiry into these students’ background showed that they attended schools where the 
monolingual use of English was practised for teaching and learning. With regard to such 
students, the question that remains to be answered is whether such a cohort of students has 
acquired the necessary proficiency in the English language for them to be academically 
successful. However, if one takes the advice of van der Walt and Hibbert (2014 :207), it may 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
108 
 
be important for lecturers to manage students’ perceptions about the inclusion of the other 
languages that they possess in their linguistic repertoires in order to reverse the monolingual 
orientation entrenched in them.  Therefore, further research and strategies are required in this 
regard.    
Theme 4: English preference over mother tongue for learning purposes 
The fourth and last theme that came out of the open-ended responses to the questionnaire was 
that a few respondents (4 out of 39) indicated that they did not benefit from using their home 
languages for learning. Below are some extracts from their responses: 
Respondent 11: 
No, it makes it worse. I don’t feel like I am explaining to them correctly. I prefer 
English. Mother Tongue for computers concepts is difficult so I prefer to express 
myself in English. 
 Respondent 22: 
I don’t really feel happy about that because I prefer to use English it is the universal 
language. 
This theme was constituted by international students who felt that using English for learning 
purposes created a middle ground for them, since they could not speak South African 
languages other than English. However, it is important to note that research has attributed to 
the academic literacy unpreparedness in many international students. According to Harfenick 
and Wiant (2012), it is important for lecturers to encourage such students to use their own 
languages for meaning-making. Even though they may feel no one will understand their 
language, it should be stressed that what is important is for them to grasp the meaning and to 
understand concepts (Garcia, 2009a).   
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented students’ responses to the use of translanguaging to enhance 
understanding of computer science concepts. Students reported that they did benefit from 
using their home languages in order for them to understand concepts better. Responses from 
the students confirmed that they perceived using their home languages to be a vehicle that 
could help them to understand difficult concepts in computer science. It is also important to 
note that the use of translanguaging does not require only English language lecturers to utilise 
it for teaching purposes. We thus recommend all members of faculties to embrace a 
multilingual ‘possibility model’ and use translanguaging to assist students in the learning 
process. The translanguaging pedagogy does not require lecturers to speak all the languages 
spoken by the students. The focus should be on students’ understanding of concepts and not 
on the lecturer’s knowledge of languages. In this regard, we urge and call for change from all 
lecturers from different faculties to embrace translanguaging as a pedagogical strategy for the 
benefit of the multilingual students.  However, a few students still felt that English was the 
universal language and the language of conducting business; thus, they preferred using 
English. The question that requires further research is whether these students fully understand 
these concepts when not utilising their full linguistic repertoires.  

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
109 
 
REFERENCES   
BOAKYE, N & V MBIRIMI.  2015. Multilingual pedagogy in higher education: lecturers’             
perceptions of translanguaging in promoting academic literacy. In L Makalela (Ed.), 
New directions in language and literacy education for multilingual classrooms. Cape 
Town: CASAS. 153-156. 
CANAGARAJAH, S. 2006. Understanding the ‘native speaker fallacy’: non-linguistic roots, 
non-pedagogical results. In G Braine (Ed.), Non-native educators in English language 
teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
CANAGARAJAH, S. 2011. Translanguaging in the classroom: emerging issues for research 
and pedagogy. Applied Linguistics Review, 2:1-27. 
CHADWICK, C. 2012. Language awareness in teaching: a toolkit for content and language 
teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
CRABTREE, H & JAK SILVER. 2004. Can student retention and progression be improved 
by active participation in learning? Innovative Learning in Action, 2:11-15. 
COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION. 2009. Available from www.che.ac.za  [Accessed: 
13 July 2016].  
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION. 2001. National plan for higher education in South 
Africa. Available from www.education.gov.za [Accessed: 13 July 2016]. 
GARCIA, O & T KLEYN. 2016. Translanguaging theory and project. In O Garcia & T Kleyn 
(Eds), Translanguaging with multilingual students: learning from classroom moments. 
New York: Routledge.  9-34. 
GARCIA, O, N  FLORES & HH WOODLEY. 2012. Transgressing monolingualism and 
bilingual dualities: Translanguaging pedagogies. In A Yiakoumetti (Ed.), Harnessing 
linguistic variation to improve education: rethinking education. Volume 5. Oxford: 
Peter Lang. 45-75. 
GARCIA, O. 2009a. Bilingual education in the 21st century: a global perspective. West 
Sussex: Blackwell. 
GARCIA, O. 2009b. ‘Education, multilingualism and translanguaging in the 21st Century.’  In 
AK Mohanty, MR Panda, R Phillipson & T Skutnabb-Kangas (Eds),  Multilingual 
education for social justice: globalising the local, New Dehli: Orien Black Swan. 140-
157. 
GARCIA, O & L WEI. 2014. Translanguaging language, bilingualism and education. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
HARFENIK, JJ & FM WIANT. 2012. Integrating multilingual students into college 
classrooms: a practical advice for faculty. New York: Multilingual Matters. 
HIBBERT, L & C VAN DER WALT. (Eds.). 2014. Multilingual universities in South Africa. 
Reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.  
HOPEWELL, S. 2011. Leveraging bilingualism to accelerate English reading comprehension. 
International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 14(5):603-620. 
KOTZE, E. 2014. The emergence of a favourable policy landscape. In L Hibbert C van der 
Walt (Eds), Multilingual universities in South Africa: Reflecting society in higher 
education. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 15-26. 
LEWIS, G, B JONES & C BAKER. 2012. Translanguaging: developing its conceptualisation 
and contextualisation. Educational Research and Evaluation, 18(7):655-670. 
LOPEZ, AA, D GUZMAN-ORTH & S TURKAN. 2014. A study on the use of 
translanguaging to assess the content knowledge of emergent bilingual students. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the AAAL Annual Conference, Portland, OR, 18-21 
March 2017. 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
110 
 
MADIBA, M. 2014. Promoting concept literacy through multilingual glossaries: 
translanguaging approach. In L Hibbert & C van der Walt (Eds), Multilingual 
universities in South Africa: Reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters. 68-80.  
MAKALELA, L. 2014. Teaching indigenous African languages: The effects of 
translanguaging for multilingual development. In L Hibbert C van der Walt (Eds),  
Multilingual universities in South Africa: reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: 
Multilingual Matters. 88-104.  
MAKALELA, L. 2015. Moving out of linguistic boxes: the effects of translanguaging 
strategies for multilingual classrooms. Language and Education, (29)3:200-217. 
MAKALELA, L & R MCCABE. 2013. Monolingualism in a historically black South African 
university: a case of inheritance. Linguistics and Education, 24:406-414. 
MASHIYI, N. 2014. Tertiary educators’ reflections on language practices that enhance 
student learning and promote multilingualism. In L Hibbert & C van der Walt (Eds), 
Multilingual universities in South Africa: reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: 
Multilingual Matters. 122-145.  
MBIRIMI-HUNGWE, V. 2016. Translanguaging as a strategy for group work: summary 
writing as a measure for reading comprehension among university students. Southern 
African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, (34)3:241-249. 
NGCOBO, S. 2014. Dual language instruction: its impact on attitudes towards the role of 
African languages in education. In L Hibbert C van der Walt (Eds), Multilingual 
universities in South Africa: reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters. 123-144. 
 NULL, L & J LOBUR. 2015. The essentials of computer organization and architecture (4th 
ed.). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett. 
OYOO, S & N SEMEON. 2015. The place of proficiency in the language of instruction: 
grade 12 physical science learner’s encounter with everyday words in science context. 
In L Makalela (Ed.), New directions in language and literacy education for multilingual 
classrooms in Africa. Cape Town: Casas. 39-66. 
PAXTON, MIJ. 2009. It’s easy to learn when using your home language but with English, 
you need to start learning language before you get to the concept: bilingual concept 
development in an English medium university in South Africa. Journal of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Development, 30(4):354-359. 
PROBYN, M. 2015. Pedagogical translanguaging: bridging discourses in South African 
classrooms. Language and Education, 23(3):218-234. 
SCOTT, I. 2009. First-year experience as terrain of failure or platform for development? 
Critical choices for higher education. In B Leibowitz, A van der Merwe, and S van 
Schalkwyk (Eds), Focus on first-year success: Perspectives Emerging from South 
Africa and beyond. Stellenbosch: Sun Press. 1-18. 
STALLINGS, W. 2016. Computer organization and architecture: designing for performance 
(10th ed). Essex: Pearson. 
VAN DER WALT, C & J DORNBRACK. 2011. Academic biliteracy in South Africa higher 
education: strategies and practices of successful students. Language, Culture and 
Curriculum, 24(1):89-104.  
VAN DER WALT, C, DR MABULE & JJ DE BEER. 2001. Letting the L1 in by the back 
door: code-switching and translation in science, mathematics and biology classes. 
Journal for Language Teaching, 35(2&3):170-184. 
VAN DER WALT, C & L HIBBERT. 2014. African languages in higher education: lessons 
from practice and prospects for the future. In L Hibbert C van der Walt (Eds), 

V Mbirimi-Hungwe & T Hungwe 
Per Linguam 2018 34(2):97-111 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5785/34-2-771 
111 
 
Multilingual universities in South Africa: Reflecting society in higher education. Bristol: 
Multilingual Matters. 202-219. 
WEI, L. 2016. New Chinglish and the post-multilingualism challenge: translanguaging ELF 
in China. JELF, 5(1):1-25.  
WILLIAMS, C. 1996. Secondary education: teaching in the bilingual situation. In C 
Williams, G Lewis & C Baker (Eds), The language policy: taking stock. UK: CAI. 39-
78. 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 
 
Vimbai Mbirimi-Hungwe is a lecturer in the Department of Language Proficiency at the 
Sefako Makgatho University of Health Sciences. Her research focus is on the use of 
translanguaging pedagogy to multilingual students.  Her research focus has extended to 
introducing translanguaging pedagogy to lecturers in the Science faculty.   
Taurai Hungwe  is a Computer Science (CS) Lecturer at Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences 
University. He is interested in using a translanguaging pedagogy in Computer Science. 
 

