Behavioral and Brain Sciences
cambridge.org/bbs
Target Article
Cite this article: Bruineberg J, Dołęga K,
Dewhurst J, Baltieri M. (2022) The Emperor’s
New Markov Blankets. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 45, e183: 1–76. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X21002351
Target Article Accepted: 16 October 2021
Target Article Manuscript Online: 22 October
2021
Commentaries Accepted: 24 February 2022
Keywords:
active inference; Bayesian inference; free
energy principle; Markov blankets; scientific
realism
What is Open Peer Commentary? What
follows on these pages is known as a
Treatment, in which a significant and
controversial Target Article is published
along with Commentaries (p. 21) and an
Author’s Response (p. 66). See bbsonline.
org for more information.
© The Author(s), 2021. Published by
Cambridge University Press
The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
Jelle Bruineberga
, Krzysztof Dołęgab
, Joe Dewhurstc
and Manuel Baltierid
aDepartment of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia; bInstitut für Philosophie II,
Fakultät für Philosophie und Erziehungswissenschaft, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany;
cFakultät für Philosophie, Wissenschaftstheorieund Religionswissenschaft, Munich Center for Mathematical
Philosophy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 80539 Munich, Germany and dLaboratory for Neural
Computation and Adaptation, RIKEN Centre for Brain Science, 351-0106 Wako City, Japan
jelle.bruineberg@mq.edu.au
krzysztof.dolega@rub.de
joseph.e.dewhurst@gmail.com
manuel.baltieri@riken.jp
Abstract
The free energy principle, an influential framework in computational neuroscience and
theoretical neurobiology, starts from the assumption that living systems ensure adaptive
exchanges with their environment by minimizing the objective function of variational free
energy. Following this premise, it claims to deliver a promising integration of the life sciences.
In recent work, Markov blankets, one of the central constructs of the free energy principle,
have been applied to resolve debates central to philosophy (such as demarcating the bound-
aries of the mind). The aim of this paper is twofold. First, we trace the development of Markov
blankets starting from their standard application in Bayesian networks, via variational inference,
to their use in the literature on active inference. We then identify a persistent confusion in the
literature between the formal use of Markov blankets as an epistemic tool for Bayesian inference,
and their novel metaphysical use in the free energy framework to demarcate the physical boun-
dary between an agent and its environment. Consequently, we propose to distinguish between
“Pearl blankets” to refer to the original epistemic use of Markov blankets and “Friston blankets”
to refer to the new metaphysical construct. Second, we use this distinction to critically assess
claims resting on the application of Markov blankets to philosophical problems. We suggest
that this literature would do well in differentiating between two different research programmes:
“inference with a model” and “inference within a model.” Only the latter is capable of doing
metaphysical work with Markov blankets, but requires additional philosophical premises and
cannot be justified by an appeal to the success of the mathematical framework alone.
1. Introduction
The last 20 years in cognitive science have been marked by what may be called a “Bayesian
turn.” An increasing number of theories and methodological approaches either appeal to,
or make use of, Bayesian methods (prominent examples include Clark, 2013; Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2006; Knill & Pouget, 2004; Körding & Wolpert, 2004; Oaksford & Chater,
2001; Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011). The Bayesian turn pertains to both
scientific methods for studying the mind, as well as to hypotheses about the mind’s “method”
for making sense of the world. In particular, the application of Bayesian formulations to the
study of perception and other inference problems has generated a large literature, highlighting
a growing interest in Bayesian probability theory for the study of brains and minds.
Probably the most ambitious and all-encompassing version of the “Bayesian turn” in
cognitive science is the free energy principle (FEP). The FEP is a mathematical framework,
developed by Karl Friston and colleagues (Friston, 2010, 2019; Friston, Daunizeau, Kilner,
& Kiebel, 2010; Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo, 2017a; Friston,
Kilner, & Harrison, 2006), which specifies an objective function that any self-organizing sys-
tem needs to minimize in order to ensure adaptive exchanges with its environment. One major
appeal of the FEP is that it aims for (and seems to deliver) an unprecedented integration of the
life sciences (including psychology, neuroscience, and theoretical biology). The difference
between the FEP and earlier inferential theories (e.g., Gregory, 1980; Grossberg, 1980; Lee
& Mumford, 2003; Rao & Ballard, 1999) is that not only perceptual processes, but also
other cognitive functions such as learning, attention, and action planning can be subsumed
under one single principle: the minimization of free energy through the process of active infer-
ence (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017a). Furthermore, it is claimed that this principle applies
not only to human and other cognitive agents, but also self-organizing systems more generally,
offering a unified approach to the life sciences (Friston, 2013; Friston, Levin, Sengupta, &
Pezzulo, 2015a).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Another appealing claim made by proponents of the FEP and
active inference is that it can be used to settle fundamental meta-
physical questions in a formally motivated and mathematically
grounded manner, often using the Markov blanket construct
that is the main focus of this paper. Via the use of Markov
blankets, the FEP has been used to (supposedly) resolve debates
about:
• the boundaries of the mind (Clark, 2017; Hohwy, 2017;
Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021),
• the boundaries of living systems (Friston, 2013; Kirchhoff, Parr,
Palacios, Friston, & Kiverstein, 2018; van Es & Kirchhoff, 2021),
• the life–mind continuity thesis (Kirchhoff, 2018; Kirchhoff &
van Es, 2021; Wiese & Friston, 2021),
• the relationship between mind and matter (Friston, Wiese, &
Hobson, 2020; Kiefer, 2020),
while also offering (apparently) new insights on:
• the (trans)formation and survival of social and societal
organizations (Boik, 2021; Fox, 2021; Khezri, 2021),
• climate systems and planetary-scale self-organization and
autopoiesis (Rubin, Parr, Da Costa, & Friston, 2020),
• the notions of “self” and “individual,” with studies on the sense
of agency and on body ownership (Hafner, Loviken, Villalpando,
& Schillaci, 2020), (in utero) co-embodiment (Ciaunica, Constant,
Preissl, & Fotopoulou, 2021), pain experience (Kiverstein,
Kirchhoff, & Thacker, 2021), and symbiosis (Sims, 2020),
• multi-level theories of sex and gender (Fausto-Sterling, 2021),
and
• ordering principles by which the spatial and temporal scales of
mind, life, and society are linked (Hesp et al., 2019; Ramstead,
Badcock, & Friston, 2018; Veissière, Constant, Ramstead,
Friston, & Kirmayer, 2020) and possibly evolve (Poirier,
Faucher, & Bourdon, 2021).
The formalisms deployed by the FEP (as outlined in sect. 3
and 4 of this paper) are sometimes explicitly presented as replac-
ing older (and supposedly outdated) philosophical arguments
(Ramstead, Kirchhoff, Constant, & Friston, 2019; Ramstead,
Friston, & Hipólito, 2020a), suggesting that they might be
intended to serve as a mathematical alternative to metaphysical
principles. A complicating factor here is that the core of the
FEP rests upon an intertwined web of mathematical constructs
borrowed from physics, computer science, computational neuro-
science, and machine learning. This web of formalisms is develop-
ing at an impressively fast pace and the theoretical constructs it
describes are often assigned a slightly unconventional meaning
whose full implications are not always obvious. While this might
explainsomeofitsappeal,asitcanseemtobesteepedinunassailable
mathematical justification, it also risks the possibility of “smuggling
in” unwarranted metaphysical assumptions. Each new iteration of
the theory also introduces novel formal constructs that can make
previous criticisms inapplicable, or least require their reformulation
(see e.g., the exchange between Seth, Millidge, Buckley, & Tschantz
[2020]; Sun & Firestone [2020a]; Van de Cruys, Friston, & Clark
[2020]; as well as Sun & Firestone [2020b]).
In this paper we want to focus on just one of the more stable
formal constructs utilized by the FEP, namely the concept of a
Markov blanket. Markov blankets originate in the literature on
Bayesian inference and graphical modelling, where they designate
a set of random variables that essentially “shield” another random
variable (or set of variables) from the rest of the variables in the
system (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012; Pearl, 1988). By identifying
which variables are (conditionally) independent from each other,
they help represent the relationships between variables in graph-
ical models, which serve as useful and compact graphical abstrac-
tions for studying complex phenomena. By contrast, in the FEP
literature Markov blankets are now frequently assigned an onto-
logical role in which they either represent, or are literally identi-
fied with, worldly boundaries. This discrepancy in the use of
Markov blankets is indicative of a broader tendency within the
FEP literature, in which mathematical abstractions are treated as
worldly entities. By focusing here on the case of Markov blankets,
we hope to give a specific diagnosis of this problem, and then a
suggested solution, but our analysis does also have potentially
wider implications for the general use of formal constructs in
the FEP literature, which we think are often described in a way
that is crucially ambiguous between a literalist, a realist, and an
instrumentalist reading (see Andrews [2020] and van Es [2021]
for broader reviews of these kinds of issues in the FEP literature).
In order to give a comprehensive picture of where the field is
now, we need to first go back to basics and explain some funda-
mental concepts. We will therefore start our paper by tracing the
development of Markov blankets in section 2, beginning with
their standard application in graphical models (focusing on
Bayesian networks) and probabilistic reasoning, and including
JELLE BRUINEBERG is currently a Research Fellow at the Department of
Philosophy of Macquarie University. In his doctoral research at the
University of Amsterdam, he investigated the philosophical implica-
tions of active inference and the free energy principle and developed
the argument that the free energy principle can be understood as an
extension of embodied theories of the mind. In 2020, he received a
Macquarie Research Fellowship to work on topics related to embodied
cognition, digital technology, and the attention economy.
KRZYSZTOF DOŁĘGA is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Ruhr-Universität
Bochum, where he is currently realizing the Volkswagen Foundation
sponsored research project “Why do people believe weird things?
Bayesian Brain, Conspiracy Theories, and Intellectual Vices.” Apart
from probabilistic models of cognition, his work focuses on topics
related to intentionality, mental representation, consciousness, and
artificial intelligence. He is the co-editor, together with Joulia
Smortchkova and Tobias Schlicht, of the 2020 Oxford University
Press collection titled “What Are Mental Representations?”
JOE DEWHURST is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Munich Center
for Mathematical Philosophy, where he works on topics to do with
computation, mechanistic explanation, and more recently formal
approaches to causation and emergence in complex systems. His earlier
doctoral research at the University of Edinburgh looked at the relation-
ship between common-sense intuitions and scientific theories in con-
temporary cognitive science, and he worked at Edinburgh as a
Teaching Assistant before moving to Munich in 2018.
MANUEL BALTIERI is a Researcher at Araya Inc. and a Visiting Researcher
at the University of Sussex. Previously, he was a JSPS/Royal Society
Postdoctoral Fellow in the Laboratory for Neural Computation and
Adaptation at the RIKEN Centre for Brain Science while working on
the target article. His research spans different areas of artificial
intelligence, embodied cognition, control theory, Bayesian inference
methods, and more generally, theories of agency, individuality, and
agent–environment interactions in biology and artificial life.
2
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

some of the formal machinery required for variational Bayesian
inference. In section 3 we present the active inference framework
and the different roles played by Markov blankets within this
framework, which we suggest has ended up stretching the original
concept beyond its initial formal purpose (here we distinguish
between the original “Pearl” blankets and the novel “Friston” blan-
kets). In section 4 we focus specifically on the role played by Friston
blankets in distinguishing the sensorimotor boundaries of organ-
isms, which we argue stretches the original notion of a Markov
blanket in a potentially philosophically unprincipled manner. In
section 5 we discuss some conceptual issues to do with Friston
blankets, and in section 6 we suggest that it would be both more
accurate and theoretically productive to keep Pearl blankets and
Friston blankets clearly distinct from one another when discussing
active inference and the FEP. This would avoid conceptual confu-
sion and also disambiguate two distinct theoretical projects that
might each be valuable in their own right.
2. Probabilistic reasoning and Bayesian networks
The concept of a Markov blanket was first introduced by Pearl
(1988) in the context of his work on probabilistic reasoning and
graphical models. In this section we will introduce the formal
background that is required in order to understand the role played
by Markov blankets in this literature. This will provide the neces-
sary foundation for sections 3 and 4, where we will discuss the
ways in which Markov blankets have been used (and potentially
misused) within the FEP literature.
2.1 Probabilistic reasoning
Probabilistic reasoning is an approach to formal decision making
under uncertain conditions. This approach is typically introduced
as a middle ground between heuristics-based systems that are fast
but will face many exceptions, and rules-based systems that will be
accurate but slow and hard to put into practice. The probabilistic
reasoning framework is a way to summarize relevant exceptions,
providing a middle ground between speed and accuracy. The
first step in this approach is to classify variables in order to distin-
guish between observables and unobservables. Inference is then
the process by which one can estimate an unobservable given
some observables. For instance, how is it that we are able to deter-
mine if a watermelon is ripe by knocking on it? On the basis of
observing the sound (resonant or dull), we are able to infer the
unobserved state of the watermelon (ripe or not). When formal-
izing such kinds of everyday inference problems, we need to
answer three interrelated questions:
(1) How do we adequately summarize our previous experience?
(2) How do we use previous experience to infer what is going on
in the present?
(3) How do we update the summary in the light of new experience?
In section 2.2 we will address Bayesian networks, a specific way
of answering question 1. In section 2.3 we will address variational
inference, a specific way of addressing question 2. Question 3 is
addressed by appealing to Bayes theorem. Bayes theorem nor-
mally takes the following form:
p(x|y) = p(y, x)
p(y) = p(y|x)p(x)
p(y)
.
(1)
This formula is a recipe for calculating the posterior probabil-
ity, p(x|y), of an unobserved set of states x ∈X given observations
y ∈Y. The probability p(x) captures prior knowledge about states
x (i.e., a prior probability), while p(y|x) describes the likelihood of
observing y for a given x. The remaining term, p(y), represents the
probability of observing y independently of the hidden state x and
is usually referred to as the marginal likelihood or model evidence,
and plays the role of a normalizing factor that ensures that the
posterior sums up to 1. In other words, the posterior probability
p(x|y) represents the optimal combination of prior information
represented by p(x) (e.g., what we know about ripe watermelons,
before we get to knock on the one in front of us) and a likelihood
model p(y|x) of how observations are generated in the first place
(e.g., how watermelons give rise to different sounds at specific
maturation stages, including the observed sound y), normalized
by the knowledge about the observations integrated over all pos-
sible hidden variables, p(y) (e.g., how watermelons may typically
sound, regardless of the specific maturation stage).
What holds for everyday reasoning problems holds for cogni-
tion and science as well: how can a cognitive system estimate the
presence of some object on the basis of the state of its receptors
alone? How can a neuroscientist estimate brain activity on the
basis of magnetic fields measured in an fMRI scanner? Both of
these kinds of questions can be formalized using Bayes’ theorem
(see e.g., Friston, Harrison, & Penny, 2003; Gregory, 1980; Penny,
Friston, Ashburner, Kiebel, & Nichols, 2011).
Although this scheme offers a powerful tool for probabilistic
inference, it is mostly limited to simple, low-dimensional, and
often discrete or otherwise analytically tractable problems. For
example, computing the exact model evidence is rarely feasible,
because the computation is often analytically intractable or com-
putationally too expensive (Beal, 2003; Bishop, 2006; MacKay,
2003). To obviate some of the limitations of exact Bayesian infer-
ence schemes, different approximations can be deployed, which
rely on either stochastic or deterministic methods. In this context,
variational methods (Beal, 2003; Bishop, 2006; Blei, Kucukelbir, &
McAuliffe, 2017; Hinton & Zemel, 1994; Jordan, Ghahramani,
Jaakkola,
&
Saul,
1999;
MacKay,
2003;
Zhang,
Bütepage,
Kjellström, & Mandt, 2018) are a popular choice, including for
the FEP framework discussed in this paper. We will discuss
those in section 2.3, but first we will introduce the Bayesian
network approach developed by Pearl.
2.2 Bayesian networks
Pearl (1988) developed a mathematical language to formulate
summaries of previous experience in computer learning systems.
That mathematical language constitutes the focus of this paper,
due to the ease with which it can be used to demonstrate the
use (and misuse) of Markov blankets using probabilistic graphical
models. Probabilistic graphical models capture the dependencies
between random variables using a visual language that renders
the study of certain probabilistic interactions across variables, tra-
ditionally defined with analytical methods, more intuitive and
easy to track.1 Random variables are drawn as nodes in a graph,
with shaded nodes usually representing variables that are observed
and empty nodes used for variables that are unobserved (latent or
hidden variables). The (probabilistic) relationships between such
random variables are then expressed using edges (lines) connect-
ing the nodes. For present purposes we will focus on acyclic
graphs with directed edges, which provide the basis for graphical
models, and play a crucial role in the context of active inference
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Friston, Parr, & de Vries, 2017b). Relationships between the var-
iables are often described using genealogical terms, with pa(a)
being the parents (or “ancestors”) of their children (or “descen-
dants”) node a and copa(a) being the co-parents: nodes with
which a has a child in common. In Figure 1 below, m is the target
variable, c and b are the parents of m, a is the child of m, and e is
m’s co-parent since they have a in common as a child. Although
the dependencies are formally defined in terms of basic manipu-
lations on probability distributions, graphical models provide
some practical advantages in reasoning about these formal prop-
erties, presenting a clear and easily interpretable depiction of the
relationships between variables.
Let us introduce a simple textbook example that will help
familiarize us with some of the nuances of Bayesian graphs.
The illustration we will consider is a slight modification of a com-
mon textbook example, the “alarm” network (Pearl, 1988).
Imagine that you have an alarm system (a) in your house and it
is sensitive to motion, so that it will go off whenever it detects
any movement (m). In some cases the movement can be caused
by a burglar (b), but it could also be caused by your neighbour’s
cat (c). The alarm is also sensitive (for independent reasons) to
power surges in the electrical grid, and can sometimes be trig-
gered by changes in the supply of electricity (e). Of course, having
an alarm is not much help when you’re away, so you asked two of
your neighbours – Gloria (g) and John (j) – to call you if they
hear the alarm. Unfortunately, John suffers from severe tinnitus
(t) and has been known to call you even though the alarm
wasn’t on. This example can be formalized both algebraically
and visually.
Algebraically, this example can be expressed by the following
joint probability of all the included variables:
p(a, b, c, e, g, j, t, m) = p(g|a)p( j|a, t)p(a|e, m)
× p(e)p(m|c, b)p(c)p(b).
(2)
This joint probability is not especially easy to interpret. The
graph in Figure 1 models the dependencies among the variables
in this scenario in a more easily interpretable manner, where
directed edges indicate probabilistic relationships between nodes
(variables).
The alarm network allows us to illustrate a number of canon-
ical examples of statistical (in)dependencies between nodes,
known also as d-separation (Pearl, 1988):
• e and m are marginally independent but only conditionally
dependent if a is observed (i.e., when a becomes a shaded
node), a case technically known also as head-to-head relation.
This can be made intuitive in the following way: in general,
surges in electricity e and other forms of movement m are
not related to one another. Once you know that the alarm
went off, then knowing that there was no surge implies that
some other factor was responsible for the activation (and vice
versa).
• c and a are marginally dependent but conditionally indepen-
dent if m is observed, also known as head-to-tail. Once you
know that there was movement, knowing that the cat caused
the movement will not make a difference in your estimation
for whether the alarm went off.
• g and j are marginally dependent but conditionally independent
if a is observed, also known as tail-to-tail. In general, Gloria
calling will make it likely that John will call as well. But once
you know the alarm went off, Gloria calling will not change
the probability of John calling.
Bayesian networks like the one above play an especially prom-
inent role in exemplifying marginal and conditional indepen-
dence relations. Marginal independence is represented by the
lack of a directed path between two nodes. Conditional indepen-
dence is defined in terms of a node “shielding” one variable (or
set of variables) from another node. This notion of “shielding”
can be made more explicit by introducing the idea of a Markov
blanket, which will be the central focus of this paper.
A Markov blanket designates the minimal2 set of nodes with
respect to which a particular node (or set of nodes) is condition-
ally independent of all other nodes in a Bayesian graph,3 that is, it
shields that node from all other nodes. Formally, a Markov blanket
for a set of variables xi is thus equivalent to:
mb(xi) = pa(xi) < ch(xi) < copa(xi),
(3)
where pa(xi) corresponds to the parents of xi, ch(xi) to the chil-
dren, and copa(xi) to the co-parents of xi respectively.
To make the notion of a Markov blanket clearer, we have
drawn the blankets of different nodes in the alarm network.
Figure 1a shows the Markov blanket for node m or mb(m). It is
composed of m’s parents (c and b), its child (a), and its children’s
other parents (e). The mb( j) shown in Figure 1b, on the other
hand, is composed of just two nodes (a and t), hence:
mb(m) = {c, b, a, e} and mb(j) = {a, t}
(4)
What this means intuitively is that given the Markov blanket of
a node, any other change in the network will not make a direct
difference to one’s estimation of the random variable. If you
could know John’s state of tinnitus and the state of the alarm,
you can calculate the probability that he will be calling. The rest
of the state of the network does not make a difference for this cal-
culation. In other words, a node’s Markov blanket captures exactly
all nodes that are relevant to infer the state of that node. As we
will illustrate in the next section, the conditional independence
of any variable from the nodes outside its Markov blanket is
one of the key factors that makes probabilistic graphs useful for
inference.
2.3 Variational inference
We mentioned before that exact Bayesian inference will in many
cases not be feasible. There are a number of techniques available
in the literature to perform approximate inference. The version of
approximate inference that we will focus on in this paper is called
variational inference, and here Markov blankets play an important
role in identifying which variables are actually relevant to any
given inference problem.
The main idea behind variational inference is that the problem
of inferring the posterior probability of some latent or hidden
variables from a set of observations can be transformed into an
optimization problem. Roughly speaking, the method involves
stipulating a family Q of probability densities over the latent var-
iables, such that each q(x) ∈Q is a possible approximation to the
exact posterior. The goal of variational inference is then to find an
optimal distribution q*(x) that is closest to the true posterior. The
candidate
distribution
is
often
called
the
recognition
or
variational density, because the methods used employ variational
4
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

calculus, that is, functions q(x) are varied with respect to some
partition of the latent variables in order to achieve the best
approximation of p(x|y). This measure of closeness is formalized
by the Kullback–Leibler divergence, a common measure of dis-
similarity between two probability distributions (here denoted
by DKL):
q∗(x) = arg min
q(x)[Q DKL(q(x) ∥p(x|y)).
(5)
Equation (5) reads: the optimal distribution is the one that
minimizes the dissimilarity between the variational density and
the exact posterior. This can be shown to be bounded (above)
by the minimization of a quantity that is called variational free
energy (see Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012):
q∗(x) = arg min
q(x)[Q

q(x) ln q(x)
p(y, x) dx
= arg min
q(x)[Q F(x).
(6)
One of the most crucial components of variational inference is
the choice of a family Q. If the chosen Q is too complicated, then
the inference will remain unfeasible, but if it is too simple then the
optimal distribution might be too far removed from the exact pos-
terior. Popular choices for Q include a treatment in terms of con-
jugate priors (Bishop, 2006), a mean-field approximation (Parisi,
1988),
the
variational
Gaussian
approximation
(Opper
&
Archambeau, 2009), and the Laplace method (MacKay, 2003).
It is however crucial to highlight that such methods operate
only on the family Q of the variational density q(x). This
means that they do not necessarily encode dependencies captur-
ing constraints among variables xi ∈x derived from knowledge
of the underlying system to be modelled (e.g., its physics).
These further constraints are instead captured in the joint proba-
bility p(y, x), used to infer x via the posterior p(x|y), of which q(x)
is an approximation (see equation [6]). It is here that the concepts
of marginal and conditional independence show up again.
Inferential processes can in fact be simplified by orders of magni-
tude if we consider that each variable will only exert some (direct)
influence on a number of (other) variables that is usually quite
limited.
In the mean-field approach, for example, mean-field effects
(i.e., averages) for a particular partition (i.e., a subset) of variables
are constructed only using its Markov blanket (Jordan et al.,
1999). This means that such partition need only be optimized
with respect to its blanket states, hence the idea of “shielding,”
intended to highlight how only a relatively small number of var-
iables need actually be considered in most problems of inference
(Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012). In more concrete terms, and using
our previous example of the alarm network, to infer the most
likely cause that set off the alarm one need not consider burglary
(b) directly, as the effects of this variable are already captured by
motion (m). Likewise, when trying to infer if John (j) will have to
call us, we need to only consider if the alarm was actually set off,
regardless of whether it was because of some electricity supply
problem (e) or some motion detected by the alarm (m), or
whether John’s tinnitus (t) is the true cause of John’s call.
Through an iterative procedure in which each (subset of) node(s)
is optimized given its Markov blanket, the process will settle on
the best estimate of the posterior distribution given the simplifying
assumptions that were made for a particular model. As we can see
by now, Markov blankets are a relatively technical construct tradi-
tionally applied to problems of inference.
2.4 Bayesian model selection
One of Pearl’s main innovations when it comes to Bayesian net-
works was the idea that dependencies between different variables
of the original system could be discovered by manipulating (i.e.,
“intervening on”) a chosen variable and seeing which other vari-
ables are affected. This idea has proven to be immensely useful
when trying to infer the organization of some system with an
unknown structure, that is, for structure learning, or structure
discovery. Historically, however, other distinct approaches have
also been adopted to tackle this problem. For example, structure
learning can be utilized either with or without the causal assump-
tions advocated by Pearl and others (see Vowels, Camgoz, & Bowden
[2021] for a recent review). In this family of methods, the class of
score-based approaches (Vowels et al., 2021) is of particular
Figure 1. The “alarm” network with examples of Markov
Blankets for two different variables. The target variables are
indicated with a dashed pink circle, while the variables that
are part of the Markov blanket are indicated with a solid pink
circle.
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

interest to this paper given its tight relations to the FEP and the
use of Markov blankets. In score-based approaches, to discover
the values and relations between variables one simply constructs
multiple (classes of) models of the system under investigation
and compares them to determine which one of them makes the
most accurate predictions about the observable data.
This process of pitting models against each other is often
referred to as (possibly Bayesian) model selection (Penny et al.,
2011; Stephan, Penny, Daunizeau, Moran, & Friston, 2009).
Importantly, while this process optimizes for how well different
models fit the data, it also keeps track of the tradeoff between
model accuracy and model complexity. For example, it is clear
that the alarm network we discussed before could have been
more complex: either Gloria’s or John’s telephone batteries
might play a role in whether they phone you or not, perhaps
there are other ways in which the alarm might be triggered, and
so on. However, the inclusion of such information in the network
would have further complicated the graph without necessarily
making it more accurate as a modelling tool (at least relative to
our purposes).
What then decides the level of complexity that a good Bayesian
model should have? Is it one that captures all the possibly relevant
facts that might make a difference, or is it the simplest one that
still makes a good enough prediction? The dominant assumption
in the literature is that there is a tradeoff between making a model
fit the data as closely as possible and that model’s ability to predict
new data points. In other words, the best model is one that
accounts for the available data in the most parsimonious way
(Friston et al., 2017b; Penny et al., 2011; Stephan et al., 2009).
This intuition can be formalized via a process of model compar-
ison using different criteria, for example, the Akaike information
criterion, the Bayesian information criterion, or variational free
energy (via the maximization of model evidence, equivalent to
the minimization of surprisal), but there is a general agreement
that Bayesian methods offer a quantification of Occam’s razor
(Jefferys & Berger, 1991). In the case of variational free energy,
one can then take into account a trade-off between the complexity
of a model and the accuracy with which it is able to predict the
data (or observations). When minimizing free energy using a
range of different models, the one with the lowest free energy is
thus taken to be the one that accounts for the data in the most
parsimonious way (cf. the Occam factor discussed by Bishop,
2006; Daunizeau, 2017; Friston, 2010; MacKay, 2003).
It is therefore important to note that the basic epistemic aim
(even for the models used in the context of active inference) is
not to arrive at a complete model of the system under investiga-
tion, but rather to obtain the most parsimonious model that accu-
rately captures the relevant relations (Baltieri & Buckley, 2019;
Stephan et al., 2010). This complexity/accuracy trade-off is impor-
tant to prevent overfitting the model to the available data.
Of course, which facts are relevant depends on the questions
we ask: if we are interested in how an alarm can be sensitive to
both motion and changes in electric current, the model drawn
in Figure 1 might not be very helpful, but it would do just fine
for the purpose of estimating (i.e., inferring) the probability that
your house is really being robbed when your tinnitus-struck
neighbour calls you to report a ringing noise. There is therefore
a sense in which model selection is influenced by pragmatic con-
siderations. By choosing the data worth considering for their anal-
ysis, the scientist chooses their level of analysis, and by choosing
which dimensions in model space are relevant to answer their
question, the scientist chooses what models (or families of
models) to consider (Penny et al., 2011; Stephan et al., 2010).
The same phenomenon can be analysed using different sources
of data. For example, in a study of decision making one can
include only behavioural data, or add neural measurements as
well. The choice of relevant dimensions in model space is often
influenced by previous empirical evidence, meaning that relevant
factors and model spaces themselves should be updated as new
evidence becomes available. Clearly these considerations are not
unique to (Bayesian) model selection. Furthermore, they don’t
negate any of its merits, but rather simply highlight the require-
ment for pragmatic constraints in solving difficult problems
with infinitely large model spaces, especially in realistic situations
and away from hypothetical ideal observer scenarios.
2.5 Taking stock
We have introduced a number of concepts and constructs that
jointly form a toolkit for Bayesian inference: Bayesian networks
can provide problem-specific summaries of the available data
that predict the probability of future observations. Variational
inference provides an elegant method to replace an intractable
inference
problem
with
a
tractable
optimization
problem.
Variational methods of the kind we have described in this section
have been employed across the sciences. In this scientific context,
Markov blankets are an auxiliary technical concept that demarcate
what additional nodes are relevant for estimating the state of a
specific target node.
This technical concept of a Markov blanket has undergone a
significant transformation in the literature on the FEP. In order
to distinguish this original Markov blanket concept from the
one that we will draw out of the FEP literature in section 4, we
will, with apologies to Judea Pearl, refer to instances of the orig-
inal concept as “Pearl blankets” throughout the rest of the paper.
The novel Markov blanket concept introduced in section 4, on the
other hand, we will refer to as a “Friston blanket.”4
3. Pearl blankets in the active inference framework
The specific application of the FEP that we will focus on here is
the active inference framework. In active inference, the concepts
of variational inference are applied to living systems. The thought
is that living systems are in the same position as data scientists.
They “observe” the activity at their sensory receptors and need
to infer the state of the world. However, the framework goes
even further and postulates that living systems need to also act
on the world so as to stay within viable bounds, as merely infer-
ring the states of the environment cannot guarantee survival (this
idea is illustrated in Fig. 2). In this section we will introduce the
way that Pearl blankets are used for modelling purposes in the
active inference literature and highlight one initial conceptual
issue with this use.
3.1 Modelling active inference with Pearl blankets
Active inference is a process theory derived from the application
of variational inference to the study of biological and cognitive
systems (Friston, 2013, 2019; Friston et al., 2010, 2015b, 2017a).
The core assumption underlying active inference is that living
organisms can be thought of as systems whose fundamental
imperative is to minimize free energy (this constitutes the
so-called free energy principle). Active inference attempts to
explain action, perception, and other aspects of cognition under
6
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the umbrella of variational (and expected) free energy minimiza-
tion (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2010, 2017a). From
this perspective, perception can be understood as a process of
optimizing a variational bound on surprisal, as advocated by stan-
dard methods in approximate Bayesian inference applied in the
context of perceptual science (see for instance Dayan, Hinton,
Neal, and Zemel, 1995; Friston, 2005; Knill & Richards, 1996;
Lee & Mumford, 2003; Rao & Ballard, 1999). At the same time,
action is conceptualized as a process that allows a system to create
its own new observations, while casting motor control as a form of
inference (Attias, 2003; Kappen, Gómez, & Opper, 2012), with
agents changing the world to better meet their expectations.
Active inference integrates a more general framework where
minimizing expected free energy accounts for more complex pro-
cesses of action and policy selection (Friston et al., 2015b, 2017a;
Tschantz, Seth, & Buckley, 2020). Expected free energy is the free
energy expected in the future for unknown (i.e., yet to be seen)
observations, combining a trade-off between (negative) instru-
mental and (negative) epistemic values. A full treatment of active
inference remains beyond the scope of this manuscript (for some
technical treatments and reviews, see e.g., Biehl, Guckelsberger,
Salge, Smith, & Polani, 2018; Bogacz, 2017; Buckley, Kim, McGregor,
& Seth, 2017; Da Costa et al., 2020; Friston et al., 2017b; Sajid,
Ball, Parr, & Friston, 2021), but we wish to highlight the formal
connection between this framework and the use of variational
Bayes in standard treatments of approximate probabilistic infer-
ence (as described in the previous section). Acknowledging this
relationship is crucial if we want to understand the role Pearl
blankets might play in active inference.
To understand the role played by Pearl blankets in active infer-
ence, we first need to identify some of the formal notation used by
active inference, which is related to the variational approaches
described in the previous section. Here we use the notation previ-
ously adopted in equation (6), while also introducing a second,
distinct, set of hidden random variables: action policies π ∈Π,
sequences of control states u ∈U up to a given time horizon τ
with 0 ≤τ ≤T, that is, p = [u1, u2, . . . , ut]. This will allow us
to formulate perception and action as variational problems in
active inference. Perception is the minimization (at each time
step t)5 of the following equation:
q∗(x, p) = arg min
q(x,p)[Q F(x, p).
(7)
In other words: at each time step t, select the variational den-
sity that minimizes free energy. Action is then characterized (at
each time step t) in terms of control states u where:
u∗= arg max
u[U

p[P, pt=u
q(p)
(8)
and with the (approximate) prior on a policy π, q(π), defined as
q(p) = s(−G(p, t)).
(9)
This describes action selection as a minimization of what is
called expected free energy, G(π, τ), based on beliefs about future
and unseen observations y, up to a time horizon τ ≤T. In other
words, at each time step t, select the policy π that you expect
will minimize free energy a number of time steps τ into the future
(for a more detailed treatment, see one of the latest formulations
found in, e.g., Da Costa et al., 2020; Sajid et al., 2021).
In doing so, we can notice that equation (7) essentially mirrors
the previously defined equation (6), with the important caveat
that in active inference sequences of control states (i.e., policies π)
are now a part of the free energy F (this is conceptually similar to
other formulations of control as inference, such as Attias, 2003;
Kappen et al., 2012).6 In a closed loop of action and perception,
policies π can effectively modify the state of the world, generating
new observations y, something that classical formulations of
variational inference in statistics and machine learning do not
consider, instead assuming fixed observations or data (Beal,
2003; Bishop, 2006; MacKay, 2003).
Some formulations of active inference, especially the earlier ones
(Friston, 2008; Friston, Mattout, Trujillo-Barreto, Ashburner, &
Penny, 2007; Friston, Trujillo-Barreto, & Daunizeau, 2008), have
explicitly relied on a set of assumptions similar to the ones men-
tioned in the previous section: a mean-field approximation and
Figure 2. The Markov blanket as a sensorimotor loop (adapted from Friston, 2012). A diagram representing possible dependences between different components of
interest: sensory states (green), internal states (violet), active states (red), and external states (yellow). Notice that although this figure uses arrows to signify
directed influences, the diagram is not a Bayesian network as it depicts different sets of circular dependences (between pairs of components, and an overall
loop including all nodes).
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
7
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the use of Pearl blankets to shield nodes. As mentioned in section
2.3 (see also Jordan et al., 1999), Pearl blankets can be used to
simplify the minimization of variational free energy by specifying
which variables need to be considered for mean-field averages via
appropriate constraints of conditional independence. Works such
as Friston et al. (2007), Friston et al. (2008), and Friston (2008),
however, make use of a “structured” mean-field assumption,7
where variables are partitioned in three independent sets: hidden
states and inputs, parameters, and hyper-parameters. In this case,
the use of Pearl blankets is entirely consistent with existing liter-
ature and definitions of conditional independence in graphical
models, albeit slightly unnecessary given the relatively low num-
ber of partitions. Indeed, it is not entirely clear what Pearl blankets
actually add to this formulation, since it is often claimed that given
a partition of variables (out of three) “the Markov [ = Pearl] blanket
contains all [other] subsets, apart from the subset in question”
(Friston, 2013, 2008; Friston et al., 2007, 2008), where “all
[other] subsets” corresponds to the remaining two. As we will see
shortly, the concept has gained a new life in more recent formula-
tions of active inference, where it is applied in a substantially differ-
ent way and as more than just a formal tool.
3.2 Models of models
There is an initial conceptual issue that arises from the current
discussion. We started our paper with the parallel between per-
ceptual inference and scientific inference. Both use a previously
learned model and a set of observations to infer the latent struc-
ture of unobserved features of the world. This parallel puts cogni-
tive neuroscience in a rather special place: as making models of
how animals model their environment. An important strategy in
model-based cognitive neuroscience is to use different sources
of data (such as behavioural and neural data) to infer the most
likely model that the agent’s brain might be implementing. For
example, Parr, Mirza, Cagnan, and Friston (2019) investigate
the generative models that underlie active vision. They use both
MEG and eye-tracking to disambiguate a number of potential
generative models for active vision. These putative models corre-
spond in a fairly straightforward way to a neural network and
make concrete predictions about both neural dynamics as well
as oculomotor behaviour. The most likely model (i.e., the one
that best explains the data in the most parsimonious way) is
selected by scoring each model based on its accuracy in predicting
neural dynamics and oculomotor behaviour and weighing the
scores by that model’s complexity. We can identify two separate
“models” in this scenario: one is a computational Matlab model
used by scientists for the purpose of causal dynamical inference,
while the other is the target system’s own model of its environ-
ment. Thus, the scientist uses their Matlab model to infer
which particular model the target system might implement.
While not wholly uncontroversial (as we will see in later sec-
tions), this kind of doubling up of modelling relations is wide-
spread in neuroscience and remains relatively innocuous, so
long as one is conceptually careful. What we mean by this is
that one needs to not only distinguish between properties of the
environment, properties of the agent’s model of the environment,
and properties of the scientist’s model of the agent modelling its
environment, but one should also be transparent about one’s
commitment to the existence of the features represented on differ-
ent levels of these modelling relations. Paying closer attention to
said modelling relations provides a useful lens for analysing the
difference between Pearl and Friston blankets: Pearl blankets
can be used to identify probabilistic (in)dependencies between
the variables in either the scientist’s model of the agent–environ-
ment system, or the system’s own model of the environment (in
both cases these relations can be represented using a Bayesian net-
work), while Friston blankets are posited as demarcating real
boundaries in the agent–environment system itself (as we will
see in the next section). The use of Pearl blankets in active infer-
ence, as described in this section, is rather uncontroversial. It is,
however, unlikely to be of much philosophical interest, as Pearl
blankets exist inside of models and cannot by themselves settle
questions about the boundaries between agents and their
environments.
4. Friston blankets as organism–environment boundaries
In a number of recent theoretical and philosophical works based
on the FEP, Markov blankets have been assigned a role that
they cannot play under the standard definition of Pearl blankets
presented in the previous section. In some formulations of active
inference, starting with Friston and Ao (2012), Friston (2013),
and Friston, Sengupta, and Auletta (2014), Markov blankets are
in fact introduced to directly describe a specific form of condi-
tional independence within a dynamical system, serving as a
boundary between organism and world. In other words, they
are considered to be proper parts of the target system and not
merely parts of the scientist’s model used to map that system.
Just as some parts of a cartographical map are considered to rep-
resent features of the real world (such as mountains and rivers)
and others are not (such as contour lines), Markov blankets
were originally just a statistical tool used to analyse models
(akin to contour lines), but in the FEP literature are now often
assumed to correspond to some real boundary in the world
(akin to mountains and rivers). In order to distinguish this
novel use of Markov blankets from the Pearl blankets discussed
in the previous section, we will now call Markov blankets, under-
stood in this new Fristonian sense, “Friston blankets.”
4.1 Life as we know it?
Friston’s “Life as we know it” (2013), which presents a proof-
of-principle simulation for conditions claimed to be relevant for
the origins of life, is one of the milestone publications in the
FEP literature and has played a central role in the transition
between the two uses of Markov blankets. This paper is often
used as an example of how to extend the relevance of Markov
blankets beyond the realm of probabilistic inference and into cog-
nitive (neuro)science and philosophy of mind (some examples are
listed in the introduction). Friston’s paper aims to show how
Markov blankets spontaneously form in a (simulated) “primordial
soup” and how these Markov (or “Friston’) blankets constitute an
autopoietic boundary.
In the simulation itself, a number of particles are modelled as
moving through a viscous fluid. The interaction between the par-
ticles is governed by Newtonian and electrochemical forces, both
only working at short-range. By design, one-third of the particles
is then prevented from exerting any electrochemical force on the
others. The result of running the simulation is something resem-
bling a blob of particles (Fig. 3). We will go through this simula-
tion in some detail, because it is the archetype for the reification
of the Markov blanket construct that we find throughout the
active inference literature.
8
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Using the model adopted in the simulations (for details, please
refer to Friston, 2013), one can then plot an adjacency matrix A
based on the coupling (i.e., dependencies) between different par-
ticles at a final (simulation) time T, representing the particles in a
“steady-state” (under the strong assumption that the system has
evolved towards and achieved its steady-state at time T, when
the simulation is stopped – a condition that remains unclear in
the original study). The adjacency matrix is itself a representation
of the electrochemical interactions between particles, and it is
claimed that it can be interpreted as an abstract depiction of a
Bayesian network (we would like to note, however, that this
claim itself rests on additional assumptions that are not made
explicit by Friston). A dark square in the adjacency matrix at
element r, s indicates that two particles are electrochemically
coupled, and hence we could imagine that there is a directed
edge from node r to node s. In this work, the directed edge is
drawn if and only if particle r electrochemically affects particle s
(Fig. 4). Because of the way the simulation is set up, the network
will not be symmetrical (since a third of the randomly selected
particles will not electrochemically affect the remaining ones).
Spectral graph theory is then used to identify the eight most
densely coupled nodes, which are stipulated to be the “internal”
states.8 Given these internal states, the Markov blanket is then
found through tracing the parents, children, and co-parents of
children in the network (see equation [18] in Friston, 2013).
States that are not internal states and are not part of the
Markov blanket are then called “external states.”
At this point of the analysis of the simulation, Friston intro-
duces another interpretive step, proposing that the variables in
this Markov blanket can be further separated into “sensory” and
“active” states. The sensory states are those states of the Markov
blanket whose parents are external states, while the active states
are all other states of the Markov blanket (typically, but not
always, active states will have children who are external states).
This procedure thus consists of first identifying the internal
states and the states in their Markov blanket, classifying all
other states as external, and then determining whether the states
of the Markov blanket are sensory or active states (see Fig. 5). This
delivers four sets of states:
• μ: internal states: stipulated beforehand (Friston [2013] uses
spectral graph theory to choose eight)
• ϕ: external states: all states not part of μ or its Markov blanket
• s: sensory states: states of the Markov blanket of μ whose parents
are external states
• a: active states: the remaining states of the Markov blanket of μ
Applied to the primordial soup simulation, each particle can
be coloured to indicate which of these sets it has been assigned
to (see Fig. 6). Given the dominance of short-range interactions
and the density of particles, it should not come as a surprise
that the particles that are labelled as active and sensory states
form a spatial boundary around the states that are labelled as
internal states. Given their placement in the simulated state
space, one has the impression that the active and sensory states
form a structure similar to a cell membrane.
The “Markov blanket formalism” advocated by Friston (2013)
and described formally above does most of the work in the active
inference literature when it comes to identifying internal, sensory,
active, and external states. This formalizing step requires a num-
ber of non-trivial assumptions, some of which are now included
in Friston et al., (2021a, 2021b), but were not present in the orig-
inal “Life as we know it” paper, and thus have been ignored in
much of the subsequent literature. For example, it is unclear
why only electrochemical interactions are used to construct the
adjacency matrix while other forms of influence included in the
simulation (such as Newtonian forces) are ignored. If different
Figure 4. The adjacency matrix of the simulated soup at steady-state (from Friston,
2013). Element i, j has value 1 (a dark square) if and only if subsystem i electrochem-
ically affects subsystem j. The four grey squares from top left to bottom right repre-
sent the hidden states, the sensory states, the active states, and the internal states
respectively.
Figure 3. The “primordial soup” (adapted from Friston [2013] using the code pro-
vided). The larger (grey) dots represent the location of each particle, which are
assumed to be observed by the modellers. There are three smaller (blue) dots asso-
ciated with each particle, representing the electrochemical state of that particle
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
9
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

thresholds were used to determine whether two nodes are con-
nected, the adjacency matrix would look very different. The
demarcations made by analysing the adjacency matrix are then
used to label the nodes in the original system (as in Fig. 6 above).
4.2 Friston blankets
The primordial soup simulation is claimed to provide a formal
model for the emergence of agent–environment systems. We
need to make a distinction between three different constructs:
the “real” primordial soup (i.e., the target system), a model of
the primordial soup (i.e., an idealized representation of the
soup), and the adjacency matrix (i.e., a further abstraction of
the idealized model). A Friston blanket, according to the treat-
ment in Friston (2013), can be identified using the adjacency
matrix once a set of nodes of interest has been identified.10 A
first interpretative step is taken when labelling the nodes of the
idealized model as internal, external, active, and sensory states
(i.e., as part of the Friston blanket). A further, and more problem-
atic step is taken when extending the interpretation to the target
system. The idea now is that, using the Markov blanket formalism,
it is possible to uncover hidden properties of the target system
that, in some sense, “instantiates” (Friston, 2013, p. 2) or “pos-
sesses” (ibid. p. 1) a Markov blanket. This procedure of attributing
a property of the map (the Bayesian network) to the territory (the
simulated soup, and by implication, the real primordial soup
itself) is problematic because it reifies abstract features of the
map (cf. Andrews, 2020). A further implication of this step is
that Markov blankets, which were initially introduced by Pearl
as a formal property of directed, acyclical graphs, are now seen
as real parts of systems explicitly modelled using non-directed
connections between variables. This surprising shift has gone
mostly unnoticed in the literature, even though no formal justifi-
cation is provided.
There is ample evidence in the literature of this shift from
model to target, which we might call a “reification fallacy.” For
instance, Allen and Friston (2018) begin rather uncontroversially:
The boundary (e.g., between internal and external states of the system) can
be described as a Markov blanket. The blanket separates external (hidden)
from the internal states of an organism, where the blanket per se can be
divided into sensory (caused by external) and active (caused by internal)
states. (p. 2474)
It is possible to read this passage in an entirely instrumentalist
way. That the boundary “can be described” using a blanket merely
suggests that the system can be modelled as having a blanket (see
Figure 5. The Friston blanket. The three diagrams representing the stages of identifying a Friston blanket described in section 4.1. A system of interest is repre-
sented in the form a directed graph (a). Next the variable of interest is identified and a Markov blanket of shielding variables β is delineated separating the internal
variable μ from the external ones denoted by ϕ (b). Finally, the variables within the blanket are identified as sensory s or active a depending on their relations with
the external states (c).9
Figure 6. The Markov blanket of the simulated soup at steady-state (adapted from
Friston [2013] using the code provided). Similarly to Figure 3, particles are indicated
by larger dots. Particles that belong to the set of sensory states are in green, active
states are in red. Internal states are violet, while external states are marked in yellow.
A “blanket” of active and sensory cells surrounding the internal particles can be seen.
10
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

for instance Friston, 2013; Palacios, Razi, Parr, Kirchhoff, &
Friston, 2020). Without considering the further assumptions
explained in Biehl, Pollock, and Kanai (2021) and Friston et al.
(2021a), this notion of a Markov blanket is in line with the
standard use of the notion introduced by Pearl and explained
in the first part of this paper. However, Allen and Friston
undermine this innocent instrumentalist reading on the very
next page:
In short, the very existence of a system depends upon conserving its
boundary, known technically as a Markov blanket, so that it remains
distinguishable from its environment—into which it would otherwise
dissipate. The computational ‘function’ of the organism is here fundamen-
tally and inescapably bound up into the kind of living being the organism
is, and the kinds of neighbourhoods it must inhabit. (p. 2475)
In this passage a Markov blanket is taken to be either equiva-
lent to, or identical with, a physical boundary in the world.11
Markov blankets here distinguish a system from its environment,
much in the way a cell membrane does: the loss of a Markov blan-
ket is equated with the loss of systemic integrity. This function is
far removed from the initial auxiliary role played by Markov blan-
kets in variational inference, where notions of temporal dynamics
and system integrity do not come up. Instead, Markov blankets
serve here as a real boundary between organism and world, that
is, what we are calling a “Friston blanket.”
Many proponents of active inference now use the Markov
blanket formalism in a much more metaphysically robust sense,
one that does not simply follow from the formal details.
Whereas the Pearl blankets discussed in the previous section are
unambiguously part of the map (e.g., the graphical model),
Friston blankets are best understood as parts of the territory
(e.g., the system being studied). We will now look in more detail
at some of the philosophical claims about agent–environment
boundaries that Friston blankets have been taken to support.
4.3 Ambiguous boundaries
Why and how have Markov blankets been reified to act as parts of
the target system, for example, by delineating its spatiotemporal
boundaries, rather than merely being used as formal tools
intended for scientific representation and statistical analysis?
When did the map become conflated with the territory? Here
we aim to answer this question by presenting a series of different
treatments inspired by Friston’s use of Markov blankets in “Life as
we know it” (2013). In doing so we can see how what was once an
abstract mathematical construct defined by conditional indepen-
dences in graphical models (a Pearl blanket) came to be seen as
an entity that somehow causes (or “induces,” or “renders”) con-
ditional independence (a Friston blanket).12 This latter interpreta-
tion has potentially interesting philosophical implications, but
does not follow directly from the former mathematical construct.
Perhaps surprisingly, many authors in the field are seemingly not
aware of this process of reification, leading to the conflation of
several different kinds of boundaries in the literature: Markov
blankets are characterized alternatively as statistical boundaries,
spatial boundaries, ontological boundaries, or autopoietic bound-
aries, and each characterization is treated as somehow equivalent
to (and interchangeable with) the others.
Some authors are admittedly more careful, for example, Clark
(2017) makes sure to distinguish between the physical process
(the territory) and the Bayesian network (the map):
Notice that the mere fact that some creature (a simple feed-forward robot,
for example) is not engaging in active online prediction error minimiza-
tion in no way renders the appeal to a Markov blanket unexplanatory
with respect to that creature. The discovery of a Markov blanket indicates
the presence of some kind of boundary responsible for those statistical
independencies. The crucial thing to notice, however, is that those bound-
aries are often both malleable (over time) and multiple (at a given time), as
we shall see. (p.4)
Here the discovery of a Markov blanket, perhaps only in our
model of the system, serves to indicate the presence of “some
kind of boundary” in the system itself. Clark holds that Markov
blankets are discovered inside the modelling domain (what we
call Pearl blankets), and that this discovery indicates the presence
of something important (“some kind of boundary”) in the target
domain (perhaps a Friston blanket). While relatively unobjection-
able, this move seems to presuppose a tight (and hence non-
arbitrary) relation between the model and its target domain of
an agent and its environment, with potentially crucial conse-
quences for our understanding of cognitive systems (cf. Clark’s
previous
work on “cognitive
extension” in e.g.,
Clark &
Chalmers, 1998).
In a similar fashion, other works reinforce the perspective that
Markov blankets are a useful indicator to look for when attempt-
ing to define the boundaries of a system of interest. For example,
Kirchhoff et al. (2018) write that:
A Markov blanket defines the boundaries of a system (e.g., a cell or a
multi-cellular organism) in a statistical sense. (p. 1)
They also assume that this statement implies something much
stronger, namely that
[A] teleological (Bayesian) interpretation of dynamical behaviour in terms
of optimization allows us to think about any system that possesses a
Markov blanket as some rudimentary (or possibly sophisticated) ‘agent’
that is optimizing something; namely, the evidence for its own existence.
(p. 2)
However, the authors never explicate exactly how to conceive
of a “boundary in a statistical sense,” perhaps indirectly relying
on the inflated version of a Markov blanket proposed in Friston
and Ao (2012) and Friston (2013).
Hohwy (2017) also equates the internal states identified by a
Markov blanket formalism with the agent:
The free energy agent maps onto the Markov blanket in the following way.
The internal, blanketed states constitute the model. The children of the
model are the active states that drive action through prediction error min-
imization in active inference, and the sensory states are the parents of the
model, driving inference. If the system minimizes free energy — or the
long-term average prediction error — then the hidden causes beyond
the blanket are inferred. (pp. 3–4)
Furthermore, Hohwy assumes that the Markov blanket is not
just a statistical boundary, but also an epistemic one. Because
the external states are conditionally independent from the internal
states (given the Markov blanket), the agent needs to infer the
value of the external states (the “hidden causes”) based upon
the information it is receiving “at” its Markov blanket, that is,
the sensory surface. Hohwy even goes as far as to define the phil-
osophical position of epistemic internalism in terms of a Markov
blanket:
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
11
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A better answer is provided by the notion of Markov blankets and self-
evidencing through approximation to Bayesian inference. Here there is a
principled distinction between the internal, known causes as they are
inferred by the model and the external, hidden causes on the other side
of the Markov blanket. This seems a clear way to define internalism as
a view of the mind according to which perceptual and cognitive processing
all happen within the internal model, or, equivalently, within the Markov
blanket. This is then what non-internalist views must deny. (p. 7)
In other words, Markov blankets “epistemically seal-off”
agents from their environment. In the same paper, Hohwy, like
Allen and Friston above, equates an agent’s physical boundary
with the Markov blanket:
Crucially, self-evidencing means we can understand the formation of a
well-evidenced model, in terms of the existence of its Markov blanket: if
the Markov blanket breaks down, the model is destroyed (there literally
ceases to be evidence for its existence), and the agent disappears. (p.4)
Finally, in a similar vein Ramstead et al. (2018) characterize
Markov blankets as at once statistical, epistemic, and systemic
boundaries:
Markov blankets establish a conditional independence between internal
and external states that renders the inside open to the outside, but only
in a conditional sense (i.e., the internal states only ‘see’ the external states
through the ‘veil’ of the Markov blanket; [32,42]). With these conditional
independencies in place, we now have a well-defined (statistical) separa-
tion between the internal and external states of any system. A Markov
blanket can be thought of as the surface of a cell, the states of our sensory
epithelia, or carefully chosen nodes of the World Wide Web surrounding a
particular province. (p. 4)
All of the above examples show how Markov blankets have
moved from a rather simple statistical tool used for specifying a
particular structure of conditional independence within a set of
abstract random variables, to a specification of structures in the
world that are said to “cause” conditional independence, separate
an organism from its environment, or epistemically seal off agents
from their environment.13 These characterizations would sound
bizarre to the average computer scientist and statistician familiar
only with the original Pearl blanket formulation (perhaps the only
people commonly aware of Markov blankets before 2012 or 2013).
In the next section we will consider the novel construct of a
Friston blanket in more detail, and highlight a number of addi-
tional assumptions that are necessary for Markov blankets to do
the kind of philosophical work they have been proposed to do
by the authors quoted above.
5. Conceptual issues with Friston blankets
So far, we have provided some initial analysis of both Pearl and
Friston blankets, demonstrating that they are used to answer differ-
ent kinds of scientific and philosophical questions. Since these are
different formal constructs with different metaphysical implica-
tions, the scientific credibility of Pearl blankets should not automat-
ically be extended to Friston blankets. In this section, we focus on
twoconceptualissueswithFristonblankets.Theseconceptualissues
illustrate the kinds of problems that arise when using conditional
independence as a tool to settle the kinds of philosophical questions
that we saw Fristonblankets being applied to in the previous section.
To bring these conceptual issues into full view, let us introduce
a second toy example. Consider how the conditions that lead up
to and modulate the patellar reflex (or knee-jerk reaction) could
be illustrated using a Bayesian graph. This is a common example
of a mono-synaptic reflex arc in which a movement of the leg can
be caused by mechanically stretching the quadriceps leg muscle
by striking it with a small hammer. The stretch produces a sen-
sory signal sent directly to motor neurons in the spinal cord,
which, in turn, produce an efferent signal that triggers a contrac-
tion of the quadriceps femoris muscle (or what is observed more
familiarly as a jerking leg movement). If we project these condi-
tions onto a simple Bayesian network, we get something like
Figure 7.
5.1 Counterintuitive sensorimotor boundaries
This simple network allows us to illustrate some problems with
using Friston blankets to demarcate agents and their (sensorimo-
tor) boundaries. The first problem concerns which role to attri-
bute to co-parents in Friston blankets. Take s, that is, the
activation of the cortical motor neurons, as the node of interest.
As the graph makes clear, the activation of these neurons can
be explained away by either a strike of a medical hammer into
the tendon (h) or a motor command from the central nervous sys-
tem (c).14 This reflects the fact that the contraction of muscles iso-
lated in the patellar reflex could also be the result of the patient’s
motor intentions. If we interpret the motor command c as an
internal state of the patient, the spinal signal that causes the
movement would be an active state. However, this leads to a
puzzle about the way in which we should interpret h. Clearly, h is
a co-parent of c and hence lies on its Friston blanket. According
to the partition system used by Friston (2013, 2019) and Friston
et al. (2021b), h should fall into the Friston blanket of c as a sen-
sory state (see Fig. 7b). But regardless of whether one assigns a
sensory or active status to h, its inclusion in the Friston blanket
of c is problematic. From a sensorimotor perspective15 (see
Barandiaran, Di Paolo, & Rohde, 2009; Tishby & Polani, 2011),
h is an environmental variable external to the organism. As
such, the medical hammer h should not be identified as part of
an active agent, or even attributed a rather generous role as part
of its sensory interface with the world.
One could object that our example delineates internal states in
the wrong way, and that s should be considered an internal state,
as in Figure 7c, while the bodily movement m and the external
kick k should be considered, in the language of Friston blankets,
as active states. Notice, however, that this would not help in any
way, since what we might think of as an external intervention k
that could lead to the same kind of bodily movement, is now
part of the active states, while at the same time displaying the
same formal properties as any putatively “internal” cause of the
movement (as the Bayesian network in Fig. 7 should make
clear). This example exposes the problem of differentiating
between effects produced by an agent (internal states) and those
brought about by nodes not constitutive of an agent (co-parents).
The state of a node is not simply the joint product of its
co-parents, as completely separate causal chains (the doctor’s
intention vs. the patient’s intention) can produce the same out-
come (i.e., spinal neuron activation). Hence the partitioning of
the states into internal and external by means of a Markov blanket
does not necessarily equate with the boundary between agent and
environment found in sensorimotor loops, at least as these are
intuitively or typically understood.
In other words, the co-parents of a child s in a Bayesian net-
work include all other factors that could potentially cause,
12
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

modulate, or influence the occurrence of s. This puts pressure on
the analogy between Markov blankets and sensorimotor boundar-
ies on which Friston blankets are based. Including these
co-parents in the Friston blanket will include states in the envi-
ronment (like the doctor’s hammer), forcing one to accept coun-
terintuitive conclusions about the boundaries of an agent. Not
including the co-parents, on the other hand, gives up on the
idea that conditional independence and Markov blankets are the
right kind of tools to delineate the boundaries of agents, calling
into question the validity of the Friston blanket construct as a for-
mal tool.
5.2 Conditional independence is model-relative
A further, and perhaps even more substantial, problem is that
conditional independence is itself model-relative. One possible
objection to the patellar reflex network presented above is that
the conditions making up the graph are not fine grained enough,
that is, that the model is too simple. After all, the hammer does
not directly intervene on the neurons in the spinal column, but
rather on the tendon that causes the contraction of the muscle,
which is responsible for the afferent signal that is the true proxi-
mal cause of the activation of the spinal motor neurons. However,
just as it is difficult (and potentially ill-defined) to identify the
most proximate cause of the knee-jerk, it is difficult to identify
the most proximate cause and consequence of any internal
state. Since the very distinction between sensory and active states
(the sensorimotor boundary) and external states (the rest of the
world) hangs upon the distinction between “most proximate
cause” and “causes further removed,” the identifiability of such
a cause is crucial.16 This point is well made by Anderson
(2017) who writes on the identifiability of the proximal cause:
An obvious candidate answer would be that I have access only to the last
link in the causal chain; the links prior are increasingly distal. But I do not
believe that identifying our access with the cause most proximal to the
brain can be made to work, here, because I don’t see a way to avoid the
path that leads to our access being restricted to the chemicals at the nearest
synapse, or the ions at the last gate. There is always a cause even “closer” to
the brain than the world next to the retina or fingertip. (p. 4)
As has been mentioned in the previous section, Bayesian
models are often explicitly said to be instrumental tools that are
not designed to develop a final and complete description of a
system, but are rather best at capturing the dependencies between
the element of a system and/or predicting its behaviour, at a
particular level of analysis (and relative to our current knowledge
and resource constraints). What the “right” Bayesian network is
for the knee-jerk reaction might depend on the observed states
that we are given, our background knowledge and assumptions,
and more pragmatically, the problem we want to model, as well
as the time and computational power that is at our disposal.
Which, and how many, Markov blankets can be identified within
this model will depend on all of these factors. This suggests that
Bayesian networks are not the right kind of tool to delineate
real ontological boundaries in a non-arbitrary way. Here we are
talking about Bayesian models in general, but an important caveat
is that Bayesian networks have been famously used as tools for
decomposing
physical
systems.
Importantly,
however,
such
decomposition relies on treating the model as a map of the target
system, which is then used to direct interventions that can be
modelled using Pearl’s “do-calculus” (Pearl, 2009; cf. Woodward,
2003). Such applications of Bayesian modelling rarely make use
of the Bayesian Occam’s razor (mentioned in section 2.4.), since
the goal is not to predict the behaviour of the system, but rather
to depict how parts of the system influence each other.
What does this imply for the philosophical prospects of the
Friston blanket construct serving as a sensorimotor boundary?
Simply put, where Friston blankets are located in a model
depends (at least partially) on modelling choices, that is, relevant
Friston blankets cannot simply be “detected” in some objective
way and then used to determine the boundary of a system.17
This can be easily seen by the fact that Markov blankets are
defined only in relation to a set of conditional (in)dependencies,
Figure 7. Conditions leading up to the knee-jerk reflex.
On the left, a Bayesian network where id and ip denote
the motor intentions of the doctor and the patient
respectively. Node s denotes the spinal neurons that
are directly responsible for causing the kicking move-
ment m. Node h indicates a medical intervention
with a hammer, while c stands for a motor command
sent to s from the central nervous system. Finally, node
k stands for a third way of moving the patient’s leg, for
example, by someone else kicking it to move it
mechanically. The middle (b) and the right figures (c)
with the coloured-in nodes show two different ways
of partitioning the same network using a “naive”
Friston blanket with different choices of internal
states, c and s respectively.
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
13
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

or the equivalent graphical models (in either static systems, see
Pearl [1988], or dynamic regimes at steady-state, see Friston
et al. [2021a]). The choice of a particular graphical model is
then usually enforced by Bayesian model selection, which is in
turn dependent on the data used (e.g., one cannot hope to
model the firing activity of neurons, given as data fMRI record-
ings that already measure only at the grain of voxels). These con-
siderations point, in our opinion, to a strongly instrumentalist
understanding of Bayesian networks, and hence of Markov blan-
kets, which would not justify the kinds of strong philosophical
conclusions drawn by some from the idea of a Friston blanket
(see e.g., cf. Andrews, 2020; Beni, 2021; Friston et al., 2020;
Hohwy, 2016; Sánchez-Cañizares, 2021; Wiese & Friston, 2021
for some recent critical discussion).
While we do not want to try and solve all of these issues here,
it is important to recognize that the notion of a Friston blanket as
employed in the active inference literature is intended to carry out
a very different role from the standard definition of a Pearl blan-
ket used in the formal modelling literature. The open question
here is whether Bayesian networks and Markov blankets are really
the right kinds of conceptual tools to delineate the sensorimotor
boundaries of agents and living organisms, or whether there are
really two different kinds of project going on here, each of
which deserves its own set of formal tools and assumptions. We
turn to this question in the next section, but it is important to
note that even if a legitimate explanatory project can be defined
for Friston blankets, the conceptual issues outlined in this section
will also still need to be addressed.
6. Two (very) different tools for two (very) different
projects
So far, we have presented the conceptual journey on which
Markov blankets have been taken. They started out as an auxiliary
construct in the probabilistic inference literature (Pearl blankets),
and have ended up as a tool for distinguishing agents from their
environment (Friston blankets). The analysis above already
showed the deep differences between Pearl blankets and Friston
blankets, both in terms of their technical assumptions and of
the general explanatory aims of these two constructs. However,
in the literature on the FEP and active inference, the two have
not yet really been distinguished. Even in very recent work
there is an obvious conflation of Pearl and Friston blankets,
using the former to define, justify, or explain the latter. For exam-
ple, see the figures presented in Kirchhoff et al. (2018); Ramstead,
Friston, and Hipólito (2020a); Sims (2020); and Hipólito et al.
(2021), where Bayesian networks are used to describe what we
would call Friston blankets. However, there are a series of extra
assumptions that are necessary to move from Pearl blankets to
Friston blankets, and these are rarely (if ever) explicitly stated or
argued for. To give an initial example, Kirchhoff and Kiverstein
(2021) simply assume that the Markov blanket construct can be
transposed from the formal to the physical domain, writing:
The notion of a Markov blanket is taken from the literature on causal
Bayesian networks. Transposed to the realm of living systems, the
Markov blanket allows for a statistical partitioning of internal states
(e.g., neuronal states) from external states (e.g., environmental states)
via a third set of states: active and sensory states. The Markov blanket for-
malism can be used to define a boundary for living systems that both seg-
regates internal from external states and couples them through active and
sensory states. (p. 2)
Such a transposition is not at all straightforward, and the
phrasing “transposed to the realm of living systems” covers up a
great explanatory leap from the merely formal Pearl blanket con-
struct to the metaphysically laden Friston blanket, which is sup-
posed to be instantiated by some physical system. The ambition
of the philosophical prospects of the Friston blanket construct
is again made clear by Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2021):
We employ the Markov blanket formalism to propose precise criteria for
demarcating the boundaries of the mind that unlike other rival candidates
for “marks of the cognitive” avoids begging the question in the extended
mind debate. (p.1)
Based on what we have presented above however, the philo-
sophical validity of using Friston blankets to draw the boundaries
of the mind cannot simply be assumed from the formal credibility
of the original Pearl blanket construct. We should emphasize at
this point that it is not only Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2021) mak-
ing this assumption, which is prevalent in much of the active
inference literature that draws on Friston’s (2013) “Life as we
know it” paper discussed in section 4.1. In what follows we will
consider the differences between the Pearl blanket and Friston
blanket constructs in more detail, providing additional examples
as we go.
6.1 Inference with a model and inference within a model
We are now in a position to articulate what we perceive to be the
central methodological difference between how the two notions of
Markov blankets are applied in the literature. As we see it, appli-
cations of the two constructs should be understood as represent-
ing different research programmes. The first, which we will call
“inference with a model,” corresponds roughly to the use of
Markov blankets (or Pearl blankets) described in section 3 of
this paper. The main thesis that drives this research programme
is that organisms perform variational inference to regulate percep-
tion and action. In doing so, they rely (implicitly or explicitly) on
a model of their environment, which might feature something like
Pearl blankets as an auxiliary statistical construct. The second
research programme, which we call “inference within a model,”
constitutes the position we described in section 4 of this paper,
using Markov blankets (or Friston blankets) as a measure of the
real ontological boundary between a system and its environment.
The main thesis that drives this latter research programmes is that
living systems and their environments are dynamically coupled
systems that can be represented using network models, and that
modelling tools (like Markov blankets) can therefore be legiti-
mately used to distinguish an agent from its environment.
These are two very different projects, with different commitments,
aims, and tools (although both might fall broadly under the FEP
framework). In the rest of this subsection we will briefly charac-
terize both projects.
6.1.1 Inference with a model
As mentioned above, an important motivation for the FEP is the
parallel between scientific inference and active inference. Like the
scientist, the agent wants to know and control the states of some
aspect of the world that remains hidden, while only having access
to some limited set of observations. The agent can solve this prob-
lem by using a generative model of its environment. The agent
uses (or appears to use) variational inference to obtain a recogni-
tion density that approximates the posterior density.
14
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In model-based cognitive neuroscience, the two approaches
have been stacked together. The explanatory project is to infer
the details of the generative model an agent is using to infer the
states of its environment. This seems to be one of the strongest
potential empirical applications of the FEP and some of its related
ideas (Adams, Stephan, Brown, Frith, & Friston, 2013; Parr et al.,
2019; Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston, 2018), and reflects a more gene-
ral explanatory strategy in cognitive neuroscience (Lee
&
Mumford, 2003; Rao & Ballard, 1999). Although perhaps not
directly empirically refutable (cf. Andrews, 2020), this approach
guides an active research programme, whose quality will eventu-
ally determine its overall viability.
As we highlighted in section 3.1, Pearl blankets play an auxil-
iary role in projects of this kind. They describe conditional inde-
pendence on random variables (represented for instance in
Bayesian networks), and are not a literal feature of either the
agent or its environment (or indeed, the boundary between the
two). There has been some discussion of the status of the theoret-
ical posits of this kind of research. Do agents really possess a
model of their environment, or are they merely usefully modelled
as such? These questions about realism and instrumentalism of
cognitive constructs are interesting and have been extensively dis-
cussed in the recent literature on active inference (Colombo &
Seriès, 2012; Ramstead, Kirchhoff, & Friston, 2020b; Ramstead
et al., 2020a; van Es, 2021), but these discussions are not our main
focus. The framing of the agent as a modeller of its environment
has also led to an important but rather long-winded debate about
whether, and in what sense, free energy minimizing agents should
be seen as utilizing generative models as representations of their
environment (Clark, 2015a, 2015b; Dołęga, 2017; Gładziejewski,
2016; Kiefer & Hohwy, 2018; Kirchhoff & Robertson, 2018;
Williams, 2018). Here we merely point out that this debate also
allows for taking an instrumentalist or realist stance and, more
importantly, that it is orthogonal to the distinction between infer-
ence with a model and inference within a model.
One complicating factor that is worth mentioning here is a
potential disanalogy between scientific inference and active infer-
ence. In scientific inference, a scientist literally uses a model to
make inferences out of observed data. The model itself is inert
when not being used by an intentional agent. The same does
not go for active inference. The agent does not have a model of
its environment that it uses to perform inference, but rather the
agent is a model of its environment (Baltieri & Buckley, 2019;
Bruineberg, Kiverstein, & Rietveld, 2018; Friston, 2013; Friston,
2019). There is no separate entity that uses a generative model
to perform inference, instead the agent performs (or appears to
perform) inference, and it is at once both scientist and model.
Considerations of this kind have led some theorists to turn
towards a different (and perhaps more ambitious) explanatory
project, where Markov blankets also come to be seen as a literal
part of the physical systems being studied.
6.1.2 Inference within a model
The “primordial soup simulation” that we presented in section 4.2
suggests a very different research direction for the active inference
framework. This simulation starts out with a soup of coupled parti-
cles and aims to show how a distinction between “agent” and “envi-
ronment” emerges as the dynamics of the system reach equilibrium.
Agent and environment are separated by each other through a
Friston blanket. The Markov blanket formalism has subsequently
been presented as not just being able to identify the boundaries of
agents, but also of any supposedly self-organizing system, including
species (Ramstead et al., 2019) and biospheres (Rubin et al., 2020).
One could see the primordial soup simulation as an interesting
toy model to investigate the emergence of sensorimotor boundar-
ies in a highly idealized domain. This has long been a successful
strategy in complex systems research. For example, Conway’s
Game of Life (Gardner, 1970) has been used to formalize con-
cepts such as autopoiesis (Beer, 2004, 2014, 2020). Such toy mod-
els come with strong explanatory power but also forthright
metaphysical modesty: they do not claim to directly model or cap-
ture real-world phenomena. They are merely used as demonstra-
tions of how certain concepts or principles could play out in a
simplified system. This, however, is very different from how
most active inference theorists frame their work, as we will now
see.
Perhaps the clearest expression of the metaphysical commit-
ments implied by the use of Friston blankets is provided by
Ramstead et al. (2019), who write:
The claims we are making about the boundaries of cognitive systems are
ontological. We are using a mathematical formalism to answer questions
that are traditionally those of the discipline of ontology, but crucially, we
are not deciding any of the ontological questions in an a priori manner.
The Markov blankets are a result of the system’s dynamics. In a sense,
we are letting the biological systems carve out their own boundaries in
applying this formalism. Hence, we are endorsing a dynamic and self-
organising ontology of systemic boundaries. (p. 3)
The claim seems to be that the answers to these ontological
questions can be simply assumed by doing the maths and then
checking where the Markov blanket lies. In order for the formal-
ism to do such heavy metaphysical lifting, however, additional
premises need to be in place. After all, cognitive systems (or
other systems whose boundaries we might be interested in) exist
in the physical world, while the original Markov blanket formal-
ism operates on abstract mathematical entities. Hence, the ques-
tion for proponents of the more ambitious FEP project is: how
can the two kinds of entities map onto each other, such that con-
clusions about the boundaries of cognitive systems can be drawn
based on the mathematical framework?
As we have hinted at before, there are three strategies available
to the FEP theorist who wants to use Markov blankets in this way:
a literalist, realist, and an instrumentalist one. The literalist posi-
tion is roughly equivalent to the claim that the world just is a net-
work consisting of interacting systems, which are themselves more
fine-grained probabilistic networks, and so on, and this is why the
Friston blanket formalism works as a way to demarcate real-world
boundaries. The realist position is still committed to the claim
that Friston blankets do pick out real boundaries in the world,
but they are taken to be representations of worldly features, rather
than literally being such features themselves. Finally, the instru-
mentalist position holds that the world can merely be usefully
modelled as a Bayesian network, and that this justifies using the
Pearl blanket formalism as a guide to worldly boundaries. We
think that both the literalist and realist positions have similar
problems, while the instrumentalist position is less problematic
but also less interesting. We will discuss each position in turn.
The literalist position entails that the mathematical structures
posited by the FEP are not merely a map of self-organizing sys-
tems, but are themselves the territory (cf. Andrews, 2020). In
this case, the FEP framework might constitute something like a
“blanket-oriented ontology” (BOO): a view in which reality
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
15
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consists of a number of hierarchically nested Friston blankets.
This might be an appealing picture for some, but it is certainly
not something that can be simply read off the formalism itself.
Rather, it is an additional assumption that must be explicitly
stated and argued for. In a recent paper, Menary and Gillett
(2020) point out the strong Platonist and Pythagorean attitude
that would be necessary in order to motivate this kind of ontol-
ogy. Such an approach is not without allure and could be made
philosophically interesting, but it would certainly not be meta-
physically agnostic. The FEP and Friston blankets would serve
as a starting assumption of such an ontological project, rather
than its end goal. At any rate, the resulting approach would be
quite far removed from the empirical and naturalistic research
programme that FEP purports to be, and would certainly involve
answering
“ontological
questions
in
an
a
priori
manner”
(Ramstead et al., 2019, p. 3).
At first sight, the realist alternative might look less objection-
able. Conclusions can be drawn about real-world systems because
there is a systematic mapping between reality and our mathemat-
ical descriptions of reality in terms of Bayesian networks. After all,
it is relatively easy to find some mapping between a given target
and the assumed model domain. However, the difficulty lies in
finding a non-arbitrary mapping that is privileged for principled
reasons. In the literature on Bayesian inference, the gold standard
for establishing what the right kind of model is for a given target
domain is Bayesian model selection. This requires a set of obser-
vations that is then used to select the most parsimonious explan-
atory model of these observations (see sect. 2.4). In turn, Friston
blankets can be understood only relative to such a model (see sect.
5.2). The puzzle then is that if one wants to use the Markov blan-
ket formalism to demarcate the boundaries of, for example, a cog-
nitive agent, one needs to already have a principled justification
for why to start from one particular model rather than a different
one, at which point it is not clear that the Markov blanket formal-
ism is doing much additional work.
Some authors have followed this path and advocated for the
realist position by claiming that it is not the Markov blanket
alone, but rather the Markov blanket plus the FEP, that provides
the relevant demarcations of agent–environment boundaries.
Only those Markov blankets that demarcate free energy minimiz-
ing systems (or the systems that minimize the most free energy,
see Hohwy, 2016) can be taken to represent the boundaries of liv-
ing or cognitive systems. This defense of Friston blankets might
look appealing at first, but faces a serious obstacle by assuming
that free energy minimizing systems can be identified without
the help of the assumptions behind the Friston blanket construct,
such as the existence of unambiguously active or passive states.
This is a problem because, as it turns out, it is not that difficult
to characterize all sorts of systems as free energy minimizing sys-
tems. For example, Baltieri, Buckley, and Bruineberg (2020) show
that even the humble Watt governor can be analysed as a free
energy minimizing system. Elsewhere, Rubin et al. (2020) have
proposed modelling the Earth’s climate system as the planet’s
own Friston blanket, while Parr (2021) uses Friston blankets to
model enzymatic reactions in biochemical networks. What these
examples show is that the scope of the free energy formula is so
broad that it is inadequate to pick out only living or cognitive sys-
tems. One could bite the bullet and claim that planets and Watt
governors are cognitive systems, but this would be a surprising
result and few would be on board with such radical assumptions.
Finally, as we saw in section 2, the FEP already assumes a math-
ematical structure to be in place (be it a random dynamical system
or a Bayesian network). Therefore, in and of itself, the FEP has
nothing to say about how these mathematical structures should
be mapped onto physical structures.
All of the above suggest that Bayesian networks are not the
right kind of tools to delineate real-world boundaries in an objec-
tive and non-question-begging way. Perhaps ultimately these
problems are resolvable, but as far as we know, nearly no-one
in the literature has thus far paid any attention to them (for a
refreshing exception see Biehl [2017], and some of the references
therein). These considerations have led some authors behind the
more recent active inference literature to embrace instrumental-
ism about the whole framework, not just the Friston blanket con-
struct. Some have suggested that the active inference framework
should subscribe to a fundamentally instrumentalist approach to
scientific investigation, such that the use of Markov blankets to
demarcate organism–environment boundaries should be under-
stood just as another feature of our (scientific) models, rather
than making any ontological claims about the structure of the
world (see e.g., Andrews, 2020; Colombo, Elkin, & Hartmann,
2018; Ramstead et al., 2020a, 2020b; van Es, 2021). This kind of
global scientific instrumentalism is fine so far as it goes, and of
course has precedents elsewhere in the philosophical debates
about scientific realism (see e.g., Chakravartty, 2017 for a helpful
overview), but we do not think that it is reflective of the attitude
that most scientists (or even philosophers) take towards the kinds
of claims being made about Friston blankets in the active infer-
ence literature. Such global instrumentalism definitely does not
sit well with the BOO described above, and seems to be incompat-
ible with understanding FEP as providing a “formal ontology”
(Ramstead et al., 2019). Nonetheless, we are happy to settle for
a conditional conclusion here: insofar as one is a scientific realist,
and treats the seemingly ontological claims made about Friston
blankets in a realist manner, then some further metaphysical
assumptions are needed in order to warrant these claims.
7. Conclusion
Despite all of the issues and ambiguities pointed out in our above
treatment, the FEP and active inference framework have consider-
able following in the fields of neuroscience and biology, due in
part to ambitious claims regarding their unificatory potential
(Friston, 2010, 2019; Friston et al., 2017a; Hesp et al., 2019;
Kuchling, Friston, Georgiev, & Levin, 2020). Under the umbrella
term of predictive processing, they have also gained popularity in
philosophy of mind and cognitive science, where they appear to
play the role of a new conceptual tool that could settle centuries-
long disputes about the relationship between mind and life (Clark,
2013, 2015a, 2020; Friston et al., 2020; Hohwy, 2013). At the same
time, different parts of the framework have raised some impor-
tant, and in some cases yet-to-be-answered, scientific and philo-
sophical problems. Some of these problems have to do with the
capacity of the framework to account for traditional folk psycho-
logical distinctions between belief and desire (see e.g., Dewhurst,
2017; Klein, 2018; Yon, Heyes, & Press, 2020), although its
defenders have argued that it can account for desire in a novel
way (Clark, 2020; Wilkinson, Deane, Nave, & Clark, 2019).
Another, very common, kind of critique is that the framework
either does not enjoy any empirical support, or that the FEP is
empirically inadequate (Colombo & Palacios, 2021; Colombo &
Wright, 2021; Williams, 2021), and should therefore be consid-
ered to offer, at best, a redescription of existing data (see e.g.,
Cao, 2020; Colombo et al., 2018; Liwtin & Miłkowski, 2020).
16
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Yet another kind of critique argues that there is no significant
connection between the (a priori) FEP formalism on the one
hand, and the (empirical) process theories it is intended to sup-
port on the other (Colombo & Palacios, 2021; Colombo &
Wright, 2021; Williams, 2021), or that it presents a false equivo-
cation between probability and adaptive value (Colombo, 2020).
Other works, such as Di Paolo, Thompson, and Beer (2021)
and Raja, Valluri, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson (2021) have
recently disputed claims about the FEP representing a general
unifying principle, claiming that it fails to account for different
sensorimotor aspects of embodied and (autopoietic) enactive
cognition.
More relevant for what we have discussed here, Andrews
(2020) and van Es (2021) have recently argued against a realist
interpretation of the mathematical models described by FEP,
which are claimed to be better interpreted instrumentally.
Along the same lines, Baltieri et al. (2020) provided a worked-out
example of this instrumentalist view, where an engine coupled to
a Watt (centrifugal) governor is shown to perform active infer-
ence as an example of “pan-(active-)inferentionalism,” asking
what can possibly be gained by thinking of the behaviour of a
coupled
engine-mechanical
governor
system
in
terms
of
perception-action loops under the banner of free energy minimi-
zation. Finally, various technical aspects of the FEP are now under
scrutiny in works such as Rosas, Mediano, Biehl, Chandaria, and
Polani (2020); Biehl et al. (2021); and Aguilera, Millidge,
Tschantz, and Buckley (2021). Rosas et al. (2020) define a new
object, a “causal blanket,” based on ideas from computational
mechanics, in an attempt to overcome assumptions about
Langevin dynamics in a stationary/steady-state regime. Biehl
et al. (2021) cast doubts on the inconsistent mathematical treat-
ment of Markov blankets over the years, partially acknowledged
by Friston et al. (2021a) who now address such differences and
specifies new and more detailed constraints for a cohesive treat-
ment of Markov blankets in the FEP (see endnote 9). Aguilera
et al. (2021), on the other hand, question the relevance of the
FEP for sensorimotor accounts of living systems, given some of
its assumptions and in particular the description of agents’ behav-
iour in terms of free energy gradients on ensemble averages of
trajectories, claiming that (under the mathematical assumptions
presented in their paper) these “free energy gradients [are] unin-
formative about the behaviour of an agent or its specific trajecto-
ries” (see also Di Paolo et al. [2021] for a similar conceptual point,
and Da Costa, Friston, Heins, & Pavliotis [2021] and Parr, Da
Costa,
Heins,
Ramstead,
&
Friston
[2021]
for
possible
counterarguments).
These latter works come closest, at least in spirit, to the topics
discussed in this paper, which have to do with a disconnect
between the formal properties of Markov blankets and the way
they are deployed to support metaphysical claims made by the
FEP, especially in the context of active agents and living organ-
isms. After having been initially developed in the context of (var-
iational) inference problems, as a tool to simplify the calculations
of approximate posteriors by taking advantage of relations of con-
ditional independence (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012), Markov
blankets have been claimed by proponents of the FEP to clarify
the boundaries of the mind (Clark, 2017; Hohwy, 2017;
Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021), of living systems (Friston, 2013;
Kirchhoff, 2018; Kirchhoff et al., 2018), and even of social systems
(Fox, 2021; Ramstead et al., 2018; Rubin et al., 2020; Veissière
et al., 2020). Interestingly, in these papers a system gets defined
in terms of relations of independence made within a Bayesian
network. In other words, the Bayesian network takes precedence
over the physical world that it is supposed to model. In some pas-
sages it even appears that the world itself is taken to be a Bayesian
network, with the Markov blankets defining what it is to be a
“thing” within this world (Friston, 2013; Friston, 2019; Hipólito
et al., 2021; Kirchhoff et al., 2018). We then raised some possible
issues with this approach, namely the question of whether
Bayesian networks are merely an instrumental modelling tool
for the FEP framework, or whether the framework presupposes
some kind of more fundamental Bayesian graphical ontology.
All of this points towards a fundamental dilemma for anyone
interested in using Markov blankets to make substantial philo-
sophical claims about biological and cognitive systems (which is
what we take proponents of the FEP to be wanting to do). On
the one hand, Markov blankets can be used in their original
Pearl blanket guise, as a formal mathematical construct for per-
forming inference on a generative model. This usage is philosoph-
ically innocent but cannot, without further assumptions that need
to be explicitly stated, justify the kinds of conclusions that it is
sometimes used for in the FEP literature (see e.g., Hohwy, 2017;
Kirchhoff et al., 2018; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021). On the
other hand, Markov blankets can be used in a more ontologically
robust fashion, as what we have called Friston blankets, to demar-
cate actual worldly boundaries. This is surely a more exciting
application of the Markov blanket formalism, but it cannot be
simply or innocently read off the mathematics of the more stan-
dard usage advocated in statistics and machine learning (Pearl,
1988), and requires some additional technical (Biehl et al., 2021;
Friston, 2019; Parr, Da Costa, & Friston, 2020) and philosophical
(Friston et al., 2020; Hipólito et al., 2021; Ramstead et al., 2018)
assumptions that may in the end be doing all of the interesting
work themselves.
The difference between inference with and inference within a
model, here roughly corresponding to the use of Pearl and
Friston blankets, shows why the potential payoff of the latter con-
struct is much larger than the former. In inference with a model,
the graphical model is an epistemic tool for a scientist or organ-
ism to perform inference. In inference within a model the scientist
disappears from the scene, becoming a mere spectator of the
inference show unfolding before their eyes. Here the Friston blan-
ket specifies the anatomy of the target system: it is a formalization
of the boundary between this system and its environment.
Ultimately, the considerations presented in this paper leaves
the FEP theorist with a choice. One can accept a rather technical
and innocent conception of Markov blankets as an auxiliary for-
mal concept that define what nodes are relevant for variational
inference. This conception is admittedly scientifically useful but
has not yet lead to any philosophically interesting conclusions
about the nature of life or cognition. Alternatively, one can import
a number of stronger metaphysical assumptions about the math-
ematical structure of reality to support a realist reading, where the
blanket becomes a literal boundary between agents and their envi-
ronment. Such a strong realist reading cannot be justified by just
“doing the maths,” but rather needs to be independently argued
for, and no such argument has yet been offered.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank Micah Allen, Mel
Andrews, Martin Biehl, Daniel Dennett, Kevin Flowers, Hajo Greif, Julian
Kiverstein, Richard Menary, Thomas Parr, Nina Poth, Maxwell Ramstead,
Fernando Rosas, Matthew Sims, Filippo Torresan, Wanja Wiese, Tobias
Schlicht and members of his research group, Marcin Miłkowski and members
of his research group, and the Active Inference Lab for insightful and critical
discussions and timely feedback on previous versions of the manuscript. The
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
17
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

authors also thank the editor and eight reviewers for their time and effort. The
manuscript has benefited enormously from their critical reports.
Financial Support. JB is funded by a Macquarie Research Fellowship. KD’s
work is funded by the Volkswagen Stiftung grant no. 87 105. MB is a JSPS
International Research Fellow supported by a KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (No. JP19F19809).
Conflict of Interest. None.
Notes
1. There are also other graphical formalisms commonly adopted in the liter-
ature outside of the ones proposed by Pearl, showing advantages in highlight-
ing other features, for instance factor graphs (Bishop, 2006), but here the focus
will be solely on Bayesian networks.
2. It should be noted that in its initial definition (Pearl, 1988) Markov blankets
represented all possible sets of nodes shielding another node from the rest of
the network, while the notion of a Markov boundary was used to characterize
the smallest Markov blanket. Over time, however, the two definitions have
often come to be used interchangeably to describe the minimal set of nodes,
see for instance Bishop (2006), Murphy (2012). Here we will thus use
“Markov blanket” to refer to this latter notion.
3. Although Markov Blankets are typically presented visually as drawn on a
Bayesian graph, the conditional independencies required for a Markov blanket
can be obtained directly from the probability distribution.
4. The authors wish to credit Martin Biehl for this name, which he suggested
after first pointing out some of the crucial novelties introduced by Friston in
his use of Markov blankets.
5. Note that the time index t is different from the time horizon τ used to
describe instead the number of future steps to take into account when one
optimizes a policy of τ-steps.
6. However, see Millidge, Tschantz, Seth, and Buckley (2020) for a treatment
about the differences with more traditional frameworks for control as inference.
7. Unlike the “naïve” or fully factorized mean-field (Zhang et al., 2018) where
all latent variables are assumed to be independent, a structured mean-field
imposes, as the name suggests, some non-trivial structure, that is, independen-
cies across partitions of hidden variables rather than single ones.
8. Notice that the number of states identified as internal due to their coupling
could have been smaller or larger, depending on the cut-off point for the met-
ric of coupling used. It seems that in the original paper this was mostly an arbi-
trary choice following pragmatic, if somewhat unclear, considerations (Biehl,
2017; Friston et al., 2021b).
9. Crucially, Friston blankets should be understood in the context of stochastic
processes (i.e., time-indexed collections of random variables) rather than ran-
dom variables for which Pearl blankets are usually defined. This implies the
presence of an extra step whereby the nodes in the third panel ought to be
interpreted as part of a “time slice” of a stochastic process after it has reached
its non-equilibrium steady-state (NESS) (Friston et al., 2021a, 2021b).
Conditional independence is thus defined at the level of a single time slice
of the NESS density, under the strong assumption that such density is a useful
depiction of an agent–environment coupled system. Subsequently, and under a
number of further non-trivial assumptions (Friston et al., 2021a, or see next
note), this conditional independence is then applied to the dynamical cou-
plings across different variables of the process.
10. As highlighted by Biehl et al. (2021), the definition of Markov blankets
using the adjacency matrix is ambiguous, and necessitates further, non-trivial
constraints, that is, independencies on different partitions of the variables now
specified in Friston et al. (2021a), to be formally consistent with Pearl’s notion
ofblankets.AsFristonetal.(2021a)note,theuseoftheadjacencymatrix(dynam-
ical coupling or flow) has no direct relation to Pearl blankets, beyond a somewhat
contrived version of conditional independence. In light of our discussion here,
however, this aspect is not central, as we aim to showcase different issues in the
use of Pearl blankets advocated under the free energy principle and active infer-
ence implementations, that is, “Friston blankets,” even in their most recent for-
mulations (Friston, 2019; Friston et al., 2021a, 2021b).
11. The passage in Allen and Friston (2018) is part of a paragraph discussing
relations between Friston blankets and the concept of autopoiesis for systems
that “self-create,” maintaining their own existence over time via relational and
operational constraints (Maturana & Varela, 1972; see also Beer, 2004, 2014,
2020). This paragraph uses the paradigmatic example of an autopietic system:
the living cell. The notion of physical boundary is thus interpreted following
the given example, that is, a cell membrane.
12. This apparent reversal can also be seen, for instance, in the following
passages:
• Ramstead et al. (2019), “a Markov blanket induces a statistical partitioning
between internal (systemic) and external (environmental) states” even
though [and they do not specify the details] “Markov blankets are a result
of the system’s dynamics” (pp. 43–44)
• Hesp et al. (2019), “The notion of a Markov blanket, and the independencies
between states it induces, can be directly applied to […]” (p. 198)
• Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2019), “the Markov blanket for a cell […] renders
the internal states of the cell statistically independent from its surroundings,
and vice versa” (p. 69), “The Markov blanket concept […] provides a stat-
istical partitionioning of internal and external states” (p. 71), and “The pres-
ence of a Markov blanket renders internal and external states conditionally
independent of one another” (p. 71)
• Ramstead et al. (2020a), “The presence of a Markov blanket induces a con-
ditional independence between internal and external variables” (p. 7)
• Ramstead et al. (2021), “By inducing conditional independence (Pearl,
1988), Markov blankets enable us to define the boundaries between a system
and its environment, and thereby delimit the system as such (Friston, 2013,
2019; Friston et al., 2015a).” and “The existence of a Markov blanket induces
certain conditional independences: the presence of the blanket partitions the
system into […]” (p. 11)
• Hipólito et al. (2021), “Ultimately, the dependencies induced by Markov
blankets create a […]” (p. 90)
13. Note that specifications of these kinds do not require that anyone literally
believe that the world itself is composed of Bayesian graphs, nodes, and arrows
(and we are certainly not accusing anyone of this), but rather just that they
posit a direct, non-arbitrary mapping between a Markov blanket in a statistical
model and a real, and in some ways meaningful, boundary in the world. This
non-arbitrary mapping is sometimes attributed to the status of a structure-
preserving mapping, or isomorphism, for instance by Palacios et al. (2020)
where “[t]he isomorphism between a statistical and spatial boundary rests
on spatially dependent interactions among internal and external states.”
Although some formulations do suggest a literalist understanding of Markov
Blankets, it is the latter kind of project that we think is particularly widespread
in the contemporary literature and are criticising here.
14. As highlighted in Friston et al. (2010), the notion of “command” in active
inference is best understood in terms of proprioceptive predictions, with action
seen in terms of minimizing proprioceptive prediction errors. Here we stick to
widely accepted nomenclature for the sake of simplicity.
15. The sensorimotor perspective is inherent in active inference formulations
with, for instance, “[t]he treatment of neurons as if they were active agents”
(Hipólito et al., 2021).
16. Note that the problem of distinguishing proximal from distal interactions
is different from similar worries in philosophy of causation and in debates over
internalism and externalism. Here the problem is specific to the postulate of
using Markov blankets as tools for picking out active agents from the environ-
ments in which they are embedded.
17. In most cases, one might consider a relevant Friston blanket to be a struc-
ture that can be used to characterize a cell membrane as opposed to, say, a
structure that maps to an arbitrary fraction of a cell split into five parts,
where relations of conditional independence can nonetheless be identified
using different thresholds (cf. Friston et al., 2021b). This choice of relevance
is nonetheless a choice that has to be made at some point in the modelling pro-
cess, and cannot simply be read off the model itself. Friston et al. (2021b) ele-
gantly describe the problem: “The nonuniqueness of the particular partition is
a key practical issue. There is no pretense that there is any unique particular
partition. There are a vast number of particular partitions for any given cou-
pled dynamical system. In other words, by simply starting with different inter-
nal states – or indeed the number of internal states per particle – we would get
a different particular partition.” (pp. 245–246)
18
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Adams, R. A., Stephan, K., Brown, H., Frith, C., & Friston, K. J. (2013). The computa-
tional anatomy of psychosis. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 4, 47.
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle? arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.11203.
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computa-
tional framework for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.
Anderson, M. L. (2017). Of Bayes and bullets: An embodied, situated, targeting-based
account of predictive processing. In W. Wiese & T. K. Metzinger (Eds.), Philosophy
and predictive processing (Vol. 4, pp. 1–14). MINDGroup.
Andrews, M. (2020). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle.
[Preprint]. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18315
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by probabilistic inference. In Bishop, C. M., & Frey, B. J.
(Eds.), Proc. of the 9th Int. Workshop on artificial intelligence and statistics, 2003
(pp. 9–16). PMLR.
Baltieri, M., & Buckley, C. L. (2019). Generative models as parsimonious descriptions of
sensorimotor loops. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 42, e218.
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020). Predictions in the eye of the beholder:
An active inference account of Watt governors. Artificial life conference proceedings
(pp. 121–129). MIT Press.
Barandiaran, X. E., Di Paolo, E., & Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency: Individuality,
normativity, asymmetry, and spatio-temporality in action. Adaptive Behavior, 17(5),
367–386.
Beal, M. J. (2003). Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference. Doctoral
dissertation, UCL (University College London).
Beer, R. D. (2004). Autopoiesis and cognition in the game of life. Artificial Life, 10(3),
309–326.
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life. Artificial Life,
20(2), 183–206.
Beer, R. D. (2020). An investigation into the origin of autopoiesis. Artificial Life, 26(1),
5–22.
Beni, M. D. (2021). A critical analysis of Markovian monism. Synthese, 199, 6407–
6427. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-03075-x
Biehl, M. (2017). Formal approaches to a definition of agents. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Hertfordshire.
Biehl, M., Guckelsberger, C., Salge, C., Smith, S. C., & Polani, D. (2018). Expanding the
active inference landscape: More intrinsic motivations in the perception-action loop.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 12, 45.
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293.
Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer-Verlag.
Blei, D. M., Kucukelbir, A., & McAuliffe, J. D. (2017). Variational inference: A review for
statisticians. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 112(518), 859–877.
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free energy framework for modelling perception and
learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 76, 198–211.
Boik, J. C. (2021). Science-driven societal transformation, part III: Design. Sustainability,
13(2), 726.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scien-
tist: The free energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195
(6), 2417–2444.
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle
for action and perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
14, 55–79.
Cao, R. (2020). New labels for old ideas: Predictive processing and the interpretation of
neural signals. Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 11(3), 517–546.
Chakravartty, A. (2017). Scientific realism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia
of philosophy (summer 2017 edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/
entries/scientific-realism/
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H., & Fotopoulou, K. (2021). The first prior: From
co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life. Consciousness and Cognition, 91,
103117.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cog-
nitive science. Behavioral and BrainSciences, 36(3), 181–204.
Clark, A. (2015a). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford
University Press.
Clark, A. (2015b). Radical predictive processing. The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 53,
3–27.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket. In T. K. Metzinger & W. Wiese
(Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing: 3. Open MIND (pp. 1–19). MIND Group.
Clark, A. (2020). Beyond desire? Agency, choice, and the predictive mind. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 98(1), 1–15.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58(1), 7–19.
Colombo, M. (2020). Maladaptive social norms, cultural progress, and the free-energy
principle. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, e100.
Colombo, M., Elkin, L., & Hartmann, S. (2018). Being realist about Bayes, and the pre-
dictive processing theory of mind. The British Journal for Philosophy of Science, 72(1).
Colombo, M., & Palacios, P. (2021). Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free
energy principle in biology. Biology & Philosophy, 36(5), 1–26.
Colombo, M., & Seriès, P. (2012). Bayes in the brain – on Bayesian modelling in neuro-
science. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 63, 697–723.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2021). First principles in the life sciences: The free-energy
principle, organism, and mechanism. Synthese, 198(14), 3463–3488.
Da Costa, L., Friston, K., Heins, C., & Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian mechanics for sta-
tionary processes. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 477(2256), 20210518.
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., & Friston, K. (2020). Active inference
on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 99, 102447.
Daunizeau, J. (2017). The variational Laplace approach to approximate Bayesian infer-
ence. [preprint] arXiv:1703.02089.
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., & Zemel, R. S. (1995). The Helmholtz machine.
Neural computation, 7(5), 889–904.
Dewhurst, J. (2017). Folk psychology and the Bayesian brain. In Philosophy and predictive
processing (pp. 1–13). MIND Group.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2021). Laying down a forking path:
Incompatibilities between enaction and the free energy principle.
Dołęga, K. (2017). Moderate predictive processing. In T. K. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.),
Philosophy and predictive processing (pp. 1–19). MIND Group.
Fausto-Sterling, A. (2021). A dynamic systems framework for gender/sex development:
From sensory input in infancy to subjective certainty in toddlerhood. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 15, 150.
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free energy. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 4, 215.
Fox, S. (2021). Active inference: Applicability to different types of social organization
explained through reference to industrial engineering and quality management.
Entropy, 23(2), 198.
Friston, K., Sengupta, B., & Auletta, G. (2014). Cognitive dynamics: From attractors to
active inference. Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(4), 427–445.
Friston, K. J. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biologicalsciences, 360(1456), 815–836.
Friston, K. J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Computational Biology, 4(11).
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 2012(14),
2100–2121.
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475.
Friston, K. J. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. [preprint]
arXiv:1906.10184.
Friston, K. J., & Ao, P. (2012). Free energy, value, and attractors. Computational and
mathematical methods in medicine, Volume 2012, Article ID 937860.
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Some interesting observations on the free
energy principle. Entropy, 2021(23), 1076. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23081076
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior: A free
energy formulation. Biological Cybernetics, 102(3), 227–260.
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi,
A. (2021b). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience,
5(1), 211–251.
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017a). Active
inference: A process theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., & Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage,
19(4), 1273–1302.
Friston, K. J., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 100(1), 70–87.
Friston, K. J., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., & Pezzulo, G. (2015a). Knowing one’s place: A free
energy approach to pattern regulation. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 12(105),
20141383.
Friston, K. J., Mattout, J., Trujillo-Barreto, N., Ashburner, J., & Penny, W. (2007).
Variational free energy and the Laplace approximation. Neuroimage, 34(1), 220–234.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and
active inference. Network Neuroscience, 1(4), 381–414.
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015b).
Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214.
Friston, K. J., Trujillo-Barreto, N., & Daunizeau, J. (2008). DEM: A variational treatment
of dynamic systems. NeuroImage, 41(3), 849–885.
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516.
Gardner, M. (1970). Mathematical games: The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s
new solitaire game “life.” Scientific American, 223, 120–123.
Gładziejewski, P. (2016). Predictive coding and representationalism. Synthese, 193(2),
559–582.
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
19
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Gregory, R. L. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. B, Biological Sciences, 290(1038), 181–197.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2006). Optimal predictions in everyday cognition.
Psychological Science, 17(9), 767–773.
Grossberg, S. (1980). How does a brain build a cognitive code? Psychological Review,
87(1), 1–51.
Hafner, V. V., Loviken, P., Villalpando, A. P., & Schillaci, G. (2020). Prerequisites for an
artificial self. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 14, 1–10.
Hesp, C., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Badcock, P., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2019). A
multi-scale view of the emergent complexity of life: A free energy proposal. In
Evolution, development and complexity (pp. 195–227). Springer.
Hinton, G. E., & Zemel, R. S. (1994). Autoencoders, minimum description length, and
Helmholtz free energy. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3–
10). Morgan Kaufmann.
Hipólito, I., Ramstead, M. J. D., Convertino, L., Bhat, A., Friston, K. J., & Parr, T. (2021).
Markov blankets in the brain. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 125, 88–97.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285.
Hohwy, J. (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In T. K. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.),
Philosophy and predictive processing: 2. Open MIND (pp. 1–15). MIND Group.
Jefferys, W. H., & Berger, J. O. (1991). Sharpening Occams razor on a Bayesian strop.
Bulletin of the Astronomical Society, 23(3), 1259.
Jordan, M. I., Ghahramani, Z., Jaakkola, T. S., & Saul, L. K. (1999). An introduction to
variational methods for graphical models. Machine Learning, 37(2), 183–233.
Kappen, H. J., Gómez, V., & Opper, M. (2012). Optimal control as a graphical model
inference problem. Machine Learning, 87(2), 159–182.
Khezri, D. B. (2021). Free energy governance-sensing, sensemaking, and strategic renewal-
surprise-minimization and firm survival. Doctoral dissertation, Universität St. Gallen.
Kiefer, A., & Hohwy, J. (2018). Content and misrepresentation in hierarchical generative
models. Synthese, 195, 2387–2415.
Kiefer, A. B. (2020). Psychophysical identity and free energy. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 17(169), 20200370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0370
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2018). Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life–mind continuity thesis.
Synthese, 195(6), 2519–2540.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended consciousness and predictive processing:
A third-wave view. Routledge.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198(5), 4791–4810. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-019-02370-y
Kirchhoff, M. D., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K. J., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of
The Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Robertson, I. (2018). Enactivism and predictive processing: A non-
representational view. Philosophical Explorations, 21(2), 264–281.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & van Es, T. (2021). A universal ethology challenge to the free
energy principle: Species of inference and good regulators. Biology & Philosophy,
36, 8.
Kiverstein, J., Kirchhoff, M., & Thacker, M. (2021). Why pain experience is not a con-
trolled hallucination of the body. [preprint]. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18770/
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195(6), 2541–2557.
Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: The role of uncertainty in neural
coding and computation. Trends in Neurosciences, 27(12), 712–719.
Knill, D. C., & Richards, W. (1996). Perception as Bayesian inference. Cambridge
University Press.
Körding, K., & Wolpert, D. (2004). Bayesian integration in sensorimotor learning. Nature,
427, 244–247.
Kuchling, F., Friston, K. J., Georgiev, G., & Levin, M. (2020). Morphogenesis as Bayesian
inference: A variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex biolog-
ical systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 33, 88–108.
Lee, T. S., & Mumford, D. (2003). Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the visual cortex.
JOSA A, 20(7), 1434–1448.
Litwin, P., & Miłkowski, M. (2020). Unification by fiat: Arrested development of predic-
tive processing. Cognitive Science, 44, e12867.
MacKay, D. J. (2003). Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. CUP.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1972). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the
living (Vol. 42). Springer Science & Business Media.
Menary, R., & Gillett, A. J. (2020). Are Markov blankets real and does it matter? In D.
Mendonca, M. Curado, & S. S. Gouveia (Eds.), The philosophy and science of predictive
processing (pp. 39–58). Bloomsbury Academic.
Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020). On the relationship
between active inference and control as inference. International workshop on active
inference (pp. 3–11). Springer.
Murphy, K. P. (2012). Machine learning: A probabilistic perspective. MIT press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic approach to human reasoning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(8), 349–357.
Opper, M., & Archambeau, C. (2009). The variational Gaussian approximation revisited.
Neural computation, 21(3), 786–792.
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). On Markov blankets
and hierarchical self-organisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486, 110089.
Parisi, G. (1988). Statistical field theory. Addison-Wesley.
Parr, T. (2021). Message passing and metabolism. Entropy, 23(5), 606.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets, information geometry
and stochastic thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
378(2164), 20190159.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Heins, C., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Memory and
Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1105.
Parr, T., Mirza, M. B., Cagnan, H., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Dynamic causal modelling of
active vision. Journal of Neuroscience, 39(32), 6265–6275.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible infer-
ence. Morgan Kaufmann.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Penny, W. D., Friston, K. J., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, S., & Nichols, T. (Eds.) (2011).
Statistical parametric mapping: The analysis of functional brain images. Elsevier.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical active inference: A theory of
motivated control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(4), 294–306.
Poirier, P., Faucher, L., & Bourdon, J. N. (2021). Cultural blankets: Epistemological
pluralism in the evolutionary epistemology of mechanisms. Journal for General
Philosophy of Science, 52(2), 335–350.
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. L. (2021). The Markov blan-
ket trick: On the scope of the free energy principle and active inference. Physics of Life
Reviews, 39(2), 49–72. doi:10.1016/j.plrev.2021.09.001
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020a). Is the free energy principle a formal
theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic rep-
resentations. Entropy, 22(8), 889.
Ramstead, M. J., Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Smith, R., Constant, A., & Friston, K. (2021).
Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle. Neuroscience
& Biobehavioral Reviews, 120, 109–122. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti-
cle/pii/S0149763420306643
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Multiscale inte-
gration: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese, 198, 41–70.
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2020b). A tale of two densities: Active
inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225–239.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s ques-
tion: A free energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.
Rao, R. P., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience,
2(1), 79–87.
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A. M., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020). Causal blan-
kets: Theory and algorithmic framework. In T. Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L. Buckley, &
C. De Boom (Eds.), Active Inference. IWAI 2020. Communications in Computer and
Information Science (Vol. 1326, pp. 187–198). Springer.
Rubin, S., Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Future climates: Markov blankets and
active inference in the biosphere. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 17, 20200503.
Sajid, N., Ball, P. J., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Active inference: Demystified and
compared. Neural Computation, 33(3), 674–712.
Sánchez-Cañizares, J. (2021). The free energy principle: Good science and questionable
philosophy in a grand unifying theory. Entropy, 23(2), 238. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e23020238
Seth, A., Millidge, B., Buckley, C. L., & Tschantz, A. (2020). Curious inferences: Reply to
Sun and Firestone on the dark room problem. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(9),
681–683.
Sims, M. (2020). How to count biological minds: Symbiosis, the free energy principle, and
reciprocal multiscale integration. Synthese, 199, 2157–2179. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-020-02876-w
Stephan, K. E., Penny, D., Daunizeau, W. J., Moran, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2009). Bayesian
model selection for group studies. NeuroImage, 46(4), 1004–1017.
Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Moran, R. J., den Ouden, H. E., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. J.
(2010). Ten simple rules for dynamic causal modeling. Neuroimage, 49(4), 3099–3109.
Sun, Z., & Firestone, C. (2020a). The dark room problem. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24,
346–348.
Sun, Z., & Firestone, C. (2020b). Optimism and pessimism in the predictive brain. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 24, 683–685.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind:
Statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science (New York, N.Y.), 331(6022), 1279–1285.
Tishby, N., & Polani, D. (2011). Information theory of decisions and actions.
Perception-action cycle (pp. 601–636). Springer.
Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020). Learning action-oriented models
through active inference. PLoS Computational Biology, 16(4), e1007805.
Van de Cruys, S., Friston, K. J., & Clark, A. (2020). Controlled optimism: Reply to Sun
and Firestone on the dark room problem. Trends in Cognitive Science, 24(9), 680–681.
20
Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

van Es, T. (2021). Living models or life modelled? On the use of models in the free
energy
principle.
Adaptive
Behavior,
29(3),
315–329.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
1059712320918678
van Es, T., & Kirchhoff, M. D. (2021). Between pebbles and organisms: Weaving
autonomy into the Markov blanket. Synthese, 199, 6623–6644. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-021-03084-w
Veissière, S. P., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2020).
Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and culture.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, 1–21.
Vowels, M. J., Camgoz, N. C., & Bowden, R. (2021). D’ya like DAGs? A survey on struc-
ture learning and causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02582, 1–35.
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Examining the continuity between life and mind: Is
there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and representationality?
Philosophies, 6(1), 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies6010018
Wilkinson, S., Deane, G., Nave, K., & Clark, A. (2019). Getting warmer: Predictive pro-
cessing and the nature of emotion. The value of emotions for knowledge (pp. 101–119).
Palgrave Macmillan.
Williams, D. (2018). Predictive processing and the representation wars. Minds and
Machines, 28, 141–172
Williams, D. (2021). Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation? Philosophical
Studies, 195, 2459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11098-021-01722-0
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen. Oxford University Press.
Yon, D., Heyes, C., & Press, C. (2020). Beliefs and desires in the predictive brain. Nature
Communications, 11, 4404.
Zhang, C., Bütepage, J., Kjellström, H., & Mandt, S. (2018). Advances in variational
inference. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41(8),
2008–2026.
Open Peer Commentary
Recurrent, nonequilibrium systems
and the Markov blanket assumption
Miguel Aguilera
and Christopher L. Buckley
School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton
BN1 9QJ, UK
sci@maguilera.net, C.L.Buckley@sussex.ac.uk
https://maguilera.net/, https://christopherlbuckley.com/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000309, e184
Abstract
Markov blankets – statistical independences between system and
environment – have become popular to describe the boundaries
of living systems under Bayesian views of cognition. The intui-
tion behind Markov blankets originates from considering acy-
clic, atemporal networks. In contrast, living systems display
recurrent, nonequilibrium interactions that generate pervasive
couplings between system and environment, making Markov
blankets highly unusual and restricted to particular cases.
In the target article, Bruineberg and colleagues disrupt current
debates about the role of Markov blankets in demarcating the
boundaries between living systems and their environments. The
authors accurately describe the gap between a Markov blanket
as a useful property for statistical inference and the more ontolog-
ically loaded concept in the free energy principle (FEP), as a
boundary within which Bayesian inference occurs. While the
arguments pursued by the target article are both correct and
important, we think that a fundamental concern remains unad-
dressed as the paper tacitly accepts (as generally the FEP does)
that Markov blankets can be identified largely on the basis of
the structural connectivity of a system (as opposed to its func-
tional connectivity).
A Markov blanket is defined as a set of variables (the “blan-
ket”) that separates two other sets of variables within a system,
rendering them conditionally independent. That is, if the state of
the blanket is fixed, the first set of variables (e.g., an agent)
becomes independent of the second set (e.g., the environment).
This property, also known as the global Markov condition
(Richardson & Spirtes, 1996), depends on the (conditional) func-
tional couplings describing the statistical interdependencies of a
system. Markov blankets were initially introduced in the context
of Bayesian networks (Pearl, 1988), which take the form of
directed acyclic graphs. In such acyclic models, Markov blankets
can be directly identified by applying a simple rule to the struc-
tural connectivity alone (e.g., Fig. 1A). In particular, the
Markov blanket of a set of nodes x contains the parent nodes of
x, the children nodes of x and the parents of each child (where
children and parents of x are defined as the nodes with incom-
ing/outgoing connections from/to x). This specific sparse struc-
tural connectivity is defined as the local Markov condition
(Richardson & Spirtes, 1996).
The FEP derives much of its intuitions about Markov blankets
from acyclic models. However, the theory takes the idea much
further, both philosophically and mathematically. The FEP
often considers the local Markov condition sufficient for a
Markov blanket (Friston, 2013, 2019), suggesting that a boundary
between system and environment arises naturally from this sparse
structural connectivity as in directed acyclic graphs, without con-
sidering functional dynamics. Recent works have refined this
argument, and justify a similar equivalence of Markov blankets
and structural connectivity under an asymptotic approximation
to a weak-coupling equilibrium (Friston et al., 2021b, see Eq.
[S8] in Supplementary material). Under this assumption, some
works have predicted that Markov blankets will be commonplace
in adaptive systems, for example, in brain networks (Friston et al.,
2021b; Hipólito et al., 2021).
Under assumptions of either acyclic models or asymptotic
equilibrium, previous works have focused solely on the structural
connectivity between system elements. However, living systems
present two crucial properties that make the occurrence of
Markov blankets difficult: (1) they display cycles in the form of
both reentrant connectivity and loops of interaction with
their environment, and (2) they behave far from equilibrium,
usually exhibiting asymmetric interactions both between compo-
nents and with the environment. These properties make the
relationship
between
structural
and
functional
connectivity
non-trivial.
In a recent article (Aguilera, Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley,
2022), we studied analytically the existence of Markov blankets
in nonequilibrium linear systems with recurrent connections. In
these systems, their cyclic, asymmetric structure propagates rever-
berant activity system-wide, generating couplings beyond their
structural connectivity. As a consequence, for most parameter
configurations of a system, the sparse connectivity of the local
Markov condition does not result in a Markov blanket. That is,
even if a system only interacts with the environment via a physical
boundary (e.g., a cell membrane or a perception–action interface),
it will in general not display the conditional independence associ-
ated with a Markov blanket, a crucial issue that has been ignored
in the FEP literature until very recently (Aguilera et al., 2022;
Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai, 2021).
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
21
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

These results raise fundamental and primary concerns about
the frequent use of Markov blankets, not only in the FEP, but
more generally as an explanatory concept for natural phenomena.
A recent article (Friston, Da Costa, & Parr, 2021a) has suggested
that additional conditions (a sparsity of solenoidal couplings, a
type of dynamical flows driving systems out of equilibrium)
guarantee the emergence of Markov blankets, our study shows
that these additional conditions become even more unlikely in
the presence of recurrent connectivity in the studied non-
equilibrium dynamics (Aguilera et al., 2022). It is important to
note that these studies were restricted to linear systems and the
generalization of these conclusions to nonlinear systems is yet
to be studied. However, one could expect that nonlinear interac-
tions might create a larger gap between intuitions drawn from
structural considerations and actual functional couplings in the
system.
These results do not imply that recurrent, nonequilibrium sys-
tems can never display Markov blankets. Our point, however, is
that this only happens for highly specific cases, and certainly
does not straightforwardly follow from the identification of a
physical boundary. Therefore, it cannot be taken for granted
that biological systems operate in this narrow parameter space.
Such a finding would have significant implications for the physics
of biological systems. Nevertheless, without evidence of this,
debates about the implications of Markov blankets for living sys-
tems seem presumptuous and risk relegating the role of Markov
blankets in elucidating the properties of living systems to the
level of a potentially misleading metaphor rather than a verifiable
hypothesis.
Financial support. M. A. is funded by the European Commission’s under a
Marie Skłodowska-Curie Action (grant agreement 892715). C. L. B. is sup-
ported by BBRSC grant BB/P022197/1.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2022). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews, 40, 24–50. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.11.001
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23030293
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. J. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. ArXiv:1906.10184
[q-Bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Some interesting observations on the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(8), 1076. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23081076
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi,
A. (2021b). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience,
5(1), 211–251. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00175
Hipólito, I., Ramstead, M. J. D., Convertino, L., Bhat, A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2021).
Markov blankets in the brain. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 125, 88–97.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.003
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible infer-
ence. Morgan Kaufmann.
Richardson, T. S., & Spirtes, P. (1996). Automated discovery of linear feedback models.
Carnegie Mellon (Department of Philosophy).
The seductive allure of cargo
cult computationalism
Micah Allena,b,c
aAarhus Institute of Advanced Studies, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark; bCenter of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University,
8000 Aarhus, Denmark and cCambridge Psychiatry, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 8AH, UK
micah@cfin.au.dk
https://www.the-ecg.org/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000279, e185
Figure 1 (Aguilera and Buckley). Structural and func-
tional couplings in cyclic versus acyclic networks.
The left-hand figures show the structural connectivity
of directed graphs. The right-hand figures show the
conditional functional couplings of the system when
the state of the “blanket” s, a is fixed. In directed acy-
clic graphs (A), the structural and functional couplings
are directly related, and fixing the boundary results in
conditional independence of x, y, yielding a Markov
blanket. In directed cyclic graphs (B), the recurrent
structural connections result in additional functional
couplings between variables, generating a new cou-
pling between x, y that “crosses” the boundary, there-
fore not resulting in a Markov blanket in general.
22
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues report a striking confusion, in which
the formal Bayesian notion of a “Markov blanket” has been fre-
quently misunderstood and misapplied to phenomena of mind
and life. I argue that misappropriation of formal concepts is per-
vasive in the “predictive processing” literature, and echo Richard
Feynman in suggesting how we might resist the allure of cargo
cult computationalism.
The first principle is that you must not fool yourself – and you are the eas-
iest person to fool.
— Richard Feynman (1974)
In their compelling arguments, Bruineberg and colleagues reveal
how the mathematical, Bayesian construct of a “Markov blanket”
has become a go-to explanans in topics as far-reaching as neuro-
science, sociology, the philosophy of mind, and epistemology.
Through careful analyses of the prerequisite formalisms, they
reveal how many of these works confuse a realist understanding
of Markov blankets with their actual properties as defined by for-
mal mathematics. A consequence of this confusion is that Markov
blankets are ascribed properties they do not possess and are fre-
quently leveraged to explain phenomena for which they have little
direct relevance. Indeed, it has been argued Markov blankets
demarcate the definition of life (Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios,
Friston, & Kiverstein, 2018), can guide an Asimov-like attempt
at psychohistory (Allen, 2018; Ramstead, Badcock, & Friston,
2018; Veissière, Constant, Ramstead, Friston, & Kirmayer,
2019), and even extend cognition to plants (Calvo & Friston,
2017). Bruineberg and colleagues argue that these and many sim-
ilar arguments fail to capture what is and is not offered by Markov
blankets and proffer a helpful framework for understanding and
applying Markovian concepts, based on an informed analysis of
their actual formal properties.
As I read the target article, I could not help but think of the
late Richard Feynman’s now infamous remarks, delivered to the
Caltech class of 1974, in which he warned of the dangers of
“cargo cult science” (Feynman, 1974). Prior to the commence-
ment address, Feynman visited the Esalen Institute, a well-known
nexus for “alternative” science. He recounted how, to his surprise,
many of the advocates of esoteric mysticism and parapsychology
he met there inevitably presented their ideas as scientific, when
they were clearly anything but. But perhaps more worrying, he
also remarked how many of the styles of argumentation he
encountered could also be found in mainstream fields of psychol-
ogy, neuroscience, and even physics. Feynman dubbed these
trends as “cargo cult science” and outlined how to identify and
avoid becoming one.
What then, is cargo cult science? Cargo cults were first
described during the Second World War, when Melanesian
and other Pacific Islanders sought to capture the technological
and economic powers of the Allied and Japanese forces who
would
frequently
land
there
to
trade
cargo
for
goods.
Convinced by their spiritual leaders that such awesome wealth
and technological power would be shared with them, the islands
formed ritualistic cults fetishizing outward characteristics of the
foreign powers. By wearing their uniforms, making totem rifles,
and marching around the beach, these cults hoped that the gods
would also bestow upon them the same powers of those they
imitated.
Much like these namesake cults, Feynman described cargo cult
science as generally being that which sought the appeal and
authority of the scientific method, but which failed to live up to
its standard in several key regards. First and foremost, a key qual-
ity lacking in cargo cult science was a radical commitment to sci-
entific integrity – a commitment to acting as one’s own harshest
critic. Other key signs of possible cultism included: (1) a failure to
engage critically with both the strengths and faults of any theoret-
ical
or
empirical
postulate,
(2)
an
insistence
on
doing
pseudo-experiments that could not have come out otherwise,
(3) a kind of ahistorical perspective in which key data points or
advances are overlooked or ignored entirely, and crucially, (4) a
surface appeal to explanatory devices or scientific concepts with-
out a deeper engagement.
In recent years, I have observed a steady growth of these sorts
of errors in the predictive processing literature. Chief among these
is a casual, devil-may-care appropriation of computational con-
cepts and the outward appearances of computationalism without
a deeper engagement. This takes several forms: For example, the
description of pseudo-equations as Bayesian “models,”1 or the fre-
quent introduction of new psychological “theories” rehashing
concepts such as “priors,” “prediction errors,” “precision,” or
“Markov Blankets” as explanatory in and of themselves.2 A
more recent trend is found in the burgeoning volume of so-called
“in silico” demonstrations, wherein an off the shelf Markovian
model is merely re-parameterized and then described as a new
“model” of some complex phenomenon – emotion (Hesp et al.,
2021), ecological niche construction (Bruineberg, Rietveld, Parr,
van Maanen, & Friston, 2018), or interoception (Allen, Levy,
Parr, & Friston, 2019) are all salient examples. Typically, such
demonstrations involve minimal reshaping of the underlying
models themselves, which is remarkable considering the breadth
of topics to which they are applied.
A similar error can be found frequently in empirical studies of
various psychological phenomena – a kind of computational pres-
tidigitation, in which a construct such as “precision” is appealed
to, an experiment is conducted, and then a paper produced that
proudly claims to have provided evidence for the underlying com-
putational theory. For example, experiment in which attention to
the body is manipulated, and some consequent alteration in an
ambiguous data feature is observed, which is then interpreted
unambiguously
as
“evidence
for
precision
weighting”
(Petzschner et al., 2019). While predictive processing will certainly
claim the credit here, it seems obvious that in the absence of an
actual model fitting procedure, just about any psychological or
computational theory could explain the obtained results. This
trick is pervasive in a new flood of psychological and neuroscien-
tific experiments in which attention, expectation, confidence, or
other concepts with a similar sounding cousin in formal theory
of can be found and manipulated, a high impact paper produced,
and no attempt at true falsification made.
The issue is of course that across all these examples there is a
failure to engage critically and directly with the underlying formal
constructs, and a commensurate failure to apply appropriate com-
putational methods to enable falsification and ultimately, safe-
guard against pseudoscience. Critical steps for establishing
Feynman’s radical honesty – such as model cross-validation,
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
23
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

model falsification, or even fitting to empirical data at all, are few
and far between (Palminteri, Wyart, & Koechlin, 2017; Wilson &
Collins, 2019). It is salient then that in the same lecture, Feynman
famously warned of his “first principle.” Too many of us increas-
ingly risk violating these ideals, perhaps in hopes of riding the
Bayesian wave to the promised land of high impact computational
neuroscience papers. I applaud Bruineberg and colleagues for
showing us how to leave the cargo cult behind.
Financial support. MA is supported by a Lundbeckfonden Fellowship
(under Grant R272-2017-4345), and the AIAS-COFUND II fellowship pro-
gramme that is supported by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 (under Grant 754513), and the Aarhus
University Research Foundation.
Conflict of interest. None.
Notes
1. See, e.g., “This model is formalized by the following equation: P(Mommy|
Interoception, Exteroception) ∝P(Mommy) × P(Interoception|Mommy) × P
(Exteroception|Mommy),” from Atzil, Gao, Fradkin, & Barrett (2018). See
another similar example in Allen and Tsakiris (2018).
2. Aptly dubbed the “Bayes Glaze” by anonymous twitter commentator,
@Neuroskeptic.
References
Allen, M. (2018). The foundation: Mechanism, prediction, and falsification in Bayesian
enactivism: Comment on “Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formula-
tion” by Maxwell James Désormeau Ramstead et al. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 17–20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.01.007
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). In the body’s eye: The computational
anatomy of interoceptive inference. BioRxiv, 603928. https://doi.org/10.1101/603928
Allen, M., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). The body as first prior: Interoceptive predictive processing
and the primacy. In M. Tsakiris, & H. De Preester (Eds.), The interoceptive mind: From
homeostasis to Awareness (p. 27). Oxford Univeristy Press.
Atzil, S., Gao, W., Fradkin, I., & Barrett, L. F. (2018). Growing a social brain. Nature
Human Behaviour, 2(9), 624–636. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0384-6
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-energy
minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A niche construction perspective.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 455, 161–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.
002
Calvo, P., & Friston, K. (2017). Predicting green: Really radical (plant) predictive process-
ing. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 14(131), 20170096. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2017.0096
Feynman, R. P. (1974). Cargo cult science. Engineering and Science, 37(7), 10–13.
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Deeply
felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep active inference. Neural Computation,
33(2), 398–446. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01341
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal
of the Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.
0792
Palminteri, S., Wyart, V., & Koechlin, E. (2017). The importance of falsification in com-
putational cognitive modeling. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(6), 425–433. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.03.011
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A., Wellstein, K. V., Paolini, G., Do, C. T., & Stephan, K. E.
(2019). Focus of attention modulates the heartbeat evoked potential. NeuroImage, 186,
595–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.11.037
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s ques-
tion: A free-energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J.
(2019). Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and
culture.
Behavioral
and
Brain
Sciences,
43,
e90.
https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X19001213
Wilson, R. C., & Collins, A. G. (2019). Ten simple rules for the computational modeling
of behavioral data. ELife, 8, e49547. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.49547
Making reification concrete: A
response to Bruineberg et al.
Mel Andrews
Department of Philosophy, The University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221,
USA
mel.andrews@tufts.edu
www.mel-andrews.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000310, e186
Abstract
The principal target of this article is the reification Bruineberg
et al. perceive of formalism within the literature on the varia-
tional free energy minimization (VFEM) framework. The
authors do not provide a definition of reification, as none yet
exists. Here I offer one. On this definition, the objects of the
authors’ critiques fall short of full-blown reification – as do
the authors themselves.
Scientific modelling is a bit like playing a game of pretend. We
play soldiers and pretend our sticks to be guns; we play explorers
and pretend the sand to be lava. Misrepresentations, distortions,
and untruths run rampant in scientific models. Such idealisations
are harmless, so long as we do not forget that we have made them;
so long as we do not forget that the sand is really sand and our
friends really our friends.
Imagining the developing organism to be a generative model,
or the brain a predictive engine can be scientifically fecund. It
requires, however, a bit of suspension of disbelief. It requires
the scientist to dream up a mapping between two things which
are fundamentally unalike; to envision the world as though it
really were a directed acyclic graph, a phase space, Shannon infor-
mation measures over a Riemannian manifold. We come to talk
as though these were one and the same.
Formal modelling, as with science in general, aims at uncover-
ing causal patterns (Potochnik, 2017). Philosophers of science
hold
scientific
models
to
consist
of
interpreted
structure
(Weisberg, 2013). Take structure to be a mathematical system;
an interpretation or construal thereof relates this formal structure
to a target phenomenon of interest. Model structures bear no
intrinsic representation relations to targets (Nguyen & Frigg,
2021). We stipulate a relation of partial representation between
model structure and target in order to put the model to work.
Crucially, there will be features of any model structure that do
not map onto any feature of the systems we utilise them to inves-
tigate. This makes modelling prone to undergo reification.
The mere employment of an idealisation or the application of
an idealised model is not yet a reification, however; nor is the mix-
ing of math and metaphorical language. Reification is the mis-
mapping of formal structure onto target phenomena – or
theoretical representation thereof – in a manner that leads us to
misapprehend the causal structure of nature. Reification is defini-
tionally an epistemic error.
The central move in Bruineberg et al. is to distinguish between
a strictly formal reading of the Markov blanket construct, as
developed in Pearl (1988), and a conceptually – even metaphysi-
cally – laden notion, as wielded under the variational free energy
24
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

minimization (VFEM) framework. It is this “reification of the
Markov blanket construct” in the research programme centred
around this second notion that they denounce.
“[M]any authors in the field,” they write, “are seemingly not aware of this
process of reification, leading to the conflation of several different kinds of
boundaries in the literature: Markov blankets are characterized alterna-
tively as statistical boundaries, spatial boundaries, ontological boundaries,
or autopoietic boundaries.”
One way to view this is as a multifold reification. But I think
that there is a much more natural reading available, namely that
the Markov blanket is simply a mathematical fixture of the
VFEM framework – held as contentless formal modelling frame-
work. It is utilised to build many different models that differ with
respect to their conceptual content.
I have argued (Andrews, 2021) that the VFEM framework is
a mathematical model structure and can do no conceptual or
philosophical work on its own. The interpreted formal structure
of VFEM models, however, can. Such models typically operate
in an intuition-pumping capacity; they function to shape our
conceptual grasp on the causal structure of target systems of
interest, ranging from microphage to macrocosm (Kirchhoff,
Parr, Palacios, Friston, & Kiverstein, 2018; Kuchling, Friston,
Georgiev, & Levin, 2019; Rubin, Parr, Da Costa, & Friston,
2020). What Bruineberg et al. take to be assertions about
nature are mere modelling gambits.
There is a crucial distinction to be drawn between claims made
about the causal structure of nature that result from a modelling
exercise and idealisations or gambits involved in the modelling
procedure which may be literally untrue in reference to the mod-
el’s target – and which, indeed, hold no pretence to truth
(Potochnik, 2017). Not all scientific modelling efforts aim to fur-
nish such assertions, however. Some modelling work furthers our
epistemic aims of latching onto causal patterns in the world by
enabling us to reenvision the form that such causal architectures
could take. All modelling aims at facilitating human understand-
ing, but not all modelling aims at truth. This entails that we will
have different degrees of commitment to the posits involved in
our modelling efforts.
Interpreted model structure does not consist of knowledge about
the natural world. The interpretation of a formal model merely maps
it onto our conceptual representations of things which we hold to
exist in nature. Facts, or tentative facts, are only generated when a
model is put into appropriate coordination with an empirical mea-
surement procedure. Not all scientific modelling, however, is in dia-
logue with data in this manner. We run into trouble when we treat
modelling practices not aimed at knowledge – conceived as suffi-
ciently true causal patterns – as generating knowledge.
Game-theoretic modelling in the social sciences or optimality
modelling in biology do not on their own generate knowledge of
natural systems, because they are not coordinated with the results
of empirical measurement procedures. The use of VFEM models
occupies a similar epistemic position. So long as we keep this con-
text in view, the conceptual exploration facilitated by such models
is harmless.
Bruineberg et al. understand VFEM models to be after claims
about the causal structure of systems in the world because they
implicitly take the epistemic utility of modelling to reside solely
in offering truth-evaluable assertions about nature. The loose,
analogical reasoning of the literature surrounding the VFEM for-
malism strikes them as would-be statements of fact. Were this the
case, it would indeed be a reification, and an egregious one, at
that. I want us to resist, however, the temptation to read the liter-
ature in this light.
Indeed, if reification were merely talk of the world as though it
had formal properties, or talk of formal structure as though it had
empirical or conceptual content, Bruineberg et al. would them-
selves be guilty of the reification fallacy, for they speak of
Pearl’s (1988) Markov boundary as being “substantiated by the
empirical literature,” and address its “scientific credibility.” The
existence and use of a formal tool, however, cannot receive empir-
ical substantiation.
Thus the takeaway of this exposition is not that the VFEM
framework is unscientific or bad science, or that it does not
deliver what its proponents and architects want of it, but rather
that its ambitions were (like most science) far less ambitious to
begin with than philosophers had hoped. The other key lesson
is to caution VFEM modellers against use of overly suggestive lan-
guage, lest they send the philosophers into an even deeper state of
befuddlement. Such conceptual promiscuity, especially in the
treatment of heavily idealised models, opens the door to
reification.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle.
Biology & Philosophy, 36(3), 1–19.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of
the Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., & Levin, M. (2019). Morphogenesis as Bayesian
inference: A variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex
biological systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 33, 88–108.
Nguyen, J., & Frigg, R. (2021). Mathematics is not the only language in the book of
nature. Synthese, 198(24), 5941–5962.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible
inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Potochnik, A. (2017). Idealization and the aims of science. University of Chicago Press.
Rubin, S., Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Future climates: Markov blankets
and active inference in the biosphere. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 17(172),
20200503.
Weisberg, M. (2013). Simulation and similarity: Using models to understand the world.
Oxford University Press.
Markov blankets and
Bayesian territories
Jeff Beck
Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA
jeff.beck@duke.edu
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000619, e187
Abstract
Bruineberg et al. argue that one ought not confuse the map
(model) for the territory (reality) and delineate a distinction
between innocuous Pearl blankets and metaphysically laden
Friston blankets. I argue that all we have are models, all knowl-
edge is conditional, and that if there is a Pearl/Friston distinc-
tion, it is a matter of the domain of application: latents or
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
25
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

observations. This suggests that, if anything, Friston blankets
may inherit philosophical significance previously assigned to
observations.
Models models everywhere
“Do not mistake the map for the territory.” This critique is meant
to be a generic criticism of drawing conclusions about the real
world from one’s scientific model. The map is the model and
the territory is the target of the modeling endeavor.
This instrumentalist view is consistent with the Bayesian view,
which holds that models serve only to represent or summarize
statistical regularities present in observations. A model is never
correct or true, it is simply more likely than other models
under consideration. Finite data and failure to consider all possi-
ble models render metaphysical (a priori true) conclusions
unavailable. Paraphrasing Laplace and Maxwell, all knowledge is
conditional. Bayesians have priors and likelihoods with relative
truth values that are conditioned on the data. Mathematicians
have axioms (priors) and tools for generating additional truths
conditioned on those axioms (likelihoods with logical structure).
Philosophers specify relationships between and properties of intu-
itive “concepts” (likelihoods) and then prune and organize them
to fit into axiomatic logical decision trees (priors). For example,
Russell’s paradox arises from the intuition that sets can be defined
solely by a list of properties. His theory of types resolves this by
introducing a hierarchal generative model for sets and sets of
sets (Russell, 1903). Zermelo’s solution was to say that elements
of a set can have properties that further divide them into subsets.
This corresponds to generative models for subsets that have the
philosophically preferred logical tree structure (Zermelo, 1908).
Regardless, all we have are models. This is as true for the phi-
losopher as it is for the mathematician and scientist. The above
criticism reduces to the true but irrelevant statement that meta-
physical (a priori) conclusions cannot be drawn. Ultimately, I
believe the problem here is that “reality” is an evocative but poorly
defined term that should be avoided. Territory, on the other hand,
may be a sensible notion and Markov blankets can play a role in
its identification. In the Bayesian framework, models, hypotheses,
parameters, latents all receive the same treatment. There is only
one quantity that has a special role: the observations or data
(D). A Bayesian doesn’t care about which model is correct or
what values the parameters and latents take. This is explicit in
posterior predictive modeling, which marginalizes out these
details to generate a summary of previously observed data in
the form of a prediction about future or unobserved data given
the set of models under consideration, that is, p(D′|D,{M}). If
observations are the territory, then this posterior predictive object
has the appealing property that it is conditioned on the territory
and its domain is the territory. Alternatively, it takes in something
that can be called “facts” and generates predictions about future or
unobserved “facts.” Model details simply provide a language to
talk about relationships between observations. For example, sup-
pose some observations of d1 and d2 are linearly correlated. A
model with independent latent z that linearly drives d1 and d2
provides a compact language that describes the observed correla-
tion. The posterior predictive formulation also demonstrates that
science is ultimately concerned with prediction and data compres-
sion and nothing else. Models simply provide a language for talking
about relationships between observations.
Markov blankets define objects
Markov blankets have two domains of application: latent variables
of a model or observations. Historically, Pearl blankets are applied
to latent variabes in a model. This allows us to define macroscopic
objects (collections of latents) within a model and establish a tax-
onomy of objects defined by the statistics of their boundaries. It also
has the potential to establish a language for discussing similarities
between models in the same way we discuss motifs of connections
between latents. When applied directly to observations, as in “The
Markov blankets of life” (Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston, &
Kiverstein, 2018), Markov blankets identify macroscopic objects in
the territory.
By virtue of the epistemic seal, the blanket also defines the
territory of the macroscopic object. As with Pearl blankets,
this can lead to a taxonomy of objects defined by the statistics
of their boundaries. The presence of a Markov blanket in our
observations also tells us that we can ignore the territory within
the boundary without consequence to our ability to predict
what is going on outside the boundary, so long as the boundary
persists and is observed. This is why it is generally irrelevant
that protons are made up of a zoo of more fundamental things.
Regardless, this line of reasoning establishes the link between
Markov blankets and “thingness” and defines a thing by the
relationship between the statistics of its boundary and the
statistics of its environment. It also suggests that if there is any
philosophical distinction to be made between Friston and Pearl
blankets, that distinction is derived or inherited from the domain
of application.
Regarding the notion of “inference with a model.” I do not
view this as a categorically unique thing. The free-energy prin-
ciple offers up a normative description of the behavior of
objects (defined by their Markov blankets) in the language of
agent–environment interaction. That is, objects (1) form beliefs
about the external world, (2) use that information to predict
changes in the boundary, and (3) act to affect the boundary
(and indirectly the external world) in a way that drives boundary
statistics to a desired stationary distribution. This is necessary
because boundary maintenance and object identity are inexorably
linked.
However, from the complete class theorem, we know that the
language of agent–environment interaction is uniformly applica-
ble to coupled systems. Thus, the relatively innocuous statement
that objects are defined by the statistics of the interactions
between their boundary and their environment is equivalent to
the statement that objects perform inference with a generative
model and “act” to enforce a particular statistical relationship
between boundary and environment. That said, the moral of
this story seems to be that the simple language of object–
environment interactions should be preferred over the language
of agent–environment interactions because the latter tends to
generate confusion and unnecessary philosophical reaction.
Still, it is just two ways of saying the same thing (Ramstead,
Friston, & Hipólito, 2020).
Financial support. I received no funding for this effort.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792. doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
26
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a for-
mal theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic
representations. Entropy (Basel), 22(8), 889. doi:10.3390/e22080889
Russell, B. (1903). Appendix B: The doctrine of types. In B. Russell (Ed.), The principles of
mathematics (pp. 523–528). Cambridge University Press.
Zermelo, E. (1908). Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I.
Mathematische Annalen, 65(2), 261–281.
Redressing the emperor in
causal clothing
Victor J. Btesha, Neil R. Bramleyb and David A. Lagnadoa
aExperimental Psychology Department, University College London, London
WC1H 0AP, UK and bPsychology Department, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EC8 9JZ, UK
victor.btesh.19@ucl.ac.uk; neil.bramley@ed.ac.uk; d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk
https://www.bramleylab.ppls.ed.ac.uk/;
https://www.ucl.ac.uk/lagnado-lab/david_lagnado.html
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000176, e188
Abstract
Over-flexibility in the definition of Friston blankets obscures a key
distinction between observational and interventional inference.
The latter requires cognizers form not just a causal representation
of the world but also of their own boundary and relationship with
it, in order to diagnose the consequences of their actions. We sug-
gest this locates the blanket in the eye of the beholder.
Bruineberg et al. argue for a crucial distinction between inference
with and within a model, with Pearl blankets pertaining to the
former and Friston blankets the latter. However, any set of vari-
ables in a graphical model possesses a Pearl blanket (which there-
fore says nothing about system boundaries), while Friston
blankets are taken to pick out living subsystems of a larger ecosys-
tem. Unfortunately, Friston blankets have been applied almost as
liberally as their statistical counterparts, including to individualneu-
rons (Palacios, Isomura, Parr, & Friston, 2019), body substructures
such as the brain (Seth & Friston, 2016), and eyes (Parr & Friston,
2018) as well as larger organisms (Buckley, Kim, McGregor, &
Seth, 2017; Veissière, Constant, Ramstead, Friston, & Kirmayer,
2019). This plurality of blankets is acknowledged by Parr (2020)
and celebrated by Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston, and Kiverstein
(2018) as evidence for the ubiquity of the free-energy principle
(FEP). We contend that this flexibility in what is cast as internal,
external, sensory, or active states, is dangerously confused; it gives
the false impression that the theory can recruit causal concepts, for
example, Markov blankets, without committing to the full implica-
tions of acausal model-based understanding of perception and action.
The causal nature of the world is implicit in active inference,
where sensory states are depicted as caused by external states
that are, in turn, causally influenced by active states (Friston,
Daunizeau, & Kiebel, 2009; 2011). However, Friston et al. (2009)
propose that agents do not represent the world as such, but simply
as a statistical coupling between the distribution of internal and
external states through the blanket states. Worryingly, FEP theo-
rists assume this is sufficient for agents to evaluate the conse-
quences of their actions (Ramstead, Kirchhoff, & Friston, 2020),
and do everything else associated with cognition such as thinking,
planning, imagining, and explaining (Sloman & Lagnado, 2015).
While Ramstead et al. (2021) claim that the recognition density
(the agents’ approximate distribution over external states condi-
tional on sensory states) represents the world, nothing is said
about how this density encodes causal relations that are separable
from actions and sensations. If the self-evidencing agent only rep-
resents relationships between their active and sensory states, and
not the external world of causes that give rise to these, how can
they arbitrate between inputs caused by their own actions and
those that “would have happened anyway,” for example, those
caused by ongoing dynamics out in the world? How too are
they to do the myriad other things we associate with cognition?
In other words, active inference seems to conflate two different
forms of inference. One is simply conditioning one’s internal
model on observations to update probabilities and make predic-
tions. This includes both inferring likely consequences of observa-
tions – if the light turns on, we predict that the room is illuminated
– but also their likely causes – that someone else must be home and
have turned on the switch. A much-discussed limitation of such
“passive” learning is that it struggles to answer questions about
causal directionality (Bramley, Dayan, Griffiths, & Lagnado, 2017;
Lagnado
&
Sloman,
2004,
2006;
Steyvers,
Tenenbaum,
Wagenmakers, & Blum, 2003). Thus, a second form of inference
is through active interventions, local alterations to the world that
allow the learner to identify causal effects – for example, that the
switch controls the light rather than the reverse. Clearly, if they
then conclude that the light coming on means someone else is
home, or that turning on the light would make someone else
appear, they would have made a foundational mistake. Learning
from intervention, or imagining actions, requires updating one’s
model in a more sophisticated way than simply conditioning on
observations (Pearl, 2009). One must represent one’s own action
as coming from outside the system being modelled. This is a
subtlety that active inference overlooks but one that humans are
highly
sensitive
to
(Bramley,
Lagnado,
&
Speekenbrink,
2015; Bramley et al., 2017; Bramley, Gerstenberg, Mayrhofer, &
Lagnado,
2018,
2019;
Hagmayer,
Sloman,
Lagnado,
&
Waldmann, 2007; Lagnado & Sloman, 2004; Rothe, Deverett,
Mayrhofer, & Kemp, 2018; Sloman & Lagnado, 2005). Even rats
are sensitive to the distinction between light or noise as signals
(for food) or as consequences of their own action, that is, pressing
a button (Blaisdell, Sawa, Leising, & Waldmann, 2006; Clayton &
Dickinson, 2006). To avoid interpreting the consequences of their
own actions as signals for food, rats must treat themselves as inde-
pendent from the light–food system. Critically, whether a sensory
input
is
perceived
as
observational
or
interventional
is
agent-relative. One agent’s intervention is, from the perspective
of another agent, a worldly cause. This highlights that deciding
what falls inside or outside a system’s boundaries is a modelling
choice that depends on the goal of the modeller and so does not
resolve questions about actual physical boundaries.
To exhibit adaptive behaviour in a causal world, cognizers should
not only approximate the expected observational distribution of
external states but also the expected distribution under potential
actions. This latter task requires that cognizers treat themselves as
separatefrom the system theyare learning about.To choose and eval-
uate the effect of its actions, an agent must perform inference with a
model encoding asymmetric causal relations – in the sense that only
actions on causes influence effects but not the reverse (Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2005, 2009; Lagnado, Waldmann, Hagmayer, &
Sloman, 2007; Tenenbaum, Griffiths, & Kemp, 2006) and should
exhibit behaviour aimed at disambiguating these asymmetries. As
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
27
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

such, we suggest that the notion of Markov blankets is critical to the
agent’s model of its own interactions with the world. In this sense,
both the agent and the theorist describing it are performing inference
with a model, and the cognition-relevant blankets are those that are
properties of self-world representations rather than ontological fea-
tures of living systems.
To sum up, we agree that casting behaviour as action–perception
loops has yielded theoretical insights into self-regulatory (Barrett,
2017; Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston, 2015; Seth & Friston, 2016) and
habitual behaviour (Friston et al., 2015, 2016). However, we fear
that inattention to causal representational structure means active
inference suffers the same pitfalls as predictive processing (Sloman,
2013), and behaviourism before it, consigned to explain only simple
autonomic or reflex behaviours and not those that make intelligent
systems such fascinating and unique parts of the natural world.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference account
of interoception and categorization. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
12(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw154
Blaisdell, A. P., Sawa, K., Leising, K. J., & Waldmann, M. R. (2006). Causal reasoning in rats.
Science (New York, N.Y.), 311(5763), 1020–1022. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1121872
Bramley, N. R., Dayan, P., Griffiths, T. L., & Lagnado, D. A. (2017). Formalizing Neurath’s
ship: Approximate algorithms for online causal learning. Psychological Review, 124(3),
301–338. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000061
Bramley, N. R., Gerstenberg, T., Mayrhofer, R., & Lagnado, D. A. (2019). Intervening in time.
In S. Kleinberg (Ed.), Time and Causality across the Sciences (pp. 86–115). Cambridge
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592703.006
Bramley, N. R., Lagnado, D. A., & Speekenbrink, M. (2015). Conservative forgetful scholars:
How people learn causal structure through sequences of interventions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 41(3), 708–731.
Bramley, N. R., Gerstenberg, T., Mayrhofer, R., & Lagnado, D. A. (2018). Time in causal
structure learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 44(12), 1880–1910. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000548
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle
for action and perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
81, 55–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004
Clayton, N., & Dickinson, A. (2006). Rational rats. Nature Neuroscience, 9(4), 472–474.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn0406-472
Friston, K., Daunizeau, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement learning or active infer-
ence? PLoS ONE, 4(7), e6421. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006421
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., & Pezzulo, G.
(2016). Active inference and learning. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 68,
862–879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active inference.
Biological Cybernetics, 104(1–2), 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015).
Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–224. https://
doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and strength in causal induction.
Cognitive Psychology, 51, 334–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2005.05.004
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based causal induction. Psychological
Review, 116(4), 661–716. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017201
Hagmayer, Y., Sloman, S. A., Lagnado, D. A., & Waldmann, M. R. (2007). Causal reasoning
through intervention. In A. Gopnik & L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology, philos-
ophy, and computation (pp. 86–100). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
acprof:oso/9780195176803.003.0007
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Lagnado, D. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2004). The advantage of timely intervention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 30(4), 856–876. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0278-7393.30.4.856
Lagnado, D. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2006). Time as a guide to cause. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 32(3), 451–460. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0278-7393.32.3.451
Lagnado, D. A., Waldmann, M. R., Hagmayer, Y., & Sloman, S. A. (2007). Beyond covari-
ation: Cues to causal structure. In A. Gopnik & L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning:
Psychology, philosophy, and computation (Vol. 44, pp. 154–172). https://doi.org/10.
1093/acprof:oso/9780195176803.003.0011
Palacios, E., Isomura, T., Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2019). The emergence of synchrony in
networks of mutually inferring neurons. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-019-42821-7
Parr, T. (2020). Choosing a Markov blanket. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, E112.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19002632
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Active inference and the anatomy of oculomotion.
Neuropsychologia, 111(October 2017), 334–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsy-
chologia.2018.01.041
Pearl, J. (2009). Models, reasoning, and inference (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation and
adaptive behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Multiscale
integration: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese, 198, 41–70. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). A tale of two densities: Active
inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225–239. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1059712319862774
Rothe, A., Deverett, B., Mayrhofer, R., & Kemp, C. (2018). Successful structure learning
from observational data. Cognition, 179(March 2017), 266–297. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cognition.2018.06.003
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional
brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371
(1708), 20160007. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Sloman, A. (2013). What else can brains do? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3),
230–231. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12002439
Sloman, S. A. & Lagnado, D. A. (2005). Do we “do”? Cognitive Science, 29, 5–39.
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2015). Causality in thought. Annual Review of
Psychology, 66(1), 223–247. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015135
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E. J., & Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal
networks from observations and interventions. Cognitive Science, 27(3), 453–489. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(03)00010-7
Tenenbaum, J. B., Griffiths, T. L., & Kemp, C. (2006). Theory-based Bayesian models of
inductive learning and reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(7), 309–318. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.05.009
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K., & Kirmayer, L. J.
(2019). Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and
culture. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, e90: 1–75. doi: https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X19001213
The map, the territory, and the
cartographer: Linking the “pure”
formal models to the “murky”
material world
Anna Ciaunicaa,b
aCentre for Philosophy of Science, University of Lisbon, Campo Grande, Edificio
C4 - 1749-016 Lisbon, Portugal and bInstitute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
University College London, London WC1N 3AR, UK
a.ciaunica@ucl.ac.uk
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000590, e189
Abstract
Assigning to Pearl blankets an instrumental, a “pure” formal
role, tacitly delegates the thorny question of mapping the
“murky” territory to empirical sciences. But this move side-
lines the problem, and does not offer a solution to the question:
How do we relate the formal properties of an agent’s model of
the world to the real properties of the world itself?
28
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This interesting paper aims at disentangling two distinct yet
related interpretations of what it means to make an inference
(a) within a model and (b) with a model. The authors note that
insights resulting from the formal description in (b) are “smug-
gled in” via (a), leading to unwarranted metaphysical assumptions
about what a Market blanket is or does in the real world. In short,
the paper convincingly argues that the map should not be con-
flated with the territory.
How do we connect the map with the territory? And more
importantly who makes this mapping and why? Here I suggest
that the distinction between making an inference (a) within a
model and (b) with a model, while important, leaves out the mod-
els’ makers (i.e., the cartographers) and what the formalisms are
for (i.e., the “real” world).
While maps/maths (i.e., formal models) can be viewed as sig-
nificantly more “pure” and less “messy” than the murky empirical
territory, without the latter and a cartographer to interpret them,
not only they would be worthless, they wouldn’t even exist. Maps/
maths are indeed artefacts, while the territory is, as the authors
acknowledge, “real.”
Another way to express this idea is to say that maps/maths are
real insofar they also part of the territory as being constructed,
made, by someone for a particular purpose. In a way, everything
belongs to the territory, even the numbers that a mathematician
writes on a paper or on a screen. But in which sense “that” reality
is different from the reality of a snake that bites your skin?
The interesting debate sparked by this thought-provoking
paper brings us back to at least two classical debates in philoso-
phy. One is between Plato and Aristotle around the notion of
“matter” and “form,” which is key for our discussion here.
Indeed, “Pearl blankets” are after all a formal property of nodes
in a Bayesian network where the latter is used as “useful and com-
pact graphical abstractions for studying complex phenomena”
(sect. 1, para. 5). These complex phenomena may be things like
the behaviour of atomic particles or stock markets, both of
which belong to the category “matter.”
Aristotle introduces matter and form as contrasting notions,
distinct causes, which together make up every ordinary object
(Ainsworth, 2020). In doing so, he distances himself from
Plato’s theory of forms, which exist quite apart from the material
world. He does so in part by insisting that “his own forms are
somehow enmeshed in matter (Metaphysics vi 1 and vii 11, and
De Anima i 1). He also maintains that all natural forms are like
something which is snub, where something is snub only if it is
concavity-realized-in-a-nose
(Physics
ii
2;
cf.
Sophistical
Refutations 13 and 31)” (Ainsworth, 2020).
This is an important distinction because while in Plato’s view
forms can exist apart from the material reality (in an “ideal”
world), for Aristotle they are intertwined. Coming back to the tar-
get paper: The only way to keep the Pearl blankets on the safe ter-
ritory of pure abstractions as useful tools to tackle complex
phenomena is to detach from the murky territory, as Plato
does. This is an option, but it is not very informative one.
Because what matters in the end is what we do with maps/
maths in the real world, and how the cartographer enmeshes
them with the territory. At some point, the Pearl blankets formal-
isms will need to meet the territory if they want to provide some
useful information about our “real” world, for example, to help us
stay safe from snakes and predict stock markets.
A couple of 2000 years or so later, a second classical debate which
echoes nicely the debate captured in the target paper, opposed
within the Vienna Circle, Schlick to Neurath on the foundations
of human knowledge. On the one hand, Schlick notes that “all
great attempts at establishing a theory of knowing arise from the
problem of the reliability of human cognition, and this problem in
turn originates in the wish for absolute certainty” (1959, p. 209,
my italics). Scientific attempts are in search of “an unshakeable,
indubitable foundation, a firm basis on which the uncertain structure
of our knowledge could rest (…) the bedrock, which exists prior to
all construction and does not itself vacillate” (ibid.). One may argue
that maths/maps provide such basis via the formal models.
Against this view, Neurath pointed out that our cognitive situation
is that of a sailor who “far out at sea, transforms the shape of their
clumsy vessel from a more circular to a more fishlike one (…) and
must rebuild their ship upon the open sea, never able to dismantle
it in dry dock or to reconstruct it there from the best materials”
(Neurath, 1944, p. 47). Or to use again our metaphor: One cannot
leave the “shacky” territory in order to make a “pure” abstract
map/model of it. Not only we cannot leave the territory, but our
maps are also parts of the territory, and highly influenced by it.
Here I suggest that both Pearl and Markov blankets have in com-
mon the fact that they are maps/models constructed by a cartogra-
pher with the purpose of making sense of an open and constantly
moving sea. However, while the former aims at sticking to the
abstract formalism insisting on its instrumental role, the latter
crosses the boundaries between map and territory and dives
into the sea, by making ontological claims. These claims may be
wrong, the same way many former theories were proven throughout
centuries of scientific endeavour. Yet, we do know with certainty
that sticking to the maps/maths only will not give us interesting
information about the territory, especially if we disregard the cartog-
rapher behind it and her relation to the map itself.
Financial
support. This
work
was
supported
by
an
FCT
grant
2020.02773.CEECIND and an FCT project INTERSELF PTDC/FER-FIL/
4802/2020 to AC.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Ainsworth, T. (2020). Form vs matter – Sandford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy. First pub-
lished February 8, 2016; substantive revision March 25, 2020. Retrieved from https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/form-matter/.
Neurath, O. (1944). Foundations of the social sciences. In O. Neurath, R. Carnap &
C. Morris (Eds.), International encyclopedia of unified science (Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. iii+50). University of Chicago Press.
Schlick, M. (1959). The foundation of knowledge. In A. J. Ayer (Ed.), Logical positivism
(pp. 209–227). The Free Press.
Return of the math: Markov blankets,
dynamical systems theory, and the
bounds of mind
Lincoln John Colling
School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Falmer BN1 9QH, UK
l.colling@sussex.ac.uk
http://research.colling.net.nz
doi:10.1017/S0140525X2200022X, e190
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
29
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues highlight work using Markov blan-
kets to demarcate the bounds of the mind. This echoes earlier
attempts to demarcate the bounds of the mind from a dynamical
systems perspective. Advocates of mechanistic explanation have
challenged the dynamical approach to independently motivate
the application of the formalism, a challenge that Markov blan-
ket theorists must also meet.
The target article highlights work by, for example, Kirchhoff and
Kiverstein (2021) and Ramstead, Kirchhoff, Constant, and Friston
(2021), where attempts have been made to invoke the mathemat-
ical formalism of Markov blankets to justify claims about the
bounds of the mind. The strategy highlighted in the target article
is, however, not a new one. Rather, it echoes earlier approaches by
advocates of dynamical systems theory to similarly use mathemat-
ical models of a system’s behaviour to justify claims about the
bounds of the mind. By placing the target article in the context
of this earlier work it might be possible to bring into sharper relief
the issues raised in the target article and, more positively, sketch a
way forward for Markov blanket theorists.
One well-known model from the dynamical approach to cogni-
tion is the Haken–Kelso–Bunz model (Haken, Kelso, & Bunz,
1985), which arose out of empirical work on the dynamics of inter-
limb coordination. For example, Kelso (1984) observed that when
people rotated their wrists in an anti-phase pattern while gradually
increasing the cycling speed a critical point was reached after which
there was a rapid breakdown in the anti-phase pattern with coor-
dination rapidly being reestablished in an in-phase pattern. The
model was able to formalise this phenomena using the tools of
dynamical modelling resulting in a model containing two parame-
ters: one for cycling speed and one for the relative phase between
the two limbs. The power of this model is its generality. Not
only can it capture the dynamics of inter-limb coordination but
it can also be applied to phenomena like socially coordinated
motor behaviour. For example, Schmidt, Carello, and Turvey
(1990) found that two people seated next to each other, and engag-
ing in anti-phase leg swings, exhibit the same dynamics as inter-
limb coordination.
The Haken–Kelso–Bunz model is an example of a nonlinear
dynamical system. As Chemero (2011) argues, only linear systems
are
decomposable
while
nonlinear
systems
are
non-
decomposable. The upshot of this non-decomposability is that
the dynamics of nonlinear systems must be modelled in terms
of global collective variables, and that it is not possible to
model the system dynamics in terms of separate component
parts. That is, the mathematical formalism enforces viewing the
two people engaged in inter-personal coordination as a single
unified system. The boundaries of this system are not located
within a single person but encompass both people. Drawing the
boundaries of the system at the edge of a person’s skull amounts
to splitting the system, a move prohibited by the formalism. The
move here is echoed by Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2021) and
Ramstead et al. (2021) outlined by the target article. The mathe-
matical formalism of nonlinearly coupled dynamical systems is
replaced with the Markov blanket formalism, but the consequence
is the same. The formalism used to model the system defines the
bounds of the system.
This move is not unproblematic. The explanatory status of
dynamical models has been questioned by those advocating for
mechanistic explanation (e.g., Colling & Williamson, 2014;
Kaplan & Bechtel, 2011; Kaplan & Craver, 2011). Although it’s
not possible to replay these arguments here, I will pick out one
point that turns on this explanatory worry. The coupling-induced
synchronisation observed in intra- and inter-personal limb move-
ments is also found in other physical systems including ostensibly
non-cognitive systems like pendulum clocks. Although the model
accurately predicts the dynamics of these systems, the model itself,
by avoiding reference to the physical facts of the system, does not
allow one to predict which systems might exhibit the relevant
dynamics. However, if one does examine the physical facts of
the system then it is evident why some systems exhibit the rele-
vant dynamics and others do not. In the example of coupled pen-
dulum clocks an explanation that makes reference to the physical
facts of the system, their parts, and their interactions – that is, a
mechanistic explanation – provides reasons why certain arrange-
ments of pendulum clocks exhibit the relevant dynamics while
other arrangements do not. For example, a sketch of a mechanistic
explanation might reference vibrations produced by the clocks
and the role the wall plays in transmitting vibrations between
clocks. This in turn provides an explanation for why clocks placed
side-by-side on the same wall exhibit the relevant dynamics while
clocks placed on opposite walls do not. Mechanistic explanations
might similarly be furnished for why particular limb movements
or interpersonal actions exhibit the relevant dynamics. The fact
that the system exhibits these dynamics is only part of the
story. What is missing is an explanation of why the system should
exhibit these dynamics in the first place. The upshot of this is that
what licenses application of the model (and what licenses demar-
cating the boundaries of the system) are some set of facts about
the mechanism.
The move by Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2021) and Ramstead
et al. (2021) to demarcate the boundaries of the mind gives rise
to a similar worry. Is there some set of explanatory facts that
licences placing the Markov blanket at the brain, the skin, or at
any other “boundary”? On this, the answer is not clear. For exam-
ple, Kirchhoff and Kiverstein (2021) reject the idea of explanation
dependent boundaries while Ramstead et al. (2021) appear to at
least
partially endorse
the
idea.
Kirchhoff,
Parr,
Palacios,
Friston, and Kiverstein (2018) go further and explicitly reference
a mechanism sketch in deciding on the location of the Markov
blanket (using the example of coupled pendulums). But as the
example from dynamical systems theory shows, the formalism
itself does not license predictions about which systems are amena-
ble to the formalism and which are. Rather, these predictions are
made independently of the formalism on, for example, mechanis-
tic grounds. The Markov blanket theorist is presented with the
same challenge. That is, to provide an explanation or prediction
of which systems are amenable to the formalism – or because the
formalism is applicable to every “thing” (Friston, 2019), which sys-
tems are amenable to specific applications of the formalism inde-
pendent of the particular application of the formalism itself.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Chemero, A. (2011). Radical embodied cognitive science. MIT Press.
Colling, L. J., & Williamson, K. (2014). Entrainment and motor emulation approaches to
joint action: Alternatives or complementary approaches? Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 8, 754. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00754
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. Retrieved January 3,
2022, from http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
30
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Haken, H., Kelso, J. A. S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical model of phase transitions in
human hand movements. Biological Cybernetics, 51(5), 347–356. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00336922
Kaplan, D. M., & Bechtel, W. (2011). Dynamical models: An alternative or complement
to mechanistic explanations? Topics in Cognitive Science, 3(2), 438–444. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2011.01147.x
Kaplan, D. M., & Craver, C. F. (2011). The explanatory force of dynamical and mathemat-
ical models in neuroscience: A mechanistic perspective. Philosophy of Science, 78(4),
601–627. https://doi.org/10.1086/661755
Kelso, J. A. (1984). Phase transitions and critical behavior in human bimanual coordina-
tion. The American Journal of Physiology, 246, R1000–R1004. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpregu.1984.246.6.R1000
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198, 4791–4810.
Kirchhoff, M. D., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal
of
the
Royal
Society
Interface,
15(138),
20170792.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.
20170792.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Multiscale
integration: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese, 198(1), 41–70. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Schmidt, R. C., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (1990). Phase transitions and critical fluctu-
ations in the visual coordination of rhythmic movements between people. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16(2), 227–247. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.16.2.227
Nothing but a useful tool? (F)utility
and the free-energy principle
Matteo Colombo
Tilburg Center for Logic, Ethics and Philosophy of Science, Tilburg University,
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
m.colombo@uvt.nl
https://mteocolphi.wordpress.com/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000346, e191
Abstract
Bruineberg and collaborators distinguish three philosophical
positions about the status of Markov blankets in the context of
active inference modelling, namely: literalism, realism, and
instrumentalism. They criticize the first two positions and sug-
gest that instrumentalism is “less problematic but also less inter-
esting” (sect. 6.1.2, para. 5) Here, I sketch how literalists and
realists might reply to Bruineberg et al.’s criticisms, and I explain
why instrumentalism is more interesting and contentious than
what Bruineberg and collaborators suggest.
Bruineberg and collaborators distinguish three philosophical
positions about the status of Markov blankets in active inference
modelling, namely: literalism, realism and instrumentalism
(sect. 6.1). Literalism is the view that the world is fundamentally
a Markov blanket; so, everything in it – including your brain,
my tortoises, and the symbols you are currently reading on
this page – is a Markov blanket or grounded in a Markov blan-
ket. Realism concerns the relation of active inference models to
the world. It says that, for any active inference model, there is
some mapping between some of its theoretical posits and
some worldly features. Particularly, it says that the Markov blan-
kets posited by any of these models can be mapped onto some
boundaries of some objects. Instrumentalism concerns the rela-
tion of Markov blankets in active inference models both to the
world and to their users. It presumes that at least some active-
inference models are useful for achieving some epistemic or
pragmatic goal.
Though these -isms might come across as futility, they fore-
ground very general questions about the point of the free-energy
principle (FEP) and its relevance for understanding life and mind,
the utility and correct way of interpreting active inference model-
ling, and the rational epistemic attitude towards the content of the
theories and models grounded in the FEP.
Bruineberg et al. criticize literalism because it reifies abstract
mathematical structures and is “removed from the empirical
and naturalistic research programme that FEP purports to be”
(sect. 6.1.2, para. 6). Yet literalists may reply they are engaged
in revisionary metaphysics that makes no appeal to the supernat-
ural. Noticing the FEP is a research programme in mathematical
physics quite removed from empirical data (Colombo & Palacios,
2021), literalists may point out reification (or Platonism) is wide-
spread among mathematicians to make sense of their achieve-
ments, and may also draw an analogy with computation,
showing how cellular automata have been stripped of their “meta-
physical modesty” for arguing that the universe is fundamentally a
cellular automaton (e.g., Wolfram, 2002; Zuse, 1970).
Bruineberg et al. criticize realism because the Markov blanket
formalism doesn’t tell modellers how to find “a non-arbitrary
mapping that is privileged for principled reasons” (sect. 6.1.2,
para. 7). As this criticism accepts that idealized active inference
models can be evaluated for their accuracy, realists may insist
that somebody’s finding a boundary (counter)intuitive has no
bearing on when an active inference model is accurate. Insofar
as a given active inference model is accurate and the Markov blan-
kets it posits enjoy referential success, then the system being mod-
elled does possess the properties to which the formal structure of
the model successfully refers – whether counterintuitively or not.
Perhaps, Bruineberg et al.’s criticism is not that realism and lit-
eralism are counterintuitive or incoherent, but that these positions
in the FEP literature are often based on bad (or no) arguments
uninformed by relevant results in metaphysics and the philosophy
of modelling about, say, the boundaries of objects (e.g., Varzi,
2011), the notions of structure, thing, and fundamentality (e.g.,
Sider, 2020) or the bearing of imagination and fiction on scientific
modelling (e.g., Levy & Godfrey-Smith, 2019). Or perhaps,
Bruineberg et al.’s criticism is that, to account for the achieve-
ments of active inference modelling, we should focus attention
on the utility of such models rather than their accuracy; and to
explain their utility, it’s irrelevant whether Markov blankets are
“fundamental,” “real,” or “fictitious.”
This last idea seemingly coheres with Bruineberg et al.’s rec-
ommended instrumentalism. But any plausible, instrumentalist
position towards a scientific model is premised on the success
of that model in furthering some scientific aim. The problem,
in the context of the FEP, is that it’s unclear how active inference
modelling is successful.
It’s uncontroversial that Markov blankets, and other statistical
and algorithmic tools for causal search, discovery, and inference
often play an incredibly useful role in helping scientists to repre-
sent and study systems of interest at a suitable scale, make reliable
predictions, discover causal mechanisms, and facilitate interven-
tions in the world (e.g., Marinescu, Lawlor, & Kording, 2018;
Spirtes, Glymour, Scheines, & Heckerman, 2000). It’s also uncon-
troversial that some tools such as the digital computer (and meth-
ods for inferential statistics) have historically inspired new
theories like the computational theory of mind (Gigerenzer,
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
31
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1991). What is contentious is whether successful active inference
models are nothing but instruments for prediction, control, or
achieving some other aim, and whether the theoretical claims of
these models constitute knowledge of the world (including of its
unobservable aspects). Traditionally, instrumentalists don’t limit
themselves to make the banal claim that maths and stats are useful
tools to do science. They want to make sense of successful scien-
tific practices, accounting for what warrants scientists’ reliance on
empirically successful models in inquiry (cf. Psillos, 1999;
Stanford, 2006). So, any plausible instrumentalist position
towards an active inference model, or FEP more generally, should
presume the model under consideration is useful, successful, or
furthers some scientific aim.
While computational neuroscientists, as well as modellers
in other sciences have a diversity of aims (Kording, Blohm,
Schrater, & Kay, 2018; Potochnik, 2017), widely shared modelling
aims include empirical adequacy (Van Fraassen, 1980, pp. 11–13),
novel predictions (Lakatos, 1978, pp. 31–34), and guidance on
how to intervene in the world (Cartwright, 2007, Ch. 3;
Woodward, 2003, pp. 7–9). If it’s unclear that active inference mod-
els are empirically adequate, make novel predictions, and guide cog-
nitive and life scientists to successfully intervene in the world, then
there is no obvious question for instrumentalists (and scientific rea-
lists) to address about the epistemic status of these models.
In fact, when they describe Baltieri, Buckley, and Bruineberg’s
(2020) active inference model of the Watt governor, Bruineberg
et al. give us reason to believe that active inference modelling is
not a useful approach for studying and understanding any self-
organizing system. As Bruineberg et al. themselves recognize,
it’s unclear “what can possibly be gained by thinking of the behav-
iour of a coupled engine-mechanical governor system in terms
of perception-action loops under the banner of free energy min-
imization” (sect. 7, para. 2). If the utility and empirical successes
of active-inference modelling are contentious, then an instrumen-
talist position towards the FEP and the modelling practices it
grounds cannot be as unproblematic and uninteresting as
Bruineberg et al. suggest.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020). Predictions in the eye of the beholder:
an active inference account of Watt governors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11495.
Cartwright, N. (2007). Hunting causes and using them: Approaches in philosophy and
economics. Cambridge University Press.
Colombo, M., & Palacios, P. (2021). Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free
energy principle in biology. Biology & Philosophy, 36(5), 1–26.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). From tools to theories: A heuristic of discovery in cognitive
psychology. Psychological Review, 98,254–267.
Kording, K., Blohm, G., Schrater, P., & Kay, K. (2018). Appreciating diversity of goals in
computational neuroscience. Preprint: https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/3vy69
Lakatos, I. (1978). Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes.
In J. Worrall & G. Currie (Eds.). The methodology of scientific research programmes
(philosophical papers I) (pp. 8–101). Cambridge University Press.
Levy, A., & Godfrey-Smith, P. (Eds.). (2019). The scientific imagination. Oxford
University Press.
Marinescu, I. E., Lawlor, P. N., & Kording, K. P. (2018). Quasi-experimental causality in
neuroscience and behavioural research. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(12), 891–898.
Potochnik, A. (2017). Idealization and the aims of science. University of Chicago Press.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientific realism: How science tracks truth. Routledge.
Sider, T. (2020). The tools of metaphysics and the metaphysics of science. Oxford
University Press.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C. N., Scheines, R., & Heckerman, D. (2000). Causation, prediction,
and search. MIT Press.
Stanford, P. K. (2006). Instrumentalism. In S. Sarkar & J. Pfeifer (Eds.), The philosophy of
science: An encyclopedia (pp. 400–405). Routledge.
Van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The scientific image. Oxford University Press.
Varzi, A. C. (2011). Boundaries, conventions, and realism. In J. K. Campbell, M.
O’Rourke, & M. H. Slater (Eds.), Carving nature at its joints (pp. 129–153). MIT Press.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Wolfram Media.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen: A theory of causal explanation. Oxford
University Press.
Zuse, K. (1970). Calculating space. MIT Press.
Markov blankets and the
preformationist assumption
Mads Dengsøa
, Ian Robertsona
and Axel Constantb
aFaculty of the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities, University of Wollongong,
Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia and bCharles Perkins Centre, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
madsdengsoe@gmail.com
ianrob@uow.edu.au
axel.constant.pruvost@gmail.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000358, e192
Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues argue that a realist interpretation of
Markov blankets inadvertently relies upon unfounded assump-
tions. However, insofar as their diagnosis is accurate, their pre-
scribed instrumentalism may ultimately prove insufficient as a
complete remedy. Drawing upon a process-based perspective
on living systems, we suggest a potential way to avoid some of
the assumptions behind problems described by Bruineberg
and colleagues.
Bruineberg and colleagues contend that so-called “Friston blan-
kets” introduce a number of “non-arbitrary assumptions” in
applying Markov blankets to the boundaries of living systems
(sect. 4, paras. 1 and 2). The application of Markov blankets to
living systems requires prior observations providing “a principled
justification for why to start from one particular model rather
than a different one” (sect. 6, para. 1). In this sense, they conclude,
Markov blankets owe part of their explanatory power to these
prior assumptions to a point where “it is not clear that the
Markov blanket formalism is doing much additional work”
(sect. 6.1.2, para. 7).
If the application of Markov blankets to living systems is
indeed determined by such underlying assumptions, this would
seem to imply that at least some of the confusions that
Bruineberg and colleagues have set out to untangle run deeper
than our attitudes toward Markov blankets.
If so, then a strong instrumentalism about Markov blankets
may itself be insufficient as a measure to untangle the root causes
of the confusions between realist and instrumentalist readings of
Markov blankets (see Andrews [2021] and Kirchhoff, Kiverstein,
& Robertson [2022] for recent discussion of realism and instru-
mentalism qua free-energy principle [FEP] models). Besides the
eternal vigilance demanded by our models and metaphors, we
32
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

may need to reevaluate some of the starting observations inform-
ing their application.
The assumption that the organism and the environment con-
stitute two conditionally independent interactants defines many
Bayesian approaches to living systems, including the Fristonian
one targeted by Bruineberg and colleagues. This guiding assump-
tion behind designating living systems in terms of an inner organ-
ism contraposed by an outer environment may be interpreted as a
variant of preformationism: The notion that organisms and envi-
ronments constitute and should be evaluated in our theorizing as
separate entities with inherent properties, and whose interaction is
essentially
secondary
to
their
independent
existence
(see
Anderson, 2017; see also Oyama, 2000).
This assumption, of a pre-established conditional indepen-
dence between organisms and their respective environments, pre-
sents a potential point of theoretical (Colombo & Wright, 2021)
and empirical (Aguilera, Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley, 2021)
incongruity between Markov blankets and the essentially coupled
character of sensorimotor interfaces. It has moreover been
brought into question by more recent accounts emphasizing the
constitutive role that interaction plays in producing and sustain-
ing the separate forms of organism and environment (see, e.g.,
Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2019; Gallagher & Allen, 2018; Kirchhoff
& Kiverstein, 2019, 2021).
We believe that the risk of preformationism echoes earlier
debates within the literature in that it “force[s] us to recognize
that the picture of biological agents as free-energy-minimizing
systems requires something closer to a process-based (rather
than a static or state-based) ontology” (Clark, 2017, p. 17). In
this regard, existing accounts have already shown how temporally
deep hierarchical models provide for adaptive models with less
sharp distinctions between organisms and their environments
(see Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston, and Kiverstein, 2018).
What we here want to briefly suggest is that a process-based
perspective may furthermore avoid preformationism not only in
the application of Markov blankets, but also at the level of the
underlying assumptions that inform this application.
The sort of process-based perspective that we have in mind
serves to preclude preformationism specifically by reconceptualiz-
ing stabilized forms on either side of the (Markov) boundary as
products of ongoing exchanges that serve to perpetuate the living
system. That is, under a process-based perspective on living sys-
tems, we may understand the organism and its respective environ-
ment not as a preformed substance but as an ensemble of
processes (e.g., metabolism). The process view we refer to echoes
the view of process ontology that takes processes – instead of sub-
stantive forms – as the fundamental unit of analysis in biology.
Process ontology seeks to reverse the explanatory relation between
entities and processes: Rather than explaining processes in terms
of interactions between distinct entities, process ontology explains
entities as relatively stable phases of continuous processes
(Nicholson & Dupré, 2018; see also Griffiths & Stotz, 2018).
Narratively, as applied to active inference, a process-based per-
spective conceptualizes organismic boundaries as “hard-won
achievements” of living systems (Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2019;
see also Kirchhoff, 2015; Sutton, 2010). This reversal is decisive
for at least one of the underlying assumptions that Bruineberg
and colleagues ascribe to Friston blankets: It eliminates the
need for the assumption of a preformed organism qua model
and environment qua modeled distal world, which arguably
commits Friston blankets (and other Bayesian accounts) to a par-
ticular variant of substantialist realism. In its stead, processes are
what is taken to be the fundamental unit of biological analysis.
Under a process-based view, then, one need not assume the
organism and environment since these may be derived from the
continuous exchanges.
While Bruineberg and colleagues’ prescribed strong instru-
mentalism might still furnish us with helpful resources for clear-
ing up confusions surrounding the application of Markov
blankets to living systems, we find that some such confusions
may still be traced to the prior observations that inform this appli-
cation. We believe that a process-based perspective may aid us in
upending a central assumption that prefigures some of the forms
of confusion targeted by Bruineberg and colleagues. While a far
cry from absolving us of the duty to attend to other crucially
important issues pointed out by Bruineberg and colleagues in
their insightful target article, we nonetheless believe that critically
assessing the starting assumptions underlying these issues may
ultimately prove to be indispensable in their resolution.
Financial support. This work was supported by the Australian Research
Council Discovery Project Minds in Skilled Performance (IR, grant number
DP170102987) and by the Australian Laureate Fellowship Project A
Philosophy
of
Medicine
for
the
21st
Century
(AC,
grant
number
FL170100160) and by a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
(SSHRC) doctoral fellowship (AC, grant number 752-2019-0065).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle?. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.11203.
Anderson, M. L. (2017). Of Bayes and bullets: An embodied, situated, targeting-based
account of predictive processing. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy
and predictive processing: 4. MIND Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573055
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle.
Biology & Philosophy, 36(3), 1–19.
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2019). What’s inside your head once you’ve figured out
what your head’s inside of. Ecological Psychology, 31(3), 198–217.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket: Resisting the second law with
metamorphic minds. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive
processing: 3. MIND Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573031
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2021). First principles in the life sciences: The free-energy
principle, organicism, and mechanism. Synthese, 198(14), 3463–3488.
Gallagher, S., & Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneutics of
social cognition. Synthese, 195(6), 2627–2648.
Griffiths, P., & Stotz, K. (2018). Developmental systems theory as a process theory. In D. J.
Nicholson & J. Dupré (Eds.), Everything flows: Towards a processual philosophy of biol-
ogy (pp. 225–245). Oxford University Pres.
Kirchhoff, M., Kiverstein, J., & Robertson, I. (2022). The literalist fallacy & the free energy
principle: Model-building, scientific realism and instrumentalism. [Preprint].
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2015). Species of realization and the free energy principle. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 93(4), 706–723.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended consciousness and predictive processing:
A third-wave view. Routledge.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198(5), 4791–4810.
Nicholson, D. J., & Dupré, J. (2018). A manifesto for a processual philosophy of biology.
In D. J. Nicholson & J. Dupré (Eds.), Everything flows: Towards a processual philosophy
of biology (pp. 4–45). Oxford University Press.
Oyama, S. (2000). The ontogeny of information. Duke University Press.
Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinarity: History, the extended mind, and the
civilizing process. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp. 189–225). MIT Press.
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
33
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

There is no “inference within a
model”
Marco Facchin
Department of Human and Life Sciences, L&PIC (Linguistic and Philosophy IUSS
Center), University School for Advanced Studies (IUSS) Pavia, Pavia 27100,
Lombardy, Italy
marco.facchin@iusspavia.it
marco.facchin.marco.facchin@gmail.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000085, e193
Abstract
I argue that there is no viable development of the instrumentalist
inference within a model research program. I further argue that
both Friston and Pearl blankets are not the right sort of tool
to settle debates on philosophical internalism and externalism.
For these reasons, the inference within a model program is far
less promising than the target article suggests.
In this commentary, I want to focus on the inference within a
model research program, and briefly argue for two claims. If cor-
rect, these claims suggest that Bruineberg and co-authors present
the inference within a model research program in a far too bright
light.
First claim: Bruineberg and co-authors mischaracterize the
instrumentalist development of that research program. They say
that it is viable, but uninteresting. I think the opposite is true:
It is not a viable development, but, if viable, it would be
interesting.
Recall that, as the target article makes amply clear, (a) Pearl
blankets only capture the patterns of (in)dependencies between
variables in a model, which need not correspond to real boundar-
ies in the world, and (b) Pearl blankets are model-dependent.
Now, the instrumentalist inference within a model program
uses Pearl blankets as a guide to find real boundaries in the
world. Given (a) and (b), the success of such a program seems
predicated on having at least a reliable rule of thumb to identify
patterns of conditional independencies corresponding to real,
worldly, systemic boundaries, as well as a reliable rule of thumb
to identify the models that accurately capture the real structure
of the modeled phenomena (as opposed to merely providing a
parsimonious account of the data observed).
These rules of thumb would be interesting epistemic tools in
their own right, and their usage would allow us to learn a great
deal about the world. Moreover, while possessing these rules of
thumb would not allow us to vindicate the most ambitious claims
concerning Friston blankets in the literature on the free-energy
principle (e.g., the claim that physical systems “possess” or
“instantiate” Friston blankets, see Friston, 2013), possessing
these rules of thumb would be sufficient to allow Pearl blankets
to play the boundary-defining role Friston blankets are currently
supposed to play in the philosophical literature on the free-energy
principle (Hohwy, 2016, 2017; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021;
Ramstead, Kirchhoff, Constant, & Friston, 2019). This could (in
principle) allow us to solve hotly discussed philosophical problems
only by “doing the math” as many supporters of the free energy
principle claim, which would be an interesting development.
Yet the instrumentalist inference within a model program is
not really viable, because it is subtly circular. Recall that a Pearl
blanket is defined as the union of three sets: the sets of parents,
co-parent, and children of a target variable. This means that, in
order to identify the Pearl blanket of a variable (or set thereof),
we must have already identified the target, “blanketed” variable.
If this is correct, the identification of the target variable logically
precedes the identification of its Pearl blanket. This means that,
in order to identify the Pearl blanket of a real-world system, we
must have already identified the variable(s) mapping over that
system. Hence we cannot identify systems, and the various vari-
ables describing their behavior, by identifying their Pearl blankets,
on the pain of circularity. So, although the usage of Pearl blanket
to identify the boundaries of a system suggested by the instrumen-
talist inference within a model would have interesting conse-
quences is viable, it does not really seem viable.
Second claim: Neither Friston nor Pearl blankets can be used
to satisfactorily solve the disputes surrounding various forms of
philosophical internalism and externalism.
Consider that Friston and/or Pearl blankets have been used to
“identify in a principled manner” all the relevant factors consti-
tuting some phenomena of interest (see, e.g., Clark, 2017;
Hohwy, 2016; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021). Consider further
that in the relevant literature the presence of a Friston and/or
Pearl blanket defines what counts as internal or external in the rel-
evant sense. What is “surrounded” by the blanket counts as inter-
nal in the relevant sense, the rest counts as external (see Hohwy,
2017, pp. 6–7).
It is easy to see that the conjunction of these two ideas entails
that all the factors constituting a phenomenon of interest count,
by definition of “internal,” as internal. But this means that the
conjunction of these two claims makes internalism true by defini-
tion. If this is a solution to the philosophical internalism/external-
ism debate, it is not a satisfactory solution.
For one thing, the truth value of some forms of internalism
and externalism seems to depend on contingent matters of fact.
For example, the debate concerning externalism/internalism
about the vehicles of cognition and consciousness would surely
be solved by the existence of non-biological props able to
mimic cerebral processes sufficiently well (see Adams & Aizawa,
2010, p. 78; Vold, 2015). It is hard to see how such a debate, con-
cerning at least in part matters of fact, could be solved by
definition.
The same verdict holds for other debates concerning externalism
and internalism. The truth value of externalism and internalism
about knowledge and mental content, for example, depends on
what content and knowledge are; that is, on their nature (cf.
Bonjour, 2005; Egan, 2009; Segal, 2009). But the nature of content
and knowledge is not something that can be satisfactorily settled
by definition. Surely no internalist or externalist should be allowed
to win the day just by defining certain factors as internal or external!
Summarizing: in this commentary, I have tried to argue that
the target article is wrong on the instrumentalist development
of the inference within a model research program: it would be
an exciting research program, if it were viable. But it is not viable.
Furthermore, I have tried to argue that Friston and Pearl blankets
are the wrong kind of tools when it comes to providing a satisfac-
tory solution to the philosophical debates concerning externalism
and internalism. If the arguments I have provided here are cor-
rect, the target article mischaracterizes the inference within a
model research program: Its chances of success are far slimmer
than Bruineberg and co-authors suggest.
34
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sector.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2010). Why the mind is still in the head. In P. Robbins &
M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of situated cognition (pp. 78–96).
Cambridge University Press.
Bonjour, L. (2005). Internalism and externalism. In P. K. Moser (Ed.), The Oxford hand-
book of epistemology (pp. 234–263). Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese
(Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing: 3 (pp. 1–19). The MIND Group.
https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573031
Egan, F. (2009). Wide content. In A. Beckermann, B. P. McLaughlin & S. Walter (Eds.),
The Oxford handbook of philosophy of mind (pp. 406–425). Oxford University Press..
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285.
Hohwy, J. (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.),
Philosophy and predictive processing: 2 (pp. 1–15). The MIND Group. https://doi.org/
10.15502/9783958573048
Kirchhoff, D. M., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198(5), 4791–4810.
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, D. M., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Multiscale inte-
gration: Beyond externalism and internalism. Synthese, 198(1), 41–70.
Segal, G. (2009). Narrow content. In A. Beckermann, B. P. McLaughlin & S. Walter
(Eds.), The Oxford handbook of philosophy of mind (pp. 425–440). Oxford
University Press.
Vold, K. (2015). The parity argument for extended consciousness. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 22(3–4), 16–33.
Practical implications from
distinguishing between Pearl
blankets and Friston blankets
Stephen Fox
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FI-02150 Espoo, Finland
stephen.fox@vtt.fi
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000061, e194
Abstract
Analysis provided in The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
reveals that there is limited potential for practical application
of Pearl and Friston blankets. However, Bruineberg and col-
leagues’ analysis includes a simple diagram that has potential
to better enable shared understanding of interactions between
free energy principle constructs during the design and imple-
mentation of biosocial–technical systems.
A major contribution of Bruineberg and colleagues’ analysis is to
reduce potential time and confusion involved in trying to work
out what might be done in practice with Markov blankets. In
particular, they provide succinct comparative analyses of the
many different descriptions of Markov blankets. Importantly,
their comparative analysis includes illustrative cases, which is a
proven strategy for improving learning (Roelle & Berthold,
2015). However, Bruineberg and colleagues’ analysis reveals
that both Pearl and Friston blankets are of limited usefulness
for practice. In particular, Bruineberg and colleagues clarify
that Pearl blankets is only an auxiliary construct that can be
used to describe conditional independence on random variables.
They also clarify that what can be done with Friston blankets in
2021 is a matter of ongoing debate that includes dispute over
conceptual issues and mathematical details.
To use an automotive vehicle analogy for brevity, Bruineberg
and colleagues’ analysis can be distilled into the following sum-
mary: Pearl blankets can contribute to describing what is going
on “under the hood” while Friston blankets can contribute to
describing what is going on “in and around the hood.” From
an instrumentalist systems design perspective, both Pearl and
Friston blankets are human ascriptions made in order to
model real-world systems. Colloquial description using the
“hood” analogy is not appropriate for natural science and social
science, but is appropriate for action science within which the
need for practical framings is emphasized (Friedman &
Putman, 2014).
The limited practical usefulness of distinguishing between
Pearl and Friston blankets can be illustrated with the following
example related to functional disorders: that is, medical condi-
tions without complete medical explanation that impair normal
functioning of bodily processes (Stone, 2009). Better healthcare
systems are needed to provide support for people suffering with
functional disorders (Stone, 2016). Gait issues are involved in
functional disorders (Espay et al., 2018). Gait is related to person-
ality in ways that are not fully understood (Sun et al., 2018). This
ascription problem is exacerbated by the difficulty of defining
where one personality type ends and another begins (Haslam,
2019). Furthermore, gait is related to memory in ways that are
not fully understood (Michalak, Rohde, & Troje, 2015). This
ascription problem is exacerbated by the difficulty of defining
what aspects of memory are in the mind and what aspects are
in the body (Tozzi, 2014). Thus, distinguishing between what is
“under the hood” and what is “in and around the hood” is very
difficult. For example, are personality type and body memory
“under the hood” while gait is “in and around the hood”? If so,
how is the fascia’s connection of bones and muscles in gait related
to the fascia system holding body memories (Tozzi, 2014)? Should
the same fascia be described with both Pearl and Friston blankets?
This example illustrates that distinguishing between Pearl and
Friston blankets does not necessarily make modelling complex
systems any easier. Nor does it necessarily end potential argument
that there should only be one type of Markov blanket or potential
argument that Markov blankets could be superseded, for example,
by causal blankets (Rosas, Mediano, Biehl, Chandaria, & Polani,
2020).
Although reading The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
reveals limitations of Pearl and Friston blankets, this does not
mean that nothing practical can be done. In particular, it has
been argued that it may be useful to frame systems in terms of
constructs such as Markov blankets, but without applying all
technical details and associated mathematics (Fox, 2021).
There is precedence for this in Kurt Lewin’s force field analysis
diagram being used widely, but many technical details and
associated mathematics of his field theory not being used. This
is a relevant example as force field analysis is applied to deter-
mine interactions between forces for change and forces against
change during the evolution of organizations (Burnes &
Cooke, 2013).
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
35
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Apropos, Bruineberg, and colleagues provide another useful
contribution with their Figure 5, which has potential as a boun-
dary object: that is, as a means of providing meaningful informa-
tion to different parties who have different backgrounds (Bowker
& Star, 2020). In particular, their Figure 5 provides a succinct
explanation of interactions between main constructs in the free
energy principle. Importantly, it does not involve single line
demarcations, which can facilitate the reification fallacy (Mishra
& Mishra, 2010). Moreover, it has much potential to provide
the basis for an interactive multimodal symbol system, which
can facilitate effective communication among people who have
different backgrounds (Fox, Moreno, & Vahala, 2019) during
the design and implementation of biosocial–technical systems
(Fox, Griffy-Brown, & Dabic, 2020). For example, facilitate effec-
tive communication among individuals suffering with functional
disorders and healthcare practitioners who could provide them
with support (Allen, 2009; Stone, 2016).
Financial support. Support was provided from European Commission grant
number 952091.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Allen, D. (2009). From boundary concept to boundary object: The practice and politics of
care pathway development. Social Science & Medicine, 69(3), 354–361.
Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (2020). Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences.
MIT Press.
Burnes, B., & Cooke, B. (2013). Kurt Lewin’s field theory: A review and re-evaluation.
International Journal of Management Reviews, 15, 408–425.
Espay, A. J., Aybek, S., Carson, A., Edwards, M. J., Goldstein, L. H., Hallett, M., …
Morgante, F. (2018). Current concepts in diagnosis and treatment of functional neu-
rological disorders. JAMA Neurology, 75(9), 1132–1141.
Fox, S. (2021). Active inference: Applicability to different types of social organization
explained through reference to industrial engineering and quality management.
Entropy, 23(2), 198.
Fox, S., Griffy-Brown, C., & Dabic, M. (2020). From socio-technical systems to biosocial
technical systems: New themes and new guidance for the field of technology in society.
Technology in Society, 62, 101291.
Fox, S., Moreno, M., & Vahala, P. (2019). Innovation symbol system: Multimodal gram-
mars and vocabularies for facilitating mutual innovation knowledge. Journal of
Innovation & Knowledge, 4, 12–22.
Friedman, V. J., & Putman, R. W. (2014). Action science. In D. Coghlan & M.
Brydon-Miller (Eds.), The Sage encyclopedia of action research (pp. 15–18). SAGE.
Haslam, N. (2019). Unicorns, snarks, and personality types: A review of the first
102 taxometric studies of personality. Australian Journal of Psychology, 71(1),
39–49.
Michalak, J., Rohde, K., & Troje, N. F. (2015). How we walk affects what we remember:
Gait modifications through biofeedback change negative affective memory bias.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 46, 121–125.
Mishra, A., & Mishra, H. (2010). Border bias: The belief that state borders can protect
against disasters. Psychological Science, 21(11), 1582–1586.
Roelle, J., & Berthold, K. (2015). Effects of comparing contrasting cases on learning from
subsequent explanations. Cognition and Instruction, 33(3), 199–225.
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020). Causal blan-
kets: Theory and algorithmic framework. In T. Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L. Buckley, &
C. De Boom (Eds.), Active Inference. IWAI 2020. Communications in Computer and
Information Science (Vol. 1326, pp. 187–198). Springer.
Stone, J. (2009). Functional symptoms in neurology: The bare essentials. Practical
Neurology, 9(3), 179–189.
Stone, J. (2016). Functional neurological disorders: The neurological assessment as treat-
ment. Practical Neurology, 16(1), 7–17.
Sun, J., Wu, P., Shen, Y., Yang, Z., Li, H., Liu, Y., … Chen, M. (2018). Relationship
between
personality
and
gait:
Predicting
personality
with
gait
features.
In
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and
Biomedicine (BIBM), Madrid, Spain, 3–6 December, pp. 1227–1231.
Tozzi, P. (2014). Does fascia hold memories? Journal of Bodywork and Movement
Therapies, 18(2), 259–265.
Maps and territories, smoke,
and mirrors
Karl Friston
Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3AR, UK
k.friston@ucl.ac.uk
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000073, e195
Abstract
It is a pleasure to comment on Bruineberg et al. – who raise
some interesting questions of a philosophical and technical
nature. I will try to answer three questions posed by the authors.
Are Pearl and Friston blankets different things? Are Markov
blankets used in an ontological sense? Is there a privileged
Markov blanket?
Are Pearl and Friston blankets different things? Yes and no.
Markov boundaries, blankets, chains, and fields are just ways of
carving nature at its joints, in terms of conditional independen-
cies. For example, the “present” constitutes a Markov blanket
that separates the “past” from the “future.” Pearl and Friston
blankets are just Markov blankets applied in different settings.
Pearl blankets (as defined here) are the minimal Markov bound-
aries in directed acyclic Bayesian networks. Friston blankets (as
defined here) are exactly the same thing formulated for dynamic
Bayesian networks. This distinction is important because Markov
blankets are defined in terms of conditional independencies that
require a well-defined probability density. In a dynamic setting,
there are two candidates for this probability density: either the
(nonequilibrium steady state) solution to density dynamics
(e.g., obtained by the Fokker Planck formulation) or the probabil-
ity density over paths through state space (e.g., obtained via the
path integral formulation). It is probably the move to a dynamic
setting that has led to puzzlement in the philosophical literature;
especially, in understanding the link between sparse coupling in
dynamical systems and the ensuing conditional independencies.
(This puzzlement generally arises when focusing on linear edge
cases; e.g., Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai, 2020.) However, Pearl and
Friston
blankets
are
just
Markov
blankets
in
the
usual
Markovian sense (Pearl, 2009).
Are Markov blankets used in an ontological sense under the
free energy principle (FEP)? Yes. In the FEP, they are used in
an ontologically robust sense, to model the actual boundaries of
living systems (in other words, to model features of the territory)
(Friston, 2013). One may be a realist or an instrumentalist about
this usage (i.e., about the features of the map), but in either case,
the aim is to model the actual properties – in this case, the real
boundaries – of actual systems.
In relation to the distinction between maps and territories,
the FEP says something quite radical, and philosophically sig-
nificant: it says, heuristically, that to exist at all is to become
a map of one’s territory (i.e., to entail a generative model of
one’s environment). It might be helpful to think about map-
making as the sense-making implicit in any internal states
that are equipped with a Markov blanket. Internal states are
effectively generating a coarse-grained map of the territory
36
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

beyond the Markov blanket. On this reading, the distinction
between a (living) map and the accompanying territory only
exists in virtue of a Markov blanket, which allows the map
to mirror the territory, while allowing a separation of the ter-
ritory from the map.
Is there a particular Markov blanket that is privileged for
principled reasons? No. There is no unique Markov blanket
or partition that is privileged under the FEP. However, this
does not imply that particular partitions of a system are
arbitrary. A failure to appreciate this precludes a proper treat-
ment of the nature of things and, in particular, their scale
invariance. Given a set of states at a particular scale, there
are potentially many different partitions that have nontrivial
Markov blankets. In other words, there are many ways of carv-
ing nature at its joints – as illustrated with the knee-jerk exam-
ple in the target article.
The within-scale composition of Markov blankets is espe-
cially important in defining the architecture of generative mod-
els entailed by internal dynamics. Not only do Markov blankets
define the structure of hierarchical generative models but also –
within a hierarchical level – the factorisation afforded by
Markov blankets can be read as modularity (Colas, Diard, &
Bessiere, 2010; Parr, Sajid, & Friston, 2020b). Indeed, this
aspect of Markov blankets speaks to their foundational role
in the FEP; in the sense that variational free energy is a func-
tional of a mean field approximation to posterior beliefs – and
a mean field approximation entails a factorisation that just is a
specification of Markov blankets (Dauwels, 2007; Winn &
Bishop, 2005). This factorisation is ontological because it spec-
ifies the functional and computational architectures that are
realised
by
(e.g.,
neuronal)
message
passing
and
implicit
Bayesian belief updating. This means that the FEP rests on
Markov blankets within (the internal states that are enclosed
by)
Markov
blankets
(Palacios,
Razi,
Parr,
Kirchhoff,
&
Friston, 2020).
Finally, at the between-scale level, there is no privileged scale.
The deeper question here is how one scale maps to the next and
what variational principles are conserved over scales – and the
implications for the top-down and bottom-up causation between
scales (Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston, & Kiverstein, 2018;
Palacios et al., 2020; Parr, Da Costa, & Friston, 2020a).
Formally, this is probably best dealt with using the apparatus of
the renormalisation group. This apparatus has been applied in a
realist fashion to the synthetic soup (see Figure 11 in Friston
[2019]) and instrumentally in the modelling of neuronal dynam-
ics in the brain (Friston et al., 2021). In brief, it’s Markov blankets
all the way down – and all the way up.
Financial support. This work was supported by funding for the Wellcome
Centre for Human Neuroimaging (Ref: 205103/Z/16/Z); and a Canada–UK
Artificial Intelligence Initiative (Ref: ES/T01279X/1).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2020). A technical critique of the free energy prin-
ciple as presented in “Life as we know it.” arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2001.06408.
Colas, F., Diard, J., & Bessiere, P. (2010). Common Bayesian models for common cogni-
tive issues. Acta Biotheoretica, 58, 191–216.
Dauwels, J. (2007). On variational message passing on factor graphs. 2007 IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 2546–2550.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 10, 20130475.
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv eprint,
arXiv:1906.10184.
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi, A.
(2021). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience, 5,
211–251.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society, Interface, 15, 20170792.
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). On Markov blankets
and hierarchical self-organisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486, 110089.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020a). Markov blankets, information geometry and
stochastic thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions. Series A, Mathematical,
Physical, and Engineering Sciences, 378, 20190159.
Parr, T., Sajid, N., & Friston, K. J. (2020b). Modules or mean-fields? Entropy, 22, 552.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Winn, J., & Bishop, C. M. (2005). Variational message passing. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 6, 661–694.
Making life and mind as clear as
possible, but not clearer
Alex Gomez-Marin
Instituto de Neurociencias (CSIC-UMH), 03550 San Juan Alicante, Spain
agomezmarin@gmail.com
https://behavior-of-organisms.org/@behaviOrganisms
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000127, e196
Abstract
Neuroscience needs theory. Ideas without data are blind, and yet
mechanisms without concepts are empty. Friston’s free energy
principle paradigmatically illustrates the power and pitfalls of
current theoretical biology. Mighty metaphors, turned into
mathematical
models,
can
become
mindless
metaphysics.
Then, seeking to understand everything in principle, we may
explain nothing in practice. Life can’t live in a map.
In their brilliant but rather undiscovered book, The Dialectical
Biologist, Richard Levins and Richard Lewontin write: “a theory
that can explain everything explains nothing” (1985, p. 65). The
paragraph is worth quoting in its entirety, but on another occa-
sion.
They refer to the ideological
excesses
of Marxism,
Freudianism, and Darwinism. In the context of twenty-first cen-
tury life and mind sciences, a similar cautionary note could be
made about Fristonism.
Already well-known for his contributions to functional imag-
ing, the British neuroscientist Karl Friston has distinguished him-
self over the last decade as a steady proponent of the so-called free
energy principle (FEP) (Friston, 2010). Friston borrows founda-
tional concepts from thermodynamics and combines them with
two good old ideas: Hermann von Helmholtz’s understanding
of perception as inference (1867) and Claude Bernard’s insight
on the self-regulatory nature of vital processes (1878). The FEP
is a normative theory, and its main commandment is the minimi-
zation of surprise. Framed in a modern Bayesian framework –
whereby beliefs are updated by means of loops of prediction,
error, and correction – the brain would be an active inference
machine doing predictive processing.
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
37
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

But this is precisely what begs the question. It is not uncom-
mon that a formal approach used by brain scientists to study
other brains ends up surreptitiously postulated as what all brains
actually do (Gomez-Marin, 2019): If one can make sense of brains
as inference machines, then brains must be inference machines.
Indeed, a pervasive temptation among scientists is to treat the
conjunction “as if” as “is” (e.g., animals are [like] machines, brains
are [like] computers). We know that maps are not terrains, but we
still conflate them (Andrews, 2021).
The FEP illustrates what I call “the 3M fallacy,” a sleight of
mind whereby captivating metaphors are turned into mathemat-
ical models that then become covert or self-ignorant metaphysics.
Bruineberg et al. thus offer a timely dissection of the notion of
Markov blankets as interpreted by some FEP proponents, making
a distinction between mathematical tools to study organisms and
ontological pronouncements about those very organisms. The cri-
tique would not be so patently urgent had Friston and collabora-
tors refrained from elevating their theoretical framework from a
powerful heuristic into a sort of biological theory of everything.
Having started as an ambitious integrative theory of brain
function, the FEP has been progressively expanded to behavior,
the mind, and even consciousness! Perception, decision making
and learning would all be explainable under the FEP too, in ani-
mals but also in plants and microorganisms. And yet one should
be hesitant of any sweeping principle that accounts for nematode
foraging and romantic love. Seeking an understanding of virtually
everything in principle, the framework risks explaining actually
nothing in practice.
Is Friston’s FEP neurobiology’s “string theory”? The latter has
been deemed by prominent physicists as “not even wrong” (Woit,
2006). The FEP is no less ambitious. Sufficiently elaborated for
professional acolytes to revere and pursue, it appears sufficiently
vague to be immune to empirical data. Without indulging in fal-
sification chauvinism, one should at least ask whether and how
the FEP could be wrong.
Perhaps, like Darwin’s, Friston’s theory may not be disprovable
by any one experiment, while still offering a powerful overall way
to see things. Back to Freud and Marx, their hypotheses have also
tremendously influenced modern thought, whether directly test-
able or not. Isn’t it paradoxical that Darwin’s account (1859),
arguably the greatest of all biological theories (and firmly
grounded in empirical observation), cannot be falsified by a single
aberrant finding? Biology is the paradigmatic science of excep-
tions.
Consistency
is
overrated;
coherency
is
scarce.
Overwhelmed by analytical facts, we desperately need synthetic
views. Science accomplishes something remarkable when, apart
from discovering causal mechanisms, it offers organizing princi-
ples. A virtuous middle may be found where castles in the air
meet castles made of sand.
Should theoreticians rejoice at mass-producing prêt-à-porter
“conceptual blankets,” or strive to offer tailor-made suits to the
phenomena of life? Concerned with clarity we lose touch with
concrete reality, as the physicist’s joke of the spherical cow infa-
mously illustrates. Pushing the blanket analogy a bit further, let
us ask: How closely fit should the cloth be? A loose one can fit
almost everything, but properly fit nothing. A tight fit does a
proper job, but just once. The “comfy blanket” may be a suitable
garment to watch a movie at home, but a tremendously inappro-
priate one to attend a funeral. Paradoxically, as Iain McGilchrist
remarks, “[k]nowledge of something that is by its nature not
precise will itself have to be imprecise, if it is to be accurate”
(2021, p. 583). Our duty as thinkers is to be as clear as possible,
but not clearer.
In that respect, the FEP has remarkable ingredients. It puts
action into perception, re-enacting Henri Bergson’s pioneering
theory of perception as virtual action (1896). It also emphasizes
the life–mind continuity (Thompson, 2010), but see Bitbol and
Gallagher (2018). The framework, however, leaves crucial biolog-
ical aspects out. Based on statistical averages in steady states, it
struggles to take historicity and individuality into account.
Moreover, it overlooks the developmental origin of Bayesian pri-
ors
(Ciaunica,
Constant,
Preissl,
&
Fotopoulou,
2021).
Evolutionarily, the FEP focuses on important similarities across
species, but dispenses with the relevant differences, say, between
a shiitake mushroom and a beluga whale.
In sum, we can appreciate the most fecund aspects of the the-
ory without mistaking stupendous abstractions for concrete real-
ity. Such is the Herculean challenge faced when seeking
knowledge
of
life
as
we
know
it
versus
as
it
is
lived
(Canguilhem, 1952). The objectivist stance disregards the per-
spective of each living organism. “We think in generalities, but
we live in detail,” wrote Alfred North Whitehead (1926, p. 192).
Theories of everything can hardly be theories of every thing,
since nothing is anything except in its context. Conversely, a the-
ory of every thing cannot be a theory of everything since, to our
dismay (and sometimes denial), physics does not account for the
existence of lived experience. Theory strives for simplicity, but life
is complicated. Living organisms can’t live in a map.
Acknowledgments. I
thank
Michel
Bitbol,
Tim
Elmo
Feiten,
Iain
McGilchrist, and Rupert Sheldrake for insightful discussions.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle.
Biology & Philosophy, 36, 30.
Bergson, H. (1896). Matière et mémoire: Essai sur la relation du corps à l’esprit.
Bernard, C. (1878). Leçons sur les phénomènes de la vie communes aux animaux et aux
végétaux. Baillière.
Bitbol, M., & Gallagher, S. (2018). The free energy principle and autopoiesis. Physics of
Life Reviews, 24, 24–26.
Canguilhem, G. (1952). La connaissance de la vie. Vrin.
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H, & Fotopoulou, K. (2021). The first prior: From
co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life. Consciousness and Cognition,
91, 103117.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of Species by means of natural selection, or the preserva-
tion of favoured races in the struggle for life. John Murray.
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Gomez-Marin, A. (2019). A clash of Umwelts: Anthropomorphism in behavioral neuro-
science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 42, E229.
Levins, R., & Lewontin, R. (1985). The dialectical biologist. Harvard University Press.
McGilchrist, I. (2021). The matter with things: Our brains, our delusions, and the unmak-
ing of the world. Perspectiva.
Thompson, E. (2010). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology and the sciences of mind.
Belknap Press, Harvard University Press.
von Helmholtz, H. (1867). Handbuch der physiologischen optik. Leopold Voss.
Whitehead, A. N. (1926). The education of an Englishman. The Atlantic Monthly, 138,
192–198.
Woit, P. (2006). Not even wrong: The failure of string theory and the continuing challenge
to unify the laws of physics. Basic Books.
38
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Spatiotemporal constraints of
causality: Blanket closure emerges
from localized interactions between
temporally separable subsystems
Casper Hespa,b,c,d
aDepartment of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam,
Netherlands; bAmsterdam Brain and Cognition Centre, University of
Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam, Netherlands; cInstitute for Advanced Study,
University of Amsterdam, 1012 GC Amsterdam, Netherlands and dWellcome
Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London
WC1N 3BG, UK
c.hesp@uva.nl
twitter: @casper_hesp
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000620, e197
Abstract
In this commentary, I first acknowledge points of common
ground with the target article by Bruineberg and colleagues.
Then, I consider how certain ambiguities could be resolved by
considering spatiotemporal constraints on causality. In particu-
lar I show how blanket closure emerges from localized interac-
tions between temporally separable subsystems, and how this
points to valuable directions of future research. Finally, I close
with a process note discussing the allegorical implications of
the authors’ creative title.
In “The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets,” Bruineberg and col-
leagues present a stimulating treatment of developments in con-
ceptually distinct uses of the concept of Markov blankets. The
authors attribute the original definition of Markov blankets to
Pearl and then explain how it differs from a more recent concep-
tion of Markov blankets, which they attribute to Friston. Their
narrative is of the cautionary sort, warning readers against the
conflation of these distinct uses. Bruineberg and I mentioned sim-
ilar points in our co-authored commentary (Bruineberg & Hesp,
2018) calling researchers to move “beyond blanket terms.” It was
an early prelude to some of the concerns raised in the target arti-
cle – namely that associating the physical boundaries of living sys-
tems with Markov blankets still leaves us with thorny issues and
edge cases, requiring further theoretical, empirical, and computa-
tional work. The authors emphasize the following distinction
between two “types” of Markov blankets:
(a) Pearl introduced the definition of a Markov blanket as the
minimal set of nodes in a directed acyclic graph that render
a given target node conditionally independent from all the
other nodes in the network: parents, children, and co-parents.
(b) Friston’s characterization of Markov blankets emphasizes cir-
cular causality by partitioning a given system of interest in
terms of its external and internal states, whose recursive
influences are mediated by “blanket states,” which entail sen-
sory and active states. Given a designated set of internal
states, sensory states mediate inward influences (from exter-
nal to internal states), while active states mediate outward
influences (from internal to external states).
In the target article, the authors argue that Pearl’s characteri-
zation of Markov blankets is more innocuous than that of
Friston – as presented in “Life as we know it” (Friston, 2013). I
will pay particular attention to the following technical points
made by Bruineberg and colleagues:
(1) Friston’s formulation focuses explicitly on circular causality
and bi-directional connectivity, while Pearl’s formulation
focuses on directed acyclic graphs.
(2) There is an ambiguous mapping between Friston’s formula-
tion and Pearl’s definition of a Markov blanket: If the internal
states are designated as the target set, then sensory states are
parent nodes and active states are child nodes, but this leaves
co-parent nodes unaccounted for.
(3) The identification of internal states depends heavily on
thresholding parameters and other modelling choices.
First, we consider the causal (in)dependency structure imposed
on complex dynamical systems by temporal and physical con-
straints of interactions. Figure 1 illustrates that a combination of
localized interactions combined with a separation of convergence
time scales (as induced by the rate parameter in Friston’s primor-
dial soup) speaks to the first two points. Firstly, dynamical rela-
tionships are causally directed due to the arrow of time and
exhibit
recurrence
when
considering
multiple
time
steps.
Second, separation of time scales in localized interactions means
that all co-parents of a target state are also its parents. As
shown in Figure 1, these conditions allow for a correspondence
between the Markov blanket of a target node – as originally
defined by Pearl – and its causal blanket – as defined by Rosas,
Mediano, Biehl, Chandaria, and Polani (2020). The significance
of blanket leakage versus blanket closure is that unaccounted
co-parents will act as confounding variables for any inferential
process. Temporal separability minimizes such confounding rela-
tionships, affording some “probabilistic grip” to the target
Figure 1 (Hesp). On the left, a directed acyclic graph describing
a complex system consisting of five variables at five time points
(t −2, t −1, t, t + 1, t + 2), with localized interactions and a sep-
aration of time scales where the target node i changes twice as
fast as its neighbours (i −1, i + 1), which in turn change twice as
fast as their next neighbours (i −2, i + 2). On the top right, the
associated “Friston blanket,” showing the resulting correspon-
dence between the “Pearl blanket” (in blue) and the causal
blanket in purple (as in Rosas et al., 2020), induced by the com-
bination of localized interactions and separation of time scales.
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
39
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

node. As such, investigating the sufficient conditions for the
stability of such “blanket closure” would be a valuable avenue
for research into the emergence of life.
With respect to the dependence on modelling assumptions, I
would echo George Box: “All models are wrong, but some are use-
ful.” Methods for partitioning systems will reveal different kinds
of information about them, but for given variables of interest
they can be evaluated against each other. The authors rightly
noted the additional complexity given the fact that predictive
accounts of cognition tend to involve “models within models.”
These nuances do not detract from the utility of such formalisms
as modelling heuristics. For any given living system, any model
being modelled is – by logical necessity – epistemologically
bounded by influences crossing its causal blanket. Furthermore,
such models should be biased towards those aspects of the envi-
ronment that are relevant to organismic integrity and function.
Because their capacity to maintain such a probabilistic grip
would depend heavily on the stability of blanket closure, this
approach naturally emphasizes the functional relevance of auto-
poiesis and – in extension – self-modelling (Ramstead et al.,
2021; Sandved-Smith et al., 2021). At this point, we can consider
“models of models within models” to characterize the heterarch-
ical structure of cognition. Perhaps to the frustration of those who
prefer philosophical clarity, I would argue that, when territories
are devoted to mapping (sub)sections of themselves recursively
on different levels of description, maps and territories can mingle
– blurring their conceptual boundaries.
Allegorical implications of “The Emperor’s New Clothes”
The authors have selected a pithy title that fits with the theme of pub-
licly calling into question a common belief. However, Anderson’s
original
story
suggests
a
much
darker
allegorical
message.
Intentional deceit was attributed explicitly to every single character
in this story except the “little child,” who heroically disrupted the
echo chamber. The echoes were started by the weavers, who falsely
claimed that “a simpleton, or one unfit for his job would be unable
to see the cloth.” While everyone was taken hostage by their own
social insecurities, only the little child dared to speak out loud.
Transposed to our context, this allegory appears to suggest that
researchers have formed an echo chamber – driven by reliance on
hearsay and intellectual dishonesty – for fear of being seen as a
“simpleton.” Bruineberg and colleagues associate their own mes-
sage with the little child – exposing an obvious lie. The implied
accusation appears to run counter to the principle of charity,
which is essential for effective academic discourse.1 Presumably
this was not intended, but the authors could have steered clear
of such ambiguities by explaining their choice of title in-text –
as is common practice when academics use popular references.
Hopefully, if nothing else, my commentary could elicit such
clarification from the authors.
Financial support. The work of this author is supported by funding from a
NWO Research Talent Grant of the Dutch Government (no. 406.18.535).
Conflict of interest. None.
Note
1. The target article is not an isolated case of academics invoking a theme of
trickery, even when we constrain ourselves to recent writing on the topic of
Markov blankets. For example, Raja et al. (2021; cited in the target article)
aimed to expose what they called “the Markov blanket trick.”
References
Bruineberg, J., & Hesp, C. (2018). Beyond blanket terms: Challenges for the explanatory
value of variational (neuro-)ethology. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 37–39. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.11.015
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 10(86),
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. L. (2021). The Markov blan-
ket trick: On the scope of the free energy principle and active inference. Physics of Life
Reviews, 39(2), 49–72. doi:10.1016/j.plrev.2021.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Smith, R., Constant, A., & Friston, K. (2021).
Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 120, 109–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2020.11.024
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A. M., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020). Causal blan-
kets: Theory and algorithmic framework. Communications in Computer and
Information Science, 1326, 187–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64919-7_19
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ramstead, M. J. D.
(2021). Towards a computational phenomenology of mental action: Modelling meta-
awareness and attentional control with deep parametric active inference. Neuroscience
of Consciousness, 2021(2). https://doi.org/10.1093/NC/NIAB018m
Free-energy pragmatics: Markov
blankets don’t prescribe objective
ontology, and that’s okay
Inês Hipólitoa
and Thomas van Esb
aBerlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10117 Berlin,
Germany and bCentre for Philosophical Psychology, Universiteit Antwerpen,
2000 Antwerpen, Belgium
ines.hipolito@hu-berlin.de; thomas.vanes@uantwerpen.be
http://www.ineshipolito.org/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000322, e198
Abstract
We target the ontological and epistemological ramifications of
the proposed distinction between Friston and Pearl blankets.
We emphasize the need for empirical testing next to computa-
tional modeling. A peculiar aspect of the free energy principle
(FEP) is its purported support of radically opposed ontologies
of the mind. In our view, the objective ontological aspiration
itself should be rejected for a pragmatic instrumentalist view.
In their impressive paper, Bruineberg et al. make a significant contri-
bution to the free energy principle (FEP) literature by distinguishing
between “Pearl blankets” and “Friston blankets,” identifying the for-
meras anepistemic tool for Bayesian inference and the latter in terms
ofits “novel metaphysical use in the free energyframework todemar-
cate the physical boundary between an agent and its environment”
(abstract). Yet the authors have another aspiration. They call out
the presupposed legitimacy of extracting ontological predictors
from mathematical formalisms, which we applaud.
One thing that is fascinating about the Markov blanket is that
this tool allows us to make greater sense of a nested world. Every
scale is seen as part of a multiscale network of reciprocal influ-
ences interactively shaped by the history of interactions into a
common environment. Computational models and simulations
can then be viewed as the folk ontology of constructing “imagi-
nary
biological
populations,
imaginary
neural
networks”
(Godfrey-Smith, 2009) to explore the viability of conceiving of
cognitive life as active inference under the FEP.
40
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

But a theory does not reduce to the tools constructed to
explore its viability. Tools such as Markov blankets under
Bayesian statistics or simulation models are deprived of truth
value in themselves outside of the context of the theory.
Markov blankets and computational models are built to explore
the predictive power of the FEP as a theory of cognition. A theory
precedes all the mathematics and computational models in the
world. It arises by noticing a pattern, sometimes by what Karl
Friston called a “Gerald Durrell” moment (Friston, Fortier, &
Friedman, 2018); the FEP, interestingly, first arose to him while
preoccupied with some woodlice’s antics who were frantically
scurrying around trying to find some shade. Just like this, a theory
unfolds as discernment of correlations between events or pro-
cesses of change under philosophical contours and commitments.
After all, as Dennett well says, “[t]here is no such thing as
philosophy-free science; there is only science whose philosophical
baggage is taken on board without examination” (Dennett, 1995,
p. 21).
The FEP as a theory of cognition too must answer the empir-
ical test to see if it lives up to its promises. The FEP theory and its
models might be mistaken, thus, they must be tested empirically
to see whether their predictions are borne out. While the FEP the-
ory may seem plausible, establishing its applications in, say, neu-
rocognitive activity, is not a trivial matter of translating it into
models and proclaiming the truth. The FEP, as a theory of cogni-
tion, needs to answer to the tedious process of hypothesis and
experimental verification. If, for example, a human being acts
like an ideal (active) inference machine, this is an experimental
and not a computational model fact. It must be tested under a
wide variety of experimental situations.
Yet what is it that should be tested in the first place? A peculiar
aspect of the FEP is its use in support of radically opposed ontol-
ogies of the mind. Using the FEP’s formal framework, different
groups of theorists have come to a wide range of solutions,
such as Hohwy’s (2016, p. 274) neurocentric representational
view, Bruineberg et al.’s (2018) embodied dynamic view, or
Kirchhoff and Kiverstein’s (2019) view of an activity-dependent,
gear-switching fluid boundary. These ontologies identify what
the respective workers deem the appropriate boundaries of a
study of the mind. Yet, Bruineberg et al. argue, such ontologies
are the result not of inherent features of the formalism, but
instead of “additional philosophical premises.” We suggest that
this is not a fault. In our view, the objective ontological aspiration
itself should be rejected; we propose a more thoroughly pragmatic
instrumentalist view.
The relevant scale of investigation is relative to pragmatic
research considerations. An example may help. Say that we
want to understand an outfielder’s flyball catching activity. We
could investigate the outfielder in relation to the flyball and the
field they are running on. Yet if we want to understand the out-
fielder’s baseball play their catching is part of, we need to consider
the larger-scale dynamics, including the relation of the outfielder
to the other players, the current score, and so on. This can
explode if we are instead interested in, say, the outfielder’s weekly
leisure routine. As such, the boundaries of the relevant system of
study when studying the mind can change drastically depending
on our focus.
Our view can be seen as an instrumentalist take on Kirchhoff
and Kiverstein’s (2019) realist view. Their view takes the boundary
of the mind to swing within the spectrum ranging from environ-
mentally extensive to skull-bound depending on the organism’s
activity. Yet the determination of the relevant processes for each
activity rests, as Bruineberg et al. show, not upon fundamental
mathematics, but, as we have described here in brief, on pragmatic
considerations. As such, activity-centrism bottoms out into prag-
matic research interest-dependence, and does not ground an
objective ontology. We thus agree with Bruineberg et al. that
the FEP in itself will not adjudicate ontological questions. Yet
we argue that, under pragmatic instrumentalism, this is superflu-
ous anyway. After all, to demand an ontology over and above what
is relevant to our research interests is to demand an ontology that
is epiphenomenal to our investigations. Our view thus provides a
pragmatic way forward for an instrumentalist FEP.
Financial support. This work has been funded by the Postdoctoral
Fellowship by Humboldt University (I. H.).
Conflict of interest. The authors (Thomas van Es, Inês Hipolito) certify that
they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with
any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in
speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership,
or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrange-
ments), or nonfinancial interest (such as personal or professional relation-
ships, affiliations, knowledge, or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials
discussed in this manuscript.
References
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scien-
tist: The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195
(6), 2417–2444.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s dangerous idea. The Sciences, 35(3), 34–40.
Friston, K., Fortier, M., & Friedman, D. A. (2018). Of woodlice and men: A Bayesian
account of cognition, life and consciousness. An interview with Karl Friston. ALIUS
Bulletin, 2, 17–43.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2009). Models and fictions in science. Philosophical Studies, 143(1),
101–116.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended consciousness and predictive processing:
A third-wave view. Routledge.
Bayesian realism and
structural representation
Alex Kiefera
and Jakob Hohwyb
aCognition & Philosophy Lab, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia
and bMonash Center for Consciousness & Contemplative Studies, Cognition &
Philosophy Lab, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia
Alex.Kiefer@monash.edu
Jakob.Hohwy@monash.edu
alexbkiefer.net
https://research.monash.edu/en/persons/jakob-hohwy
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000231, e199
Abstract
We challenge the authors’ view that Markov blankets are illicitly
reified when used to describe organismic boundaries. We do this
both on general methodological grounds, where we appeal to a
form of structural realism derived from Bayesian cognitive sci-
ence to dissolve the problem, and by rebutting specific argu-
ments in the target article.
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
41
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In this commentary we argue that, from the point of view of
Bayesian cognitive science, concerns about the reification of
Markov blankets are misplaced. We assume that scientific theories
represent reality in the same way in which we have argued (Kiefer
& Hohwy, 2017, 2019) that organisms’ internal generative models
represent their external worlds: by way of (exploitable) structural
similarity. Mathematically articulated theories or models set up
relations among their variables, which, when successful, mimic
the relations that obtain among elements of the target system
(Cummins, 1991). In asserting such theories, we impute these
very structural properties to the world.
This view is fundamentally a structural-realist one (Ladyman,
1998; Ladyman & Ross, 2007), and is in a sense nothing new, but
whether novel or not it is adequate to the task of addressing the
present criticism. To start, this perspective on the semantics of
scientific theories completely defuses the concern that projection
of the content of a mathematically expressed theory (such as the
free energy principle [FEP]) onto the physical world involves a
category-mistake or fallacy. The “substance” of the representa-
tional medium (whether collections of abstract mathematical
symbols or bits of pasta) makes no difference apart from its
expressive adequacy, since it is the form and not the substance
of the target domain that the theory attempts to capture in virtue
of its form.
A traditional argument against instrumentalism (Putnam,
1975) has it that theories are predictive only to the extent that
they are true. Structuralist representationalism allows us to nuance
this argument: We may expect observational adequacy to the
degree that the structure of the theory matches that of the gener-
ator of observations. A Bayesian might point out that the confi-
dence we (ought to) place in a theory also scales with its
predictive accuracy (as well as its prior plausibility). By adopting
a Bayesian attitude towards scientific theories, we can then dis-
pense with a categorical distinction between realism and instru-
mentalism, while taking on board the epistemic humility that
makes the latter appealing.
The preceding remarks do not on their own, of course, justify a
realist attitude towards Markov blankets in living systems or else-
where – this would depend on the empirical adequacy of such
Markovian descriptions. They do however suggest that there is
nothing methodologically flawed in the practice of imputing for-
mally characterized structures (such as structures of conditional
independence in Bayesian networks) to the real world.
In the remainder we rebut three arguments given in the target
article that purport to establish the contrary.
The first argument poses an analogy between Markov blankets
and contour lines on cartographic maps. I expect to observe rivers
and mountains when I navigate by a map, but pace the authors, I
also expect to experience elevation and other aspects of the terrain
represented by contour lines. To mistake contour lines as such for
features of the terrain would indeed be a radical mistake, but so
would expecting the river to be ink-blue. We do not make these
mistakes in practice any more than proponents of the FEP suppose
on the basis of their diagrams that the sensory epithelia of organ-
isms consist in labelled circles with black outlines.
The moral is that contour lines contribute to the same funda-
mentally spatial (indeed structural-similarity-based) representation
as other elements of the map, though in a slightly more abstract
and conventional way. There may be more reasonable concerns
about reification, for example that graphical models cut the world
artificially into discrete, repeatable event-types, but this worry
would impugn the use of such abstractions to represent causal
structure (such as smoking’s causing cancer) quite generally, and
so is not properly directed against the FEP literature.
In fact, the authors do argue for a blanket instrumentalism
with respect to Bayesian networks, which brings us to the second
argument: That the choice of model for a given system depends in
part on extrinsic circumstances like data availability or the inter-
ests of the scientist. But the intrusion of this pragmatic element
means merely that there exist many sets of conditional dependen-
cies, some more interesting than others, which does not impugn a
realist attitude towards any one of those sets.
The authors further suggest that the Markov blanket formal-
ism does little work in delineating organismic boundaries if we
must already have selected a model in order to consider its blan-
ket. It is unclear to us how this epistemic point could count
against realism, but in any case the plurality of Markov blankets
present in any system of interest has long been admitted by
FEP theorists (cf. Friston et al., 2021; Hohwy, 2016), and in prac-
tice the FEP is interesting not as a tool for distinguishing organ-
isms from their environments, which we can do well enough
without it, but for its formal account of how systems act to main-
tain the integrity of their boundaries, however initially identified.
The final argument we consider suggests that the literature
around the FEP stratifies into two distinct projects, the respectable
empirical one of using Markov blankets to characterize aspects of
organisms’ cognitive models of their environments (“inference
with a model”), and the metaphysically ambitious one of using
Markov blankets to characterize organisms themselves and their
boundaries with respect to their environments (“inference within
a model”). Here, it is sufficient to point out that these projects are
not, actually, fundamentally distinct in kind. The explanatory tar-
gets in both cases are real features of organisms (their cognitive
models, in the first case, and their sensorimotor boundaries, in
the second). What may be controversial in the case of the FEP
is the idea that the entire organism (as opposed to some construct
in its brain) may be regarded as a “model,” but this is not the
ground on which the authors stake their claim.
In conclusion, we have seen no reason, either on the basis of its
general mathematical character or on the basis of its particular
modes of application, to suspect that the Markov blanket formalism
has been used by FEP theorists to commit fallacies of reification.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Cummins, R. (1991). Meaning and mental representation. MIT Press.
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi,
A. (2021). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience,
5(1), 211–251. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00175
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nous.12062
Kiefer, A., & Hohwy, J. (2017) Content and misrepresentation in hierarchical generative
models. Synthese, 195(Special issue on predictive brains (M. Kirchhoff, ed.)), 2387–
2415.
Kiefer, A. B., & Hohwy, J. (2019). Representation in the prediction error minimization
framework. In S. Robins, J. Symons, & P. Calvo (Eds.), The Routledge companion to
the philosophy of psychology (2nd ed., pp. 384–409). Routledge.
Ladyman, J. (1998) What is structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science, 29(3), 409–424. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-3681(98)80129-5
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics naturalised. Oxford
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199276196.001.0001
Putnam, H. (1975). Mathematics, matter and method. Cambridge University Press.
42
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Scientific realism about Friston
blankets without literalism
Julian Kiversteina
and Michael Kirchhoffb
aDepartment of Psychiatry, Amsterdam University Medical Centre, 1105 AZ,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands and bFaculty of Art, Social Sciences and
Humanities, School of Liberal Arts, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW
2522, Australia
j.d.kiverstein@amsterdamumc.nl
kirchhoff@uow.edu.au
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000267, e200
Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues’ critique of Friston blankets relies on
what we call the “literalist fallacy”: the assumption that in order
for Friston blankets to represent real boundaries, biological sys-
tems must literally possess or instantiate Markov blankets. We
argue that it is important to distinguish a realist view of
Friston blankets from the literalist view of Bruineberg and
colleagues’ critique.
In our commentary we set out to offer a defence of scientific
realism about Markov blankets. Bruineberg and colleagues are
right to highlight the choices that go into constructing a scien-
tific model, such as a causal Bayesian network. However, it
doesn’t follow that scientific models thereby do not, or cannot,
indirectly represent – even if only in an approximate fashion
– target systems. Second, we argue that Bruineberg and col-
leagues’ critique of the free energy principle (FEP) relies on a
fallacy we call the “literalist fallacy.” This is the fallacy of assum-
ing that in order for Markov blankets to identify real boundar-
ies, biological systems must literally possess or instantiate
Markov blankets. Scientific realism should be distinguished
from literalism, as Bruineberg and colleagues acknowledge. In
sum, we conclude that while the target article asks many impor-
tant questions about the use of the Markov blanket construct in
the context of the FEP, it falls short of making the case against
scientific realism.
Bruineberg and colleagues, in their lucid presentation of the
FEP, make a helpful distinction between three meanings that
attach to the use of the word “model.” The first use of the term
refers to the scientist’s explanatory target: The neurobiological
systems that are argued, by proponents of the FEP, to literally
be models of their environments (Friston, 2013). Second, are
the models the scientist makes of neurobiological systems by
applying the mathematics of the FEP. Finally, following a signifi-
cant amount of idealisation and abstraction on the part of the sci-
entist, the scientist arrives at an explanatory model that purports
to represent something of interest about a target system. It is at
this stage in the modelling process that we arrive at the Friston
blanket: A mathematical construct that purports to describe the
autopoietic processes that produce a boundary separating the
agent from its environment (Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston,
& Kiverstein, 2018).
Bruineberg and colleagues correctly argue that to identify a
Friston blanket certain nodes in a Bayesian causal network have
to be labelled as internal, external, active, and sensory states.
They go on to argue (in sect. 5) that the location of the Markov
blanket within a model is largely dependent on the “arbitrary”
modelling choices of the scientist. The Markov blanket construct
should therefore be understood as a property of the model the sci-
entist is constructing. To think otherwise is to “reify” the Markov
blanket, mistaking a construct that is the outcome of modelling
statistical relationships of conditional independence, for the
cause of this conditional independence.
We fully agree with Bruineberg et al., that the scientist has to
make choices about where to locate the Markov blanket within a
model. It does not follow, as Bruineberg and colleagues claim, that
such choices are arbitrary. The scientist’s decisions about how to
interpret a model are a part of the process of model-building. The
Markov blanket is a formal or mathematical construct. To model
anything this mathematical construct has to be given an interpre-
tation by the scientist. This interpretation does however purport
to represent (i.e., describe and explain), the unobservable causes
of the behaviour of real-world target systems. In the case of
Markov blankets, the unobservable causes are the autopoietic pro-
cesses that produce and maintain a boundary distinguishing the
individual agent from its environment. The choices the scientist
makes about how to interpret the Markov blanket formalism
are therefore not arbitrary. They are guided by the explanatory
interests of the scientist, which in this case concern the process
of autopoiesis.
Bruineberg and colleagues devote a good deal of attention to
uncovering hidden assumptions that are required to apply
Friston blankets to biological systems. Scientific models are
however very often idealised models that allow for highly com-
plex and intractable problems to be solved – for example, plac-
ing a free energy bound on entropy. One might think that
idealisation rules out models from providing accurate represen-
tations of their target systems. Idealisation introduces distortion
into a model, rendering the resulting model inaccurate. Such an
objection rests on a short-term view of what scientific modelling
can contribute. As Weisberg (2007) notes, scientific idealisation is
best understood in the context of a longer-term scientific pro-
gramme to provide an accurate representation of a target system.
A scientific model can represent a target system partially, approx-
imately or probably. The descriptions of the system the scientist
provides need not be literally true of the system to approximately
describe the behaviour of a target system.
Consider again, with these helpful reminders from the philos-
ophy of science in place, the philosophical mistake Bruineberg
and colleagues claim to have uncovered in the very idea of
Friston blankets. We have argued that Friston blankets are inter-
pretations given of the Markov blanket formalism in the context
of the FEP that purport to describe autopoietic processes.
Bruineberg and colleagues claim that to take Friston blankets to
represent the processes that cause the conditional independencies
differentiating the agent from its environment, one must take the
biological agent to literally instantiate or possess a Markov blan-
ket. However, such a claim relies on a fallacious assumption: that
scientific realism implies literalism. The realist claims that the
Markov blanket formalism can, as an idealised interpretation of
a model, nevertheless purport to represent an unobservable causal
property. The literalist claims that for a model to represent an
unobservable cause, the model must literally be true of a system.
Bruineberg and colleagues’ argument against Friston blankets
trades on a confusion of realism and literalism we call the “liter-
alist fallacy.”
The target article offers other arguments against Friston blan-
kets. They suggest for instance that for a Friston blanket to mark
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
43
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the boundary of a biological system one must already know where
to place the boundary. However, this neglects the application of
Friston blankets to extended cognitive systems whose boundaries
are negotiable (Clark, 2017; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021). The
question of where to place the boundary of the system is what
is at stake in applying the Markov blanket formalism to such sys-
tems (Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021). Bruineberg and colleagues
have not shown that Friston blankets cannot help to settle such
a question.
Financial support. Kiverstein is supported by an Amsterdam Brain and
Cognition Project Grant; The European Research Council (Grant number
679190) and the Netherlands Scientific Organisation (NWO, Vici, awarded to
Erik Rietveld). Kirchhoff is supported by Australian Research Council
Discovery Project Minds in Skilled Performance (Grant number DP170102987).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket: Resisting the second law with
metamorphic minds. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive
processing: 3 (pp. 1–19). MIND Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573031
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198, 4791–4810. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-019-02370-y
Kirchhoff, M. D., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K. J., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of
the Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Weisberg, M. (2007). Three kinds of idealization. The Journal of Philosophy, 104(102),
639–659.
Markov blankets do not demarcate
the boundaries of the mind
Richard Menary
and Alexander J. Gillett
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
richard.menary@mq.edu.au
alexander.gillett@mq.edu.au
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000371, e201
Abstract
We agree with Bruineberg and colleagues’ main claims.
However, we urge for a more forceful critique by focusing on
the extended mind debate. We argue that even once the Pearl
and Friston versions of the Markov blanket have been untangled,
that neither is sufficient for tackling and resolving the question
of demarcating the boundaries of the mind.
When demarcating the boundaries of the mind the demarcation
conditions should meet the following criteria:
(1) naturalistically motivated,
(2) non-question begging, and
(3) carve nature at the joints.
Markov blankets have been proposed as providing the conditions
for the demarcation of the boundary of mind and world (Clark,
2016; Hohwy, 2016; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021; Kirchhoff,
Parr, Palacios, Friston, & Kiverstein, 2018; Ramstead, Kirchhoff,
Constant, & Friston, 2021). We argue that Bruineberg and col-
leagues’ distinction between Friston and Pearl blankets exposes
why Markov blankets cannot meet the criteria required to demar-
cate the boundaries of mind.
Pearl blankets are naturalistically motivated and non-question
begging but do not carve nature at the joints. This is because Pearl
blankets are based upon practices in a range of scientific fields
which do not have the purpose of carving nature at its joints,
but are methodologically salient.
Friston blankets are not naturalistically motivated. There is an
“explanatory leap,” as Bruineberg and colleagues put it, whereby
the scientific practices and mathematical rigour of Pearl blankets
are erroneously transposed onto Friston blankets by free energy
principle (FEP) proponents despite them being disanalogous.
Principled reasons and evidence need to be presented to go
beyond Pearl blankets to metaphysical claims about reality. For
example, in a survey article by Mann, Pain, and Kirchhoff (forth-
coming), they effortlessly move between Pearl’s restricted sense of
a Markov blanket as the total information provided about a node
in a Bayesian network by all of the nodes to which it is locally
connected, to the “special usage” of Markov blanket as a Friston
blanket: A set of nodes that screen off an agent from a set of
nodes that are external to the agent. They do so without any
explanation of how we get from Pearl’s conception to Friston’s,
this is a very clear example of the explanatory leap that
Bruineberg and colleagues have identified.
Furthermore, it is debatable whether the Friston blanket is
carving nature at the joints, and it is question begging insofar
that it modifies the debate rather than tackles it – transforming
the debate from one about the extended mind (Clark &
Chalmers, 1998) to one about the applicability of mathematics
(Bangu, 2012). Friston blankets carry radical metaphysical bag-
gage that is, at present, unjustified and unacknowledged by FEP
proponents. For instance, Ramstead et al. (2021) posit a formal
ontology in which “traditional” metaphysical enquiry is replaced
by mathematics. Rather than eliminating metaphysics, this is a
metaphysical view – with a long lineage in Western philosophy.
As we have argued previously (Menary & Gillett, 2021), the inher-
ent Platonism and Pythagoreanism here is controversial. There
are a number of issues that must be tackled in order to make
such a view legitimate. For example, if one contends that nature
is mathematical, then there are a range of concerns about the rela-
tionship between mathematical and physical structures, and
whether one is claiming that mathematical entities have causal
powers. If Friston blankets are to function as demarcating the
actual boundaries of the mind, then the inference is that they
have causal powers. But, as mentioned above, FEP proponents
often move between methodological and ontological usages of
the concept. One cannot simply forgo philosophical argumenta-
tion by “doing the math,” as nicely noted by Bruineberg and col-
leagues. Instead, serious principled reasons need to be given as to
why this metaphysical picture is justified and warranted. To be
clear, our claim is not that a Friston blanket style-approach to
demarcating the boundaries of the mind is untenable, rather it
is currently undefended.
Pearl blankets are insufficient
One option is to rely on Pearl blankets as a heuristic for demar-
cation. Some FEP proponents (e.g., Ramstead, Friston, and
44
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hipólito, 2020a; Ramstead, Kirchhoff, & Friston, 2020b) have
dabbled with instrumentalism. However, even a deflationary posi-
tion does not help. Pearl blankets by themselves are insufficient to
adjudicate between internalist (e.g., Hohwy, 2013) and extended
(e.g., Clark, 2016) accounts of the boundaries of cognition that
draw upon the Markov blanket conception. The issue is that a
Pearl blanket – as the evidentiary boundary beyond which are
hidden variables – can be articulated as a shifting boundary
based on an action-orientated engagement with the world (a la
Clark) or as a fixed boundary of the skull-bound brain (a la
Hohwy). Not only is a Pearl blanket consistent with these oppos-
ing positions but it is also insufficient by itself to differentiate
between them.
Friston blankets are insufficient
To clearly demarcate the boundaries of the mind one must deter-
mine the ontological conditions under which such boundaries are
drawn, and this is not a matter of heuristics or instrumental
thinking; it is a matter of carving nature at its joints. We note
that this scientific realist construal of Friston blankets allows
that the scientific models can be approximately true, partial,
and probabilistic. However, they nevertheless make concrete onto-
logical claims about the existence of causal phenomena in the
world – that is, Friston blankets are real entities. As such, we
are forced to return to the challenges discussed above and
Friston blankets fail the first and second criteria. We would like
those utilising Friston blankets to demarcate the boundaries of
mind to be more careful in their shift between Pearl blankets
and Friston blankets and to begin to give an account of how
these entities function in nature in terms of their causal powers.
In summary, the conundrum for FEP proponents is that both
conceptions fail to fully meet the criteria for demarcating the
boundaries of the mind. If we adopt a Pearl blanket conception,
then we are incapable of differentiating between internalist and
extended positions because a methodological heuristic cannot
decide an ontological matter. Therefore, we must turn to the
more ontologically robust Friston blanket conception. This
move involves an explanatory leap that is not currently justified.
This either retreats the position back to the unworkable but justi-
fied Pearl blanket conception, or requires a commitment to the
causal powers of Friston blankets – but this only replaces one
set of problems with another (from the extended mind to the
applicability of mathematics) rather than actually helping to
tackle the original problem.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Bangu, S. (2012). The applicability of mathematics in science: Indispensability and ontol-
ogy. Palgrave Macmillan.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford
University Press.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58(1), 7–19.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50, 259–285.
Kirchhoff, M., & Kiverstein, J. (2021) How to determine the boundaries of the mind: A
Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198, 4791–4810.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society: Interface, 15, 20170792.
Mann, S. F., Pain, R., & Kirchhoff, M. (forthcoming). Free energy: A user’s guide.
Menary, R., & Gillett, A. J. (2021). Are Markov blankets real and does it matter? In
D. Mendonça, M. Curado & S. S. Gouveia (Eds.), The philosophy and science of pre-
dictive processing (pp. 39–58). Bloomsbury Academic.
Ramstead, M., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. (2021). Multiscale integra-
tion: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese, 198(Suppl 1), S41–S70.
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020a). Is the free energy principle a formal
theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic rep-
resentations. Entropy, 22(8), 889.
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2020b). A tale of two densities: Active
inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225–239.
Boundaries and borders gone! But
life goes on
Kathryn Nave
Department of Philosophy, School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language
Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK
Kathryn.nave1@gmail.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000152, e202
Abstract
Unlike machines, living systems are distinguished by the contin-
ual destruction and regeneration of their boundaries and other
components. Stable Markov blankets may be a real feature of
the world, or they may be merely a construction of particular
models, but they are neither a feature of organisms nor of any
model that can capture the necessary conditions of their
existence.
Suppose we took the view that fundamental reality is one great big
Bayes net, decomposable into distinct units whose state is gov-
erned by local interactions that respect the causal Markov condi-
tion. Fristonite metaphysicians would not be the first to advance
such a reduction – see Weslake (2006) for a critical review. Then,
even if our partial models and their particular blankets are prag-
matic constructions, there would still be a fact of the matter about
where the real Markov blankets lie.
Unfortunately, as the authors note, we would end up with far
more overlapping “real Markov blankets” than we’d know what to
do with. This seems problematic if they are to be treated as dis-
tinctive of living systems, and if we wish, as Kirchhoff, Parr,
Palacios, Friston, and Kiverstein (2019) apparently do, to “think
about any system that possesses a Markov blanket as some rudi-
mentary (or possibly sophisticated) ‘agent’” (p. 2).
There is, however, a more significant problem than the pro-
miscuous vitalism this entails. This is the fact, oddly neglected
in the free-energy literature, that living systems are specifically
distinguished by their rare ability to persist through, and consti-
tutive dependence upon, the continual destruction and regenera-
tion of their boundaries.
In the free-energy literature, the cellular membrane is taken as
the canonical example of a biological agent’s Markov blanket.
Friston (2013, 2019) repeatedly contrasts this to the candle
flame that cannot possess a Markov blanket “because its constit-
uent particles are in constant flux” (2019, p. 50).
Yet the membrane’s stability is illusory, its constituent parts
being relentlessly exchanged through endo- and exocytosis for
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
45
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

regeneration, growth, and particle transport. In the slime mould
Dictyostelium, membrane turnover enables locomotion, with esti-
mated times for complete turnover in the order of 4–10 min
(Aguado-Velasco & Bretscher, 1999). The same goes for the inte-
rior of the cell, where we find turnover times for its enzymes, that
are far shorter than the lifespan of the cell itself (Toyama &
Hetzer, 2013).
A “literalist” who treats the fundamental relata of causality as
the states of particular token particles will find that the compo-
nents of any “real” Markov blanket they identify around an organ-
ism will dissipate on timescales shorter than that lifespan of the
organism whose “very existence,” they claim, “depends” on that
boundary’s preservation (Allen & Friston, 2018).
We don’t have to take the states of specific particles as the nodes
of reality’s network. One’s metaphysics of causality could be statis-
tical reductionism, but where the relata are higher-level macrophys-
ical variables (Papineau, 1992). In an organism, as in a machine, we
could suggest that what must be fixed are not particular material
components but the formal parts making up its functional organi-
zation. While it would seem less plausible to regard a set of formal
parts as constituting a physical boundary in the world, this would be
compatible with the realist position that the Markov blanket
describes something objective about the world.
Still, the realist needs to explain how we identify this organiza-
tion amid the constant turnover of the stuff that realizes it, in
order to then evaluate any statistical or causal relationships that
might hold between its parts. Once we have done so, it’s not clear
what further the Markov blanket formalism offers beyond establish-
ing a beachhead for the deployment of the free energy principle.
The instrumentalist is in a slightly easier position, needing
only to offer a pragmatic justification for dividing the world up
in a particular way, and being free to admit that the represented
stability of some network (and resulting Markov blanket) is a
modelling distortion that abstracts away from material turnover,
in order to focus on other features of the organism’s dynamics.
This is fine if the purpose of our model is only to describe a
specific behaviour, such as the regulation of body temperature. But
if our model is supposed to provide the basis for a general theory
of life, as Friston (2013, 2019) presents the free energy framework,
then to acknowledge that it, like all models, is partial and distorted
is not sufficient. The task of a model of “life in general” is to
highlight the right things, and neglect only those contingent
features of the particular instances we happened to have encountered.
To abstract away from metabolic turnover is not merely to
neglect some capacities common to many organisms, it is to fun-
damentally misconceive what an organism is, and what differen-
tiates it from a mechanism. Unlike in machines the structures that
constrain an organism’s dynamics, its membrane, its enzymes,
and so on are inherently unstable and recursively dependent
upon those dynamics for continued repair and reproduction
(Bickhard, 2009; Montévil & Mossio, 2015). The flow of matter
is not just channelled through fixed constraints like fuel in an
engine,
it
constitutes
those
constraints.
In
organisms,
as
Nicholson (2018) puts it, “everything flows.”
A statistical network and its attendant Markov blanket
describe how a system’s structure constrains its dynamics, they
do not address any reciprocal dependence of this structure
upon those dynamics. Once Huygen’s coupled pendulums wind
down, the connecting beam remains as a constraint on possible
interactions should they be perturbed again.
Organisms are not just homoeostatic mechanisms, “acting” only
in response to perturbation. They are intrinsically unstable
structures – stabilized only via their own ceaseless activity and
dependent upon the environment as a resource for such self-
production. As Jonas (1953) criticized of the free-energy frame-
work’s cybernetic precursor, “A feedback mechanism may be
going, or may be at rest: in either state the machine exists. The
organism has to keep going, because to be going is its very exis-
tence” (p. 191).
Markov blankets may be useful for modelling coupled feed-
back mechanisms. Such mechanisms may even literally have
Markov blankets. But for a theory of living systems, the principal
issue is not whether Markov blankets are features of reality, or just
of our models. It’s that cells are much more like candle flames
than they are like pendulums. While it may sometimes be conve-
nient to treat an organism like a machine, this fiction obscures
why the cell is alive, and the pendulum is not.
Financial support. This study was supported by the Royal Institute of
Philosophy, The Aristotelean Society and ERC advanced grant X-SPECT –
DLV-692739.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguado-Velasco, C., & Bretscher, M. S. (1999). Circulation of the plasma membrane in
Dictyostelium. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 10(12), 4419–4427.
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computa-
tional framework for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.
Bickhard, M. H. (2009). The interactivist model. Synthese, 166(3), 547–591.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475.
Friston, K. (2019). Beyond the desert landscape. In M. Colombo, E. Irvine, & M.
Stapleton (Eds.), Andy Clark and his critics (pp. 174–190). Oxford University Press.
Jonas, H. (1953). A critique of cybernetics. Social Research, 20, 172–192.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blan-
kets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Montévil, M., & Mossio, M. (2015). Biological organisation as closure of constraints.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 372, 179–191.
Nicholson, D. J. (2018). Reconceptualizing the organism: From complex machine to flow-
ing stream. In D. J. Nicholson & J. Dupré (Eds.), Everything flows: Towards a proces-
sual philosophy of biology (pp. 139–166). Oxford University Press.
Papineau, D. (1992). Can we reduce causal direction to probabilities? In A. Woody (Ed.),
PSA: Proceedings of the biennial meeting of the philosophy of science association (Vol.
1992, No. 2, pp. 238–252). Philosophy of Science Association.
Toyama, B. H., & Hetzer, M. W. (2013). Protein homeostasis: Live long, won’t prosper.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 14(1), 55–61.
Weslake, B. (2006). Common causes and the direction of causation. Minds and Machines,
16(3), 239–257.
What’s special about space?
Thomas Parr
Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3AR, UK
thomas.parr.12@ucl.ac.uk
https://tejparr.github.io/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X2200019X, e203
Abstract
This commentary suggests that, although Markov blankets may
have different interpretations in different systems, these distinc-
tions rest not upon the type of blanket, but upon the model that
46
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

determines the blanket. As an example, the conditions for a
model in which the Markov blanket may be interpretable as a
physical (spatial) boundary are considered.
I enjoyed reading the target article by Bruineberg et al. and fully
endorse the authors’ agenda of ambiguity resolution. In this spi-
rit, it is worth beginning this article by carefully considering what
we mean by the words we choose, and specifically by the word
“model.” The definition of a model is a subject that deserves
much more space than is available for this commentary.
However, the use of the term by the authors of the target article
suggests a very simple definition of the sort of model we are inter-
ested in. For the purposes of this commentary, a model is another
word for a joint probability distribution. The graphical models of
the target article can be derived simply from this starting point
(Wainwright & Jordan, 2008).
Under this definition of a model, it follows that a Markov
blanket, itself defined in terms of conditional probabilities
(Pearl, 1988), must always be defined in relation to a model.
This raises the question of where models come from. One source
of the probability distributions that make up a model is the poten-
tial function, Hamiltonian, or steady-state density of some
dynamical system (Friston & Ao, 2012). This represents a
model of a specific sort of (time-evolving) system. Bruineberg
et al. suggest that this means blankets in such systems are different
in nature to those in other kinds of systems. However, the identi-
fication of a Markov blanket in such a model is no different to its
identification in any other model.
As such, the key distinction is not between different kinds of
Markov blankets. A taxonomy of models, from which conditional
independencies can be identified, may be a more meaningful way
of addressing the implicit distinctions. Bruineberg et al. make
some steps towards this, subcategorising models in several differ-
ent ways. For instance, they highlight the distinction between our
model of some system versus some (sentient) system’s model of
its world (Friston, Wiese, & Hobson, 2020). While many of
these were interesting, the distinction that I found most intriguing
was that between a model in which the Markov blanket plays the
role of a “physical” boundary and one in which it offers only a
“statistical” boundary.
So, what is it that makes a boundary physical? The remainder
of this commentary explores this question, assuming that physical
is here synonymous with spatial, with the aid of an example sys-
tem depicted in Figure 1. Here, we have three beads on a string,
separated by springs. If two beads become too close, the com-
pressed spring pushes them away from one another. If too far
apart, the extended spring pulls them back together.
Figure 1 (Parr). Spatial boundaries. This figure depicts an example system that can be interpreted as having a “physical” boundary. It comprises three beads (with
positions μ, η, and b, and velocities indicated by prime notation) separated by two springs with equilibrium lengths ℓ. The Hamiltonian (ℋ) incorporates the poten-
tial energies associated with the springs, and the kinetic energies of each bead. The decomposition of the Hamiltonian into a sum of terms ensures the associated
steady-state density is consistent with the conditional independencies required for a Markov blanket. Interpreting this steady state as a model, we can express it as
a Bayesian network (lower right). The trajectories of each bead are shown at the top of the figure, showing many trajectories with different initial conditions (sam-
pled from the steady-state density). An example trajectory is superimposed upon each. The lower left plot shows all simulated trajectories plotted in three dimen-
sions, with the direction of the first principal component shown in red.
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
47
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In this example, the positions of each bead collectively consti-
tute a three-dimensional system (as plotted in the lower left).
What is it that licenses us to embed each of these along a single
spatial dimension, such that it is meaningful to describe the posi-
tions of objects relative to one another? Only by doing so can we
talk of spatial boundaries for which it would be surprising to
observe one element of the system cross from one side of this
boundary to the other.
The steady-state density implicit in this system’s Hamiltonian
factorises to reveal a Markov blanket. Specifically, the positions of
the left and right beads are conditionally independent of one
another given the central bead. This means the middle bead’s
position is a Markov blanket for the positions of the other two
beads. Another way of putting this is that all covariance shared
between the left and right beads is dependent upon the middle
bead. The lower left plot of Figure 1 illustrates this heuristically
by plotting multiple trajectories with different initialisations to
give a sense of the shape of the joint probability density. Note
that the axis that accounts for most of the variance (shown in
red) is a linear combination of the original three axes.
The use of prepositions (left, right, and middle) in describing
the beads is crucial in interpreting the Markov blanket implied by
this model as a spatial boundary. Clearly it would be meaningless
to plot the three positions on the same axis (as in the upper plot
of Fig. 1) if their positions relative to one another played no role
in their behaviour. The model of the beads ensures pairs of adja-
cent beads constrain one another’s positions such that (for exam-
ple) it would be very surprising to find two beads in the same
spatial location.
In short, a model that lends itself towards an interpretation of
its Markov blankets as spatial boundaries must exhibit the follow-
ing features:
(1) The probability density associated with the model must have
a non-spherical covariance structure. This is guaranteed by
the presence of a non-trivial Markov blanket.
(2) The pair of conditional densities describing the positions of the
variables partitioned by the blanket, given the blanket, must
assign very low probability to positions immediately proximate
to the position of the blanket. This is achieved in our example
via the repulsive forces when the springs were compressed.
(3) The model must be interpretable as a steady-state density.
This implies a system that evolves in time but whose density
dynamics, when initialised at the steady state, are static. The
time evolution is important in that it provides an explicit
link
between
the
model
and
the
Lagrangians
and
Hamiltonians found in physics.
Presumably, one of the reasons Bruineberg et al. highlighted the
special case in which Markov blankets take on the flavour of spa-
tial boundaries is that they are sometimes called upon (Ramstead,
Badcock, & Friston, 2018) in an attempt to address Schrödinger’s
famous question about the physics of life (Schrödinger, 1944),
formulated explicitly in terms of a spatial boundary. This com-
mentary was written to question whether such boundaries require
special kinds of Markov blankets and suggests that, instead, they
require special kinds of model.
Financial support. The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging is sup-
ported by core funding (203147/Z/16/Z).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Friston, K. J., & Ao, P. (2012). Free energy, value, and attractors. Computational and
Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2012, 937860–937860. doi: 10.1155/2012/937860
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. doi: 10.3390/
e22050516
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible
inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s question: A
free-energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What Is Life?: The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell. Retrieved
from Dublin.
Wainwright, M. J., & Jordan, M. I. (2008). Graphical models, exponential families, and
variational inference. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 1(1–2), 1–305.
doi: 10.1561/2200000001
The emperor has no blanket!
Vicente Rajaa
, Edward Baggsb, Anthony Chemeroc
and Michael L. Andersond
aRotman Institute of Philosophy, Western University, London, Ontario N6A 5B7,
Canada; bDepartment of Language and Communication, Danish Institute for
Advanced Study, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense, Denmark;
cDepartments of Philosophy and Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA and dDepartment of Philosophy, Brain and Mind
Institute, Rotman Institute of Philosophy, Western University, London, Ontario
N6A 5B7, Canada
vgalian@uwo.ca
ebag@sdu.dk
chemeray@ucmail.uc.edu
mande54@uwo.ca
http://www.emrglab.org
https://danish-ias.dk/people/edward-baggs-danish-ias/
https://uc.academia.edu/TonyChemero
http://www.emrglab.org
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000243, e204
Abstract
While we applaud Bruineberg et al.’s analysis of the differences
between Markov blankets and Friston blankets, we think it is
not carried out to its ultimate consequences. There are reasons
to think that, once Friston blankets are accepted as a theoretical
construct, they do not do the work proponents of free energy
principle (FEP) attribute to them. The emperor is indeed
naked.
The title of the target article gestures toward H. C. Andersen’s The
Emperor’s New Clothes short story. The core of the story is a child
saying what all the neighbors already knew but were afraid to say:
that the emperor had no clothes! After this suggestive title, we
expected a paper that not only would analyze the differences
between Markov and Friston blankets but that, following the child’s
lead, would tell us whether the theoretical construct of “Friston
blankets” is doing the job many free energy principle (FEP) propo-
nents attribute to it. Namely, it would tell us whether Friston blan-
kets are indeed a principled way to find the ontological boundaries
between biological/cognitive systems and environments.
Against our expectations, the target article concludes in an ecu-
menical way taking Markov and Friston blankets as two different
48
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

constructs for two different projects. In the case of Friston blankets
the project is an ontological one that is focused on finding bound-
aries in a principled way – for example, organismal boundaries in
the case of the cell membrane or cognitive boundaries in the case
of sensory receptors and motor effectors. We think, however, this
ecumenical solution is supported neither by the arguments in the
target article nor in the current literature on FEP. Indeed, all things
considered, a more radical consequence is preferable: Friston blan-
kets do not provide a principled way to find ontological boundaries
between biological/cognitive systems and their environments.
The reasons to endorse such a radical consequence are both
technical and theoretical. Technically speaking, recent work has
consistently shown problems with both the formalism of Friston
blankets (Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai, 2021) and its scope (Aguilera,
Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley, 2021). We think these problems
are substantive and point to a mismatch between the promises of
FEP as a framework and its theoretical and mathematical develop-
ment to date. The typical response to these technical problems is
that the FEP formalism is a work in progress, so these problems
will eventually be solved. This is perfectly fine, but a work in pro-
gress is not sufficient to support the grandiose claims FEP propo-
nents make about its current relevance for theoretical biology,
cognitive science, or even physics (e.g., Friston, 2019; see also the
Introduction of the target article). However interesting and impor-
tant these technical issues are, we think the problems with Friston
blankets go beyond them. Even granting that the formalism is
right and fairly complete, Friston blankets do not do the principled,
ontological work they are claimed to do. We discussed this in depth
in Raja, Valluri, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson (2021). One of our
arguments parallels the target article’s argument of ambiguous
boundaries exemplified by various Friston blanket models of the
knee-jerk reflex, so we will not repeat it here.
Another argument has to do with the fact that the states of the
system partitioned by Friston blankets must be decided before
finding the blanket. Consider an organism that, moving around
in its environment, encounters a gap between obstacles. The
organism must know whether the gap is big enough to fit its
body through. In this situation, the environmental states might
be of at least two kinds: (1) the position of each of the obstacles
or (2) the relative position of the obstacles (i.e., the gap).
Depending on describing this environment in terms of (1) or
(2), the internal states of the organism will be inferring relation-
ships from non-relative states or detecting relative states, respec-
tively. Friston blankets do not help with this decision. A
different set of resources to decide ontological questions such as
what environmental states are and how these states relate to the
internal ones is needed. These resources are the ones making
the ontological heavy lifting, so the principled nature of the
Friston blankets seems to be challenged. More generally, this
argument relates to the inability of Friston blankets to deal with
relational properties. This is a big problem for FEP’s ambition
to provide a theory of cognition because relational properties
are
ubiquitous
within
organism–environment
systems.
For
instance, if affordances are organism–environment relationships,
they seem to cut across any partition of the systemic states with
Friston blankets.
A further issue, pointed out by Di Paolo, Thompson, and Beer
(2021) and Raja et al. (2021), is that Friston blankets are unable to
account for autopoietic self-organization. The paradigmatic exam-
ple of autopoietic self-organization is the cell. The membrane of a
cell is the product of the internal mechanisms of the cell itself.
FEP proponents have suggested that the cell membrane can be
understood as a Friston blanket. However, while Friston blankets
are used to model the input–output relations of the cell through
its membrane boundary, they say nothing about how the blanket
itself comes to existence as the product of cellular activities. This is
what autopoietic self-organization seeks to explain but within the
Friston blanket framework it is merely presupposed. Additionally, in
the case of cognitive systems, Friston blankets always appear in the
context of inferential frameworks (therefore active inference), and
inferential frameworks have their own issues (see Raja, 2020) that
are neither dependent on nor solved by the use of Friston blankets.
In summary, Friston blankets need many other assumptions,
and these other assumptions are the ones doing the ontological
work (e.g., deciding what the states are, what the system does,
how the system self-organizes, etc.). Friston blankets cannot be
the arbiters of ontological debates. They might be just tools for
modeling a previously decided ontology, but that claim requires fur-
ther work that is not found in the FEP literature so far. In this con-
text, we are in general agreement with the target article that Friston
blankets are not just Markov blankets. However, we think the
authors do not fully embrace the consequences of their own concep-
tual move. Friston blankets are not good resources for finding onto-
logical boundaries. Maybe it is more sensible to follow William
James in understanding the boundary-line of the mental – and,
we add, of life – as something paradigmatically vague and, therefore,
to be more pluralistic in our attempts to model it.
Financial support. This research was supported in part by a Canada
Research Chairs Program award to MA, grant number SSHRC 950-231929.
AC was supported by the Charles Phelps Taft Research Center at University
of Cincinnati (USA).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews, 40, 24–50. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.11.001
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2021). Laying down a forking path:
Incompatibilities between enaction and the free energy principle. https://doi.org/10.
31234/osf.io/d9v8f
Friston, K. J. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. [preprint]
arXiv:1906.10184.
Raja, V. (2020). Embodiment and cognitive neuroscience: The forgotten tales. Philosophy
and the Cognitive Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-020-09711-0
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. L. (2021). The Markov blan-
ket trick: On the scope of the free energy principle and active inference. Physics of Life
Reviews, 39, 49–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.09.001
The empire strikes back: Some
responses to Bruineberg
and colleagues
Maxwell J. D. Ramsteada,b
aWellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London,
London WC1N 3AR, UK and bVERSES Research Lab and Spatial Web Foundation,
Los Angeles, CA 90016, USA
maxwell.d.ramstead@gmail.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000139, e205
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
49
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Abstract
In their target paper, Bruineberg and colleagues provide us with
a timely opportunity to discuss the formal constructs and phil-
osophical implications of the free energy principle. I critically
discuss their proposed distinction between Pearl and Friston
blankets. I then critically assess the distinction between inference
with a model and inference within a model in light of instru-
mentalist approaches to science.
Bruineberg and colleagues provide us with a timely opportunity to
discuss the core mathematical and philosophical aspects of the
variational free energy principle (FEP) and the Bayesian mechan-
ics that follows from it. They focus on the construct of Markov
blankets (MBs), which they claim has been deployed in two dif-
ferent – but largely conflated – ways in the literature. In their
view, this conflation has led some to unduly project the epistemic
virtues of one use of the construct – to formalize conditional
independence in the context of inference in Bayesian networks,
what they call “Pearl blankets” (PBs) – to another use; namely,
to demarcate the boundaries of things that exist – what they
call “Friston blankets” (FBs). Furthermore, the authors argue
that these constructs are employed to pursue quite distinct
research projects. These are “inference with a model,” where the
features of the model (here, the MBs) are assumed to be part of
the scientist’s model of the world, and “inference within a
model,” where these features are assumed to be present in the
modelled system itself (i.e., the MB is cast as an actually existing
boundary between the system modelled and its embedding
environment).
Here, I respond critically to these claims. First, I argue that PBs
and FBs are nothing more than articulations of MBs in different
mathematical contexts (i.e., in static statistical inference vs. sto-
chastic dynamics). Second, I claim that an instrumentalist reading
of the FEP is available and informative, and that it is not given
enough
consideration
in
the
account
by
Bruineberg
and
colleagues.
Friston and Pearl blankets are just Markov blankets
The target paper claims that FBs are a novel mathematical con-
struct that do not inherit their epistemic virtues from the use of
MBs
in
statistical
inference
(i.e.,
from
the
use
of
PBs).
Mathematically speaking, however, there is no justification for
this hardline distinction.
This is because FBs and PBs just are MBs – in different math-
ematical contexts. Generally speaking, as the authors note, MBs
formalize conditional (in)dependence between variables, where
the MB itself is a set of variables that renders two other sets of
(“internal” and “external”) variables conditionally independent
of each other. The fundamental distinction is that PBs are the
kind of MB that arises in the context of static statistical inference
within a Bayes network, while FBs arise when considering the
interdependencies between dynamics, which is crucial, for
instance, when defining the self in relation to the non-self.
However, both PBs and FBs are MBs.
A same mathematical object may have different mathematical
properties in different mathematical contexts. Consider an anal-
ogy. Let us list the numbers that are generated by the Peano axi-
oms. We start by defining a first number, and we call it “0.” Next,
we define a successor function S, such that for ever number n,
S(n) = n + 1. Now, when considered as objects of the category of
natural numbers, these Peano numbers have specific properties.
For instance, there exist no numbers between any numbers and
its successor, and there exists no number smaller than zero.
Next, consider the same sequence, now interpreted in the category
of real numbers. Although the objects have not changed (since,
after all, we are considering the same sequence), their properties
are remarkably different. For instance, there are no longer zero,
but now infinitely many numbers between any number in the
sequence and its successor, and there are infinitely many numbers
smaller than zero.
This example illustrates that mathematical context matters in
determining the properties of mathematical objects. Just as the
number 1 is the same object in both categorical interpretations
(albeit with different properties when considered as a natural
vs. as a real number), so, too, are FBs and PBs – just MBs, albeit
defined in different mathematical contexts. In category-theoretic
terms, we have changed the category, so the object instance has
new properties, but it is still the same object.
The Bayesian mechanics is physics, not metaphysics
I believe that the core issue with the target paper is that it treats
the FEP as if it were a metaphysical statement, when in reality,
it is better understood as a new chapter of physics – a Bayesian
mechanics – and is compatible with instrumentalism about scien-
tific theories (Friston, Heins, Ueltzhoffer, Da Costa, & Parr, 2021).
Although the authors discuss this possibility in passing, they
downplay its significance.
There is a longstanding tradition in the philosophy of physics
that is instrumentalist about physical theories (Giere, 1999, 2010;
Van Fraassen, 1980). On the instrumentalist view, all scientific
models, such as the ones used in physics, are literally false and
play the role of useful fictions that help us to understand the
world.
Now, there is nothing about the FEP that commits us to real-
ism about scientific models. In fact, we have argued that precisely
the opposite is the case; see Ramstead, Friston, and Hipólito
(2020).
In section 3.2 of their paper, the authors provide a great out-
line of the modelling strategy at play in the computational neuro-
science literature: what they call “models of models.” We agree
with this way of putting things but would suggest to extend the
logic at play to FBs. They point out that in computational neuro-
science, there are two “levels” of modelling at play, which are
explored in Ramstead et al. (2020). The first level is that of the sci-
entist that is modelling some target phenomenon, for example,
constructing scientific models of living systems. The second
level is that of the system being modelled. In computational neu-
roscience, scientists are constructing scientific models of the infer-
ential models and processes that are assumed to be used by
cognitive systems themselves. Crucially, this “second level” of
modelling is just a special case of the first level – it just happens
to be that the physical system being modelled, is modelled as if it
were inferring the causes of its sensory states. As Alex Kiefer put it
(personal communication), according to the FEP, the best scien-
tific model of the organism is a statistical model of its world.
From an instrumentalist perspective, there is no robust philo-
sophical difference between inference with a model and inference
within a model. There is no reason why we cannot use MBs as a
modelling tool, to carve out the boundaries of systems, when these
are modelled as random dynamical systems (i.e., as sets of random
50
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

variables over paths – i.e., stochastic processes – with dependence
relations).
The authors appeal to the notion of a formal ontology that was
introduced by Ramstead, Constant, Badcock, and Friston (2019),
but misapprehend it. The formal ontology that flows from the
Bayesian mechanics is not an a priori attempt to find or draw
boundaries in nature. Rather, it is an attempt to construct scientific
models of these boundaries, in an instrumentalist fashion. The for-
mal ontology only entails that we create empirically evaluable, for-
mal models of organism boundaries. Interestingly, this model of
boundaries is itself evaluable via Bayesian model evidence, leading
to a nice, reflexive aspect to the framework: Our scientific model
of the boundaries of living systems that can be improved iteratively
via free energy or prediction error minimization.
Acknowledgements. I wish to express my gratitude to Lancelot Da Costa,
Karl Friston, Conor Heins, Alex Kiefer, Dalton Sakthivadivel, and Thomas
Parr for helpful discussions that were of great assistance in writing this paper.
Financial support. No funding to report.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhoffer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021). Stochastic chaos
and Markov blankets. Entropy (Basel), 23(9), 1220. doi:10.3390/e23091220
Giere, R. N. (1999). Science without laws. University of Chicago Press.
Giere, R. N. (2010). Scientific perspectivism. University of Chicago Press.
Ramstead, M. J., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational ecology
and the physics of sentient systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 188–205.
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a formal
theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic rep-
resentations. Entropy, 22(8), 889.
Van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The scientific image. Oxford University Press.
Enough blanket metaphysics, time
for data-driven heuristics
Wiktor Rorota,b
, Tomasz Korbakc
, Piotr Litwinb
and Marcin Miłkowskid
aFaculty of Philosophy, University of Warsaw, 00-927 Warszawa, Poland;
bFaculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, 00-183 Warszawa, Poland;
cDepartment of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK and
dInstitute of Philosophy and Sociology, Polish Academy of Sciences, 00-330
Warszawa, Poland
w.rorot@uw.edu.pl, tomasz.korbak@gmail.com, piotr.litwin@psych.uw.edu.pl,
mmilkows@ifispan.edu.pl
https://wiktor.rorot.pl, https://tomekkorbak.com, http://marcinmilkowski.pl/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000280, e206
Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues criticisms’ have been received but
downplayed in the free energy principle (FEP) literature. We
strengthen their points, arguing that Friston blanket discovery,
even if tractable, requires a full formal description of the system
of interest at the outset. Hence, blanket metaphysics is futile, and
we postulate that researchers should turn back to heuristic uses
of Pearl blankets.
Bruineberg and colleagues point out an important, yet hitherto
overlooked flaw in the free energy principle (FEP) literature:
The term “Markov blanket” has unnoticeably evolved into a
more
ontologically
involved
concept
of
“Friston
blanket.”
However, the gravity of this problem has been underplayed by
some of the proponents of the FEP (e.g., Wiese & Friston, 2021,
p. 4) who ignore the trouble that the reification of formal concepts
leads to. We want to highlight one particular issue for the propo-
nents of the FEP, especially of an associated metaphysical pro-
gramme of “Markovian monism” (Friston, Wiese, & Hobson,
2020; Wiese & Friston, 2021), concerned with the procedures
for identification of Friston blankets in the world.
The problem stems from an important tension: Most other
fields of computational modelling use Markov blankets as approx-
imations or optimization tools (e.g., in machine learning for the
purpose of dimensionality reduction and variable selection, see
Aliferis, Tsamardinos, and Statnikov, 2003; Peña, Nilsson,
Björkegren,
and
Tegnér,
2007;
Tsamardinos,
Aliferis,
and
Statnikov, 2003; or for causal search, see Bai et al., 2004; Pellet
& Elisseeff, 2008). However, the FEP requires an (in principle)
exact identification of a unique Markov blanket for each system
of interest, what Friston, Heins, Ueltzhöffer, Da Costa, and Parr
(2021a) call a “particular partition.” This is necessary because,
as Friston argues (2019; Friston et al., 2020), the existence of a
Markov (Friston) blanket in a (non-equilibrium) steady-state sys-
tem is sufficient to prove that the (autonomous, i.e., internal and
active) states of the system will “look as if they are trying to min-
imise (…) the surprisal of states that constitute the thing, particle,
or creature. (…) This means that anything that exists must, in
some sense, be self-evidencing” (Friston et al., 2020, p. 6).
Hence, for Friston, the existence of a particular partition secures
that the system will conform to the FEP and allows for deducing it
from first principles.
For this reason, in the recent FEP literature, there has been a
quickly growing number of attempts to provide solutions to the
problem of identifying Markov blankets (e.g., Da Costa, Friston,
Heins, and Pavliotis, 2021; Friston et al., 2021a, 2021b). All
those attempts focus on providing sufficiently strong approxima-
tions, as developing an exact analytical solution to this problem
would require solving difficult open problems in partial differen-
tial equations. Additionally, researchers in this research commu-
nity overlook an even more important issue, namely that both
strong approximations of Markov blankets, and hypothetical
methods for exact solutions to this problem require a full formal
description of the system of interest (i.e., the equation describing
its dynamics) at the outset. This defeats the practical purpose of
finding Markov blankets.
Hence, the paradoxical tension between Markov and Friston
blankets we want to highlight is that the pursuit of the metaphys-
ical programme associated with the identification of Friston blan-
kets under the FEP entails intractable mathematical problems that
depend on our prior knowledge of the system’s dynamics. But if
we had a formal description of the system’s behaviour, what new
knowledge would Friston blankets provide? They certainly would
not allow us to find the boundaries of entities of interest in the
wild, since those must be assumed for the purpose of description
of the system (even if it takes the general form of a Langevin equa-
tion, it still requires the assumption that the system is sufficiently
stationary). And, if we assumed the whole causal structure of the
system beforehand, there would be no need to refer to Pearl or
Friston blankets to show that the system will behave in accordance
with the FEP, as this would entirely follow from the description of
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
51
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the dynamics. As a consequence, neither this result nor blankets
themselves would follow from first principles, but rather from a
fallible heuristic analysis of the system of interest.
On the other hand, if we eschew precision and accept approx-
imate optimization methods for finding Pearl blankets such as
those widespread in machine learning and causal search (e.g.,
Pellet & Elisseeff, 2008), we can use them as tools of discovery
to identify the boundaries of entities (e.g., nodes in neural net-
works for the purpose of systems neuroscience). Furthermore,
showing that a system delineated in this way conforms to the
FEP might provide much more insight into the nature of the pro-
cess, as it would require less knowledge at the outset. However,
approximate methods do not allow for the use of the concept
of Friston blanket and effectively preclude the viability of the
metaphysical programme of the FEP as a naturalist ontology for
life sciences.
Perhaps it is too quick to throw the blankets entirely at this
point. Nonetheless, we believe that the use of the Markov blanket
construct should enable us to solve pressing issues in computa-
tional modelling in the sciences of brain and behaviour. While
Markovian monism metaphysics is not such a pressing issue,
studying the causal and functional dynamics of cognitive sys-
tems is. In this context, we need various fallible heuristics for
delineating Pearl blankets; that is, many stupid (Smaldino,
2017), approximate, and tractable models, and we need more
of them to be able to make use of the error diversity inherent
in any heuristic enterprise (Wimsatt, 2007). While stronger
analytical methods for finding Markov (and Friston) blankets
are not necessarily dead ends, the FEP theorists’ focus on
those difficult methods makes them overlook a lot of lower
hanging fruits.
Acknowledgements. We want to thank Mel Andrews, Conor Heins, Dalton
Sakthivadivel, and the Active Inference Lab for helpful clarifications.
Financial support. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education
and Science (Poland) research grant (W. R., DI2018 010448), as part of the
“Diamentowy Grant” programme; National Science Centre (Poland) research
grant (M. M., P. L., grant number 2014/14/E/HS1/00803) and Leverhulme
Doctoral Scholarship (T. K.).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aliferis, C. F., Tsamardinos, I., & Statnikov, A. (2003). HITON: a novel Markov
blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. AMIA 2003 Annual Symposium
Proceedings. AMIA Symposium, 2003, 21–25.
Bai, X., Glymour, C., Padman, R., Ramsey, J., Spirtes, P. L., & Wimberly, F. C. (2004).
PCX: Markov blanket classification for large data sets with few cases. Center for
Automated Learning and Discovery. Retrieved from http://reports-archive.adm.cs.
cmu.edu/anon/cald/CMU-CALD-04-102.pdf
Da Costa, L., Friston, K., Heins, C., & Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian mechanics for sta-
tionary processes. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 477(2256), 20210518. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2021.0518
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Stochastic chaos
and Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1220. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23091220
Friston, K. J. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv:1906.10184
[q-bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi,
A. (2021b). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience,
5(1), 211–251. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00175
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. https://doi.
org/10.3390/e22050516
Pellet, J.-P., & Elisseeff, A. (2008). Using Markov blankets for causal structure learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(43), 1295–1342.
Peña, J. M., Nilsson, R., Björkegren, J., & Tegnér, J. (2007). Towards scalable and data
efficient learning of Markov boundaries. Eighth European Conference on Symbolic
and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU 2005),
45(2), 211–232. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2006.06.008
Smaldino, P. E. (2017). Models are stupid, and we need more of them. In R. R. Vallacher,
S. J. Read, & A. Nowak (Eds.), Computational social psychology (pp. 311–331).
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315173726-14
Tsamardinos, I., Aliferis, C. F., & Statnikov, A. (2003). Time and sample efficient discov-
ery of Markov blankets and direct causal relations. Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
673–678. https://doi.org/10.1145/956750.956838
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Examining the continuity between life and mind: Is
there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and representationality?
Philosophies, 6(1), 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies6010018
Wimsatt, W. C. (2007). Re-engineering philosophy for limited beings: Piecewise approxi-
mations to reality. Harvard University Press.
Markov blankets as boundary
conditions: Sweeping dirt under the
rug still cleans the house
Javier Sánchez-Cañizares
Mind-Brain Group at the Institute for Culture and Society (ICS), University of
Navarra, 31009 Pamplona, Spain
js.canizares@unav.es
https://www.issr.org.uk/fellows/user/496/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000097, e207
Abstract
Bruineberg et al. underestimate the ontological weight of
Markov blankets as actual boundaries of systems and lean
toward an instrumentalist understanding thereof. Yet Markov
blankets need not be deemed mere tools. Determining their real-
ity depends on the fundamental problem of distinguishing
between system and environment in physics, which, in turn,
demands a metaphysical bedrock backed by a realist stance on
science.
Do Markov blankets have any ontological weight? Most of the lit-
erature on the free energy principle (FEP) equates Markov blan-
kets
with
actual
system
boundaries
without
further
ado.
However, as the authors rightly point out, there is a crucial differ-
ence between using blankets as an epistemic tool in Bayesian net-
works to identify independencies among random variables (Pearl
blankets) and using them as actual boundaries between a system
and its environment (Friston blankets).
I agree with the authors on the insufficiency of Friston blan-
kets to demarcate the physical boundary between an agent and
its environment, and the need for additional philosophical
assumptions “to do such heavy metaphysical lifting.” FEP theo-
rists seem aware of this since they recently gave their framework
a freshly minted metaphysical interpretation, dubbed Markovian
monism (MM) (Friston, Wiese, & Hobson, 2020). According to
MM, the very fact that one may demarcate a system from its envi-
ronment through a Markov blanket induces a dual aspect infor-
mation geometry in the system’s internal states that enables it
to represent its surroundings. MM thus reveals the troublesome
transition between Markov blankets as epistemic model-bound
52
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

tools and their alleged ontological consequences, which are beset
by circular reasoning (Sánchez-Cañizares, 2021).
However, within FEP formalism, the ontology proper to
Markov blankets need not take the brunt of the blow because it
inherits the more general problem of distinguishing between a
system and its environment in physics. In the absence of a theory
of everything, conventional physics must accept initial conditions
to start computing the world’s behavior. “You need a starting
point!” (Wilczek, 2015). Remarkably, the existence of systems
seems to require the universe to have exceptional initial condi-
tions and dynamics (Tegmark, 2015) since the theory that is cur-
rently most fundamental, that is, quantum mechanics, deems the
distinction
between
system
and
environment
as
relative
(Lombardi, Fortín, & Castagnino, 2012). Physics teaches us that
one must make an ansatz to progress in the scientific description
of nature. Whether a chosen ansatz holds at a specific process
only becomes evident a posteriori. Markov blankets are undoubt-
edly the most basic ansatz for FEP formalism to work.
Things being so, the authors’ critiques of Markov blankets as
Friston blankets become less weighty in two interrelated respects:
(1) Markov blankets define the dominion – via the partition of
variables – for which it makes sense to minimize free energy.
Their precise definition must change whenever the model
becomes unsuitable for describing unexpected dynamics,
that is, dynamics that cannot be fully grasped within the
assumptions of a particular model. But this does not differ
from the usual procedure of changing boundary conditions
for the distinct models that are compatible with a principle
theory. The authors themselves recognize this when quoting
Andy Clark, “boundaries are malleable (over time) and mul-
tiple.” FEP is a principle and needs reinterpretation for each
model. One such reinterpretation must state what the system
and its environment are, even though such a distinction does
not strictly stem from FEP formalism. As a consequence, one
should not consider FEP as wholly explanatory of living
beings’ natural history (Longo & Montévil, 2014), if only
because Friston blankets also change throughout the system’s
history.
(2) Even though Friston blankets are metaphysically wanting,
they should not be judged as a mere instrumental tool. The
authors, however, ultimately lean toward “a strongly instru-
mentalist understanding of Bayesian networks, and hence of
Markov blankets, which would not justify the kinds of strong
philosophical conclusions drawn by some from the idea of a
Friston blanket.” Instrumentalism undoubtedly looms large
in philosophical interpretations of scientific research, but, in
the end, this seems to be a self-defeating strategy for several
reasons:
(2.1) The instrumentalist that deems Markov blankets as
Pearl blankets forgoes endowing the former with any
ontological weight. Yet such a mindset could easily
lead to denying the very existence of systems – as
sheer constructs of human perception. Nevertheless, if
one does not wish to embrace such a radical position
and, on the contrary, accepts the existence of systems
in the universe, something quite similar to Friston blan-
kets must also exist in each system in order to sieve
through the many environmental influences that foster
or threaten the system’s identity.
(2.2) It seems paradoxical to emphasize the insufficient justi-
fication for transforming Pearl blankets into Friston
blankets whereas, ultimately, glossing over what addi-
tional philosophical assumptions might look like for
such a move. A scientific realist, for instance, could
call on formal causation as a valid metaphysical frame-
work that allows for the use of ad hoc boundary condi-
tions
to
individuate
systems
that
enjoy
specific
dynamics in nature (Owen, 2020, 2021; Sánchez-
Cañizares, 2022a, 2022b). In other words, Markov blan-
kets reflect the emergence of boundary conditions for
living systems. If boundary conditions exist for some
relevant time scale, Markov blankets are Friston blan-
kets. In addition, such a philosophical commitment
can adequately frame the emergence of complex
dynamical systems, which one cannot just deduce
from
their
underlying
dynamics
(Juarrero,
2002;
Sánchez-Cañizares, 2016).
(2.3) The methodological issue at play refers to whether other
kinds of knowledge – for example, knowing living sys-
tems as wholes – that influence scientific research
should be accepted within the overall explanatory pic-
ture. Certain pre-scientific knowledge is necessary for
guiding scientific methodology. If one assumes said
knowledge, there is no fundamental reason to deny
that some Markov blankets are also Friston blankets,
even if for a limited period, or that Friston blankets
are not fixed and may transition in a variety of ways
toward different instantiations. In doing so, the inevita-
ble, closed circularity of scientific instrumentalism turns
into the open circularity of scientific realism, which
admits a hierarchical variety of assumptions and
hypotheses about the world, as well as the possibility
of cognitive progress based on constant confrontation
with observation.
Financial support. This work has been funded with the help of Fundación
Ciudadanía y Valores (FUNCIVA) and Proeduca Summa S.L.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. https://doi.
org/10.3390/E22050516
Juarrero, A. (2002). Complex dynamical systems and the problem of identity. Emergence,
4(1), 94–104.
Lombardi, O., Fortín, S., & Castagnino, M. (2012). The problem of identifying the system
and the environment in the phenomenon of decoherence. In H. W. de Regt,
S. Hartmann & S. Okasha (Eds.), The European philosophy of science association pro-
ceedings: Amsterdam 2009 (pp. 161–174). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-
007-2404-4_15
Longo, G., & Montévil, M. (2014). Perspectives on organisms: Biological time, symmetries
and singularities. Springer.
Owen, M. (2020). Aristotelian causation and neural correlates of consciousness. Topoi, 39
(5), 1113–1124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-9606-9
Owen, M. (2021). Circumnavigating the causal pairing problem with hylomorphism and
the integrated information theory of consciousness. Synthese, 198, 2829–2851. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02403-6
Sánchez-Cañizares, J. (2016). Entropy, quantum mechanics, and information in complex
systems: A plea for ontological pluralism. European Journal of Science and Theology,
12(1), 17–37.
Sánchez-Cañizares, J. (2021). The free energy principle: Good science and questionable
philosophy in a grand unifying theory. Entropy, 23(2), 238. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e23020238
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
53
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Sánchez-Cañizares, J. (2022a). Formal causation in integrated information theory: An
answer to the intrinsicality problem. Foundations of Science, 27, 77–94. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10699-020-09775-w
Sánchez-Cañizares, J. (2022b). Integrated information theory as testing ground for causa-
tion: Why nested hylomorphism overcomes physicalism and panpsychism. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 29(1–2), 56–78. https://doi.org/10.53765/20512201.29.1.056
Tegmark, M. (2015). Consciousness as a state of matter. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 76,
238–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2015.03.014
Wilczek, F. (2015). A beautiful question. Finding nature’s deep design. Penguin Press.
A continuity of Markov blanket
interpretations under the free-
energy principle
Anil Seth
, Tomasz Korbak and Alexander Tschantz
Department of Informatics, School of Engineering and Informatics, University of
Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK
a.k.seth@sussex.ac.uk
tomasz.korbak@gmail.com
tschantz.alec@gmail.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X2200036X, e208
Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues helpfully distinguish between instru-
mental and ontological interpretations of Markov blankets,
exposing the dangers of using the former to make claims
about the latter. However, proposing a sharp distinction neglects
the value of recognising a continuum spanning from instrumen-
tal to ontological. This value extends to the related distinction
between “being” and “having” a model.
“We should not confuse the foundations of the real world with
the intellectual props that serve to evoke that world on the stage
of our thoughts.” This quote from Ernst Mach (Mach [2012],
p. 531, translated in Sigmund [2017], p. 19), surfacing from the
origins of the philosophy of science, connects directly to the target
article, in which Bruineberg and colleagues discuss how Markov
blankets (MBs) should be understood within the wider literature
of the free energy principle (FEP, Friston, 2010), as well as how
“models” and “modelling” should be interpreted within the cog-
nitive and brain sciences more generally.
MBs are statistical descriptions that partition systems into
internal, external, and blanket variables – where the internal var-
iables are conditionally independent of the external variables,
given the blanket variables. Bruineberg et al. provide a valuable
service by distinguishing two interpretations of MBs: “Pearl blan-
kets” (PBs) and “Friston blankets” (FBs). PBs embody an instru-
mental approach, in which MBs are used as tools to aid the
analysis of complex systems, for example by identifying sets of
variables suitable for further investigation. In contrast, FBs
adopt an ontological stance in which they are assumed to either
be (a literalist reading) – or usefully approximate (a realist reading)
actually existing boundaries in the world, such as the boundary
between a cell and its milieu, or between an organism or agent
and its environment. Bruineberg et al. reveal the dangers of con-
flating these two interpretations, in particular when an instru-
mental (PB) application is implicitly or explicitly taken to
justify ontological (FB) conclusions. Their arguments should be
borne in mind by those inclined to help themselves to the FEP
to explain their favourite grand mystery, or to take it as gospel.
Having said this, making a sharp distinction is often a useful
prelude to recognising a spectrum of positions, each of which
may be useful when assessed on its own merits. We suggest this
is the case here. For example, one may begin with an instrumen-
talist approach and progressively refine and extend the corre-
sponding model so as to make increasingly specific claims
about the causal mechanisms at play in the system under study
– in this way, gradually moving towards a more ontological or
realist stance. What does “refine and extend” mean? It could
mean equipping the model with additional features that represent
potentially important and context-specific aspects of the relevant
boundaries, such as autopoietic (self-producing) processes for
biological boundaries (Kirchhoff, Parr, Palacios, Friston, &
Kiverstein, 2018; Maturana & Varela, 1980), and embodied and
embedded
interactions
for
cognitive
boundaries
(Clark
&
Chalmers, 1998; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021), as well as a recog-
nition of the limited degree to which statistical identification of an
MB might generalise to nonequilibrium systems (Aguilera,
Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley, 2022; Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai,
2021).
Bruineberg et al. mention these possibilities, but downplay
their significance by drawing a contrast between “additional phil-
osophical assumptions” and “additional technical assumptions,”
where the latter implicitly subsumes everything just mentioned.
But these modelling strategies and mathematical constraints are
more than just additional assumptions, they can often be
part-and-parcel of the explanatory model itself. And rather than
“additional
philosophical
assumptions,”
what
seems to
be
required is a recognition of the model’s philosophical context
and the claims made on its behalf, so as to avoid the sort of con-
flation helpfully identified by Bruineberg.
Bruineberg et al. worry that, given such additional aspects,
whether the MB formalism itself can still be doing any work?
The answer is yes, to the extent that it helps specify those parts
of a model that are focused on boundaries. By casting the distinc-
tion between PBs and FBs as sharp, rather than as extrema on a
continuum, Bruineberg et al. underestimate the explanatory
work that MBs may uniquely be able to do.
Digging a little deeper, one reason we might be tempted to
invoke a bright-line distinction between PBs and FBs is because
of the dramatic claims made for literalist readings of FBs, in
which MBs are seen as really existing ontological boundaries in
physical systems. But – as Mach reminds us – models are always
models, whatever their granularity. Once we discount the relevance
of an overly literalist reading, the value of a continuity between
instrumental and ontological stances becomes easier to appreciate.
(Here, it is worth separating Mach’s valuable scepticism about lit-
eralism from his ultimately doomed project to ground physics
solely in phenomenology; it is not likely that Mach would have
had much time for FBs, even of a realist flavour.)
The same reasoning can be applied to the distinction between
“being a model” and “having a model” – a distinction that
Bruineberg et al. mention, but only in passing (see also Seth
and Tsakiris, 2018). Under the FEP, and following the spirit of
the cybernetic pioneers (Conant & Ashby, 1970), many systems
can be interpreted as “being” a model of their environment. In
an example briefly discussed by Bruineberg et al., even a simple
Watt governor can be described as performing inference – how-
ever it is best thought of not as having a model that is used to
54
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

perform inference, but as being a model of its environment, from
the perspective of an external observer (see Van Gelder [1995] for
the original and still instructive version of this argument, in the
context of computational theories of mind). By contrast, neuro-
cognitive systems that are modelled as implementing generative
models of their sensorium, in order to perform inference through
prediction error minimization, are better described as having
models, rather than merely being models.
This distinction is important, because the status of having
(rather than being) a model may speak to a variety of interesting
phenomena, such as the potential for counterfactual cognition,
imagination and imagery, volitional action of various kinds, and
perhaps even the difference between conscious and unconscious
perception. Methodologically, the hypothesis that a system has a
model can be warranted if having that hypothesis leads to novel
testable predictions that would not have been made without
that hypothesis (see Chemero [2000] for a related argument).
Again, it is beneficial to recognise that this distinction comes in
degrees, and that even the (realist, ontological) claim that a system
has a model should not confuse the map with the territory.
The broader lesson from Bruineberg et al. is the need for a
healthy interaction across disciplinary boundaries, and especially
among philosophy, physics, biology, and cognitive science, in
order to avoid the pitfalls of explanatory overreach, and to take
advantage of the many opportunities that arise at disciplinary
boundaries. Ernst Mach – a physicist who eventually took a
Chair in the Department of Philosophy at the University of
Vienna, making lasting contributions to psychology and physiol-
ogy along the way – exemplifies these virtues.
Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to Chris Buckley and Miguel
Aguilera for helpful comments.
Financial support. ThisworkwassupportedbytheEuropeanResearchCouncil
(AKS, AdvancedInvestigatorgrant number101019254), bythe CanadianInstitute
for Advanced Research (AKS and AT, CIFAR Program on Brain, Mind, and
Consciousness), by the Dr. Mortimer and Theresa Sackler Foundation (The
Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, AKS and AT), and by the Leverhulme
Trust
(AKS and TK, Doctoral Scholarship Programme grant number
DS-2017-011).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., Buckley, C. L. (2022). How particular is the phys-
ics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews, 40, 24–50.
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021) A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy (Basel), 23(3), 293.
Chemero, A. (2000). Anti-representationalism and the dynamical stance. Philosophy of
Science, 67(4). https://doi.org/10.1086/392858
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. J. (1998) The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 10–23.
Conant, R, & Ashby, W. R. (1970) Every good regulator of a system must be a model of
that system. International Journal of Systems Science, 1(2), 89–97.
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K. J., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of
the Royal Society, Interface, 15(138). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198, 4791–4810.
Mach, E. (2012). Die mechanik in ihrer entwicklung. In Ernst Mach studienausgabe.
Xenomoi.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the
living. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 42. D. Reidel.
Seth, A. K., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). Being a beast machine: The somatic basis of selfhood.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 22(11), 969–981.
Sigmund, K. (2017). Exact thinking in demented times. Basic Books.
Van Gelder, T. (1995) What might cognition be if not computation? Journal of
Philosophy, 92(7), 345–381.
Blankets, heat, and why free energy
has not illuminated the workings of
the brain
Donald Spectora and Daniel Grahamb
aDepartment of Physics, Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Geneva, NY 14456,
USA and bDepartment of Psychological Sciences, Hobart and William Smith
Colleges, Geneva, NY 14456, USA
spector@hws.edu
graham@hws.edu
http://people.hws.edu/spector/
http://people.hws.edu/graham/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000188, e209
Abstract
What can we hope to learn about brains from the free energy
principle? In adopting the “primordial soup” physical model,
Bruineberg et al. perpetuate the unsupported notion that the
free-energy principle has a meaningful physical – and neuronal
– interpretation. We examine how minimization of free energy
arises in physical contexts, and what this can and cannot tell
us about brains.
To determine the implications of applying free-energy principles
to the study of the brain, it is worth examining how free energy
arises in physics in the first place, and then considering the impli-
cations for studies of the brain. We focus on two questions: What
is the functional content of applying a free-energy principle to the
brain? If the free-energy principle does work phenomenologically,
can it tell us about the underlying workings of the brain?
Free energy arises in thermodynamics, the field that describes
the bulk behavior of large systems. Statistical mechanics, in turn,
is the field that derives thermodynamics from more fundamental
principles. Via the ergodic hypothesis, statistical mechanics says
that the bulk properties of a system (macrostates) can be found
by ignoring the detailed dynamics of the intractably large number
of microstates, and instead performing ensemble averages over the
possible microstates (with equal likelihoods in isolated systems,
which implies Boltzmann weightings at finite temperature). The
bulk properties found by ensemble averages in statistical mechan-
ics can alternatively be found thermodynamically, by minimizing
the quantity known as the free energy.
The power of free energy is thus not that it is optimized at
equilibrium; after all, there are non-thermodynamic optimization
problems. It is that there is a language of macrovariables which
can characterize a system, while the underlying microvariables
evolve in a way functionally indistinguishable from randomly.
But as invoked in the target article, the free-energy principle
does not point to any macro- or microvariables, which are needed
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
55
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

for either a high- or low-level understanding of the workings of
the brain.
If the free energy principle in the study of the brain is to be
useful, we should hope that the process of deriving thermody-
namics from statistical mechanics can be run in reverse: That
establishing the efficacy of a free-energy principle to describe
the behavior and representational strategies of agents with a
brain can reveal the fundamental dynamics of the brain. Even if
we posit that there are microstates, all that is required for thermo-
dynamics to arise is that the dynamics cause those microstates to
be sampled over time with the correct weightings to allow the
ensemble average to mimic the dynamics. Alas, this does not
uniquely determine the underlying microstate dynamics.
Imagine
thermodynamics
had
been
invented
before
Newtonian mechanics. Could one deduce Newton’s laws of
motion from this formalism? The answer is no. For example, a
gas at finite temperature can be modeled using kinetic theory or
using a Metropolis algorithm. These provide different dynamical
rules on microstates that produce the same thermodynamics;
thermodynamics alone cannot reveal the fundamental dynamics.
While broad results like entropy maximization arise in a general
framework, to use statistical mechanics to obtain the thermody-
namics of specific systems relies on knowledge about those sys-
tems extrinsic to thermodynamics, already obtained in other
contexts.
Furthermore, even if one has posited micro-level dynamics for
the brain, producing a thermodynamic language still requires
identifying suitable macrostate variables. When tossing 1 million
coins, if, instead of focusing on which particular coins are heads
or tails (the microstates), we label states just by their total num-
bers of heads and tails, we can perform a free-energy style analysis
to get the average behavior (and show fluctuations from this are
negligible). This methodology hinges on choosing appropriate
macrostate variables (e.g., the number of heads, not, say, the num-
ber of heads squared). Without a suitable analogous connection
between microstates and macrostates, the promise of a free-energy
principle for the brain remains unfulfilled.
Of course, if the brain does achieve certain equilibrated behav-
ioral states, one could by construction create a free-energy func-
tion that said states minimize. Leaving aside the potential
tautology of this philosophy, the question remains, what are
those states? What macrovariables are static in equilibrium?
Perhaps more importantly, how are they connected to the micro-
states of the brain? Should we focus on neuronal states or their
interactions? Should we describe the brain in terms of synaptic
events, spikes, spike timing, oscillations, local potentials, voxel-
wise patterns, or some combination of these? What microstates
can be lumped together into useful macrostates, and by what
rules?
Although the brain is complicated, accepting ignorance of
its workings is untenable (imagine if thermodynamics itself
had stopped with Carnot’s generation and we never developed
statistical mechanics and all that ensued). Still the free-energy
principle could be used to solve real-world problems with
a set of well-understood affectors and effectors, that is, in situ-
ations like neurorobotics where we do not necessarily want to
model the brain but do want “intelligent” solutions to environ-
mental challenges.
As we think about thermodynamics and brains, let us imagine
how mysterious heat must have seemed at first. But heat, it turned
out, was not a new form of energy, simply familiar forms of
energy carried by degrees of freedom whose details were no longer
being tracked. In studies of the brain, what plays the role of heat
(or any other thermodynamic quantity), not literally, but as a
seemingly distinct macro feature that embodies hidden micro
behavior?
The free-energy principle for brains is couched in the language
of statistical mechanics but not justified by it. However, we would
welcome attempts to work from brain microstates to a thermody-
namic approach (and see what variables or principles are useful).
Whatever the differences between the principles that prevail in
brains and those relevant to physics, we still stand a better chance
of understanding both the brain and behavior through the analo-
gous study of principles in the brain as opposed to ensemble prop-
erties with unknown relationships to microstates and microstate
dynamics. This is essentially the “inside-out” approach to systems
neuroscience (Buzsáki, 2019). For example, what rules govern and
how does the brain manage flexible, brain-wide communication
flow on a neuronal network with short paths between essentially
any populations of neurons (Graham, 2021)? If elucidating princi-
ples of brain function proves successful, we could interrogate the
entire system of many physically networked elements and their
interaction with the environment directly, and potentially dispense
with blankets altogether.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The brain from inside out. Oxford University Press.
Graham, D. (2021). An internet in your head. Columbia University Press.
Good theoretical debate, but
insufficient proof of concept
Rainer Spiegel
Internal Medicine Section, Department of Acute Medicine, Basel University
Hospital, 4031 Basel, Switzerland
rainer_spiegel@hotmail.com
rainer.spiegel@usb.ch
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rainer-Spiegel
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000140, e210
Abstract
Bruineberg and colleagues argue that the patellar reflex cannot
be modeled sufficiently with a Friston blanket due to counterin-
tuitive sensorimotor boundaries. Although I agree with their
theoretical discussion, their model of the patellar reflex is insuf-
ficiently based on clinical knowledge. Consequently, this exam-
ple should not be applied to challenge Friston blankets. I will
provide an alternative example.
After explaining Markov and Friston blankets in particular,
Bruineberg et al. demonstrate how difficult it is for these to ade-
quately enclose real-world examples. One reason is the assump-
tion of conditional independence, which they are based on. To
56
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

underline their point of view, they choose an example from clin-
ical medicine: To model the patellar reflex, they construe a simple
Bayesian network and a Friston blanket.
I agree with Bruineberg and colleagues that the assumption of
conditional independence in Friston blankets is problematic for
real-world examples. Consequently, their theoretical debate on
Friston blankets makes sense. However, their example of the
patellar reflex is insufficiently based on knowledge from neuro-
physiology or clinical medicine. This makes the example in this
context problematic. As a result, I argue that the authors should
refrain from applying this example as a proof of concept for
their theoretical arguments. To make it clear what is problematic
about their choice of example, let me first describe how they try to
simulate the patellar reflex.
They propose a Bayesian network where different nodes are
dedicated to different purposes: The patient’s intention to move
the leg, the doctor’s intention to move the patient’s leg, the spinal
neurons, the intervention of striking the patellar tendon with a
hammer, the motor command from the central nervous system
sent to the spinal neurons, and finally, a third way (e.g., someone
else) moving the leg. An example for their Bayesian network can
be found in Figure 7a of their target article. Subsequently, they
present an elaboration of the Bayesian network, where the
nodes are partitioned into external states, internal states, sensory
states, and active states. This partitioning is done in what they call
a “Friston blanket,” which is a transfer of the Markov blanket idea
from statistics (Pearl, 1988) to the life sciences (e.g., Friston,
2013).
The Friston blanket from this example is problematic because
of the following reasons:
Bruineberg et al. use nodes that incorporate the patient’s
intention. However, the patient’s intention as well as the central
motor commands are not part of a monosynaptic reflex arc.
Consequently, they are not part of the patellar reflex, which is
a monosynaptic reflex arc. Rather, the incorporation of intention
would involve several neurons, interneurons and therefore sev-
eral synapses between neurons. A reflex arc with several syn-
apses, however, would be termed a polysynaptic reflex arc.
Therefore, Bruineberg et al. have construed a Friston blanket
for a polysynaptic reflex arc, although their aim was actually
to model a monosynaptic reflex arc. As a result, they cannot
argue that their Friston blanket does not adequately enclose
the patellar reflex. To understand why their example cannot be
applied as an argument against Friston blankets, let us consider
the patellar reflex, which should not incorporate the patient’s
intention, as the synaptic transmission happens at the level of
the spinal cord: After striking the patellar tendon with a ham-
mer, the muscle spindle in the quadriceps femoris muscle is acti-
vated, followed by an afferent signal traveling along the sensory
neuron to the dorsal root of the spinal cord. In the spinal cord, a
monosynaptic transmission to an alpha-motor neuron takes
place, which produces an efferent signal traveling along this
alpha-motoneuron to the quadriceps femoris muscle, eliciting
the movement (e.g., Ginanneschi, Mondelli, Piu, and Rossi,
2015). Although some interaction with interneurons at the
level of the spinal cord is possible (Ginanneschi et al., 2015),
it is obvious that the Friston blankets construed by Bruineberg
et al., Figures 7b and 7c, involve intentional leg movements,
which should not be the case.
If Bruineberg et al. had built a Friston blanket for a truly
monosynaptic reflex, they could easily avoid the counterintuitive
sensorimotor boundaries that they consider problematic for
Friston blankets. I will attempt to do this by using the same
terms and the same states as Bruineberg et al. in Figures 7b and
7c. I will only get rid of those parts that do not belong to a mono-
synaptic reflex arc: The patient’s intention ip is not part of the
monosynaptic patellar reflex, nor is the motor command sent
from the central nervous system c, nor someone else kicking the
patient’s leg k. Rather, there would be nodes for the doctor’s
intention id – external state, the hammer h – sensory state, the spi-
nal neuron s – internal state, and the motor command m active
state. Given that all nodes represent different states and each
state can lie on a different Friston blanket, there would be no
counterintuitive
sensorimotor
boundaries
in
this
example.
Because Bruineberg et al. have not modeled a truly monosynaptic
reflex arc with their choice of nodes, they see a problem. This
problem vanishes when omitting the nodes that are not part of
a monosynaptic reflex arc. Does this imply that their critique
on counterintuitive sensorimotor boundaries with Friston blan-
kets is not justified? I would argue that their critique is still justi-
fied and here is the reason why: There are several conditions in
clinical medicine that would challenge Friston blankets. For
example, the patellar reflex would require additional nodes for
the muscle spindle / the quadriceps muscle. If these were added,
as well as other internal states that change the extent of reflexes,
for example, endocrinopathies (Rodriguez-Beato & De Jesus,
2021), electrolyte derangements (Espay, 2014; Hensle & Lambert,
2010), there would be several internal states. Consequently, there
would be several Friston blankets with counterintuitive boundaries
all impacting the extent of the patellar reflex, which would chal-
lenge Friston blankets.
To conclude, Bruineberg et al. contribute substantially to the
theoretical debate on Friston blankets, but their idea to challenge
Friston blankets with the patellar reflex example does not work
due to the aforementioned shortcomings of their chosen model.
If their example is modified and other relevant nodes for the
patellar reflex are added, one can easily find counterintuitive sen-
sorimotor boundaries, which would be a challenge for Friston
blankets.
Financial support. No funding received in relation to this manuscript.
Conflict of interest. No conflict of interest in terms of this commentary.
Considering all possible conflicts of interest, Rainer Spiegel owns a small num-
ber of stocks from the respirator/ventilator company Draeger in his private
portfolio.
References
Espay, A. J. (2014). Chapter 23 – Neurologic complications of electrolyte disturbances
and acid-base. In J. Biller & J. M. Ferro (Eds.), Handbook of clinical neurology
(pp. 365–382). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7020-4086-3.00023-0
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Ginanneschi, F., Mondelli, M., Piu, P., & Rossi, A. (2015). Pathophysiology of knee jerk
reflex abnormalities in L5 root injury. Functional Neurology, 30(3), 187–191. https://
doi.org/10.11138/fneur/2015.30.3.187
Hensle, T. W., & Lambert, E. H. (2010). Chapter 3 – Renal function, fluids, electrolytes,
and nutrition from birth to adulthood. In J. P. Gearhart, R. C. Rink &
P. D. E. Mouriquand (Eds.), Pediatric urology (2nd ed., pp. 23–30). Saunders.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4160-3204-5.00003-7
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible
Inference (Chapter 3.2, pp. 96–115). Morgan Kaufmann.
Rodriguez-Beato, F. Y., & De Jesus, O. (2021). Physiology, deep tendon reflexes (Updated
26 July 2021). StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK562238/
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
57
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

What realism about agents requires
Mark Sprevak
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
mark.sprevak@ed.ac.uk
https://marksprevak.com/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000164, e211
Abstract
Bruineberg et al. argue that the formal notion of a Markov blan-
ket fails to provide a single principled boundary between an
agent and its environment. I argue that one should not expect
a general theory of agenthood to provide a single boundary;
and the reliance on auxiliary assumptions is neither arbitrary
nor reason to suspect instrumentalism.
Bruineberg et al. distinguish a metaphysically robust use from a
merely formal use of the concept of a Markov blanket (Friston
vs. Pearl blankets). They argue that Friston blankets are only
able to do the work required of them if they yield a single princi-
pled boundary between the agent and world. They argue that
Friston blankets cannot do this (sect. 5). Reasons include that a
Friston blanket depends on a number of non-trivial assumptions
that don’t flow purely from the formalism, including the choice of
which Bayesian network one uses to model the system. They con-
clude that Friston blankets cannot do the work required of them
to demarcate agents from world. They suggest an alternative role
for Friston blankets as merely instrumental constructs rather than
as real boundaries in the world.
Bruineberg et al. present a stark divide: either a Friston blanket
provides a single, objective, principled boundary or it is merely an
instrumental construct. While Bruineberg et al. are correct on
many points about the limitations of Friston blankets, this central
dilemma mischaracterises the intention and potential future pros-
pects of that notion.
First, it is unclear whether Friston blankets were intended to
meet, or even should meet the exacting standard of yielding a sin-
gle principled boundary. The idea that there is a single, objectively
correct way to divide the world up into states that are “inside” and
“outside” agents is deeply suspect (Craver, 2009). Agents are
nested inside each other and their boundaries crosscut. From var-
ious perspectives, individual humans, groups of humans, nations,
brain regions, individual cells, and sub-cellular assemblies count
as agents (Dennett, 2017; Huebner, 2014; Kingma, 2019). When
attempting to distinguish an agent from the world, one’s first
question should be “What sort of agent is one talking about?.”
Attempting to identify agential boundaries without making assump-
tions about the specific physical differences and similarities that
matter to that kind of agent’s identity and integrity – that is, that
determine one’s subject matter – does not make sense. One should
not expect the way one partitions the world into agents to be indif-
ferent to the type of agent and agenthood one is interested in (e.g.,
planetary-scale agents vs. cellular agents).
Second, the authors rightly emphasise the role of auxiliary
assumptions in applying the notion of a Friston blanket. The aux-
iliary assumptions are needed to link the formal notion of a
Markov blanket to the physical world – to determine what are
the principal variables of the target system, the kinds of stability
one is interested in (and over what timescale and set of possible
interventions), and which Bayesian network should model the
physical system. However, with less justification, they suggest
that these auxiliary assumptions are arbitrary, pragmatic, or
merely instrumental. There is little reason to think this. The
assumptions appear to be necessary, motivated, and unavoidable
even to a realist. Before partitioning the world into agents, one has
to decide the type of agent one is talking about. This explains why
Friston’s example (sect. 4) has to make non-trivial assumptions
about which forces should be considered as relevant in the target
system (electrochemical) and which threshold to apply to interac-
tions between particles (how much is required for a connection).
It also explains why the agential boundary is relative to which
Bayesian network one chooses to model the system – this specifies
the sort of invariances, dependencies, and physical variations one
wishes to consider. These are not merely pragmatic issues, con-
cerned with convenience or the personal preferences of the mod-
eller. They are necessary to settle the subject matter. If one is
interested in certain forms of stability and manipulation, then
the world divides into certain sorts of agents. If one is interested
in other forms of stability, then the world divides into a different
set of agents. Reliance on these assumptions does not entail that
agenthood is conventional or pragmatic. It is needed because one
must decide what kind of agent one is talking about before asking
the question of where its boundaries lie.
Regarding the “reification fallacy,” it is worth bearing in mind
that liberal talk here is relatively commonplace in the applied sci-
ences and it is not necessarily indicative of a confusion regarding
map and territory. Consider a simpler formal notion: the arith-
metic mean of a set of numbers. In the language of the authors,
this counts as a feature of the map as it is defined over numbers,
not over any concrete physical features. Yet we regularly ascribe
arithmetic means to the territory: We may refer to my mean coffee
consumption, my mean income, or my mean bodyweight. What per-
mits this slippage from map to territory? Is it an illicit reification?
No. In each case, the ascription presupposes a range of assumptions
that connect select aspects of the physical territory with abstract
numbers over which an arithmetic mean is defined and may be cal-
culated. Different schemes for representing my coffee consumption
with numbers may result in different numerical means being attrib-
uted to the territory. Similarly, when proponents of active inference
use Markov blankets to demarcate agents, by necessity they must
employ a background of auxiliary assumptions about which physical
features in the physical system matter and how they should be for-
mally represented in the Markov framework.
Bruineberg et al. are right that proponents of active inference
should be more explicit about these assumptions. But they give
no reason to think that those assumptions are unprincipled or
instrumental conceits. The intention of Friston’s proposal –
which has arguably been obscured by loose talk about “just apply-
ing the maths” – is that it identifies a formal pattern that is char-
acteristic of agenthood and that may be manifest in different ways
in different contexts given different auxiliary assumptions. This
yields multiple crosscutting agential boundaries, but that outcome
should be expected on any theory of agenthood. In light of what
Bruineberg et al. say, there is no reason to think that the notion of
a Friston blanket could not serve as the formal part of a version of
realism about agents worth wanting.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
58
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conflict of interest. None.
References
Craver, C. F. (2009). Mechanisms and natural kinds. Philosophical Psychology, 22,
575–594.
Dennett, D. C. (2017). From bacteria to Bach and back: The evolution of minds.
W. W. Norton.
Huebner, B. (2014). Macrocognition. Oxford University Press.
Kingma, E. (2019). Were you a part of your mother? Mind; A Quarterly Review of
Psychology and Philosophy, 128, 609–646.
Against free energy, for
direct perception
Thomas A. Stoffregena
and Robert Heathb
aThe School of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA and bHiawatha Valley Education District, Winona, MN 55987, USA
tas@umn.edu
ptbob55987@yahoo.com
https://apal.umn.edu/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000103, e212
Abstract
We question the free energy principle (FEP) as it is used in con-
temporary physics. If the FEP is incorrect in physics, then it can-
not ground the authors’ arguments. We also question the
assumption that perception requires inference. We argue that
perception (including perception of social affordances) can be
direct, in which case inference is not required.
We raise an issue relating to the physics that undergird the free
energy principle (FEP), and one relating to whether the FEP actu-
ally is relevant to perception, and to phenomena of animacy, in
general.
The authors argue the merits of various formulations of the
FEP in relation to animacy (e.g., Markov blankets, Friston blan-
kets, Pearl blankets). They acknowledge that “the core of the
FEP rests upon an intertwined web of mathematical constructs
borrowed from physics” (sect. 1, para. 4). They do not question
the validity of the underlying physics of the FEP. However, a con-
sistent thread of scholarship raises doubts about the validity of the
FEP as a description of physical reality (rather than as a mathe-
matical abstraction that is not meant to be taken as a claim
about reality; Schrodinger, 1952a, 1952b).
All versions of the FEP assume that time is discrete. That is,
the mathematical equations of the FEP are defined only if we
assume that time is discrete. In most physics, models and
theories are structured in ways that assume that time exists as dis-
crete temporal units. This assumption is accepted even by scholars
who have criticized other aspects of the FEP (e.g., Colombo and
Palacios, 2021; Raja, Valluri, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson,
2021; Unnikrishnan, 2020). Yet not everyone accepts this
assumption. Bergson (1922/1999) claimed that time does not
exist in discrete units but, rather, exists as a continuum that can-
not be sectioned into discrete units (Robbins, 2014). At mini-
mum, Bergson’s alternative conception of time alerts us to the
fact that mainstream views of discrete time are assumptions or
descriptions, rather than established facts (Schrodinger, 1952a,
1952b). Claims that are based on this assumption, such as
Friston’s FEP and the current authors’ treatment, should more
explicitly acknowledge their reliance on these contingent assump-
tions. It is also important to carefully evaluate the validity of
Bergson’s alternative perspective and the implications it may
have for our understanding of both physics and animacy.
Bergson’s (1922/1999) conception of time is consistent with
Gibson’s conception of physics, including time. Gibson argued
that traditional physics, including electromagnetism, thermody-
namics, quantum mechanics, and abstract, discrete time, cannot
account for the phenomena of animacy (Gibson, 1975, 1979).
More broadly, Rosen (1991) argued that living things rely on
physical principles (what he referred to as “new physics”) that
are primary to the physics of inanimacy. Put plainly, each of
these scholars raised deep questions, not only about the presumed
primacy of traditional physics, but also about its literal accuracy as
a description of reality. Friston’s FEP is part of an ancient tradi-
tion by which the physics of inanimacy are assumed to be basic,
with the physics of animacy being derivative. Bergson, Gibson,
Rosen, and others argue just the opposite: That the physics of ani-
macy are primary, and the physics of inanimacy derivative.
The above considerations relate intimately to our second issue,
which concerns the authors’ assumption that perception is infer-
ential. They offer as options only inference with a model, or infer-
ence within a model. But other options exist. The ecological
approach to perception and action claims that the animal–envi-
ronment interaction lawfully structures patterns in ambient
energy such that reality is specified (e.g., Gibson, 1966; Turvey,
2019). If reality is specified, then perception can be direct and,
consequently, there is no requirement for inference. Bruineberg,
Chemero, and Rietveld (2019) accepted this logic, but argued
that social affordances cannot be specified and that, therefore,
perception of social affordances cannot be direct. It would follow
that knowledge of social affordances must depend upon inference.
The sole basis for their argument was the fact that social affordan-
ces emerge from social conventions, such as linguistic grammar
and syntax, or highway speed limits. However, they offered no evi-
dence, either logical or empirical, that social conventions or social
affordances actually cannot be specified.
The fact that social affordances emerge from social conventions
does not imply that they are free of physical law, such that they can-
not be specified. Social conventions are constrained by physical law.
For example, all phonetic systems must conform to the acoustic
capabilities of the speech organs. Similarly, grammar and syntax,
which vary widely across languages, nevertheless exhibit consisten-
cies, and cannot operate outside physical law. Language is used to
communicate about physical reality, such that grammar and syntax
may be constrained by the physical laws that constrain the events
that are the principal subject of linguistic interaction (e.g.,
Anthony, 2007). Even metaphor is grounded in embodied experi-
ence (Gibbs, Lima, & Francozo, 2004). In short, the claim that
social affordances cannot be specified and that, therefore, percep-
tion must be inferential, is a claim, rather than a self-evident fact.
It may be that social affordances are specified in conformity with
physical law, such that all perception can be direct
(e.g.,
Stoffregen and Bardy, 2001; Stoffregen, Mantel, and Bardy, 2017).
Empirical research can help to address the continuity or unity of
perception. Empirical research is consistent with the idea that per-
ception of social affordances may be direct. As one example,
human observers can transition easily between perception of per-
sonal and interpersonal affordances (e.g., Richardson, Marsh, and
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
59
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Baron, 2007), suggesting that perception of personal and interper-
sonal affordances may have a similar basis. Perception of social
affordances may be grounded in the perception and control of
affordances for the individual. For example, locomotor experience
(typically, learning to crawl) causally drives the infant’s developing
understanding of referential communication (e.g., Campos et al.,
2000), while the physical experience of interpersonal synchrony
has causal influence on the development of prosocial behavior
(Cirelli, 2018), and social conventions are taught through guided
interactions (Nonaka & Stoffregen, 2020; Reed, 1996). These find-
ings suggest that perception of social affordances may emerge from
the kinds of physical interactions that Bruineberg et al. (2019)
accepted as being amenable to direct perception.
Acceptance of Friston’s FEP mandates rejection of any form of
direct perception (e.g., Friston, 2013). This stark requirement may
explain the uncritical nature of the authors’ views on specification
(Bruineberg et al., 2019). The alternative is equally stark: If per-
ception is direct, then Friston’s FEP cannot be a factual descrip-
tion of animate systems.
Financial support. Thomas A. Stoffregen was supported by NSF-1901423,
CHS: Medium: Prediction, Early Detection, and Mitigation of Virtual
Reality Simulator Sickness.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Anthony, D. W. (2007). The horse, the wheel, and language. Princeton University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400831104
Bergson, H. (1999). Duration and simultaneity. Trans. Leon Jacobson. Clinaman Press.
(Original work published in 1922).
Bruineberg, J., Chemero, A., & Rietveld, E. (2019). General ecological information
supports engagement with affordances for “higher” cognition. Synthese, 196,
5231–5251. doi:10.1007/s11229-018-1716-9
Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M., Hubbard, E. M., Hertenstein, M. J., &
Witherington, D. (2000). Travel broadens the mind. Infancy, 1, 149–219.
Cirelli, L. K. (2018). How interpersonal synchrony facilitates early prosocial behavior.
Current Opinion in Psychology, 20, 35–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.08.
009
Colombo, M., & Palacios, P. (2021). Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free
energy principle in biology. Biology & Philosophy, 36, 41. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10539-021-09818-x
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10,
20130475.
Gibbs, R. W., Lima, P. L. C., & Francozo, E. (2004). Metaphor is grounded in embodied
experience. Journal of Pragmatics, 36, 1189–1210.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Houghton-Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1975). Events are perceivable but time is not. In J. T. Fraser & N. Lawrence
(Eds.), The study of time II (pp. 295–301). Springer-Verlag.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton-Mifflin.
Nonaka, T., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2020). Social interaction in the emergence of toddler’s
mealtime spoon use. Developmental Psychobiology, 62, 1124–1133. doi:10.1002/dev.
21978
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. L. (2021). The Markov blan-
ket trick: On the scope of the free energy principle and active inference. Physics of Life
Reviews, 39, 49–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.09.001
Reed, E. S. (1996). Encountering the world: Toward an ecological psychology. Oxford
University Press.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., & Baron, R. M. (2007). Judging and actualizing intraper-
sonal and interpersonal affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 33, 845–859. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.33.4.845
Robbins, S. E. (2014). The mists of special relativity: Time, consciousness, and a deep illu-
sion in physics. CreateSpace.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life itself. A comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin, and fabrica-
tion of life. Columbia University Press.
Schrodinger, E. (1952a). Are there quantum jumps? Part I. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 3, 109–123.
Schrodinger, E. (1952b). Are there quantum jumps? Part II. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 3, 233–242. doi:10.1093/bjps/III.11.233
Stoffregen, T. A., & Bardy, B. G. (2001). On specification and the senses. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 24, 195–261.
Stoffregen, T. A., Mantel, B., & Bardy, B. G. (2017). The senses considered as one percep-
tual system. Ecological Psychology, 29, 165–197.
Turvey, M. T. (2019). Lectures on perception: An ecological perspective. Routledge.
Unnikrishnan, C. S. (2020). A new gravitational paradigm for relativity and dynamics,
and its philosophical scope. Journal of Physics, Conference Series, 1466, 012007. doi:
10.1088/1742-6596/1466/1/012007
Who tailors the blanket?
Keisuke Suzukia
, Katsunori Miyaharaa
and Kengo Miyazonoa,b
aCenter for Human Nature, Artificial Intelligence, and Neuroscience (CHAIN),
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan and bDepartment of Philosophy
and Religious Studies, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan
ksk@chain.hokudai.ac.jp
kmiyahara@chain.hokudai.ac.jp
miyazono@let.hokudai.ac.jp
https://sites.google.com/view/keisukesuzuki/
https://kmiyahara.weebly.com/
http://kengomiyazono.weebly.com/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000206, e213
Abstract
The gap between the Markov blanket and ontological boundar-
ies arises from the former’s inability to capture the dynamic pro-
cess through which biological and cognitive agents actively
generate their own boundaries with the environment. Active
inference in the free-energy principle (FEP) framework presup-
poses the existence of a Markov blanket, but it is not a process
that actively generates the latter.
We endorse the authors’ claim that there is a gap between the
Markov blanket qua statistical tool and biological and cognitive
boundaries qua ontological structures in the world. We will
offer an explanation for the gap’s existence: It arises from the
Markov blanket’s inability to capture the dynamic process
through which biological and cognitive agents create their own
boundaries with the environment over time. Active inference pre-
supposes the existence of a Markov blanket, but it is not envi-
sioned as a process that actively generates the latter.
Biological systems actively produce their boundaries with the
environment
through
autopoietic
processes
(Varela,
1979).
Autopoiesis refers to a network of processes that continually regen-
erates its components and constructs their own physical boundar-
ies, which Varela and Maturana proposed as the essence of life and
its autonomy (Varela, 1979; Varela, Maturana, & Uribe, 1974). For
instance, a biological cell maintains its own identity distinct from
the environmental medium with a membrane system constructed
by a network of metabolic processes. Moreover, living beings main-
tain their bounded identity not only by exchanging energy and
material through metabolism, but also by actively interacting
with the environment over space and time. A good illustration is
that of a single cell in a nutrient-poor environment that climbs
up a glucose gradient to maintain its physical boundary with the
environment, keeping its internal states within viable ranges
(Egbert & Di Paolo, 2009; Ikegami & Suzuki, 2008; Suzuki &
60
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Ikegami, 2009). A biological boundary, then, is not a given, but is
actively defined by the system itself. The same principle applies
across a wide variety of living systems, from single cell creatures
to more complex, multicellular animals, which live sensorimotor
lives (Thompson, 2007).
Cognitive systems likewise actively produce their boundaries
through their interaction with the environment. We can see this
in the case of extended cognition and mind (Clark, 2008; Clark
& Chalmers, 1998), where cognitive boundaries extend beyond
the biological body by incorporating environmental items as their
constitutive parts. Cognitive extension is not a state upon which
we stumble by chance; rather, it is a process we actively bring
about, or “enact,” based on skills and habits cultivated over time
(Miyahara & Robertson, 2021; Miyahara, Ransom, & Gallagher,
2020). To illustrate, consider Otto from Clark and Chalmers’
(1998) famous thought experiment. Otto suffers a mild case of
Alzheimer’s disease and uses a notebook to compensate for his
memory deficit. According to Clark (2010), Otto and his notebook
exhibit a tight functional coupling with each other to constitute a
unified cognitive system (Miyazono, 2017) to the extent that they
satisfy the following “trust and glue” conditions: (1) the resource
(viz., the notebook) is reliably available and typically invoked; (2)
any information thus retrieved is more or less automatically
endorsed; and (3) information contained in the resource is easily
accessible as and when required. Obviously, Otto will not meet
these conditions merely by developing a memory problem.
Rather, he would have to learn to use notebooks to complement
his compromised cognitive capacities and continue to do so repeat-
edly until it became a habit for him to always carry around a note-
book and use it for constant notetaking. The functional coupling is
a product of Otto’s active engagement with the notebook and his
development of relevant skills and habits over time (which is
why Otto’s Markov blanket is malleable [Clark, 2017] or negotiable
[Kirchhoff and Kiverstein, 2021]).
The main shortcoming of the Friston blanket approach con-
cerns the relationship between action (i.e., active inference) and
identity (i.e., the Markov blanket). In this approach, active inference
depends upon the Markov blanket, but not the other way round.
Biological and cognitive systems are defined by Markov blankets
as boundaries with the external environment. These systems per-
form active inferences through looping interactions between sen-
sory states, internal states, and active states defined by the
Markov blanket to keep their internal parameters within viable
bounds (Friston, 2013). On the other hand, as we saw above,
both biological and cognitive systems actively create and maintain
their bounded identity by interacting with the environment. As
Clark puts it: “Creatures like us […] are Nature’s experts at knitting
their own Markov blankets” (Clark, 2017, p. 14). To accommodate
this within the free-energy principle (FEP) framework, we must
conceive of active inference as playing an essential role in autopoi-
esis, that is, in creating and maintaining the system’s bounded iden-
tity (cf. Kirchhoff, 2018). In fact, Friston (2010) describes living
systems as performing active inference to reduce sensory surprisal
and consequently maintain its homeostasis. Nevertheless, on the
FEP, active inference does not explicitly participate in the auto-
poietic formation of the boundary between the system and its envi-
ronment, which defines the identity of living beings, that is, the
Markov blanket. That is, the dynamic relationship between action
and identity is missing in the Friston blanket approach that depicts
Markov blankets not as a product, but only as a precondition of
active inference (Friston, 2013).
In short, the Friston blanket approach fails to identify the tai-
lor who creates the boundaries. At most, Markov blankets coin-
cide with the outcome of the boundary-making processes
carried out by biological and cognitive agents. Markov blankets
are tailored by statistical patterns but living agents do not out-
source boundary-making: We actively weave our own boundaries
with the world.
Acknowledgments. We are grateful to Masatoshi Yoshida for his inputs dur-
ing the preparation stage of this commentary.
Financial support. This work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 20K00001.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2010). Memento’s revenge: The extended mind, extended. In R. Menary (Ed.),
The extended mind (pp. 43–66). MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket: Resisting the second law with
metamorphic minds. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive
processing: 3. MIND Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573031
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58(1), 7–19.
Egbert, M. D., & Di Paolo, E. (2009) Integrating autopoiesis and behavior: An exploration
in computational chemo-ethology. Adaptive Behavior, 17(5), 387–401.
Friston, K. (2010) The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11, 127–138.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Ikegami, T., & Suzuki, K. (2008). From a homeostatic to a homeodynamic self.
BioSystems, 91(2), 388–400.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2018). Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life–mind continuity thesis.
Synthese, 195(6), 2519–2540.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of the mind:
A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese, 198(5), 4791–4810.
Miyahara, K., Ransom, T. G., & Gallagher, S. (2020). What the situation affords: Habit
and heedful interrelations in skilled performance. In F. Caruana & I. Testa (Eds.),
Habit: Pragmatist approaches from cognitive neurosciences to social sciences (pp.
120–136). Cambridge University Press.
Miyahara, K., & Robertson, I. (2021) The pragmatic intelligence of habits. Topoi, 40, 597–608.
Miyazono, K. (2017). Does functionalism entail extended mind?. Synthese, 194(9), 3523–
3541.
Suzuki, K., & Ikegami, T. (2009). Shapes and self-movement in protocell systems.
Artificial Life, 15(1), 59–70.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind.
Harvard University Press.
Varela, F. R. (1979). Principles of biological autonomy. North Holland.
Varela, F. R., Maturana, H. R., & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: The organization of living
systems, its characterization and a model. BioSystems, 5, 187.
Life, mind, agency: Why Markov
blankets fail the test of evolution
Walter Veita
and Heather Browningb
aSchool of History and Philosophy of Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia and bLondon School of Economics and Political Science,
Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science, London WC2A 2AE, UK
wrwveit@gmail.com
DrHeatherBrowning@gmail.com
https://walterveit.com/
https://www.heatherbrowning.net/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000115, e214
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
61
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Abstract
There has been much criticism of the idea that Friston’s free-
energy principle can unite the life and mind sciences. Here,
we argue that perhaps the greatest problem for the totalizing
ambitions of its proponents is a failure to recognize the impor-
tance of evolutionary dynamics and to provide a convincing
adaptive story relating free-energy minimization to organismal
fitness.
In the recent explosion of literature on the free-energy principle,
many authors have become increasingly frustrated with the grand
ambitions toward using it as a general and unified theory of life,
mind, and agency. While many have noted the gulf between the
mathematical framework of the free-energy principle and its
application
to
real
target
systems,
in
their
target
article
Bruineberg et al. offer what is perhaps the most detailed and sus-
tained criticism of the use of Markov blankets in the biological
and cognitive sciences. They argue against what they consider
an imprecise use in these sciences for defining entities such as
organisms, agents, and minds, differentiating between the theoret-
ical “Pearl blankets” and the more metaphysically laden “Friston
blankets.” As these two interpretations are often confused and
those making metaphysical claims often retreat to an instrumen-
talist view once pushed, Bruineberg et al. have provided us with a
useful tool to distinguish inferences within the model from infer-
ences with a model, which ought not to be done based on the use-
fulness of the mathematical framework alone. We welcome the
challenge to a perceived conflation between the in-principle appli-
cability of the mathematical framework to any self-organizing sys-
tem and to the conviction that Markov blankets are able to
revolutionize our understanding of the living world (Friston,
2013).
The authors note that a realist reading of the application of
Friston blankets requires not just the mathematical frameworks
established for the use of Pearl blankets, but also independent
metaphysical assumptions that, they argue, have not yet been pro-
vided. Here, we wish to build on this point by emphasizing the
need for these assumptions to align with a plausible Darwinian
story. We argue that one of the major problems in recent attempts
to use Markov blankets to define the boundaries of organisms and
their environments is that they fail to pass the bottleneck of evo-
lutionary theory and give us a misleading picture of living agents
and what they are for.
Bruineberg et al. show that one cannot just “read off” the
boundary between agent and environment from the mathematical
formalism provided in the theoretical models. Instead, these are
ambiguous and depend on additional assumptions by the mod-
eler, thus requiring quite substantive metaphysical supplementa-
tion for Markov blankets to do their work. Here they note that
one of the ways of picking out the “right” model for identifying
the ontologically significant Friston blanket is through use of
the free-energy principle – relying on the assumption that living
systems aim at minimizing free energy. It is this basic assumption
of the free-energy principle that we wish to challenge. This frame-
work fails to demarcate the organismal boundary that matters,
from an evolutionary point of view.
As philosophers such as Ruth Millikan and Dan Dennett have
long argued, it is only by paying attention to the theoretical bot-
tleneck of evolutionary theory that we can distinguish important
properties, boundaries, and processes of living systems between
those that matter to the organism from those that do not.
Markov blankets are said to be able to identify the boundaries
of any agent in the sense of a self-organizing system (Ramstead,
Kirchhoff, Constant, & Friston, 2019), but they fail to distinguish
the right boundaries to understand the evolution of living sys-
tems. It has been an oversight within Friston’s framework to
fail to engage with evolutionary theory and the question of
what the organism is for. It is only in this teleonomic context,
that we can make sense of the functional boundaries of life,
mind, and agency as properties of biological systems. As the
framework fails to answer the hard question of why it is the prop-
erties picked out by attempts to apply Markov blankets to biolog-
ical systems, it cannot succeed in both its explanatory and
metaphysical ambitions.
The question that this framework would need to answer in
order to be successful in this biological context, is what is the
adaptive function of minimizing free energy? That is, how does
this process contribute to the survival and reproduction of the
organism? One response may be to simply assert that adaptive fit-
ness and negative free energy are “the same thing” (Friston,
Thornton, & Clark, 2012, p. 2). However, it is not clear why
one should take this to be true – predictive expectations and fit-
ness values do not on their surface appear to constitute anything
like the same thing. Another path may be to argue instead that
minimization of free energy, while not constituting fitness, is
still a strong contributor to it, in that organisms that act in this
way will typically have higher survival and reproduction.
However, again, it is not immediately clear why one should
believe this. As an example of why this is not particularly plausi-
ble, take the Dark Room Problem, which offers the challenge that
prediction error would be best minimized through sitting still in a
dark room, but organisms clearly did not evolve this way (Clark,
2013; Mumford, 1992). If we treat all of the cognitive activities of
organisms as a form of prediction or surprise minimization, there
will inevitably be “a wedge between what is typical and what is
good” (Klein, 2018, p. 2548); we should instead allow that there
may be other functions that will not always align with prediction
minimization. We then need a more detailed description of the
fitness benefits, and how they might be weighted or traded off
against other adaptive functions of an organism.
As well as the problems described by the authors of mistaking
the useful abstraction Markov blankets provide for the purposes
of Bayesian modeling with the idea that free-energy minimization
is all that goes on in living systems, we add what is perhaps the
greatest problem in the biological context: That it forces us to ide-
alize away from the most important features of living organisms
and thus will provide a false and diminished picture of the
world. Without the recognition of the importance of evolutionary
dynamics, the totalizing ambitions of the free-energy principle to
unite the mind and life sciences must fail.
Financial support. W. V.’s research was supported under Australian
Research Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project number
FL170100160).
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cog-
nitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–253.
62
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475.
Friston, K., Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012). Free-energy minimization and the dark-
room problem. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 1–7.
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195(6), 2541–2557.
Mumford, D. (1992). On the computational architecture of the neocortex. Biological
Cybernetics, 66(3), 241–251.
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Multiscale inte-
gration: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese, 198, 41–70.
Embracing sensorimotor history:
Time-synchronous and time-unrolled
Markov blankets in the free-
energy principle
Nathaniel Virgoa, Fernando E. Rosasb,c,d,e
and Martin Biehlf
aEarth-Life Science Institute (ELSI), Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-
8550, Japan; bDepartment of Brain Science, Centre for Psychedelic Research,
Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK; cData Science Institute,
Imperial College London, London W7 2AZ, UK; dCentre for Complexity Science,
Imperial College London, London W7 2AZ, UK; eDepartment of Informatics,
University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK and fCross Labs, Cross Compass,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan
nathanielvirgo@elsi.jp
f.rosas@imperial.ac.uk
martin.biehl@cross-compass.com
http://www.elsi.jp/en/members/researchers/nvirgo
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/f.rosas
https://twitter.com/36zimmer
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000334, e215
Abstract
The free-energy principle (FEP) builds on an assumption that
sensor–motor loops exhibit Markov blankets in stationary
state. We argue that there is rarely reason to assume a system’s
internal and external states are conditionally independent
given the sensorimotor states, and often reason to assume other-
wise. However, under mild assumptions internal and external
states are conditionally independent given the sensorimotor
history.
Bruineberg and colleagues provide a thorough review of Markov
blankets and their limitations in the context of the free-energy
principle (FEP). We wish to complement this by drawing atten-
tion to two additional issues that we believe have important con-
sequences for the FEP.
Firstly, contrary to what one might expect, the condition
known as “Markov blanket” in the FEP literature is generally
not guaranteed by a sensor–motor loop structure. Secondly, the
Markov blanket condition needed for the FEP is far stronger
than it appears to be. These issues severely limit the scope of
applicability of current formulations of the FEP. Fortunately, we
believe they can be solved, and give some hints towards a
resolution.
As Bruineberg et al. explain, the notion of a Markov blanket
arises in the context of graphical models, and in particular,
Bayesian networks. In a Bayesian network each node represents
a random variable, and their joint distribution factors in a partic-
ular way that depends on the topology of the graph (Pearl, 1988).
The literature on FEP is also concerned with graphs that are
not Bayesian networks. Each node in these graphs represents a
dynamical variable of a system and an edge represents the possi-
bility that one dynamical variable can influence another. These
include the adjacency matrix described in Bruineberg et al.’s sec-
tion 4.2, and also the sensor–motor loop as illustrated in their
Figure 2. Typically, the edges in such graphs correspond to non-
zero terms in a Jacobian matrix. We will call such graphs influence
graphs.
A stationary state defines a joint distribution over the nodes of
an influence graph. There is then some resemblance between the
influence graphs and Bayesian networks, since both contain nodes
that represent random variables and edges that represent influ-
ences of some kind.
However, these two types of graph are fundamentally different.
Influence graphs are not necessarily acyclic, but more impor-
tantly, the theorems in Pearl’s formalism do not apply to influ-
ence graphs. In particular, one might expect that the sensor–
motor loop (Bruineberg et al.’s Fig. 2) would imply the time-
synchronous Markov blanket condition
mt ⊥⊥ft | st, at.
(1)
However, this is not the case in general – and this is important
because (1) is used in deriving the FEP. This issue has been
recently pointed out (Aguilera, Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley,
2021; Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai, 2021), and while it has been
acknowledged in some of the most recent FEP literature it is
not as widely known as it should be. We sketch the underlying
reason for it in Figure 1.
Recent works (e.g., Friston, Heins, Ueltzhöffer, Da Costa, and
Parr, 2021a; Friston, Da Costa, and Parr, 2021b) have sought to
address this by seeking additional conditions or conjectures
under which the needed relationship holds. However, the fact
that these conditions are highly non-trivial suggests that the
scope of the FEP may be much more limited than previously
thought.
Furthermore, (1) itself puts a very strong constraint on a sys-
tem’s dynamics. One way to see this is via the data processing
inequality (Cover & Thomas, 2006, p. 34), which imposes that
if (1) holds then all information that μt and ϕt share needs to
be present in (st, at). This would mean that the internal and exter-
nal states could share no more information than is contained in
the sensor and motor states at the current time.
But cases where information is stored in the environment and
the agent but not in the blanket are ubiquitous. Imagine a friend
gives you a phone number written on a piece of paper, which you
memorise and then store in a box. The statistical independence
between internal and external variables conditioned on active
and sensory ones is broken as soon as the piece of paper is
away from your sensory input. Once it’s out of sight the phone
number cannot be stored simultaneously in your internal state
and on the piece of paper. As Parr, Da Costa, Heins, Ramstead,
and Friston (2021) discuss, this need not be true in transients
even if it holds in stationary state. Nevertheless it puts an unreal-
istic constraint on the stationary dynamics, which we don’t expect
to be applicable to living organisms.
A possible resolution of this limitation follows from Figure 1.
Although (1) cannot be assumed for a general sensor–motor loop,
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
63
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

we do have the relationship
mt ⊥⊥ft | st, at, st−1, at−1, st−2, at−2, . . . .
(2)
We expect an analogous result in continuous time. The internal
and external states are not conditionally independent given the
current sensorimotor states, but, under only mild assumptions,
they are conditionally independent given the sensorimotor his-
tory. Alternative constructions of blankets that follow these prin-
ciples are currently being investigated (e.g., Rosas, Mediano, Biehl,
Chandaria, and Polani, 2020).
This makes intuitive sense: Your knowledge of the world is not
limited by what you can sense at the current moment, but it is
limited by what you have been able to sense over your whole life-
time. If a new version of the FEP can be constructed based on this
alternative conditional independence relation then it will be more
encompassing and will have something close to the broad appli-
cability that was originally intended.
Financial support. M. B. and N. V. acknowledge the support of Grant 62229
from the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions expressed in this
publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the John Templeton Foundation. F. R. is supported by the Ad
Astra Chandaria Foundation.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews, 40, 24–40.
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (2006). Elements of information theory (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Stochastic chaos
and Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1220.
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021b). Some interesting observations on the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(8), 1076.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Heins, C., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Memory and
Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1105.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible infer-
ence. Morgan Kaufmann.
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020). Causal blan-
kets: Theory and algorithmic framework. In T. Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L. Buckley, &
C. De Boom (Eds.), International workshop on active inference (pp. 187–198).
Springer.
Does the metaphysical dog wag its
formal tail? The free-energy principle
and philosophical debates about life,
mind, and matter
Wanja Wiese
Institute of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
wanja.wiese@rub.de
https://homepage.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/wanja.wiese/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000292, e216
Abstract
According to Bruineberg and colleagues, philosophical argu-
ments on life, mind, and matter that are based on the free-
energy principle (FEP) (1) essentially draw on the Markov blan-
ket construct and (2) tend to assume that strong metaphysical
claims can be justified on the basis of metaphysically innocuous
formal assumptions provided by FEP. I argue against both (1)
and (2).
Bruineberg et al. distinguish between Markov blankets (MBs) as
properties of models (epistemic “Pearl blankets,” PBs) and MBs
as properties of physical systems (metaphysical “Friston blankets,”
FBs). Unlike PBs, FBs are not exclusively defined in terms of
probabilistic relations between random variables. Instead, FBs
are also defined in terms of causal relations to a system’s internal
and external states: FBs comprise sensory and active states that
mediate causal influences between internal and external states.
In perceiving agents, this causal interplay between internal, exter-
nal, and blanket states is supposed to capture perception-action
loops (Friston, 2012).
Figure 1 (Virgo et al.). Top: A “time-unrolled” sensor–motor loop in discrete time. The
time-unrolled graph is a Bayesian network, and hence the Pearl framework can be
applied. It follows that the current internal and external states, μ3 and ϕ3 (blue,
orange) are conditionally independent given the nodes in light green, which consist
of the past histories of sensor and actuator states, s1, s2, s3 and a1, a2, a3, as well as
the initial states μ0 and ϕ0. (The dashed line indicates that the initial states might be
correlated.) Bottom: The current internal and external states are in general not con-
ditionally independent given only the current sensor and actuator states, s3 and a3,
because μ3 and ϕ3 have common ancestors that are not screened off by these nodes,
for example, μ1 and ϕ1 (red). This is true regardless of stationarity. If the system is
ergodic then the dependence on the initial states will disappear in the infinite
limit, so that we can effectively say that μt and ϕt are conditionally independent
given the infinite past history of the sensorimotor states.
64
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

As Bruineberg et al.’s lucid analysis shows, a realist interpreta-
tion of the notion of an FB is metaphysically demanding: Positing
the existence of an FB entails a statement about the physical sys-
tem, that is, it entails the existence of a boundary between internal
and external states. Furthermore, the authors argue that the for-
malism that is used to identify internal, active, sensory, and exter-
nal states (as in Friston, 2013) presupposes specific, non-arbitrary
assumptions about the underlying model (target paper, sect. 4.1).
This means that FBs are not theoretically neutral descriptions of a
model’s features. Furthermore, many descriptions of FBs in the
literature are not metaphysically neutral, either, because they
describe these blankets not just as properties of a model, but as
boundaries of physical systems. As the authors point out, this is
problematic to the extent that such metaphysical interpretations
are assumed to “follow from the formal details” (target paper,
sect. 4.2).
In the context of the free-energy principle (FEP), the notion of
an MB is not just used to describe perception-action loops in cer-
tain self-organising systems. The distinction between internal,
blanket, and external states is also invoked to describe the system’s
internal states as representations of probability distributions (of
external states, given blanket states). According to FEP, this
enables a dual description of the system’s dynamics: On the one
hand, in terms of the probabilistic evolution of internal states;
on the other hand, in terms of the evolution of probabilistic
beliefs about external states, parameterised by internal states
(see Friston, 2019; Friston, Wiese, & Hobson, 2020; see also
Kiefer, 2020; Sprevak, 2020).
Apart from claims about the boundaries of minds, most phil-
osophical claims about the relationships between life, mind, and
matter do not essentially draw on the MB construct provided
by FEP. Contrary to what Bruineberg et al. suggest, the main phil-
osophically fruitful idea afforded by FEP is that internal states can
be regarded as probability distributions over external states, given
sensory and active states (see the examples given below).
One could object that this presupposes the existence of a boun-
dary between a system and its environment – which, as the
authors argue, cannot be derived from FEP, without presupposing
strong metaphysical assumptions. We can grant this for the sake
of argument, because the assumption that there is a boundary
between a system and its environment is shared by many meta-
physical theories of the mind (e.g., functionalism and, arguably,
most versions of property physicalism), and none of these theo-
ries shows how to derive this partition from metaphysically
innocuous assumptions. As long as FEP-based philosophical
accounts avoid the mistake of assuming that FEP provides a meta-
physically neutral way of determining boundaries, it is therefore
not particularly problematic to posit the existence of a boundary
between internal and external states (i.e., if it is problematic, it is
problematic independently of FEP).
Bruineberg et al. argue that claims about the relationships
between life, mind, and matter must make further metaphysical
assumptions that do not follow from FEP. The authors worry
that these assumptions “may in the end be doing all of the interesting
work themselves” (target paper, sect. 7). I disagree with this state-
ment, but here I will focus on the concern, expressed by the authors,
that researchers mistakenly believe the FEP can be used to “settle
fundamental metaphysical questions” (target paper, sect. 1).
In contrast to what Bruineberg et al. suggest, the fact that addi-
tional assumptions are needed to contribute to metaphysical
debates
is
acknowledged
in
FEP-based
arguments
for
philosophical claims. Let me illustrate this with three examples
(involving my own work).
In Friston et al. (2020), we argue that the most parsimonious
interpretation of FEP’s dual description of internal states is a form
of property physicalism (reductive materialism) that we call
Markovian monism. Crucially, we do not assume that this inter-
pretation follows from the formalism itself: We consider and eval-
uate different metaphysical interpretations of the formalism
(Friston et al., 2020, pp. 17–21).
Wiese and Friston (2021a) argue that FEP is compatible with a
strong continuity between life and mind. Again, this is not
assumed to follow directly from the formalism. Rather, we explic-
itly point out that we presuppose a mechanistic account of phys-
ical computation and a representationalist interpretation of
predictive processing/active inference (Wiese & Friston, 2021a,
pp. 10–13).
In Wiese and Friston (2021b), we draw on the duality between
the probabilistic evolution of internal states and the evolution of
probabilistic beliefs (entailed by FEP) to argue: A self-organising
system is a conscious system (as opposed to a mere simulation of a
conscious system) only if computational correlates of conscious-
ness (CCCs) are instantiated by the physical processes that help
the system sustain its existence (for details, see Wiese & Friston,
2021b, pp. 22–24). FEP is here primarily invoked to provide a pre-
cise description of how a conscious system differs from a mere
simulation: The dynamics of CCCs (in terms of probabilistic
beliefs encoded by internal states) must be equivalent to the
dynamics of internal states in terms of the system’s non-
equilibrium steady-state density.
In sum, I disagree with the authors’ claim that FEP-based phil-
osophical debates about the relationships between life, mind, and
matter presuppose that FEP “can be used to settle fundamental
metaphysical questions” (target article, sect. 1). Does this mean
that the metaphysical heavy lifting is not done by FEP itself,
but by additional metaphysical assumptions? I don’t think so:
Philosophical arguments require clear concepts, and this is exactly
what FEP’s dual description of system dynamics affords.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–
2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. [arXiv preprint] arXiv:
1906.10184. https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. https://doi.
org/10.3390/e22050516
Kiefer, A. B. (2020). Psychophysical identity and free energy. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 17(169), 20200370. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0370
Sprevak, M. (2020). Two kinds of information processing in cognition. Review of Philosophy
and Psychology, 11(3), 591–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-019-00438-9
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021a). Examining the continuity between life and mind: Is
there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and representationality?
Philosophies, 6(11), 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies6010018
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021b). The neural correlates of consciousness under the free
energy principle: From computational correlates to computational explanation.
Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 2, 9. https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2021.81
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
65
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Markov blankets: Realism and our
ontological commitments
Danielle J. Williams
Department of Philosophy, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
heywilliams@ucdavis.edu
daniellejwilliams.com
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000255, e217
Abstract
The authors argue that their target is orthogonal to the realism
and instrumentalist debate. I argue that it is born directly from
it. While the distinction is helpful in illuminating how some
ontological commitments demand a theory of implementation,
it’s less clear whether different views cleanly map onto the epi-
stemic and metaphysical uses defined in the paper.
Bruineberg and colleagues argue there is a conflation between two
uses of Markov blankets. Some use Markov blankets in an episte-
mic way while others use them to make ontological claims about
the physical world. To solve this conflation, they propose that we
should classify the former as Pearl blankets and the latter as
Friston blankets. While this strategy provides a helpful labeling
scheme for different uses, a need for a distinction of this kind
is indicative of a more substantial problem. Thus, solving this
conflation targets a symptom of a broader problem rather than
targeting what is at issue in the first place. The authors note
that their discussion is orthogonal to the realism and instrumen-
talism debate in cognitive science, but I argue that their distinc-
tion is better understood as a case study born directly from this
debate. Computational models play different roles in our scientific
theories. We can understand them as purely formal, or we can
take them as literally representing physical systems. But, regard-
less of our position, we need to say something about how our for-
mal, non-physical models relate to the concrete, physical world.
Pearl blankets are Markov blankets used in the formal sense
while Friston blankets are taken to be or to genuinely represent
concrete boundaries. This distinction rests on how scientists use
Markov blankets in their theorizing. But distinguishing between
uses leads to a question of how we should frame the difference
between Pearl and Friston blankets as scientific posits, not just
how they are used within a theory. We could understand the dis-
tinction most straightforwardly as delineating between the formal
and the physical. One way to cash this out is by thinking about
Markov blankets at either the algorithmic level or the implemen-
tation level within the Marrian framework. Pearl blankets are
purely formal models at the algorithmic level deployed irrespective
of the nuts and bolts of the physical system while Friston blankets
are implementations of Markov blankets themselves. Because real-
ism proposes that our best scientific theories provide us with
knowledge of the objective world – which ontologically commits
us to the entities they posit – Markov blankets understood at the
implementation level are a bona fide example of a realist position
while Markov blankets understood at the algorithmic level and
deployed in the Pearl sense demonstrate an instrumentalist posi-
tion. Because of this, the distinction is not orthogonal to the real-
ism and instrumentalist debate: it’s a case study within it.
The authors argue that Friston users have an additional
explanatory task because we can’t simply read our ontology off
of the mathematics. What is needed is an explanation of how a
formal construct can be understood in a such metaphysically
laden way. This is exactly correct: To complete the theory an
account of implementation is required. What is needed for proper
reification is an account that maps the formal mathematical
model to the boundaries of the physical world. While it is still
an open question how we should formulate the implementation
relation, there are some views that could be adopted. One
approach is to argue that there must be some resemblance
between the model and the target system such that some specified
features are necessarily consistent between the two (Curtis-Trudel,
2021). Resemblance may help to alleviate some conceptual issues
regarding irregular boundaries. Another viable option comes
from Bogacz (2015). Bogacz proposes a theory of implementation
that maps different elements of the model onto different neural
populations within the cortex where the mapping between the
variables in the model and the elements of the neural circuitry
may not be “clean” but rather “messy” (Bogacz, p. 209).
Different views will map the formal computation onto the phys-
ical world in different ways, but what is important is that the rela-
tion between the formal model and the physical world is
accounted for.
One worry, though, is that the distinction between Pearl blan-
kets and Friston blankets is overly restrictive. There are additional
ways to understand how Markov blankets are used over and above
the Pearl and Friston senses. For example, one might be a realist
without being committed to physical implementation: It is possi-
ble to have ontological commitments to mathematical entities at
Marr’s algorithmic level without ontologically committing oneself
to implementation level features. Scientific realism proposes that
we are ontologically committed to the existence of the posits
that do explanatory work in our best scientific theories.
Depending on your view of explanation, non-causal, formal prop-
erties can play a robust explanatory role that meets the criterion
for scientific realism (Williams & Drayson, forthcoming). This
goes beyond the epistemic use and stops just short of the meta-
physical use blurring the distinction between Pearl and Friston
blankets by neglecting to carve out space for a mathematical
ontology. If one can hold ontological commitments about formal
entities, do they also have an additional explanatory debt? Do they
now count as Friston blankets? Because you can have ontological
commitments at both the formal and physical levels, the distinc-
tion between Pearl and Friston uses blurs and additional explan-
atory requirements become unclear.
Different uses of Markov blankets provide a case study within
the instrumentalism and realism debate in cognitive science.
Some accept the formal model as an epistemic tool while others
use the formal model to make ontological claims. As with all for-
mal models, for proper reification, some account of implementa-
tion is needed. But, once the distinction is considered within the
context of the realism and instrumentalism debate in which it
belongs, it become unclear that the distinction is able to do the
work that it sets out to do in the first place because it fails to
leave room for additional ways in which one can take on a realist
stance about formal models.
Financial support. This research received no specific grant from any fund-
ing agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest. None.
66
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Bogacz, R. (2015). A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling perception and
learning. Journal of Mathematics and Psychology, 76, 198–122.
Curtis-Trudel, A. (2021). Implementation as resemblance. Philosophy of Science, 88,
1021–1032.
Williams, D., & Drayson, Z. (forthcoming). The nature of the predictive mind: Realism
and instrumentalism in Bayesian cognitive science. In T. Cheng, R. Sato &
J. Hohwy (eds.) Expected experiences: The predictive mind in an uncertain world.
Routledge.
Causal surgery under a
Markov blanket
Daniel Yona
and Philip Robert Corlettb
aDepartment of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London
WC1E 7HX, UK and bDepartment of Psychiatry, Connecticut Mental Health
Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, USA
d.yon@bbk.ac.uk
philip.corlett@yale.edu
www.danielyon.com
https://medicine.yale.edu/lab/corlett/
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000218, e218
Abstract
Bruineberg et al. provide compelling clarity on the roles Markov
blankets could (and perhaps should) play in the study of life and
mind. However, here we draw attention to a further role blankets
might play: as a hypothesis about cognition itself. People and
other animals may use blanket-like representations to model
the boundary between themselves and their worlds.
In their impressive target article Bruineberg et al. describe two
radically different ways we can use Markov blankets. Pearl blan-
kets are tools that allow scientists to identify (in)dependence
between variables when modelling complex systems. In contrast,
Friston blankets are tools philosophers may use to parse the
world into internal and external states, distinguishing agents
from the rest of their worlds.
We wholeheartedly agree that this distinction is important, but
feel this dichotomy neglects a third possibility: blankets as a
hypothesis about cognition itself. In this way of thinking, cognis-
ing creatures may use processes that approximate Bayesian mod-
elling to track which states of the world depend on or are
independent of their actions. In so doing, these creatures con-
struct a cognitive blanket that captures their beliefs about what
they can and cannot control.
This cognitive blanket hypothesis makes distinctive predictions
about how agents estimate agency and control over their bodies
and the world. Many have suggested that humans and other ani-
mals determine what they can control by tracking correlations
between actions and outcomes (Dickinson & Balleine, 1994;
Yon, Bunce, & Press, 2020). However, building a cognitive blanket
– mapping causal dependencies between actions and states –
allows an agent to entertain counterfactual scenarios and to inter-
vene on the world to test connections implied by their model.
This kind of hypothesis testing – evocatively dubbed “causal sur-
gery” (Pearl, Glymour, & Jewell, 2016) – allows agents to refine
beliefs about their own causal power by acting on the world in
informative ways.
Psychologists can test for cognitive blankets by investigating
whether agents are sensitive to counterfactual information and
engage in “causal surgery” to test what they can and cannot con-
trol. In humans, there is some evidence of sensitivity to counter-
factual information – we feel a greater sense of control when we
believe we could have acted differently and this could have altered
outcomes (Kulakova, Khalighinejad, & Haggard, 2017). There is
also tentative evidence that human agents perform exploratory
actions when judging control over events in the external world
(Wen et al., 2020). This kind of exploration could be a hallmark
of “causal surgery” that tests hypotheses about our influence.
However, it is also possible that apparently exploratory behaviour
emerges from noise in decision and action systems (Findling,
Skvortsova, Dromnelle, Palminteri, & Wyart, 2019). Targeted
tests are thus needed to establish whether humans engage in gen-
uine causal surgery when estimating control – possibly by deter-
mining whether explorations about control depend on the agent’s
uncertainty about action–outcome relationships.
The same tests could also be applied by comparative cognitive
scientists. It has long been debated how far nonhuman animals rep-
resent their behaviour as “causes” of environmental changes (Penn
& Povinelli, 2007). In our way of thinking, empirical evidence of
causal surgery in different species would suggest the animal is con-
structing a cognitive blanket – testing hypotheses about how action
and outcome connect. As with humans, it would be important to
distinguish uncertainty-driven hypothesis testing in animals from
blind exploration. Such efforts could exploit apparent signatures
of “confidence” detectable in animals (Kepecs, Uchida, Zariwala,
& Mainen, 2008), or could investigate how animals respond to dif-
ferent varieties of environmental uncertainty (Yon & Frith, 2021).
For instance, if a creature’s exploratory behaviour responds to vol-
atility in action–outcome relationships, this may be indicative of
causal surgery: The active probing of the agent’s blanket-like
model to test what they can and cannot influence.
Furthermore, cognitive blankets could illuminate the distur-
bances of action awareness that occur in psychiatric illness.
Patients with psychosis often develop delusions about action
and control: They claim to control things they objectively cannot
(grandiosity) and deny controlling some actions they have genu-
inely authored (passivity; Frith, Blakemore, and Wolpert, 2000).
These strange beliefs might arise from a disordered blanket that
draws the boundary between world and agent in an unusual
way (much like that depicted in Bruineberg et al.’s Fig. 7c). If
intervention and exploration are essential ingredients in building
up an accurate cognitive blanket, it may be fruitful for clinical sci-
entists to investigate processes of causal surgery in psychosis. If
these patients are less likely to intervene on the world to test
what they can control, unusual beliefs about the self and the
world may persist unchecked. Indeed, one could speculate that
a vicious cycle obtains in psychosis, where negative symptoms
dampening the drive to act (e.g., apathy, catatonia) rob patients
of action–outcome experiences that could challenge positive
symptoms
(i.e.,
delusions
about
action;
see
Bortolotti
&
Broome, 2012; Corlett, Honey, & Fletcher, 2016). We note with
interest the role that dopamine signalling appears to play in learn-
ing, confidence, causal inference, and their derangement in
psychosis-like states (Redgrave & Gurney, 2006; Schmack, Bosc,
Ott, Sturgill, & Kepecs, 2021; Sharpe et al., 2017).
Our third way of thinking about blankets – as representations
in the heads of agents – departs from both Friston and Pearl
Commentary/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
67
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

blankets. Even if Friston blankets cannot pick out the objective
boundaries between agents and their worlds, blanket-like compu-
tations may still be the processes by which some creatures (subop-
timally) identify where these boundaries lie.
Moreover, the ability of scientists to model an agent using
Pearl blankets cannot tell us whether the agent uses a cognitive
blanket to model itself. For example, creatures that do not build
a cognitive blanket may rely on simple, lean psychological pro-
cesses like associative learning to navigate their environments
(i.e., without building a causal graph). However, these simpler
psychological processes are only adaptive because they also gear
creatures
into
the
causal
structure
of
their
environments
(Papineau & Heyes, 2006). Simple creatures may thus be well
modelled by Pearl blankets, even if they do not have a cognitive
blanket of their own.
In conclusion, Bruineberg et al. provide an important perspec-
tive on how scientists and philosophers should use Markov blan-
kets to describe the boundaries between agents and their worlds.
However, it is also important to consider (and test) whether
blanket-like representations are at the heart of how agents con-
struct these boundaries in their own minds.
Financial support. The authors received no specific funding to support this
work.
Conflict of interest. None.
References
Bortolotti, L., & Broome, M. R. (2012). Affective dimensions of the phenomenon of dou-
ble bookkeeping in delusions. Emotion Review, 4(2), 187–191. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1754073911430115
Corlett, P. R., Honey, G. D., & Fletcher, P. C. (2016). Prediction error, ketamine and psy-
chosis: An updated model. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30(11), 1145–1155. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0269881116650087
Dickinson, A., & Balleine, B. (1994). Motivational control of goal-directed action. Animal
Learning & Behavior, 22(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03199951
Findling, C., Skvortsova, V., Dromnelle, R., Palminteri, S., & Wyart, V. (2019).
Computational noise in reward-guided learning drives behavioral variability in volatile
environments. Nature Neuroscience, 22(12), 2066–2077. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-019-0518-9
Frith, C. D., Blakemore, S. J., & Wolpert, D. M. (2000). Abnormalities in the awareness
and control of action. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B, Biological Sciences, 355(1404), 1771–1788. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2000.0734
Kepecs, A., Uchida, N., Zariwala, H. A., & Mainen, Z. F. (2008). Neural correlates, com-
putation and behavioural impact of decision confidence. Nature, 455(7210), 227–231.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07200
Kulakova, E., Khalighinejad, N., & Haggard, P. (2017). I could have done otherwise:
Availability of counterfactual comparisons informs the sense of agency. Consciousness
and Cognition, 49, 237–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.01.013
Papineau, D., & Heyes, C. (2006). Rational or associative? Imitation in Japanese quail. In
M. Nudds & S. Hurley (Eds.), Rational animals (pp. 187–195). Oxford University Press.
Pearl, J., Glymour, M., & Jewell, N. P. (2016). Causal inference in statistics: A primer.
Wiley.
Penn, D. C., & Povinelli, D. J. (2007). Causal cognition in human and nonhuman ani-
mals: A comparative, critical review. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 97–118.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085555
Redgrave, P., & Gurney, K. (2006). The short-latency dopamine signal: A role in discov-
ering novel actions? Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 7(12), 967–975. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nrn2022
Schmack, K., Bosc, M., Ott, T., Sturgill, J. F., & Kepecs, A. (2021). Striatal dopamine medi-
ates hallucination-like perception in mice. Science (New York, N.Y.), 372(6537),
eabf4740. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf4740
Sharpe, M. J., Chang, C. Y., Liu, M. A., Batchelor, H. M., Mueller, L. E., Jones, J. L., …
Schoenbaum, G. (2017). Dopamine transients are sufficient and necessary for acqui-
sition of model-based associations. Nature Neuroscience, 20(5), 735–742. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nn.4538
Wen, W., Shibata, H., Ohata, R., Yamashita, A., Asama, H., & Imamizu, H. (2020). The
active sensing of control difference. iScience, 23(5), 101112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
isci.2020.101112
Yon, D., Bunce, C., & Press, C. (2020). Illusions of control without delusions of grandeur.
Cognition, 205, 104429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104429
Yon, D., & Frith, C. D. (2021). Precision and the Bayesian brain. Current Biology, 31(17),
R1026–R1032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.07.044
Authors’ Response
The Emperor Is Naked: Replies to
commentaries on the target article
Jelle Bruineberga
, Krzysztof Dołęgab
,
Joe Dewhurstc
and Manuel Baltierid,e
aDepartment of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia;
bInstitut für Philosophie II, Fakultät für Philosophie und
Erziehungswissenschaft, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany;
cFakultät für Philosophie, Wissenschaftstheorieund Religionswissenschaft,
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, 80539 Munich, Germany; dAraya, Inc., Tokyo, Japan and eSchool of
Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK
jelle.bruineberg@mq.edu.au
krzysztof.dolega@rub.de
joseph.e.dewhurst@gmail.com
manuel_baltieri@araya.org
doi:10.1017/S0140525X22000656, e219
Abstract
The 35 commentaries cover a wide range of topics and take
many different stances on the issues explored by the target arti-
cle. We have organised our response to the commentaries
around three central questions: Are Friston blankets just Pearl
blankets? What ontological and metaphysical commitments
are implied by the use of Friston blankets? What kind of explan-
atory work are Friston blankets capable of? We conclude our
reply with a short critical reflection on the indiscriminate use
of both Markov blankets and the free energy principle.
R1. Introduction
“What’s this?” thought the Emperor. “I can’t see anything. This is terrible!
Am I a fool? Am I unfit to be the Emperor? What a thing to happen to me
of all people! – Oh! It’s very pretty,” he said. “It has my highest approval.”
And he nodded approbation at the empty loom. Nothing could make him
say that he couldn’t see anything.
In H. C. Andersen’s folktale The Emperor’s New Clothes, two
swindlers convince the king to let them make him a set of special
clothes that is invisible to anyone who is either too stupid or
incompetent. One by one, the Emperor’s advisors go and check
with the swindlers and, afraid of being thought a fool, pretend
they see the excellent patterns and beautiful colours of the new
garments. When the Emperor goes out to show the new robe to
his citizens, it is only an innocent child who bursts out: “But he
hasn’t got anything on” – and even then, the Emperor proudly
continues his procession (Anderson, 1837).
Both Raja, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson (Raja et al.) and
Hesp ask what part of the folktale we are alluding to with the title
of our paper. Raja et al. had expected us to “follow the child’s
68
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

lead” and expose Friston blankets as indeed being nothing more
than the Emperor’s New Clothes, while Hesp asks us to clarify
whether
we
intended
to
attribute
intentional
deceit
to
free energy principle (FEP) researchers. Let us start by clarifying
our position here, which will provide the leitmotif for the rest of
our response. First of all, we would like to be clear that our crit-
icism is levelled against the content of academic proposals and the
way certain concepts are used, not against the people themselves.
To stay with the metaphor, our target article focused on the puta-
tive patterns and colours of the clothes, not on the Emperor and
his courtiers. Second, there is an important distinction between
intentional deceit and what Frankfurt (2005) refers to with the
technical term bullshitting. Deceit requires knowing the truth
and intentionally hiding it from others, while bullshitting involves
attempting to persuade without taking truth into consideration.
Importantly, bullshitting can be done unintentionally. One way
in which bullshitting might happen unintentionally is when spec-
ulations are underconstrained, as is sometimes the case when
mathematical constructs are applied outside of their original for-
mal context. In such scenarios, the argumentative structure
resembles that of ordinary science, but fails to engage meaning-
fully with the underlying formal constructs. The result is armchair
philosophy dressed up as an empirical research programme,
which Allen goes so far as to label as “cargo cult” science.
Third, the FEP research programme has been an ambitious,
daring, and speculative endeavour from the start. This is what
attracted each of the authors of the target article to work on the
FEP in the first place: the potential for a formalisation of big phil-
osophical concepts like agency, intentionality, life, and conscious-
ness. But in order to make this work, it is necessary to intricately
weave together mathematical modelling, philosophy of science,
philosophy of mind, and empirical research. This interdisciplinar-
ity, along with the rapid pace at which papers on the FEP are pub-
lished, introduces vulnerabilities: it is a difficult literature to keep
up with, and even experts can sometimes be confronted with
things that they do not fully understand. It was this feeling of
epistemic dissonance, central to the Emperor’s New Clothes,
that we wanted to allude to with our title. Andersen’s folktale cap-
tures a common sentiment among those getting interested in the
FEP: am I too incompetent to understand this, are the conclu-
sions that are being drawn not supported by the theory?
Our aim for the target article was to critically assess the current
state of both philosophical and scientific literature using Markov
blankets within the FEP: what are the assumptions required to
transform Markov blankets from a technical notion in statistics
and probability theory to an ontological notion used to settle phil-
osophical and scientific disputes? In other words, can we at least
agree on what kind of clothes the Emperor is supposed to be
wearing?
In analysing the literature, we found a number of technical slip-
pages and conceptual unclarities: an ambiguity between Markov
(Pearl) blankets as modelling tools and Markov (Friston) blankets
as real-world boundaries, an ambiguity between instrumentalist,
realist, and literalist statements about the latter Friston blanket con-
struct, and a conflation of different types of explanatory project that
might use either kind of blanket. We hoped that the range of
options we presented in the target article could serve as an open
invitation for those working with the FEP to make clear what
their commitments really are, and how those commitments can
support the claims they make.
We are extremely grateful that this challenge has been taken up
by a great number of commentators, from both inside and outside
the literature on the FEP. We would like to thank the authors of
all 35 commentaries for their insightful critiques and friendly sug-
gestions. The commentaries cover a wide range of topics and take
many different stances: some push back against our framing of the
problems surrounding Markov blankets and the FEP, some sug-
gest ways to fix the problems we identified, and yet others high-
light a number of additional problems. In Table R1 we present
a thematic overview of the commentaries as we understood them.
The range of attitudes adopted in the commentaries shows just
how widespread disagreement and confusion is in the FEP litera-
ture about the conceptual, metaphysical, and methodological
commitments implied by the use of Markov blankets. Crucially,
the issues we raised in the target article are interrelated: you
can only claim that the structures identified in your model
carve out real boundaries in the world if the mapping between
model and target is structure preserving (see Parr). The useful-
ness of instrumentally treating organisms as if they are models
of their environments does not imply that it will also be useful
to treat them as if their physical boundaries emerge within this
model. The proven utility of Markov blankets as modelling
tools in the probabilistic inference literature does not directly sup-
port the claim that to be a thing is to have a Markov blanket.
There is a thin line between a scientific endeavour whose meta-
phors are pushed just a bit too far, and a heavy-duty metaphysical
theory dressed up as an empirical research programme. To better
capture the diversity of views on offer we have divided our reply
into several, mutually supporting sections, with a number of com-
mentaries being mentioned in multiple sections.
R2. Are Friston blankets just Pearl blankets?
The first major issue we would like to tackle in our reply to the
commentaries is the distinction (or lack thereof) between Pearl
and Friston blankets. One of the major contributions of the target
article was to make explicit the previously unacknowledged shift
from Pearl blankets to Friston blankets. A number of commentar-
ies argue that the two kinds of entities are, in fact, cut from the
same cloth, and that our distinction just captures two different
ways of referring to the same Markov blanket formalism.
Parr and Friston point out that a Markov [Pearl] blanket is
defined in terms of conditional probabilities and, therefore, can
only be delineated in the context of a model described in terms
of probability distributions. Whether the distributions involved
will be sourced from a steady-state density of some dynamical sys-
tem, or just some static model (i.e., one not evolving over time)
should not make a difference for the identification of a Markov
[Pearl] blanket. Ramstead claims that Friston blankets simply
are Markov blankets, that is, that Friston blankets and Pearl blan-
kets are the same abstract mathematical objects denoting condi-
tional independence, deployed in different modelling contexts.
Hesp concurs and points out that much of the confusion we iden-
tified stems from differing background assumptions about the
kinds of causal relationships and types of systems that Friston
and others are trying to study. This is echoed by Kiverstein
and Kirchhoff who write that “Friston blankets are interpreta-
tions given of the Markov blankets formalism in the context of
the FEP that purport to describe autopoietic processes.” But are
Friston blankets and Pearl blankets really one and the same thing?
Our answer is a resounding no, and we also deny that there is
any straightforward route to derive Friston blankets from Pearl
blankets. The difference between Pearl blankets and Friston blan-
kets is not simply due to differing causal commitments, as
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
69
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

suggested by Btesh, Bramley, and Lagnado (Btesh et al.), since
the use of Markov blankets (Pearl or Friston) is not tied to models
interpreted under some causal semantics (Pearl, 2009). Similarly,
commentaries such as Hesp, Kiverstein and Kirchhoff, and
Wiese that either invoke, or seem to imply the necessity of, cau-
sality in Bayesian models, fall short of explaining where this
causal interpretation comes from in the first place. Furthermore,
Friston blankets are not just Pearl blankets transformed by tech-
nical assumptions (cf. Biehl, Pollock, & Kanai, 2021), or but-
tressed with additional philosophical commitments. In his
commentary, Friston correctly argues that Markov (i.e., Pearl)
blankets are merely statements about conditional independence,
such that for generic Markov chains “the ‘present’ is a Markov
[Pearl] blanket that separates the ‘past’ from the ‘future’.”
However, this is apparently not what a Friston blanket is, as
Friston himself (Friston, Da Costa, & Parr, 2021a) writes:
“For Markovian systems, the states at the current time are the blanket
states that separate states in the future from states in the past. However,
these are not Markov [Pearl] blankets of the steady-state density.”
This tells us that the past and future of a random variable, which
would be part of a “naive” Pearl blanket in dynamic settings
(Pearl, Geiger, & Verma, 1989), are not part of a Friston blanket.
To really get to the core definition of what a Friston blanket is, we
can further look at a reply to the example found in Biehl et al.
(2021) that describes their mathematical assumptions. Friston
et al. (2021a) once again helpfully explains that
“[…]; the FEP only applies to Markov blankets that emerge under sparse
flows; in particular, when autonomous states are uncoupled from external
states (by definition).”
Here, “sparse flows” refers to a specific coupling structure
required between partitions (internal, external, active, and sensory
states) in dynamical (i.e., time-evolving) settings (see equation [7]
in Friston et al. [2021a] or equation [12] in Friston et al. [2022]).
More recently this also goes by the name of the “sparse coupling
conjecture” (Friston, Heins, Ueltzhöffer, Da Costa, & Parr, 2021b;
Friston et al., 2022-version 1, removed in version 2). In practice,
this has so far been presented as an arbitrary assumption, a con-
jecture, that excludes examples such as the one given by Biehl
et al. (2021) from falling within the scope of the FEP.
Furthermore, there are multiple ways to generalise conditional
independence relations to dynamic Bayesian networks,1 which
ultimately means that Friston blankets are not just the natural,
or even unique, description of conditional independence applied
to dynamical systems. Contrary to Ramstead’s claims, there are
reasons to distinguish Pearl and Friston blankets: a Pearl blanket
is just a statement about conditional independence, while a
Friston blanket is a finely crafted posit that includes both condi-
tional independence and a number of non-trivial additional
assumptions that are necessary in order for the construct to
play a particular role in the wider FEP theory.
As we have already seen, the debate over the distinction
between Pearl blankets and Friston blankets reveals cracks in
the conceptual foundations of the wider free energy framework,
with past co-authors disagreeing among each other about the
legitimacy of this distinction. Aguilera and Buckley and Virgo,
Rosas, and Biehl (Virgo et al.) both speak in favour of the dis-
tinction. As these authors point out, finding Markov blankets
that can delineate boundaries or sensorimotor loops within the
bounds of the assumptions made by the FEP is far more difficult
than commonly thought. Quite tellingly, Friston himself seems to
be conflicted about the difference between the two kinds of blan-
kets. On the one hand, he writes that “Pearl and Friston blankets
are just Markov blankets in the usual Markovian sense (Pearl,
2009).” On the other, he follows this directly with a rhetorical
question that undermines his previous claim: “Are Markov blan-
kets used in an ontological sense under the free energy principle
(FEP)? Yes.” This statement not only undermines the previous
one, as differentiating between the purely technical and more
Table R1. Thematic overview of commentaries
Theme
Focus
Commentaries
Formalism
Markov blanket formalism
Virgo, Rosas, and Biehl; Friston; Aguilera and Buckley
Free energy and physics
Spector and Graham; Stoffregen and Heath; Ramstead
Spatial boundaries
Parr
Philosophy of science
Realism, instrumentalism,
and literalism
Sánchez-Cañizares; Kiefer and Hohwy; Williams; Kiverstein and Kirchhoff; Ramstead; Rorot,
Korbak, Litwin, and Miłkowski; Hipólito and van Es; Friston; Colombo; Seth, Korbak, and
Tschantz; Wiese; Menary and Gillett
Causality and interventions
Btesh, Bramley, and Lagnado; Yon and Corlett
Reification
Andrews
Unification
Gomez-Marin
Models and abstraction
Nave; Spiegel; Ciaunica; Beck
Philosophy of mind
and life
Internalism and externalism
Facchin; Menary and Gillett
Autopoiesis
Nave; Suzuki, Miyahara, and Miyazono; Raja, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson; Kiefer and
Hohwy; Dengsø, Robertson, and Constant
Ecological psychology
Stoffregen and Heath; Raja, Baggs, Chemero, and Anderson
Agents and selves
Sprevak; Colling; Seth, Korbak and Tschantz; Yon and Corlett; Wiese
Interdisciplinary
Boundary objects
Fox; Allen
Evolution
Veit and Browning
70
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

metaphysically laden uses of the Markov blanket formalism was
the whole point of the target article, but also undercuts
Andrews’ accusation that we somehow misread or misinterpret
the free energy theorists’ metaphysical intentions.
A similar kind of confusion can be found in Fox’s proposal
that the distinction between the two kinds of blankets will only
lead to further debate and will not facilitate modelling complex
systems. Instead, he advocates for the position that “it may be use-
ful to frame systems in terms of constructs such as Markov blan-
kets, but without applying all technical details and associated
mathematics.” We fail to see how this is a more constructive sol-
ution or how it could help to alleviate, rather than exacerbate, the
problems Fox attributes to our account. After all, a lack of clear
distinction between formal technicalities and ontological commit-
ments is what got the field into the situation it is in now. It is to
the latter topic that we turn next, namely the metaphysics and
ontology implied by the use of Friston blankets to demarcate
worldly boundaries.
R3. The metaphysics and ontology of Friston blankets
Several of the commentaries on our target article focused on the
metaphysical and ontological aspects of our critique, namely
whether the use of Friston blankets to demarcate real-world
boundaries requires a commitment to either literalism or realism
about these constructs, and also what exactly (scientific) realism
about theoretical entities of this kind really commits one to.
One initial point we want to pick up on is the importance of dis-
tinguishing between local scientific realism (i.e., about our attitude
towards some particular theoretical entity, such as Friston blan-
kets)
and
global
scientific
realism
(i.e.,
about
our
attitude towards theoretical entities in general). It is possible to
be a global scientific realist while still advocating anti-realism or
instrumentalism towards some particular theoretical construct,
which is the position we took ourselves to be suggesting towards
the end of the target article. We did not, as Kiverstein and
Kirchhoff suggest, intend to argue against scientific realism in
general, or even to enthusiastically endorse instrumentalism
about
Friston
blankets,
as
both
Sánchez-Cañizares
and
Colombo took us to be doing (rather, we think that instrumental-
ism might be the best option if one is really committed to making
use of Friston blankets, instead of simply discarding the construct
as unworkable). Other commentators, such as Andrews, Hipólito
and van Es, and Ramstead, do seem to be advocating for a gene-
ral anti-realism or instrumentalism, which would render the par-
ticular question of the status of Friston blankets somewhat less
pressing (if all theoretical entities are just instrumental tools,
then the ontological status of any particular theoretical entity
does not matter so much, or perhaps at all).
This brings us to the next point we would like to comment on,
which is that we were quite struck by the sheer diversity of onto-
logical attitudes exhibited by proponents (or at least defenders) of
both the FEP, and the role of Markov blankets within it. These
range from a steadfast realism of some variety, as in the cases
of Kiefer and Hohwy, Kiverstein and Kirchhoff, and Wiese,
the more cautious realism exhibited by Sprevak and Seth,
Korbak, and Tschantz (Seth et al.), all the way to the full-blown
instrumentalism
of
Andrews,
Hipólito
and
van
Es,
and
Ramstead. At the very least we hope that our target article, and
the commentaries it elicited, have demonstrated that the ontolog-
ical status of Markov blankets within the FEP is far from settled,
and that those working within the framework might do well to
better communicate their ontological commitments, both to
each other and to the outside world.
In his commentary on our target article Friston claims that
Markov blankets “are deployed in various scientific fields to
‘carve nature at its joints’,” while nonetheless conceding that
“there are many ways of carving nature at its joints,” which
seems to us to be at best hedging the ontological status of
Friston blankets. He also expresses yet another ontological option,
which is the view that Friston blankets are literally real because the
real world itself is at base composed of mathematical structures of
some kind. This is certainly not scientific realism in the tradi-
tional sense, but rather something closer to the “it-from-bit”
hypothesis that the universe is fundamentally computational or
informational, defended for example by Wheeler (1982), Zuse
(1982), and Wolfram (2002). Menary and Gillett (2020) have
already indicated that there are many unanswered questions
about using this kind of formal ontology to ground Markov
blankets, and in their commentary (Menary & Gillett) they
raise further insightful issues with Friston’s claim that Markov
blankets could ever be used to carve nature at its joints.
Colombo also suggests interpreting the literalist ontology in this
way, and doubts whether a purely instrumentalist interpretation
of Friston blankets is either as successful or uninteresting as we
made it out to be.
What this points to is the distinct lack of clarity surrounding
Friston’s own ontological commitments, which appear to range
from fully instrumentalist (e.g., Ramstead, Friston, & Hipólito,
2020) to fully realist (e.g., Friston, Wiese, & Hobson [2020],
and in his response to our target article). Insofar as Friston’s
work on Markov blankets in the FEP is the canonical starting
point for much of the research that we discussed in the target arti-
cle, any appeal to the “standard” use of Markov blankets in the
framework is going to be necessarily vague. This is not to say
that everyone working on the FEP must agree about their ontolog-
ical commitments (far from it, why not let a thousand flowers
bloom), but rather that researchers must be careful to make
their own commitments clear and not to assume that this is a set-
tled question on which they can simply adopt the party line.
Several commentators suggested that our three-fold distinction
between literalism, realism, and instrumentalism might either be
too strict or unclear in some respects – we freely admit to both
charges, and we are happy to see the conversation that we started
being carried forward in a positive direction. Of particular note
here is Seth et al., who proposed that it might be better to
think in terms of a spectrum of options ranging from literalism
to instrumentalism, with various forms of realism lying in
between. We are sympathetic to this suggestion (see Fig. R1),
but we disagree with their categorisation of Pearl blankets at the
instrumentalist end of this spectrum and Friston blankets at the
realist end. Pearl blankets, as we understand them, are indeed
just a statistical modelling tool, but such a tool could be used to
identify “real” features of the world (just probably not ones that are
directly equivalent to the blankets themselves); and while Friston
blankets are intended as a more metaphysically robust entity, one
could treat this entity in an instrumentalist fashion, as several of
the other commentaries demonstrate. The distinction between
Pearl blankets and Friston blankets does not directly correspond to
any particularpositionalongthe realism–instrumentalism spectrum;
one can be a global instrumentalist and make use of Friston blankets,
or a global realist and make use of Pearl blankets. A similar claim is
made by Williams, who understands our distinction “as delineating
between the formal and the physical.” Williams expands on this by
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
71
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proposing that the two kinds of blankets are best understood as being
located on different levels of Marr’s computational analysis.
However, we think that viewing our distinction through the lens of
Marr’s heuristic division can only blur the boundaries between the
instrumental and realist uses of the Friston blanket construct. The
fact that a problem solved by a target system can be described
using a Markovian formalism does not require a commitment to
Markov blankets being explicitly represented (or instantiated) by
the system itself. It is only once theorists commit to the target system
explicitly possessing or instantiating Markov blankets, either as rep-
resentations or boundaries, that we can talk about realism.
Some commentators also questioned whether our analysis of
the metaphysical uses and misuses of Markov blankets really
hits the mark. Kiverstein and Kirchhoff argue that our critique
relies on what they call the “literalist fallacy,” the assumption
that realism about the boundaries picked out by Friston blankets
implies a belief in the literal existence of Markov blankets in the
physical world. This latter belief is indeed what we meant by “lit-
eralism,” and at least some proponents of the FEP seem to be
committed to it. It is hard to see what else is meant when, for
example, Allen and Friston (2018) write “the very existence of a
system depends upon conserving its boundary, known technically
as a Markov blanket” (emphasis added) – even if the authors
intended to say something else, the most natural reading here is
a literalist one, where the physical boundary of a system is iden-
tified as a Markov blanket. On the other hand, we by no means
wanted to deny the possibility of a more moderate “realism”
about the kinds of boundaries that might be picked out by
Friston blankets. However, even this more moderate view is not
without issues of its own, which we discussed extensively in the
target article, and were also mentioned in some of the commen-
taries. These issues are independent of a literalist interpretation of
Friston blankets, and therefore cannot be dismissed by appealing
to a “literalist fallacy.” At the very least, realism about Friston
blankets requires a formalism that guarantees a stable and non-
arbitrary mapping between formal model and target system. As
it currently stands, the proposed formalism has only been applied
to toy models in which such a mapping is already taken for
granted, and we have identified in our target article a number
of issues that make a stable and non-arbitrary mapping highly
unlikely in more realistic (and thus more interesting) cases (see
also Aguilera, Millidge, Tschantz, & Buckley, 2021).
Meanwhile, Andrews is concerned that while we accuse some
proponents of FEP of reifying the Markov blanket construct, we
fail to give a clear definition of reification and risk conflating it
with the metaphysically innocent employment of idealised mod-
els. We are happy to at least provisionally accept Andrews’ pro-
posed definition of reification as “the mismapping of formal
structure onto target phenomena – or theoretical representation
thereof – in a manner that leads us to misapprehend the causal
structure of nature,” although we might add that it is not just
the causal structure that is at stake here, but rather the structure
of the real world more generally (whether or not that structure
is either primarily or wholly causal is a further question that we
will not attempt to answer here). With this definition on the
table, Andrews then argues that our accusations of reification
miss the mark, as the use of Markov blankets in the FEP is in
fact a “mere modelling gambit” that does not aim to directly
uncover
the
causal
structure
of
the
world.
Furthermore,
Andrews claims that the FEP (or variational free energy minimi-
zation) framework does not even in general aim to “generate
knowledge of natural systems,” but is rather just a modelling
framework that must be coupled with further auxiliary assump-
tions before it can generate empirically testable hypotheses. This
approach might be congruent with what some FEP theorists are
doing, and we applaud them for exercising epistemic caution
with their uses of the framework, but it seems clear to us that oth-
ers have taken it far more literally than this, especially when it
comes to the use of Friston blankets to demarcate worldly bound-
aries. Andrews also suggests that our own claim that Markov blan-
kets are “substantiated by the empirical literature” is a case of
reification, as formal tools of this kind are not the sort of thing
that can be empirically substantiated. Our claim here was not
that Markov blankets are empirically substantiated in the sense
of being proven to exist, but rather that their repeated application
in the empirical literature vindicates their usefulness as a model-
ling tool – but we are happy to acknowledge that we may have
misspoken when making this point, and would invite those
whom we have accused of reification to do the same, or else to
explain more precisely what they think Friston blankets can tell
us about the world.
Finally, some commentaries (Beck; Ciaunica; and Dengsø,
Robertson, & Constant [Dengsø et al.]) discuss the metaphysical
possibilities afforded by Pearl blankets and Friston blankets,
focusing on the question of how to legitimately connect the
map with the territory. Ciaunica emphasises the role of the cartog-
rapher (i.e., the modeller) in this process, connecting this to older
debates between Plato and Aristotle, and somewhat more recent
debates between Schlick and Neurath. Beck similarly emphasises
the importance of the domain of application of a model, but ulti-
mately considers “metaphysics a pointless endeavor,” since “all we
have are models.” While we agree that it is important to ask who
is using a model and for what purpose, we also think that it is
important to make clear any theoretical presuppositions about
how models connect to the world, that is, what metaphysical or
ontological attitude one is taking towards the claims made
about Markov blankets and the FEP. Dengsø et al. argue that in
order to account for the dynamics of living systems (and to
Figure R1. Comparison of the positions espoused
by
some
of
the
commentaries
with
regards
to their metaphysical commitments to blanket
constructs.
72
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

avoid what they call preformationism), Markov blanket theorists
need to adopt a process ontology. This is an intriguing option,
furthermore demonstrating that many of the interesting philo-
sophical moves available to proponents of FEP are not intrinsic
to the framework itself, but rather involve additional metaphysical
presuppositions that are necessary in order to make the use of
Friston blankets plausible and coherent. In the next section we
will accordingly consider what work, if any, Friston blankets
alone are able to do.
R4. What Friston blankets are not doing
Having defended the validity of our distinction between Pearl and
Friston blankets, it is finally time to consider what kind of work
Friston blankets, at least in their present form, actually can, and
more crucially cannot, do. For instance, the causal language
adopted by several commentaries reveals the confusion we find
when inference with a model is treated as equivalent to inference
within a model (as explicitly done by Kiverstein & Kirchhoff,
Hesp, and Wiese, and implicitly suggested by Friston and
Parr). This confusion stems from using dependencies intrinsic
to models, for example, the fact that changing variable A has an
effect on variable B, to make causal claims about the world extrin-
sic to that model. We can unpack this better by appealing to an
example from Beer’s (2004, 2014, 2020) studies of stable patterns
in the Game of Life. Do the five rules constituting the game
describe interactions that can be treated as causal within the
Game of Life universe? Yes, they do. Do the same rules count
as causal in our own universe? No, they don’t, since the structures
described by the Game of Life cannot be straightforwardly
mapped onto the structures of our universe. That being said, we
could find applications of the Game of Life where it would
make sense to treat it as a model of causal relationships between
entities in the real world. However, this would only mean that the
game has been given a causal interpretation that can also be
applied to the dynamics of our world, not that it straightforwardly
captures what causation is, or that the Game of Life can by itself
be used to discover anything about our world.
Looking closer at the technical commitments defining Friston
blankets, the steady-state assumption behind the FEP is perhaps
the most controversial one. This assumption naturally leads to
questions regarding the relevance of evolutionary dynamics and
history more generally (Veit & Browning), given the asymptotic
independence on initial conditions implied by the even stronger
conditions of ergodicity and weak-mixing often assumed by the
FEP (see also Di Paolo, Thompson, & Beer [2022] for a related
discussion, and Da Costa, Friston, Heins, & Pavliotis [2021] for
a technical treatment without assuming ergodicity and weak-
mixing, but retaining stationarity). The detailed commentary by
Virgo et al. demonstrates that a definition of blankets based on
steady-state distributions ultimately leads to systems without
memory. As clearly portrayed in their example, this is because
of the data processing inequality (Cover & Thomas, 2006) applied
to Friston blankets, explaining how the internal states of a system
of interest (perhaps an agent) cannot store any more information
than is present in their current observations at any one point in
time. This leads to a severe implication that systems under
Friston blankets can only do inference on information located
in the perceptual present – past experiences carry no weight for
such systems. The only way to allow for some form of memory
is to essentially break the stationarity assumption, at least tempo-
rarily, as seen in Parr, Da Costa, Heins, Ramstead, and Friston
(2021). The implication of breaking this assumption is that the
FEP is actually doing its most interesting work away from steady
state, and therefore without Friston blankets. This seems to con-
tradict the large body of work on models based on active inference
formulations where past information appears to play a crucial role
(see for instance Baltieri & Isomura, 2021; Friston et al., 2015,
2017a, 2017b; Isomura, Shimazaki, & Friston, 2022; Lanillos
et al., 2021; Mazzaglia, Verbelen, Çatal, & Dhoedt, 2022; Parr &
Friston, 2019 – to give only a few recent examples). It is crucial,
however, to highlight that the stipulative nature of Friston blan-
kets is not playing any role in these models – active inference
can and does exist without Friston blankets.
The so-called “sparse coupling” assumption, a conjecture that
essentially allows the definition of Friston blankets for dynamics
starting from Pearl blankets on a steady-state distribution, also
leads to questionable consequences. Aguilera and Buckley ana-
lyse the validity of this assumption, arguing that its high specific-
ity makes it unlikely to realistically characterise relevant (natural
and physical) boundaries. In discussing a different derivation of
Friston blankets, namely an asymptotic approximation to a weak-
coupling equilibrium (Friston et al., 2021b), they also analyse how
sparse coupling, however unlikely, is necessary to avoid more dra-
matic shortcomings: conditional independencies that cannot be
guaranteed because of time-dependent relations across different
components of a system (cf. Virgo et al.). Altogether, we have
an assumption that appears to be essential to Friston blankets,
sparse coupling, that may unfortunately just not be able to capture
any interesting properties of sensorimotor loops, agents, or living
systems.
Moving beyond these somewhat technical details, we believe
that there are even more fundamental grounds to question the
role of Friston blankets within and beyond the FEP. The main
worry is captured well by claims that Markov blankets (whether
Pearl or Friston) are “formal tools […that] ‘carve nature at its
joints’” (Friston). In the target article, we present and discuss
different examples that show why this is simply not the case. In
the primordial soup model (Friston, 2013), the experimenter
chooses which set of states to designate as internal and which
as external, essentially determining a priori where the blanket
ought to be. Similarly, in the patellar reflex example, which should
be properly and more correctly understood following Spiegel’s
proposed alternative setup, the experimenter once again chooses
what constitutes the set of internal states from the vantage
point of a scientist who could be asking different possible ques-
tions. Contrary to what Hesp suggests, our goal with this example
was to highlight the ambiguous role of co-parents within a single
time slice (as required by Friston blankets), not to look at depen-
dencies across time steps (which are not a part of Friston blankets
anyway, as explained above following Friston et al., 2021a).
Friston seems to imply that this aspect of experimenter (or mod-
eller) choice is a feature of his formulation, but as Suzuki,
Miyahara, and Miyazono (Suzuki et al.) point out, this sidesteps
the real question of whether Friston blankets are patterns already
present in the “natural” cloth, or patterns that are intentionally
introduced by an external agent (either by the tailors themselves,
or perhaps just by the imagination of the courtiers).
In a series of commentaries addressing this very issue, it seems
to be widely recognised, and in some cases welcomed (Andrews;
Hipólito & van Es; Kiverstein & Kirchhoff; Sprevak; Wiese),
that Friston blankets are not foundational to any theory of sys-
tems, things, sensorimotor loops, or agents. The heavy lifting is
done by a scientist injecting their own assumptions into a
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
73
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

model (Facchin; Hipólito & van Es; Kiverstein & Kirchhoff;
Menary & Gillett; Raja et al.; Rorot, Korbak, Litwin, &
Miłkowski [Rorot et al.]; Sprevak; Suzuki et al.; Wiese). For
example, the choice of which parts (particles) should count as
internal in the primordial soup model is essentially arbitrary.
As has already been stated, Friston believes this is a deliberate
and advantageous feature. Some of his defenders view this simply
as part of standard modelling practice in science (Andrews;
Hipólito & van Es; Kiverstein & Kirchhoff; Sprevak; Wiese),
and not a reason to dismiss the use of Friston blankets without
empirical tests validating their practical applications. However,
others (Facchin; Menary & Gillett; Raja et al.; Rorot et al.;
Suzuki et al.) agree with the critical position we laid out in the
target article, and call for clarity in how the explanatorily relevant
blankets are identified, and who or what is doing this identifica-
tion. These two positions are clearly not inconsistent, but they do
require that we carefully consider any explanatory role attributed
to Friston blankets. Friston blankets cannot be instrumental in
defining interesting boundaries, if such boundaries have to be
deliberately selected ahead of time for this tool to be successfully
applied to. As eloquently argued by Colling, a “formalism itself
does not licence predictions about which systems are amenable
to the formalism and which are [not].” Colling argues that this
problem has been faced by other frameworks in the past, such
as dynamical systems theory, and points out that defenders of
Friston blankets need to “provide an explanation or prediction
of which systems are amenable to the formalism – or because
the formalism is applicable to every ‘thing’ (Friston, 2019),
which systems are amenable to specific applications of the formal-
ism independent of the particular application of the formalism
itself.”
This then leads us to some of the core debates regarding tele-
ology, autopoiesis, and the foundational principles of enactive
cognitive science in relation to Friston blankets and the FEP,
which
were discussed
in several commentaries.
Veit and
Browning argue that ignoring the teleonomic context of biologi-
cal systems is ultimately what is causing a lot of the confusion sur-
rounding Friston blankets since previous research has largely
overlooked questions about the evolutionary history or function
of biological boundaries. We sympathise with this concern, but
we worry that the confusion surrounding these issues will only
grow, as the ambitions of FEP’s proponents seem to have recently
moved away from the idea of seeking to explain only biological
systems (Friston, 2010; Friston, Kilner, & Harrison, 2006) to
explaining systems in general (Da Costa et al., 2021; Friston,
2019; Friston et al., 2022). This move could call into question
the necessity of teleonomics, but at the same time also raises
the issue of whether the FEP is still even trying to say something
specific about biology, or cognition, at all. Raja et al. and Suzuki
et al. (see also Di Paolo et al., 2022) carefully observe that Friston
blankets are not intrinsically self-determined properties of a sys-
tem, because as we said above they require a scientist to specify
an internal partition, and thus fall short of capturing the auto-
poietic mechanisms found in natural systems (contrary to what,
e.g., Hesp, Kiverstein & Kirchhoff, and Seth et al. claim). Nave
argues forcefully that FEP’s abstracting away from the “metabolic
turnover” of living systems leads one to “fundamentally miscon-
ceive what an organism is.” Simply put, FEP ignores that a biolog-
ical agent’s structure not only constrains its own dynamics, but
that the dynamics also constitute its structure (cf. Jonas, 1966).
So, what can Friston blankets actually do? It seems clear, at this
point, that a Friston blanket-centric metaphysics that makes
claims about “blankets of the mind” or “blankets of life” is deeply
problematic. It is most certainly not a project that can be accom-
plished by “just doing the maths,” since the relation between
Friston blankets and Pearl blankets is all but straightforward,
and Friston blankets currently appear to be afflicted by some
potentially disqualifying limitations. Furthermore, it should not
be presented as a principles-first approach for defining which
entities do inference within a model (Friston, 2019), as such enti-
ties have to be specified in advance by the modeller. Some
authors, such as Wiese, acknowledge that the framework is pri-
marily interested in defining a fundamental metaphysics, rather
than realising a purely empirical research programme, and we
think that this approach at least offers a more perspicuous starting
point for future research.
R5. Not everything needs to be a blanket
Having defended the distinction between Pearl blankets and
Friston blankets, discussed leading approaches to the metaphysi-
cal commitments of the latter, and explored the kind of explana-
tory work they might be used for, we now conclude our response
to the commentaries by looking ahead to the future of Friston
blankets and the FEP in science and philosophy.
The most obvious way forward has already been proposed in
our target article and involves the tedious, but manageable, task
of cleaning up and clarifying the use of the formal constructs in
the FEP literature. While we do not expect to see a monolithic
consolidation of the framework, confusion about Friston blankets
being “just” Pearl blankets still pervades the majority of work on
the FEP and must be addressed somehow. There are different
interpretations as to who tailors the blankets (Facchin; Friston;
Nave; Raja et al.; Suzuki et al.), what their role is (Aguilera &
Buckley; Menary & Gillett; Parr; Sprevak; Wiese), and how we
should even define a blanket (Btesh et al.; Kiverstein &
Kirchhoff; Virgo et al.). The only point that remains uncontro-
versial is that in order to try and make use of the FEP and its asso-
ciated formal tools, authors ought to explicitly state what their
starting assumptions are.
A viable, but perhaps less appreciated, alternative is to simply
make use of the FEP without committing to Friston blankets.
While the literature on the FEP has recently been centred around
the definition and use of Friston blankets, this hasn’t always been
the case. As the generalisation of conditional independence rela-
tionships to dynamical settings is not in principle unique to
Friston blankets, one could simply abandon Friston blankets for
a different construct. This could avoid some of the construct’s
current shortcomings (as discussed by Aguilera & Buckley and
Virgo et al.) by introducing more transparent and explicit
assumptions and getting rid of the unhelpful “just do the
maths” rhetoric. More interestingly, however, broader work on
active inference, predictive coding, and prediction error minimi-
zation has been flourishing mostly independently from the notion
of Friston blankets (see, e.g., Lanillos et al., 2021; Mazzaglia et al.,
2022; Millidge, Seth, & Buckley, 2021; Spratling, 2016 for reviews
in neuroscience, robotics, and machine learning). While the
mathematical connections between these ideas are unquestionable
(especially under Gaussian assumptions), their level of commit-
ment to the full tenets of the FEP varies greatly. This showcases
that active inference by itself could be used as a simple alternative
to reinforcement learning formulations of behaviour and decision
making, one that appeals to a (different) cost function (Millidge,
Tschantz, Seth, & Buckley, 2020), without committing to the
74
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

FEP’s extra baggage. Importantly, a version of the FEP that does
not appeal to Friston blankets need not collapse into an inherently
instrumentalist position, detached from any semblance of empir-
ical validation (about which we are warned by Colombo). An
active inference alternative to reinforcement learning should be
judged on its own merits, according to the empirical results that
it generates and the theoretical virtues that it demonstrates.
A third, and yet more radical, answer to the issue of FEP’s
future brings our attention to the framework as a whole.
Although we have already provided a set of actionable solutions
to fix the problems surrounding Friston blankets, and have
shown that many of the models from the FEP toolkit have seen
continuous development outside of the framework, we would
like to end by asking about the overall benefit of the FEP for sci-
ence.
With
Allen’s
accusation
of
a
“cargo
cult”
and
Gomez-Marin’s worries that the FEP might be “not even
wrong” and “appears sufficiently vague to be immune to empiri-
cal data,” it is worth considering that we might just not need the
FEP at all.
Nonetheless, if one wishes to adopt this radical strategy, it is
important to do it for the right reasons. For instance, Spector
and Graham argue that quantities defined by the FEP are need-
lessly obfuscating the differences between information-theoretic
and thermodynamical meanings of terms like “energy,” and can-
not be easily tied to a meaningful physical interpretation.
However, this simply follows a trend in modern stochastic
thermodynamics (where the focus is on far from equilibrium
systems), and is not as unique or devastating to the FEP as the
authors make it out to be. Unlike the classical equilibrium case
discussed by these authors, thermodynamic quantities such as
heat, free energy, and so on are usually not well defined far
from equilibrium, and are best tackled by a formulation based
on information theory/geometry (for a recent review see for
instance Kim, 2021). Further discussion on the relation of the
FEP to physics can be found in Friston (2019) and Friston
et al. (2022), which now clarify that the free energy invoked by
the FEP is not the same as the free energy defined in
thermodynamics.
Similarly, both Raja et al. and Stoffregen and Heath take the
FEP to be incongruent with the commitments of ecological psy-
chology, and see this as a reason to discard it. Stoffregen and
Heath seem overly impressed by talk of “inference” within FEP,
which does not need to have the intellectualistic commitments
that they think it does (cf. Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014). Raja
et al. state that the FEP cannot model relational properties, such
as affordances. However, they disregard a productive line of
research within ecological psychology that does seek integration
with selectionist neuroscience, of which FEP is a variety (see,
e.g., Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2019; Reed, 1989, 1996).
In searching for alternatives to the FEP, it might be useful to
follow Btesh et al. and Yon and Corlett, and consider whether
a more intervention-focused causal framework (in the sense of
Pearl, 2009) could lead to more insightful explanations of cognition.
As Btesh et al. argue, taking inspiration from an established litera-
ture on causality in animal cognition, non-causal alternative frame-
works have so far fallen short of explaining any truly high-level
features of intelligent and cognitive systems (Marcus, 2018; Pearl
& Mackenzie, 2018). On the other hand, Yon and Corlett propose
that while Friston blankets may not be the right solution, a different
type of blanket, which they named a “cognitive blanket” (cf. the cog-
nitive domain in autopoiesis [Beer, 2014]), based on causal inter-
ventions à la Pearl, may provide a more direct bridge to
inferential theories of cognition where brains act as hypothesis test-
ing machines by intervening on the environment. Such aframework
should still be mindful of the fundamental dichotomy drawn in our
target article, between inference with or within a model.
Overall, we think that a plurality of methods is likely to be the
most fruitful approach for a cohesive study of all the diverse
aspects of cognition and mind, as evidenced by the wide range
of perspectives offered in the 35 commentaries that we received.
The tools offered by the FEP, including the new construct of a
Friston blanket, might, with some refinement, become a valuable
addition to this plurality of methods, but we should keep in mind
that not every boundary needs to be a blanket.
R6. Conclusion
In the target article we critically assessed the current state of the
philosophical and scientific literature using Markov blankets
within the FEP, finding a number of technical slippages and con-
ceptual unclarities. We hoped our target article could serve as an
open invitation for those defending the FEP to make clear what
their commitments really are, and how those commitments can
support the claims they make about Markov blankets. The 35
commentaries we received show that there is widespread disagree-
ment about the role of the Markov blanket construct within the
FEP, its ontological status, and the explanatory projects in
which it is embedded. Therefore, we do think that the Emperor
is currently naked, or at least wearing a different costume each
time that he appears. Some commentaries provided fruitful sug-
gestions for how best to redress the Emperor – time will tell
whether these attempts will be successful. We hope that the target
article, the commentaries, and our reply will all contribute to a
more nuanced and productive discussion moving forward.
Financial support. J. B. is funded by a Macquarie Research Fellowship.
K. D.’s work is funded by the Volkswagen Stiftung grant no. 87 105.
Conflict of interest. None.
Note
1. Some alternatives to Friston’s preferred steady-state assumption + sparse
coupling conjecture include:
(a) Friston’s very own alternative, that is, an asymptotic approximation to a
weak-coupling equilibrium, found in Friston et al. (2021c) and discussed
by Aguilera and Buckley,
(b) Biehl’s example, dropping the above conjecture while retaining the steady-
state assumption and adding other constraints, as in Appendix A in Biehl
et al. (2021) and Appendices A and B in Friston et al. (2021a),
(c) definitions that don’t require stationarity or even Markov properties, based
on computational mechanics (Rosas, Mediano, Biehl, Chandaria, &
Polani, 2020),
(d) postulating blankets which are not relegated to a single time slice and thus
that can in principle consider history (Virgo, Rosas, & Biehl), or just
(e) one of the existing alternatives before the advent of Friston blankets, for
example, Flesch and Lucas (2007), Materassi and Salapaka (2014), or
Koster (1999) in particular for something related to the worries about
directed cyclic graphs raised by Aguilera and Buckley.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the
physics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews.
Allen, M., & Friston, K. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computa-
tional framework for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
75
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Anderson, H. C. (1837). The Emperor’s New Clothes. English translation by Jean Hersholt
available at https://andersen.sdu.dk/vaerk/hersholt/TheEmperorsNewClothes_e.html
Baltieri, M., & Isomura, T. (2021). Kalman filters as the steady-state solution of gradient
descent on variational free energy. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2111.10530.
Beer, R. D. (2004). Autopoiesis and cognition in the game of life. Artificial Life, 10(3), 309–326.
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life. Artificial Life,
20(2), 183–206.
Beer, R. D. (2020). An investigation into the origin of autopoiesis. Artificial Life, 26(1), 5–22.
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293.
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and
optimal grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 599.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2019). What’s inside your head once you’ve figured out
what your head’s inside of. Ecological Psychology, 31(3), 198–217.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (2006). Elements of information theory (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Da Costa, L., Friston, K., Heins, C., & Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian mechanics for sta-
tionary processes. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 477(2256), 20210518.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions between
enaction and the free energy principle. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 1–39.
Flesch, I., & Lucas, P. (2007). Independence decomposition in dynamic Bayesian net-
works. In European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to
Reasoning and Uncertainty (pp. 560–571). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Frankfurt, F. (2005). On bullshit. Princeton University Press.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475.
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv preprint,
arXiv:1906.10184.
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Pavliotis, G. A., & Parr, T.
(2022). The free energy principle made simpler but not too simple. arXiv preprint,
arXiv:2201.06387.
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021b). Stochastic chaos
and Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1220.
Friston, K., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of conscious-
ness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516.
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Some interesting observations on the free
energy principle. Entropy, 23, 1076.
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi,
A. (2021c). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience,
5(1), 211–251.
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017a). Active
inference: A process theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K. J., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 100(1), 70–87.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and
active inference. Network Neuroscience, 1(4), 381–414.
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015).
Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214.
Isomura, T., Shimazaki, H., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Canonical neural networks perform
active inference. Communications Biology, 5(1), 1–15.
Jonas, H. (1966). The phenomenon of life: Toward a philosophical biology. Northwestern
University Press.
Kim, E. J. (2021). Information geometry, fluctuations, non-equilibrium thermodynamics,
and geodesics in complex systems. Entropy, 23(11), 1393.
Koster, J. T. (1999). On the validity of the Markov interpretation of path diagrams of
Gaussian structural equations systems with correlated errors. Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics, 26(3), 413–431.
Lanillos, P., Meo, C., Pezzato, C., Meera, A. A., Baioumy, M., Ohata, W., … Tani, J.
(2021). Active inference in robotics and artificial agents: Survey and challenges.
arXiv preprint, arXiv:2112.01871.
Marcus, G. (2018). Deep learning: A critical appraisal. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1801.00631.
Materassi, D., & Salapaka, M. V. (2014). Notions of separation in graphs of dynamical
systems. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 47(3), 2341–2346. https://doi.org/10.3182/
20140824-6-ZA-1003.02661
Mazzaglia, P., Verbelen, T., Çatal, O., & Dhoedt, B. (2022). The free energy principle for
perception and action: A deep learning perspective. Entropy, 24(2), 301.
Menary, R., & Gillett, A. J. (2020). Are Markov blankets real and does It matter? In D.
Mendonca, M. Curado, & S. S. Gouveia (Eds.), The philosophy and science of predictive
processing (pp. 39–58). Bloomsbury Academic.
Millidge, B., Seth, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). Predictive coding: A theoretical and exper-
imental review. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2107.12979.
Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020). On the relationship
between active inference and control as inference. In T. Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L.
Buckley, & C. De Boom (Eds.), Active Inference. IWAI 2020. Communications in
Computer and Information Science (Vol. 1326, pp. 3–11). Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-64919-7_1
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Heins, C., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Memory and
Markov blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1105.
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Generalised free energy and active inference. Biological
Cybernetics, 113(5), 495–513.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Pearl, J., Geiger, D., & Verma, T. (1989). Conditional independence and its representa-
tions. Kybernetika, 25(7), 33–44.
Pearl, J., & Mackenzie, D. (2018). The book of why. Basic Books.
Ramstead, M., Friston, K., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a formal the-
ory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic repre-
sentations. Entropy, 22(8), 889.
Reed, E. S. (1989). Neural regulation of adaptive behavior: An essay review of neural
Darwinism.
Ecological
Psychology,
1(1),
97–117.
https://doi.org/10.1207/
s15326969eco0101_5
Reed, E. S. (1996). Encountering the world: Toward an ecological psychology. Oxford
University Press.
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020). Causal blan-
kets: Theory and algorithmic framework. In International workshop on active inference
(pp. 187–198). Springer.
Spratling, M. W. (2016). Predictive coding as a model of cognition. Cognitive Processing,
17(3), 279–305.
Wheeler, J. A. (1982). The computer and the universe. International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, 21(6–7), 557–572.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Wolfram Media.
Zuse, K. (1982). The computing universe. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
21(6–7), 589–600.
76
Response/Bruineberg et al.: The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Published online by Cambridge University Press

