 
Letter to Commission on Taxonomy Regulation from 36 civil society organisations 
 
Brussels, 19 July 2021 
Mr Frans Timmermans 
Executive Vice-President for the European Green Deal 
 
Ms Stella Kyriakides 
Commissioner for Health and Food Safety 
 
Ms Mairead McGuinness 
Commissioner for Financial Services, Financial Stability and 
Capital Markets Union 
 
Mr Virginijus Sinkevičius 
Commissioner for Environment, Oceans and Fisheries 
 
Mr Janusz Wojciechowski 
Commissioner for Agriculture 
 
Dear Vice-President and Commissioners 
 
Forthcoming Taxonomy Delegated Act on agriculture and request for meeting 
 
The undersigned organisations urge you, when drafting the new Taxonomy Delegated Act on 
agriculture, to rethink the Commission’s approach to animal farming. The first Delegated Act, 
from which agriculture was eventually removed, recognised industrial livestock production as a 
sustainable economic activity, provided that good manure management measures are adopted. 
 
We are not against animal farming per se. We consider that when animals are raised in organic, 
agro-ecological or integrated crop-livestock systems, or on well-managed permanent grassland, 
they can contribute to several of the Taxonomy Regulation’s environmental objectives and do no 
significant harm to any of them. Indeed, the Commission’s EU Biodiversity Strategy recognises 
these as sustainable practices. 
 
Industrial livestock production, however, causes significant environmental harms.   Recognising 
industrial livestock production as an environmentally sustainable activity in a new 
Delegated Act would be at odds with overwhelming environmental scientific evidence and 
would undermine the EU Green Deal and the EU Biodiversity and Farm to Fork Strategies. 
 
Industrial livestock production is not environmentally sustainable for the following reasons: 
 
1. Harm arising from use of cereals and soy as feed for industrial livestock: The draft 
Delegated Act (DA) included some helpful provisions on the use of grassland for raising livestock. 
It also addressed crop production on livestock farms. However, most industrial livestock 
operations do not produce crops.  The cereals – wheat, barley, oats and maize – used as animal 
feed are usually grown, not on the livestock farm, but on completely separate arable farms. 
 
Production of cereals for feed is mostly carried out intensively, in monocultures, with abundant 
use of agro-chemicals. This leads to soil degradation, biodiversity loss, overuse and pollution of 
water, as well as air pollution.  Thus, significant harm is done to three of the Taxonomy 
Regulation’s environmental objectives. These upstream harms were largely ignored by the initial 
draft DA, resulting in industrial livestock operations being presented as sustainable. 
 
In addition, the EU relies on the import of huge amounts of soy as animal feed, mostly used in the 
industrial pig and poultry sectors, as well as intensive dairy operations.  This contributes to 
several environmental harms, including deforestation in South America, which leads to 
biodiversity loss and significant increases in carbon emissions, in direct contradiction to two of 
the Taxonomy Regulation’s environmental objectives.  The initial draft DA required soy to be 
“certified by a recognised body”.  However, the majority of certification schemes for soy have not 
proven effective in preventing deforestation so far.  
 
Please reply to: 
Peter Stevenson OBE 
Compassion in World Farming EU  
Brussels B-1050, Belgium  
Email: peter.stevenson@ciwf.org 

2 
 
2. Air pollution: Animal husbandry, especially industrial livestock production, is a major source 
of ammonia, which arises both from manure production on farms and  fertilisers used to grow 
feed crops.   Intensive pig and poultry production releases significant emissions of ammonia, 
methane, and sulphur dioxide as well as other pollutants that can have deleterious health effects.  
Research in Italy shows that (industrial) livestock is the second most important source of fine 
particulate matter pollution. 
  
3. Water pollution: Feed production for industrial livestock consumes huge quantities of nitrogen 
fertilisers. However, only 30-60% of this nitrogen is taken up by feed crops.    Pigs and poultry 
assimilate less than half of the nitrogen in their feed; most is excreted in their manure.  The 
unabsorbed nitrogen runs off or leaches to pollute rivers, lakes, groundwater and marine 
ecosystems. The European Nitrogen Assessment has estimated that nitrogen pollution alone 
costs Europe between 70 and 320 billion euros per year.  
 
4. Biodiversity: The initial draft DA’s section on biodiversity only looked at high-nature-value and 
high-biodiversity land. However, the harm resulting from the production of cereals for feed is not 
confined to biodiversity in these special lands as nearly two thirds of EU cropland is farmed 
intensively to provide animal feed. The loss of pollinators, for instance, occurs in much of the 
EU’s farmland, not just in high-nature-value land.  
 
5. Circular economy: The initial draft DA stated that the impact of livestock on the transition to a 
circular economy is ‘non-applicable’.  However, industrial animal production is an inherently linear 
system that completely disrupts the nitrogen cycle and causes water and air pollution, while 
organic, agro-ecological, integrated or extensive animal farming systems can be genuinely 
circular. Through Do No Significant Harm criteria the DA’s section on the circular economy must 
set up minimum requirements to ensure a transition towards circularity in animal farming. 
 
6. Industrial livestock production is not a ‘transitional’ activity: The initial draft DA 
recognised livestock production as a transitional activity under Article 10(2) of the Regulation 
which states that an activity “shall qualify as contributing substantially to climate change 
mitigation where it supports the transition to a climate-neutral economy consistent with a pathway 
to limit the temperature increase to 1,5°C above pre-industrial levels”. 
 
Industrial livestock production does not support the transition to a climate-neutral economy. On 
the contrary, feed production for industrially raised animals involves substantial GHG emissions 
arising from the manufacture of fertilisers to grow feed, the application of those fertilisers, and 
deforestation resulting from soy production . 
 
The limited ability of the livestock sector to support the transition to a climate-neutral economy 
has also been recognised by the Technical Expert Group’s report. This stressed that for 
emissions from agriculture to decrease, in absolute terms, and to move towards net-zero targets 
by mid-century, an overall reduction in per-capita consumption of livestock products is essential. 
 
This proves that industrial livestock production does not fall within the Taxonomy Regulation’s 
definition of a “transitional activity”. 
 
Need for dietary change: Overwhelming scientific evidence on health and the environment as 
well as all 1.5ºC climate scenarios require a large reduction in the consumption of animal 
products. The Taxonomy Regulation must send a clear signal to move away from the use of food 
crops as feed and towards the use of grass and waste/residues streams, in order to drive a 
transition towards less and better animal products, raised extensively instead of industrially. 
 
Given the above, we call on you to set up clear taxonomy criteria for livestock 
production that would only allow organic, agro-ecological or integrated crop-livestock 
systems or systems on well-managed extensive permanent grassland to be considered 
environmentally sustainable under the EU Taxonomy.  
 
We would kindly request a meeting with you to discuss a constructive way forward on livestock. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
AbibiNsroma Foundation, Kenneth Nana Amoateng, Director 

3 
 
An Claíomh Glas, Attracta Uí Bhroin, Vice Chair  
Ansvarlig Fremtid (Denmark), Thomas Meinert Larsen, Policy advisor 
Association of Ethical Shareholders Germany, Tilman Massa, Consultant 
ASUFIN - Spanish Financial Users Association, Virginia Fuentes, Financial Services Manager 
BirdLife Europe, Ariel Brunner, Senior Head of Policy  
BirdWatch, Ireland, Oonagh Duggan, Assistant Head of Policy 
Bluelink Foundation, Pavel Antonov, Executive Editor 
Climate Strategy, Peter Sweatman, Chief Executive 
Compassion in World Farming EU, Olga Kikou, Head of Office & P Stevenson, Chief Policy Advisor 
Défense des Milieux Aquatiques, Philippe Garcia,  
Ecologistas en Acción, Enrique Molina, Coordinator  
Eurogroup for Animals, Inês Ajuda, Programme Leader- Farmed Animals 
EuroNatur Stiftung, Gabriel Schwaderer, Executive Director 
European Environmental Bureau, Jeremy Wates, Secretary General 
Fair Finance International, Kees Kodde, International Coordinator 
Feedback, Carina Millstone, Executive Director 
Friends of the Earth Europe, Jagoda Munić, Director 
Fundación Renovables, Maribel Núñez, Manager 
Greenpeace European Unit, Jorgo Riss, Director  
Green Liberty, Janis Brizga, Chair  
Hedge Laying Association of Ireland, Shane Downer, Executive Officer 
Irish Peatland Conservation Council, Tristram Whyte, Conservation, Policy & Fundraising Officer 
Kola Ecocenter, Iurii Ivanov, Member of the Council 
Pasaules Dabas Fonds, Jānis Rozītis, Director  
Profundo, Jan Willem van Gelder, Director 
Seeding Sovereignty, Janet MacGillivray, Co-Director 
Sinergia Animal, Merel van der Mark, Head of animal welfare and finance program 
Slow Food Europe, Marta Messa, Director 
Socio-ecological union international, Sviatoslav Zabelin, Coordinator  
Stowarzyszenie Ekologiczne EKO-UNIA, Poland, Radosław Gawlik 
SumOfUs, Eoin Dubsky, EU Campaigner 
The Organic Centre, Leitrim, Ireland, Jan Melia, General Manager 
World Animal Protection, Mark Dia, Global Programme Director, Farming 
WWF European Policy Office, Ester Asin, Director 
ZERO - Associação Sistema Terrestre Sustentável, Nuno Forner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

