 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
2
SORIN CERIN 
 
 
 
THE ILLUSION 
 OF  
MEMORY   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Philosophical poems  
 
2017 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © SORIN CERIN 2017  
 
Sorin Cerin. All rights reserved. No part of this 
publications may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmited in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior written permission of Sorin Cerin. 
 
 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
 
 
 
 
ISBN-13: 
978-1978264571  
 
ISBN-10: 
1978264577  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
This book have been published also in Romanian language 
in  the United States of America 
 
ISBN-13:      978-1545262931    
  
 
ISBN-10:       1545262934 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
5
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical appreciations about the 
poetry of meditation 
 
 
  
PhD Professor Al Cistelecan within the heading Avant la 
lettre, under the title Between reflection and attitude, 
appeared in the magazine Familia nr.11-12 November-
December 2015, pag.16-18, Al Cistelecan considers about 
the poetry of meditation, of  Sorin Cerin, that: 
  
 "From what I see, Sorin Cerin is a kind of volcano 
textually,   in continuously, and maximum eruption, with a 
writing equally frantic, as and, of convictions. In 
poetry,relies on gusts reflexive and on the sapiential 
enthusiasm, cultivating, how says alone in the subtitle of 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
6
the  Non-sense of the Existence, from here the poems "of 
meditation". 
One approach among all risky - not of today, 
yesterday, but from always - because he tend to mix where 
not even is, the work of poetry, making a kind of 
philosophizing versified, and willy-nilly, all kinds of 
punishments and morality. 
  
Not anymore is case to remind ourselves of the 
words said by Maiorescu, to Panait Cerna, about 
"philosophical poetry," because the poet, them knows, and, 
he very well, and precisely that wants to face: the risk of to 
work only in idea, and, of to subordinate the imaginative, to 
the conceptual. 
Truth be told, it's not for Sorin Cerin, no danger in 
this sense, for he is in fact a passional, and never reach the 
serenity and  tranquility Apolline of the thought, on the 
contrary, recites with pathos rather from within a trauma 
which he tries to a exorcise, and to sublimates, into radical 
than from inside any peace of thought or a reflexive 
harmonies. 
Even what sounds like an idea nude, transcribed 
often aphoristic, is actually a burst of attitude, a transcript 
of emotion - not with coldness, but rather with heat (was 
also remarked, moreover, manner more prophetic of the 
enunciations). 
But, how the method, of, the taking off, lyrical, 
consists in a kind of elevation of everything that comes, up 
to the dignity of articulating their reflexive (from where the 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
7
listing, 
any 
references 
to 
immediately, 
whether 
biographical or more than that), the poems by Cerin, 
undertake steep in the equations big existential and 
definitive, and they not lose time in, domestic confessions. 
They attack the Principle of reality, not its 
accidents. Thus, everything is raised to a dignity  
problematic, if no and of other nature, and prepared for a 
processing, densified. 
  Risks of the formula, arise fatal, and here, because 
is seen immediately the mechanism of to promote the 
reality to dignity of the lyrism. 
One of the mechanisms comes from expressionist 
heritage (without that Sorin Cerin to have something else in 
common with the expressionists), of the capitalized letter, 
through which establishes suddenly and unpredictably, or 
humility radicalized , or panic in front of majesty of the 
word. 
Usually the uppercase, baptizes the stratum 
"conceptual" (even if some concepts are metaphors), 
signaling the problematic alert. 
It is true, Sorin Cerin makes excess and wastage, of 
the uppercase, such that, from a while, they do not more 
create, any panic, no godliness, because abundance them 
calms effects of this kind, and spoil them into a sort of 
grandiloquence. 
The other mechanism of  the elevation in dignity 
rely on a certain - perhaps assumed, perhaps premeditated - 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
8
pretentious discourse, on a thickening lexical, and on a 
deep and serious declamation. 
It is insinuated - of lest, even establishes - and here 
is an obvious procedure of imaginative recipe, redundant 
over tolerant. 
 How is and normal - even inevitable - in a lyrical of 
reflection what wants to coagulate around certain cores 
conceptual, the modality immediate of awareness of these 
nodes conceptual, consists in materializing the abstractions, 
making them sensual is just their way of to do epiphany 
lyrical. 
But at, Sorin Cerin, imaginative mechanics is based 
on a simple use of the genitive, which materialize  the 
abstractions, (from where endless pictures like "the thorns 
of the Truth," "chimney sweeps of the Fulfillments," " the 
brushes of Deceptions" etc. etc.), under, which most often 
is a button of personification. 
On the scale of decantation in metaphors we stand, 
thus, only on the first steps, what produces simultaneously, 
an effect of candor imaginative (or discoursive), but and 
one of uniformity. 
Probable but that  this confidence in the primary 
processes  is due to the stake on decanting of the thought, 
stake which let, in subsidiary, the imaginative action (and 
on the one symbolized more so) as such.   
But not how many or what ideas roam, through 
Sorin Cerin's poems are, however the most relevant, thing 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
9
(the idea, generally, but and in this particular case, has a 
degree of indifference, to lyricism). 
On the contrary, in way somewhat paradoxically, 
decisive, not only defining, it's the attitude in which they 
gather, the affect in which coagulates. 
Beneath the appearance of a speech projected on 
"thought", Sorin Cerin promotes, in fact, an lyricism (about 
put to dry) of, emotions existential (not of intimate 
emotions). 
The reflexivity of the poems is not, from this 
perspective, than a kind of penitential attitude, an 
expression of hierarchies, of violent emotions. 
Passionate layer is, in reality, the one that shake, 
and he sees himself in almost all its components, from the 
ones of blaming, to the ones of piety, or tenderness 
sublimated (or, on the contrary, becoming sentimentalist 
again). 
The poet is, in substance, an exasperated of state of 
the world and the human condition and starting from here, 
makes exercises with sarcasm (cruel, at least, as, gush), on 
account of "consumer society" or on that of the vanity of 
"Illusions of the Existence". 
It's a fever of a figures of style that contains a curse, 
which gives impetus to the lyrics, but which especially 
highlights discoursive, the exasperation in front of this 
general degradation. 
So general, that she comprised and transcendental, 
for 
Sorin 
Cerin 
is 
more 
than 
irritated 
by 
the 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
10
instrumentalization of the God (and, of the faith) in the 
world today. 
Irritation in front of corruption the sacred, reaches 
climax, in lyrics of maximum, nerve blasphemous 
("Wickedness of Devil is called Evil, / while of the God, 
Good. ", but and others, no less provocative and" infamous 
" at the address the Godhead); but this does not happen, 
than because of the intensity and purity of his own faith 
(Stefan Borbely highlighted the energy of fervor from the 
poetry of Cerin), from a kind of devotional absolutism. 
For that not  the lyrics, of challenge and blame, do, 
actually Cerin, on the contrary: lyrics of devotion desperate 
and passionate, through which him seeks "on Our True God 
/ so different from the one of cathedrals of knee scratched / 
at the cold walls and inert of the greed of the Illusion of 
Life ". 
It is the devotional fever from on, the reverse, of 
imprecations and sarcasm, but precisely she is the one that 
contaminates all the poems. 
From a layer of ideals, squashed, comes out, with 
verve passionate, the attitudes, of Cerin, attitudes eruptive, 
no matter how, they would be encoded in a lyrical of 
reflections. " 
 
PhD Professor Elvira Sorohan - An existentialist 
poet of the 21st Century 
To fully understand the literary chronicle written by 
Elvira 
Sorohan 
in 
Convorbiri 
Literare, 
“Literary 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
11
Conversations”, which refers to an article written by Magda 
Cârneci regarding Trans-poetry, and published in România 
literară, “Romania literary”, where specified what namely 
is poetry genuine, brilliant, the great poetry, on which a 
envies the poets of the last century, Elvira Sorohan, 
specifies in the chronicle dedicated to the poetry of Cerin,  
from, Convorbiri Literare, “Literary Conversations”, 
number 9 (237), pages 25-28, 2015 under the title An 
existentialist poet of the 21st century, that: 
Without understanding what is  "trans-poetry", 
which probably is not more poetry, invoking a term coined 
by Magda Cârneci, I more read, however, poetry today and 
now I'm trying to say something about one certain. 
Dissatisfied of "insufficiency of contemporary 
poetry" in the same article from in România literară,    
"Literary Romania", reasonably poetess accuses in block, 
how, that what "delivers" now the creators of poetry, are 
not than notations of "little feeling", "small despairs" and 
"small thinking. " 
Paraphrasing it on Maiorescu, harsh critical of the 
diminutives cultivated by Alecsandri, you can not say than 
that poetry  resulting from such notation is also low (to the 
cube, if enumeration stops at three). 
The cause identified by Magda Cârneci, would be 
the lack of inspiration, that tension psychical, specific the 
men of art, an experience spontaneous, what gives birth, 
uncontrollably, at creation. 
It is moment inspiring, in the case of poetry, 
charged of impulses affective, impossible to defeated 
rationally, an impulse on that it you have or do not it have, 
and, of, which is responsible the vocation. 
Simple, this is the problem, you have vocation, you 
have inspiration. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
12
I have not really an opinion formed about poetry of 
Magda Cârneci, and I can not know, how often inspiration 
visits her, but if this state is a grace, longer the case to look 
for recipes for to a induces ? 
And yet, in the name of the guild, preoccupation the 
poetess, for the desired state, focuses interrogative: "... the 
capital question that arises is the following: how do we to 
have access  more often, more controlled and not just by 
accident, to those states intense, at the despised 
<inspiration>, at those levels, others of ours, for which the 
poetry has always been a witness (sic!) privileged ". 
We do not know whom belongs the contempt, but 
we know that the inspiration is of the poet born, not made. 
The latter not being than a craftsman and an artist. 
I have in front three volumes of lyrics of the poet, 
less known and not devoid of inspiration, Sorin Cerin, 
ordered in a logical decrescendo, understandable, Non - 
sense of the Existence, the Great silences, Death, all 
appeared in 2015, at the Publishing Paco, from Bucharest. 
After the titular ideas, immediately is striking, and 
poetic vocabulary of the first poem, and you're greeted with 
the phrase "Illusion of Life" that spelled with capital letters. 
It is, in substance, an expression inherited from 
vocabulary consecrated of the existentialist, enough to 
suspect what brand will have the poems. 
Move forward with reading, being curious to see 
you how the poet remains on same chord of background, 
and how deep, how seriously lives in this idea, not at all 
new. 
And it is not new for that the roots of the 
existentialism, reformulated modern, draw their sap from 
the skepticism of biblical, melancholic Ecclesiastes, 
discouraged, in the tragic consciousness of finitude as 
destiny. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
13
It is the King biblical, an, existentialist avant la 
lettre.  
He discovers that " weather is to you be born, and a 
time is to die", otherwise "all is hunting of wind". 
  What else can be said new in our time, even in 
personal formula, when the existentialism has been 
intensively supported philosophically, in centuries XIX, 
and, XX, from Kierkegaard and up to Sartre, with specific 
nuances. 
A poem in the terms, of the existentialism status, 
more can    interested the being  of the our days, slave of 
the visual image and the Internet, only through adaptations 
or additions updated, complementary the central idea, and 
not finally, by the power of the return over of the self. 
It is about what you are trying to achieve the poet 
Sorin Cerin, leaving us, from the beginning, the impression 
that he lives the miracle creative, the inspiration. 
Wanting to guide the reader to search for a specific 
kind of poetry cultivated in these volumes (with one and 
the same cover), author subtitled them, ne varietur "Poems 
of meditation", as and are at the level of ideas. 
But how deep and how  personal, is the meditation, 
you can not say than at the end of reading, when you 
synthesize what namely aspects of ontology and from what 
perspective,   intellectual and emotional, them develop the 
poet. 
Certainly, the existentialist poetry vocabulary 
universal, recognizable, is now redistributed in an another 
topic, what leads to combinations surprising of new , some 
daring, or terribly tough, such as those concerning the 
church. 
Reading only one of the three volumes is like as you 
them read   on all, are singing on same chord with minimal 
renewal from, a poem to another. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
14
The poet closes in a unitary conceptual sphere, from 
here the specific rhetoric. 
Wherever you open one of the volumes, you are in 
the center of the universe poetic of the same ideas, the same 
attitude of skepticism outraged. 
At the level of language, the same vocabulary, well-
tuned with the conceptual sphere, is recombined in new and 
new phrases with updates related to today's environment, 
and even immediately of the Being,  thrown into the world 
to atone for the "Original Sin". 
It is known, because sages said, "Eva's son does not 
live in a world devoid of wails". 
The ambition to build a personal meditation, 
impossible to achieve at the level of poetic vocabulary, 
already tired, is compensated by the art of combination of 
the words, without being able to avoid redundant frequency 
of some phrases. 
  The most frequent, sometimes deliberately placed 
and twice in the same poem is "Illusion of Life". 
Dozens of others keywords, complementary, 
surprises by ostentatious use, to emphasize the idea of 
"Non-sense of Existence". 
Are preferred, series of words written with 
uppercase: "Moment," "Immortality," "Illusion," "Absurd," 
"Silence," "Death," "Eternity", "Absolute Truth", "Dream", 
"Free Will", "Original Sin", "Love", "Loneliness", 
"Alienation", "God" and many others. 
The 
phrase 
brings 
here 
and 
now, 
living 
problematized of the existence is "Consumer Society". 
 Is released from poetry a frenzy of duplication of 
word, what supports the idea. 
Often this exuberant energy of rearrangement of 
words, covers what you looking for in poems composed on 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
15
one and the same theme, namely, living intense affective of 
feeling of "illusion of life" inside, not outside.  
Here, we more mention of manner to distinguish the 
expressive words spelled with a capital letter. 
Rain of uppercase tends to flood few basic 
meanings of the poems.  
And more there's a particularity, the punctuation. 
After each verse, finished or not as, understood, 
grammatical or not, it put a comma; the point is put 
preferably only after the last verse. 
Otherwise than biblical Ecclesiastes, our poet, more 
revolted, than melancholic, do hierarchies of vanities pretty 
little ordered that you to can follow clear ideas.  
The significances is agglomerating, in one and the 
same poem, like Hierarchy of the Vanity. 
But it's not the only one. 
Of blame can be contemporary reality which 
provokes on multiple planes, poet's sensibility. 
The word "the vanity" is engaged in a combination 
serious, sharp, put to accompany even the phenomenon of 
birth of the world, for to suggest, finally, by joins culinary 
very original, willfully, vulgar, disgust, "nausea", ŕ la 
Sartre, left behind by the  consciousness of the absurd of 
existence. 
I sent at the poem, Industry Meat Existential: "Plow 
of the Vanity dig deep, / in the dust of the Existence, / 
wanting to sow the genes of the Illusion of Life, / for to be 
born the World, / after a prolonged gestation, / in womb 
without limits, of the Lie, / that rests on Truth for to exist, / 
... ravens blacks of the thoughts, / by developing, / A true 
Industry of the Meat Existential, / beginning, / from steaks 
of, dreams on the barbecue of the Absurd, / up to, / sausage 
of highest quality  of the Hopelessness. " 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
16
What you find in this poem: paradox, nonsense, 
nihilism, disillusionment, dreams made ashes, all this and 
more will multiply, kaleidoscopic recombine in all creation 
contained in these volumes. 
If, the notions and synthetic concepts contained in 
words maintains their meaning constant, the fate of the 
"word" is not the same, seems to go toward exhaustion, as 
and the force of renewal of poetry. 
Have and the words their fate, apart from poetry, as 
the poet says.     
At first, paradoxically, "Autumn sentimental" is 
forsaken by the "harvests passionate of words" frantically 
collected, by the temper ignited of the poet in love only of 
certain words, those from existentialist semantics. 
Sometimes, "Flocks, of words, / furrow the sky of 
Memories". 
In registry changed, the word is tormented as a tool 
of media, violent, rightly incriminated of poet: "Words 
lacustrine / cry in pots of Martyrs, / put at the windows of 
brothels of Newspapers ...". 
Is deplored the fate of the words employed unusual, 
grotesque: "At butchery of Words, / in the street corner of 
the Destiny / are sold bones of phrases  rotten, / legs of 
meanings for fried ...". 
And with this fragment I have illustrated the 
originality resentful word combinations, which give free 
course the ideas, a poetic attitude provoked by the revolt 
against the nonsense of existence. 
  Ultimately is metaphorise "the winter of the 
Words, / which snows over our Days ..." and is deplored 
their fate, the falling "in the Mud, of some Words, / 
obscene and full of invective", and finally, their death: 
"Cemeteries of words are strung in the souls, / what they 
will and hopes at Resurrection ... ". 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
17
Here the words came back to poetry. 
But, the word is only the tool what not is only of the 
poet's, only of his, is the problem of background of 
existence illusory, perceived as such, in the existentialism 
terms from the early 21st century . 
This is the core, the leitmotif of dozens of poems 
signed by Sorin Cerin, distributed studied, I suppose 
symbolic numerological, in each volume 77 each, neither 
more or less. 
From the seed of this idea generously sown, rises 
for the poet tired of so much, kneaded thinking: "Herbs of 
questions what float lazily over the eyelids / of the Sunset, / 
what barely can keep ajar, / in the horizon of some 
Answers, / what appear to be migrated toward the cold 
distances of the Forgetfulness. " 
The note meditative of these lyrics  is not entirely 
discouraging. 
The poet is neither depressed nor anxious, because 
he has a tonic temperament. 
He always goes from the beginning with undefeated 
statements the will, to understand, without accepting, as, 
thus,   may to return toward  the knowledge of self. 
In poetic images rare, is outlined a kind of summary 
of poetic discourse,  focused in the poetry The Hierarchy of 
the Vanity, ended in contemporaneity terms of the absurd. 
It's a way to renew what was more said, that "we eat 
absurd on bread." 
The plural indicates in poet an exponent in the name 
of man in general, "the granite" signifying the mystery 
impenetrable, of  which is now facing "cane thoughtfully" 
"climbed up on the rocks of Life / we want to understand 
the granite as it is, / a reed conscious of self. 
  || Demolish the pillars of Nature of the Illusion of 
Life, / trying to put in their place, / A Dream far stranger of  

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
18
ourselves. ||  ruined the Weakness , / ... becoming our own 
wrecks, / what wander  to nowhere. || ... 
Would be the eyes of Consumer Society made only  
to/ watch  the Hierarchy of the Vanities? 
Love that would deserve a comment of the nuances 
at which send  the poetic images, is in the Dream and 
reality, an: " icon attached to the walls of the cold and 
insensitive, / of a cathedral of licentiousness, as is the 
Consumer Society, / which us consumes the lives / for a 
Sens what we will not him know, never. " 
  Beyond the game of words, is noted, the noun 
seriously, what cancels altogether the sacredness of the 
cathedral. 
It's a transfer of meanings produced by the 
permanent revolt poured out upon the type of society we 
live in. 
Our life, the poet laments in the Feline Existential: 
"is sells expensive at the counter of the Destiny / for to 
flavor the Debauchery, / subscriber with card of pleasures, 
all right / at the Consumer Society." / ... "Empty promises /   
and have lost keys of the Fulfillment / and now make, 
Moral to the cartel  of Laws / alongside  the prostitutes 
politicians, of the moment ". 
Violent language, as poetic arrows thrown and 
against terrible degradation of politics, gives free course to 
the ideas, a type nihilistic rebellion, raised to the rank of 
principle. 
Absolutely current target is even more evident 
when, in the poem, the Game of the Life with Death,, is 
criminalized in much the same terms, "Consumer Society 
Famine garden, / as, great athletes, of cutting  of incomes /  
hysterical and false, scales of the Policy, /  us skimp 
sparingly each,  Moment ... ". 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
19
Changing the subject, vocable "moment" in relation 
to "eternity", updates a note from the arsenal of specific 
words from the language of the great existentialist thinker 
who was the mystic Kierkegaard. 
After how   attitudes clearly atheist, when it comes 
to God and the church, in the poems of Cerin , update 
hardness of language, with particularities of existentialism 
of Sartre, while Mathematics of the existence and many 
other poem, us bring back into the cultural memory the 
image of that "monde cassé" perceived critical by the 
frenchman Gabriel Marcel. 
   Perhaps the most dense in complementary 
concepts the "existence", between the first poems of the 
first volume, is  Lewdness. 
Are attempts to give definitions, to put things in 
relationship through inversion with sense, again very 
serious accusatory, like the one with address at  
"monastery". 
Sure, unhappiness of the being that writes such 
poetry, comes not only from the consciousness of the fall of 
man in the world under the divine curse, but and from what 
would be a consequence, rejection, up to the blasphemy of 
the need for God. 
The interrogation, from the poetry, Lewdness, 
which, seems that leaves to the reader the freedom of to 
give particular answers, it's a trick of the poet aware of 
what affirms, at masked mode: "The existence is a ghost 
caught between two dreams, Space and / Time./ Peace will 
always be indebted to the War with her own / weapons, 
Vanity of Democracy and Dictatorship ./ Which Lewdness 
has not  its monastery and which murder /her democracy?" 
The poem continues with a new definition of 
"Existence" as a "gamble", accompanied by "Hope", never 
left at the mercy of "free will", which would give to man 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
20
the freedom to change anything. It remains only the 
freedom of the being to judge  her own existence, eternal 
fenced to can overcome the absurd. 
  Nature demonstrative of the poet him condemns, 
extroversion, at excesses, that, scatters, too generous what 
has gathered hardly from the library of his own life and of 
books. 
Paradoxically, the same temperament is the source 
of power to live authentic feeling of alienation  and 
accentuated loneliness, until to feel his soul as a "house in 
ruins", from which, gone, the being, fallen into 
"Nothingness", more has chance, of to be, doomed 
"Eternity". 
Remain many other comments of made at few 
words the poet's favorite, written with upper case. 
But, about, "Love", "God", "Church," "Absurd", 
"Moment and Eternity", "Silence" and "Death" maybe 
another time. 
Would deserve, because this poet is not lacked of 
inspiration so coveted by others, as wrote poet Magda 
Cârneci, but he must beware of the danger of remaining an 
artifex, and yet not to step too pressed the footsteps from 
Bacovia or Emil Botta, toward of not them disfigure 
through excess. 
 
Ana Blandiana: "The poetry of meditation on 
which a writes Sorin Cerin is not a versification of 
philosophical truths, but a interweaving of revelations, 
about these truths. And the ratio of intensity of these 
revelations and doubt from which are constructed the truths 
is precisely the philosopher's stone of this poetry. 
Moreover, secrecy of being able to fasten the lightning of 
the revelation is a problem as subtle as that of keeping solar 
energy from warm days into the ones cold. " 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
21
 
PhD Professor Theodor Codreanu: "Sorin Cerin 
is a paradoxist aphoristic thinker, of, a great mobility of the 
mind, who controls masterfully the antitheses, joining them 
oxymoronically, or alternating them chiasmatic, in issues 
with major stakes from our spiritual and social life. Poetry 
from, the Free Will, is an extension of his manner of 
meditation, imbuing it with a suitable dose of kynism 
(within the meaning given to the word by Peter Sloterdijk), 
succeeding, simultaneously the performance, of to remain 
in the authentic lyricism even when blames "Ravens vulgar, 
necrophiliacs and necrophagous, of the Dreams". 
 
PhD Professor Ioan Holban : "About the 
expressiveness and richness of meanings transmitted to the 
Other,  by silence, Lucian Blaga wrote anthological pages. 
The poet of today writes, in Great Silences, a poetry of 
religious sentiment, not of pulpit, but, in thought with God, 
in meditation and in the streak of lightning of thought 
toward the moment of Creation. Sorin Cerin's poetry is of 
an other Cain wandering in the wilderness, keeping still 
fragments from the joy of Eden, to exit from "Vise" of the 
world, where, at the fallen man, collapses the horizon of 
soul, in the rains of fire and traces of lead. " 
 
PhD Professor Maria Ana Tupan : "The lyrical 
meditations of Sorin Cerin have something from the 
paradoxical mixture of despair and energy of the uprising 
from  Emil Cioran's philosophical essays. The notification 
of tragicalness and grotesque of the existence, does not lead 
to psychical paralysis, but to nihilism exorcised and 
blasphemous. Quarrel with "adulterine God" - appellation 
shocking, but very expressive for the idea, of, original sin 
of ... God who must be conceived the evil world through 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
22
adultery with Satan - receives, accents sarcastic in vignettes 
of a Bibles desacralized, with a Creator who works to 
firmament at a table of blacksmith, and a Devil in whom 
were melded all rebels hippy-rap-punk-porto-Rican:  
[...] Stars alcoholic, of a universe, greedy, paltry and 
cynical,  drinking by God at the table of Creation, 
on the lachrymose heavens of Happiness, scrawled, 
with graffiti by Devil, 
   
If the poet has set in the poem, To a barbecue. an 
exercise of Urmuz, success is perfect. Not only, ingenious 
jumps deadly for the logic of identity from one ontological 
level to another, we admire here, but and tropism, of, a 
baroque inventiveness of an Eucharist  inside out, because 
in a universe of the life toward death, the one that is broken 
is the spirit, the word, to reveal a flesh ... Deleuze, animal, 
described as the meticulous anatomical map of a medical 
student. The poet us surprise by novelty and revelation of 
the definition aphoristic, because after the first moment of 
surprise, we accept the moralizing scenery of the time, with 
a past, dead, a future alive, and a present, illusory, contrary 
to common sentiment, that the lived life is our ego 
certainly, that only the present really exists, and that the 
future is a pure hypothesis. Cerin, redefines the human 
being as, finding the authenticity in multiplication mental 
of ternal reality and as existentialist project ". 
 
 
PhD Professor Mircea Muthu: "The desperation 
to find a Sens to the contemporary existence fill the poetic 
testimony of Sorin Cerin, in which the twilight of language, 
associated with "broken hourglass" of  time, is,  felt - with 
acuity tragic - of, "our words tortured." 
"Meditation, turned towards self itself, of  "the 
mirrors of the question" or of "the eyes" fabulous, of the 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
23
Ocean endlessly, is  macerated  at the same temperature 
febrile, of voltaic arc, enunciated - in short - of the phrase 
"rains of fire". 
 
PhD Professor Cornel Ungureanu : "Sorin Cerin 
proposes a poetic speech about how to pass " beyond ", a 
reflection and a meditation that always needs capital letters. 
With capital letters, words can bear the accents pressed of 
the author who walks. with so much energy on the realms, 
beautiful crossed by those endowed with the grace of the 
priesthood. Sorin Cerin ritualization times of the poetic 
deconstruction, if is to we understand properly the 
unfolding of the lyrics under the flag of the title. " 
 
PhD Professor Ion Vlad : "Sorin Cerin has defined 
his poems from the book " The Great Silences ", " poems of 
meditation ".  Undoubtedly, reflexivity is the dominant of 
his creation,  chaired by interrogations, riots, unrest and 
dramatic research of SILENCE,  topos of the doubts, of the 
audacity, and, of the adventure of the spirit, in the 
permanent search of the truth, and his poetry follows to an 
axiology of an intense dramatic. Is the lyric of the lucidity, 
meditation and of genuine lyricism ". 
 
 Ph.D. 
Lecturer 
Laura 
Lazăr 
Zăvăleanu: 
"Intellectual formed at the school Bucharest, but sensing 
the need to claim it admiringly, from the critical model, of 
the school Cluj, where he identify his exemplary models in 
the teachers, Ion Vlad and Mircea Muthu, Sorin Cerin 
builds and the poetry intertextual, because the poet of the 
Great Silences,  declares all over, his experts, identified 
here, intrinsically, with Blaga ( through philosophical 
reflection and prosodic structure, sometimes deliberately 
modeled after Poems of light) and Arghezi. The very title 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
24
of the volume, the Great Silences, impose the imperative, 
of an implicit dialogue with the poetry of Arghezi bearing 
the same title. At the searches feverish from the Psalms of  
Arghezi, of a God called to appear, answer them here the 
interpellations indefatigably of an apostate, believer, that is 
torn in the wilderness of the thought and of image broken 
mirrored by the world declared, between love denouncer, 
and  affectionate revolt, between curse incantatory and 
disguised prayer, of eternally in love, without being able, to 
decline, in reality, fervor, although the word has 
experimented, aesthetic, the whole lexicon, blasphemously 
and apocalyptic.  A duplicity of salvation, in fact, that - 
shouting the drama of alienation and of introspection 
missed, as and the impotence of the meeting with the other, 
or fear of overlapping with him, in a world whose meaning 
is wandered into "darkness of the camps of ideas", at the 
interference of a time and of a space reached ' at the end of 
border "- gives birth, in the litany, `a rebours, the signs of 
creation redeemed, in full feast cynical, "on the table of 
potter of love". 
 
PhD Professor Călin Teutişan: "Poetry of Sorin 
Cerin declaim a fatal nostalgia of the Sense. Thinking 
poetic trying his recovery, from disparate fragments, 
brought back together by labor lyrical, imagining a possible 
map reconstituted, even fragmentary, of the world, but 
especially of the being. Using of metaphors, neo-visionary, 
is context of reference of these poems, crossed,  from time 
to time, of parables of the real, "read" in the key symbolic, 
but and ironical. Cynicism is entirely absent in the lyrics of 
Sorin Cerin. This means that the lyrical personage, what 
speaks in this pages, namely, consciousness lyrical, put an 
ethics pressure over reality, thus forcing her to assume own 
forgotten truths. " 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
25
 
PhD Professor Cornel Moraru: "Prophet of 
existential nothingness, the poet is part of category of the 
moralists, summing up in a fleeting manner, precepts 
aphoristic, and rough projections from a ecstatic vision of 
the end of the world. His meditations develops a furious 
rhetoric on theme "nonsense of Existence", although 
expressing more doubts than certainties, and questions than 
answers. The intensity of involvement in this endeavor 
lyrical, touches, at a time, odds extremes: from jubilation to 
sarcasm, and from indignation again at ecstasy ... " 
 
PhD Professor Ovidiu Moceanu:"Through the 
cemeteries of the dreams, volume signed by Sorin Cerin, 
poetry of the great existential questions  seeks a new status, 
by building in texts which communicate underground, an 
image of man interrogative. "Cathedral of  the existence" 
has her pitfalls, "Absolute truth" seems unattainable, 
"White Lilies of the truth" can kill, "if not ventilates pantry 
of mind," the poetic ego discovers rather a "God too bitter" 
... All these are expressions of a state of great inner tension, 
in which the lucidity has wounded the revelation, and has 
limited the full living of the meaning of existence. " 
 
PhD Professor Dumitru Chioaru: "Speech 
prophetic, philosophical or poetic? - It's hard to determine 
in which fits texts of Sorin Cerin . The author, them 
incorporates on all three into a personal formula, seemingly 
antiquated, aesthetic, but, speaking with breath of, poeta 
vates, last words before Apocalypse. An apocalypse in 
which the world desacralized and dominated by false 
values, ends in order to can regenerate through Word ". 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
26
PhD Professor Ştefan Borbély: "Spirit deeply and 
sincerely religious, Sorin Cerin desperate search for the 
diamond hidden in the darkness of the rubble, of the ashes. 
A whole arsenal of the modernity negative - cups of the 
wilderness, water of the forgetfulness, slaughterhouses, the 
feast continuous of suffering, monkey of rotten wood, etc., 
etc. - is called to denounce in his lyrics, "lethal weapons of 
the consumer society" and "the madhouse" of the alienation 
by merchantability of our everyday existence.  The tone is 
apodictically, passionate, prophetic, does not admit shades 
or replicas. "The new steps of faith" are enunciated 
peremptorily as hope of the salvation collective, "divine 
light" it shimmers in, deliverer, at end, still distant of the  
torture, but on the moment, the poet seems to be 
preoccupied exclusively rhetoric eschatological, glimpsing 
decadence, resignation moral or ruins almost everywhere 
where it can to   walk or look "  
 
Gheorghe Andrei Neagu: "Defining for, this writer  
seems to be rightfully, the doubt, as the cornerstone of his 
poems (Mistake pg.73).  I congratulate the author, for his 
stylistic boldness from " From the eyes of the divine light,  
page 81, as well as from the other sins, nestled in his 
creator bosom. I think Romanian literature has in Sorin 
Cerin  a writer 3rd millennium that must be addressed with 
more insistence by criticism of speciality" 
 
Marian Odangiu: "Lyrical poetry of Sorin Cerin is 
one, of, the essential questions: the relationship of the 
Being with the Divinity, in a world of increasingly more 
distorted by point of view of value, -and distortionary the 
same 
time!-, 
disappearance 
of 
some 
fundamental 
benchmarks - attracting after themselves of interrogations 
overwhelming, and infinite anxieties - absence all more 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
27
disturbing of some Truths, which to  pave the way to 
Salvation,  deep doubts demotivating on the Meaning of 
Life, absurd raised at the rank of existential reason, feeds 
the fear and anxieties of the poet.  Such, his lyrics develop 
a veritable rhetoric of despair, in which, like an insect 
hallucinated of Light, the author launching unanswered 
questions, seeking confirmations where these entered from 
far in dissolution, sailing pained, but lucid, through images 
and metaphors elevated and convincing poignancy, builds 
apocalyptic scenarios about Life, Love and Death ... " 
 
Eugen Evu: "... Books seem to be objects of 
worship - culture - own testament of a ceremonial ... of, the 
neo-knowledge, Socratic-Platonic under sign, " the General 
Governing of the Genesis " for instance. What is worth 
considered is also, the transparent imperative of the author 
to communicate in native language, Romanian. The 
loneliness attributed the Sacred, is however of the human 
being, in her hypostasis reductive, of the human condition 
.... How Vinea wrote the poet sees his ideas, or the 
mirroring in the ' room with mirrors ' of the universal 
library. A destiny, of course,personal, largely assumed, 
nota bene. In the volume, the Political, at the extreme of H. 
R. Patapievici poet is well cognizant of the problem Eliade, 
of the "fall of the human in politikon zoon"... Between 
rationalism and irrationalism, Sorin Cerin sailing on the 
Interconnection Ocean. " 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
   
 
 
1. The Kiss of the Illusions of Happiness 
2. The train of lost Glances 
3. The time of our meeting 
4. Trying us the Future 
5. Among the Wrinkles of the Vanity 
6. In search of the Water of Illusions of 
Happiness 
7. Overpayment 
8. We were sold 
9. Spoiled by the  Wind of the Forgetfulness 
10. The Falling Stars of the Destinies 
11. The Illusion of Memory 
12. On the forsaken Forehead 
13. Wounding my tear 
14. On the fences of Thorns 
15. The Tear of the Day 
16. Wounded by the Illusions of Memories 
17. On Cliff of Genes 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
29
18. To not profane us the Church of Love 
19. In looking for lost Time 
20. On the forehead of the Soul 
21. No matter how hurt it would be 
22. To I die on the shoulders of Happiness 
23. At the Feast of the Illusions of Death 
24. Rigor Mortis 
25. No Day can no longer 
26. Do not tell me 
27. The Icon of the Saints of Dreams 
28. The Autumns of  Doubts 
29. Wrinkles 
30. The Life of a Frustration 
31. The Ancestors of Chance 
32. Marriage with the Illusions of My Life 
33. The Religion of Illusions of Memory 
34. The Coffin of Flowers of Ice 
35. Over the Eternity Horizon 
36. The Eyes of your Destiny 
37. It wandered 
38. At Lost Objects 
39. Much richer 
40. The Moment of Illusions of Death 
41. For a single Kiss 
42. Ditches and Thoughts 
43. Taken by the strong stream 
44. At the buttons of the shirt 
45. Indifferent Time 
46. The Dust of Heart 
47. Waiting for the Sacred Fire 
48. Destinies hit 
49. To the throat of Luck 
50. The dusty path 
51. Love tattooed 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
30
52. The Heart wasted 
53. They burn 
54. A new testament 
55. Lost eyes 
56. In the closet of a Future 
57. The Cemetery of Destiny 
58. Moment empty and withered 
59. Dreaming at the World of beyond 
60. Single and full of loneliness 
61. The bitter Ice 
62. Whose blind Days 
63. Lonely and ungrateful 
64. The Dawn of fulfilled Dreams 
65. Bricks of Churches 
66. The Stars of our Destinies 
67. Cups of Dreams from which we drink 
68. The Blood of the Testaments 
69. Still Before the World 
70. A Sense of Immortality 
71. So rarely 
72. The taste of its own Time 
73. On broken wings 
74. The worldly ones 
75. The Absolute Vanity 
76. All Waves 
77. Rashness 
78. An endlessly of the Love 
79. Crowns of Winners 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.    The Kiss of the Illusions of Happiness 
 
 
Do not tell me that Happiness, 
it will ever forget us the frustration, 
risen in the dawn of the Hearts, 
which can not understand, 
never, 
the essence of Time, 
which its wipes the sweat of the Moments, 
over the foreheads of the Words, 
of the Creation of a World, 
only ours, 
washing them the meanings, 
until they are lost, 
in the  Dust of the Forgetfulness, 
through which they stand,   
the Illusions of Memories, 
who feed us, 
Death from us. 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.   The train of lost Glances 
 
 
Could I ever understand, 
the purpose of the Smile,  
fallen, 
in the depths of the Heart, 
of the Illusions of Death ?, 
which no longer beat, 
for the Eternity of Retrieval, 
of the Stranger from us, 
what has forsaken us, 
the Destiny,  
of the Illusions of some Memories, 
in the railway station without name, 
of the train of lost Glances, 
whose merits, 
I have never met them before,   
in the written story, 
by the God of Creation of Nobody, 
who would have wanted to sell us abundantly, 
the Illusions of Happiness, 
banished from a Paradise, 
which became suddenly, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
33
so cramped, 
that he had to expand, 
and on the territory of the Inferno, 
from ourselves. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.   The time of our meeting 
 
 
Which Icon, 
could learn us to we kill us, 
the Moments ?, 
separating us, 
by the Illusions of Memory, 
from which we created us the spring of Blood, 
of to be, 
the Ancestors of Immortality, 
on which we have born her, 
banishing us the Death from Glances, 
forever, 
for to enliven us the dust, 
from the Hopes of Veins, 
of our Destinies, 
broken and forsaken, 
in the Cemetery of shards of Thoughts, 
on which we tried to bypass him, 
on the Wheel of a Time,  
satiated of the tears of Desires, 
which he was obliged, 
to bury them every time, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
34
equally alone, 
as it was, 
the time of our meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.    Trying us the Future 
 
 
Leave me the Day, 
to it wash us the Illusions of dirty Memories, 
of so many Promises, 
from which, 
none of the Cardinal Points, 
of the Illusions of Happiness, 
which, they still have remained, 
to feed us, the Vanity, 
did not succeed, 
to exit, 
by defying the mud, 
in which were bogged down, 
the Hopes, 
of to create us the Eternity, 
of the flower of the Soul, 
on which to we tear her, 
only when, 
the baskets of Dreams, 
they will wither 
trying us the Future. 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
35
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.    Among the Wrinkles of the Vanity  
 
 
The false Horizons, 
are extinguished in the arms of the Past, 
what seems to have forgotten us, 
the embracing of Time, 
on which we have banished it, 
at the table of the Meeting, 
which has fed us the Struggle of Souls, 
with the Immortality, 
of Blood of some Dawns, 
on which we had begun to breathe, 
not knowing anything about the Day of Tears, 
of some Moments, 
which they will rain us, 
with pyres kindled by dew, 
in the depths, 
of Destinies, 
which they will extinguish them, 
any Hopes, 
and from the embers of the Illusions of Memories, 
the Forgetfulness, will make for her, 
blanket of Longing, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
36
for the cold and lonely nights that will leak, 
among the Wrinkles of the Vanity, 
which they gave us life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.   In search of the Water of Illusions of Happiness 
 
 
I can not even look, 
at the face of the Soul of the World, 
so much is grubbed, 
by the own Illusions of Memory, 
that it has become a Desert of Dreams, 
in search of the Water of Illusions of Happiness, 
whose springs of Hopes have dried up, 
in the Stelar dust, of, Questions, 
on which I always say them, 
how many times I was trampled,     
by the steps of the Horizon of Divine Light, 
from the Glances of Infinite.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.   Overpayment 
 
 
Bound with the chains of Hope, 
I'm trying to touch your shores of Dreams, 
toward which I sailed, 
accompanied by the debauchery of the Illusions of Death , 
which have judged me every time, 
when I tried, 
to escape from my own Illusion of Memory, 
which I paid it, at overpayment, 
to Suffering, 
for to I be allowed to moor, 
in the Eternity of the Moment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
38
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.    We were sold  
 
 
The Stars of Tears, really, 
feel more guilty, 
when they fall, 
by blizzard, 
over the hidden wrinkles of the Illusions of Memory, 
which and are now crying, 
after the smile of Divine Light,  
which we have comprised her,  
in the fists of Immortality, 
by Loving, 
until, 
we became the Icon of Truth, 
to which the Future prayed for us, 
not knowing that he will have to kneel,  
before the Past, 
to which we were sold, 
from before we are born, 
by the Original Sin, 
of the Illusions of Death.   
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.    Spoiled by the  Wind of the Forgetfulness 
 
 
Grass of Longing,  
spoiled by the  Wind of the Forgetfulness, 
with the name Death, 
still you succeed to finish all the Dawns, 
which leaves their tears full of dew, 
over the Illusion of Memory of the Word of Creation?, 
which uttered a single Destiny, 
for the Glances, 
in which we are lost us, 
the Eyes of Water, of the  Illusions of Death , 
spreading the waves of the Day, 
in the long and passing hair, 
of a Sigh, 
whose heart is trying to longer beat, 
the Truth 
which, it insults, 
the Vanity.  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.    The Falling Stars of the Destinies 
 
 
For what, I would not succeed, 
to I bury my Happiness, 
on the row of the Vanities, 
from the Cemetery of Loves, 
who did not have the right to die, 
Never?, 
accompanying, 
the Falling Stars, of the Destinies, 
whose Letters of Glances, 
they did not have envelopes,  
on which to write an address, 
certain, 
with our names, 
of on the street of Fulfillment, 
being broken, 
in the bloody Dawns, 
wandered, 
through the dusty Shelves of some, 
Illusions of Memories, 
which not have known, 
ever, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
41
their parents, 
with the name of Love. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.      The Illusion of Memory 
 
 
How many days would be counted, 
the Existence of Illusion of Your Memory, 
that, has created for her, 
the Crown of Falling Stars, 
on which they were born, 
the Moments of the Illusions of Death, 
from the sunrise of our Destiny, 
which we can not leave it, 
never, 
beyond ourselves, 
where we would have met Love, 
dressed in the Illusion of Happiness, 
on which we would have washed it, 
with Death from us, 
giving it the Eternal Life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
42
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.    On the forsaken Forehead 
 
 
I'm still waiting, 
on the forsaken Forehead, 
of the Wrinkles full of Restlessness, 
of the Dawns, 
which begin to dry the Hugs, 
of an other Time, 
to which, 
neither an Illusion of some Happiness, 
she did no longer understand, 
his passing toward a Desert, 
which we could no longer cross it, 
bypassing us the Eyes of Destiny, 
dry, 
by the tears filled with the Illusions of Memories, 
which neither a Night of the Blood, 
no matter how cold it would have become, 
it did no longer succeed, 
to awaken, 
the Ancestors of beyond Time, 
of our Births, 
which have been given us, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
43
to enjoy us, 
of Illusions of Life and Death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.    Wounding my tear 
 
 
How many rusty leaves, 
owes to me the Steps of Dreams, 
which fall, 
hitting my Body, 
of the Hopes, 
by the Icon of the Glances, 
to which I knelt, 
decapitating my Future, 
so full of Past, 
on which I carry him even today, 
on the mountain of a Savior, 
what became to me, 
the Cross of the Soul, 
Wounding my tear, 
on which it crucified me, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
what became a religion, 
lost in the Immortality, 
of Word, 
on which God, 
he wanted him to be, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
44
the Absolute Truth, 
of the Illusion of Happiness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.    On the fences of Thorns 
 
  
The Existence Guilt, 
she threw us away, 
with the fishing rod of Illusions of Life, 
in the World of Forgetfulness, 
which we will never understand it, 
sitting on the fences of Thorns, 
on which we pierce us, 
the Hopes, 
of the Illusions of Death, 
which separates us, 
by the Illusions of Memory, 
of the Absolute Truth, 
what rusts, subdued, 
on the spines of the Words, 
said by the Illusionist God, 
in too great, hurry, 
that none, 
between Creation Days, 
did not succeed to encompass, 
in the Hearts of Feelings, 
the Original Sins, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
45
which beat us too fast, 
the vengeful Time of Destiny, 
which will no longer return, 
Never. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.    The Tear of the Day 
 
 
Why did not I find myself, 
never, 
in the Tear of the Day?, 
what was elapsed over the Destiny,   
of the Illusions of our Death, 
scattered, 
by the Cemeteries, of Meetings, 
on which the Glances had them, 
whose flames were extinguished, 
and the embers of the Feelings, 
were thrown, 
further, 
deep, 
in the Frustration, 
of some Illusions of Life, 
where neither a God, 
 seems, to no longer recognize them, 
the Past of fire, 
of the pyre of Hearts, 
on which we danced, 
our last Covenant, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
46
with the Illusion of Memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.    Wounded by the Illusions of Memories 
 
 
Let yourself, 
all Days of the Illusions of Death, 
of Moments, 
which have never understood you, 
on the tablecloth, 
of the elbows of some Longings, 
always kidnapped, 
by the wounded Time, 
by the Illusions of Memories, 
what neither now, 
after an Eternity of Hopes, 
they can not wash, 
by, the Dreams, 
fallen from the Paradise, 
of our Meeting, 
on the forehead of the Cemetery of Thoughts, 
where it seemed, 
that died us the Death, 
forever.  
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.    On Cliff of Genes 
 
 
I believe you, 
Divine Light of Tears, 
of Destiny 
in which I washed my Eternity, 
by me myself, 
to be able to meet you, 
on Cliff of Genes, 
to all the Ancestors of Sufferings, 
who they wrote to me History, 
of this Present of the Memory, 
where exists only, 
the Ocean without edges, of the Eyes, 
of Illusions of some Memories, 
which we hope, 
to we kidnap them, 
from the difficult and oppressive flight of the Apocalypse, 
for to become, 
the shepherds of their Eternity, 
from which to build ourselves, 
the bricks of a Durability,  
which will never collapse, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
48
in the Cemetery of Dreams, 
of a Happiness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.    To not profane us the Church of Love 
 
 
With what could you betray me, 
besides the Illusions of Memory ?, 
on which I have always hidden them, 
in the sighs of Feelings, 
which, they ate, hungry, 
the Illusions of Death, 
in which we believed,, 
that will give us the Infinite, 
on which none, 
we did not want him hidden, 
in a single Moment, 
of the Illusion of a Happiness, 
on which we shall bear, 
at the neck of Hopes,   
by the endless Holidays of Forgetfulness, 
from which we learned, 
to we not make us a graven image  
ever, 
for not to profane us, 
the Church of Love, 
to which, still we worship, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
49
the Past. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.   In looking for lost Time 
 
 
Dices scattered on the floor of the Promises, 
drowned in the Wrinkles of a Frustration, 
so passionate, 
that they were scattered through all the harbors, 
of the Illusions of Memories, 
where I could have met you, 
Paradise of the Smile of some Dawns, 
on which it seemed, 
that I will never understand them, 
were so of cold and indifferent, 
once with the Day of Illusions of Death, 
on which, if we had understood them, 
really, 
we would not have become today, 
a gate, of Cemetery, of the Illusions of Life, 
which always opens, 
in looking for lost Time, 
of a Love, 
on which the Horizons of the Absolute Truth, 
has trampled her into the untouchable soles, 
of the Eternity.  

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
50
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.   On the forehead of the Soul 
 
 
How much, 
would have existed, 
the clouds of Eyes of Wandering 
if it would not have rained with the tears of Remoteness, 
burgeoning the Longing, 
which I have served it, 
as an appetizer at the Love,  
which God no longer carries us, 
since when it existed, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
from which to take our ration, 
daily, 
of the Illusions of Death, 
wounding us all the barriers of Immortality, 
from the Horizon of naive Smile,  
in which I will drown my, 
Future, 
forever, 
giving him at the Forgetfulness.  
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
51
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.    No matter how hurt it would be 
 
 
And no Day, 
will not tell me, 
how many Illusions of Memories, 
you burned them to me, 
on the Wrinkles of Imagination, 
which I would have given them to you in the Night, 
in which we would have killed us, 
Endlessness?  
 
Let to me the Blood of Heaven, 
to touch the flames of the Dawns, 
which have not yet disappeared, 
through the Veins of the Remorses, 
which are still burning, 
fidgety, 
hoping that we will have a Future, 
no matter how hurt it would be, 
by, the Feelings, 
of the cold chains, 
from our Breathings, 
rusty, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
52
of Forgetfulness. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.   To I die on the shoulders of Happiness 
 
 
Drunk by the Tears, 
of Eternity, 
I thought I would succeed, 
to I die on the shoulders of the Illusions of Happiness, 
from which to create to me, 
Salvation by me myself, 
then when I considered myself, 
Death. 
 
And, not even, 
the funerary tomb, 
of the Illusions of our Memories, 
it did no longer succeed, 
it to pass us, 
through the mud without Time, 
of the Vanity, 
where we tried, 
to we defeat us, 
the Love, 
for the Absolute Truth, 
on which we forsaken him, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
53
without us to ever understand, 
his Meaning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.    At the Feast of the Illusions of Death 
 
 
Let me to squeeze, 
the Tear of the Existence, 
who bore you, 
kissing your, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
where God tried, 
for the first time, 
to becomes, 
the Absolute Truth, 
of the touches, 
from the Endlessness of Sentiments, 
so suave, 
that, 
even the Horizon of the Word, 
who it gave birth us to the World, 
began to sigh,  
when I believed, 
in the Illusions of Life, 
which, they began to snow with the Happiness, 
which the Destiny had consumed her, 
at the Feast, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
54
of the Illusions of Death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.  Rigor Mortis 
 
 
Traces on which Death, 
she would have considered them the Life, 
are following us the Time, 
in which we have hidden us, 
since died us, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
which we chewed her, 
in the riddles of Times, 
which have never found out us, 
the Future, 
which we should have to we meet him, 
equally alive, 
how dead, 
it was to us, 
the Day, 
which just I had spent it, 
in the Cemetery of your Smile, 
which has cooled so much, 
that it became, 
that Rigor Mortis, 
of the Illusions of Life. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
55
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  25.    No Day can no longer 
 
 
 
I do not know if the World, 
it could be better, 
if the Illusions  of Death, 
would have more understanding, 
with the Illusions of Life, 
on which the Eternity of a God, 
he sees them more satisfying, 
with the Vanity, 
to which, 
no Day can no longer, 
to thank him, 
for, 
Death from ourselves, 
no matter how satisfied we would be, 
to get rid us of the pyres of Consciousnesses, 
graduated from Existence, 
for the Suffering, 
which we carry her on the back, 
of a Time, 
of the Nobody.  
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.   Do not tell me 
 
 
Do not tell me, 
that you broke all the sheets of Destiny, 
which was printed, 
on our cheap Theater tickets, 
of the Illusions of Life, 
where we were invited, 
by the Illusions of Death, 
to we meditate,  
to the Illusion of Memory, 
which it would have hung us the chains of Love, 
at the neck of God, 
on which no Creation, 
would not have wanted him, 
of husband.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
57
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27.   The Icon of the Saints of Dreams 
 
 
I know that the Stars of Despair, 
they loved, 
more than the Future, 
the our Birthdays, 
where we died, 
without we ever understanding, 
what it means to truly love, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
in which we drowned without wanting, 
the Absolute, 
which I thought him, 
Somewhere sometime, 
the Icon of the Saints of Dreams, 
of our Thoughts, 
on which all the Churches of Love, 
would have wanted them, 
in the Soul of Glances, 
through which we lost us, 
the Illusions of Death. 
   
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
58
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.   The Autumns of  Doubts 
 
 
Deep traces of Illusions of the Death, 
they shade us, 
the Eyes of Heavens of the Stranger from us, 
what they have fallen us, 
from the hair of the Smile, 
full of the Autumns of Doubts, 
in which we drowned us, 
the Illusion of Happiness, 
which we buried her later, 
in the Cemetery of an Encounter,  
to which we have not been, anymore, 
none of us, 
with the Heart of the Hope, 
being so busy, 
with the Destiny,  
who he humiliated and killed us, 
the Illusion of Memory, 
on which we would have paid her, 
forever, 
to the God of Contempt, 
what seems that has born us, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
59
without ever having, 
a plan and for His Creation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.    Wrinkles 
 
 
Leave my feelings burned, 
by the Sunsets, 
of the Forgetfulness 
which I have them lit up, 
from the flesh of Horizons, 
of an Illusion of Memory, 
which, we would have liked, 
to feed us, 
the Illusion of Happiness to die, 
by, ourselves, 
lost, even her, 
in the Wrinkles, 
through which the rivers flow, 
so deep, 
of the Vanity, 
of the blood that has killed us, 
even the Genes of Ancestors, 
who would have loved, 
more than ever, 
the Future of our Eyes, 
forsaken by the own Past, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
60
for to be stolen by a History, 
of the Nobody. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.   The Life of a Frustration 
 
 
I knew you'd show me, 
the Love beyond of, the Death, 
of Eternity, 
in which we have found again the Destiny.   
 
So we were so lost, 
that all the Cemeteries of Dreams, 
we consider them to be the Eternal Lives of Beyond, 
of rusted Promises, 
by the Illusions of Memories.  
 
And then we broke us, 
by, the chains of the Blood, 
wounding its Genes with new Horizons, 
which we have roasted, 
to feed us with the Past, 
of a World, 
of the Illusions of Death, 
from which we build us, 
always, 
the Life, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
61
of a Frustration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.   The Ancestors of Chance 
 
 
They have elapsed, 
the Moments of the Illusions of Death, 
over the Wrinkles paid by Eternity, 
as being the Time of a Happiness, 
over which, 
the Sunsets of the Despair, 
would have been banished, 
by, the Eyes of Horizons, 
of some Promises, 
which it would never have closed them, 
the Lie, 
of the Bodies of Dreams, 
which we would not have touched them, 
at the Feast of Dawns, 
of an Uncertainty, 
from which we have done us, 
ropes of Heaven, 
on which to we tie them to the throat of Love, 
where to we hang us     
once and for all, 
the Future, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
62
in the depths of the Blood of our Genes, 
which none of the Ancestors of Chance,   
would not have accepted them, ever 
as being Truth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
32.   Marriage with the Illusions of My Life 
 
 
The vigor of love, 
broken from the Heart of the Past, 
wash my Existence of your Smile, 
with the Illusion of the Chain of Happiness, 
which I broke it, 
wounding my Eternity, 
what gave me free rein 
to the Illusions of Death,  
which I would have wanted to sell them, 
at the Market of Soul, 
of the Illusion of your Memory, 
for nothing, 
but none of Destinies, 
he did not want to buy them for me, 
to give them to you, 
once with marriage, 
of Illusions of my Life, 
which would have polished you, 
the Cemetery of your own Moments.   
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.   The Religion of Illusions of Memory 
 
 
Break me the label of the Vanity, 
until you will arrive, 
at the veins of the Absolute Truth, 
of a Love, 
what I wept her beyond 
of Illusions of Life, 
paying her with overpriced 
to the Destiny, 
on which no school, 
of the God of this World, 
it would not have wanted to receive it, 
so much bad it would have done, 
to the Religion of Illusions of Memory, 
whose believer I was, 
beyond the Eternity, 
of your Eyes, 
if the Churches of Loneliness, 
if they would not crumbled her, 
in the sand of a Hourglass, of the Luck, 
which they played him, 
the Heavens of Wrinkles of a Time, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
64
at the festive table, 
of the Illusions of Death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34.   The Coffin of Flowers of Ice 
 
 
And I would have gone, 
from me myself, 
toward the Coffin, 
of Flowers of Ice, 
of the Illusion of Memories, 
from which I have carved to me, 
the statue of a Love, 
on which and today, 
I keep her in the Refrigerator of the Thoughts, 
I was afraid to open him, 
in order not to melt my Illusions of Memories, 
what I bought them so expensive, 
with All, 
what I had the most important on the World: 
the Eternity of the Moment, 
on which Nobody, 
would not have wanted, 
to sell it to us ever, 
however much, we would have wanted to find it, 
in the Traces of Steps, 
on which the Breathing, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
65
of a Kiss, 
they would have trampled her, 
on the thresholds of the Church, 
of our Glances.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35.   Over the Eternity Horizon 
 
 
Give me a Palm of Destiny, 
over the Eternity Horizon, 
which I would have given it to you, 
if we had not been sold on nothing, 
in the Market of the Illusions of Death, 
which, they tied us, 
by the pillar of Vanity, 
of the Illusions of some Memories, 
until we learned by heart, 
what we have to do, 
in the World of Illusions of Life, 
which they paid us every Passing Moment, 
with the bitterness of a new Day, 
which, it no longer belonged, 
to us, 
never.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
66
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36.   The Eyes of your Destiny 
 
 
Could exist, 
a more beautiful story, 
than the Eyes of your Destiny ?, 
which I admired them, 
beyond the Illusions of Death, 
which they gave us an Encounter, 
at the corner of the street of Illusion of a Happiness, 
which demanded us more, 
than we would have worked, 
for the Illusions of Life, 
our entire Existence, 
which we have forsaken it, 
-under constraint-, 
at the pillar of Infamy, 
for it to be bought, 
by another Destiny, 
much richer, 
in Death, 
than we were.  
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
67
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37.   It wandered 
 
 
Break me the forehead of the Horizon, 
on the deep Wrinkles of Reproaches, 
of a God of Love, 
what seems to be written to us, 
the Destiny, 
by fighting,  
with the Storms of the Illusions of Life, 
on which, precisely, 
it had rescued them from drowning, 
the Smile of our Encounter, 
which wandered, 
on the paths of Illusion of a Memory, 
in which we would have wanted to stay, 
embracing us the Illusion of Happiness, 
without we knowing, 
or we to succeed, 
ever, 
we to save her, 
from the indifferent arms, 
of Illusions of Death.   
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38.   At Lost Objects 
 
 
Wedding ring of embers,  
of the Smile of a Time, 
given in search and now, 
at Lost Objects, 
you burn us the Divinity, 
of the Clouds from us, 
for to shade us the Happiness, 
with the coolness of your Eternity,  
that springs from the Dawn of Saints, 
which I forgot them, 
in the lonely cup of coffee, 
so gnawed, by the shards of Thoughts, 
that even now 
it cuts us anymore  
the Blood of Memories, 
in two equal parts, 
which would have wanted, 
to remain for Eternity, 
the Soul, 
of Immortality.   
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39.   Much richer 
 
 
Where I would succeed to find, 
chisel of the Eternity, 
through which we have carved us the Statues of the 
Dreams, 
in front of which we always met, 
the Purpose, 
without we ever delaying,  
at the hour of Illusion of Happiness, 
until when, 
through a breath of Destiny, 
we've lost us, 
the coins of Illusions of some Memories, 
which would have wanted to be Eternals, 
through the pockets of our Lives, 
in which, 
anyway, the Wind of the Vanity blew,  
which we have gathered it without wanting,   
and we believed, 
that we will succeed to buy, 
with all the Storms of his Feelings, 
at least, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
70
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a kiss of Eternity, 
which has been stolen us, 
of Illusions of Death, 
much richer, 
than all of our Hopes, 
together, 
which we have lost them at the table of Silence, 
to which he ate, 
the Blood of our Ancestors, 
Forever.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
71
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40.   The Moment of Illusions of Death 
 
 
Dressed, 
in the Heaven of your Destiny, 
I try to catch the Horizon of Eternity, 
on the forehead of the Future, 
from which I have creat to me, 
the shield of to move on,  
on the wings of the Glances, 
which you have carved it to me, 
with the cutting edge of the Heart Knife, 
in the blood of Memory, 
which will always flow, 
over the Moment of the Illusions of Death, 
through which I have known, 
the beauty of Dream, 
of not to ever understand, 
the Meaning of Love, 
which I wear to you.  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
72
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41.   For a single Kiss 
 
 
Dawns of  flint, 
they still pull out sparks of Dreams, 
from the Night of Smile, 
in which we have lost us, 
the Identity, 
of Illusions of Life, 
over which we jumped, 
drowning us in the Illusion of Memory, 
of Steps, 
on which no tear did not do them anymore, 
in the Cemetery of some Promises, 
from which we fed us,   
with the dew of Illusions of Death, 
until when, 
we forgot, 
once and for all, 
how desperate we were, 
for a single Kiss, 
of the Love. 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
73
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42.   Ditches and Thoughts 
 
 
We were born, 
for to dig, 
Ditches of Regrets, 
in which to bury us, 
the fences of Glances, 
which struggle, 
in the trenches of some Destinies, 
for to conquer, 
Citadel of Perfection, 
what seems besieged, 
a while ago of an Eternity, 
in the bleeding flesh, 
of a Sunset of the Kiss, 
in which we have lost us, 
the virginity of the Illusion of Memory, 
until we fell, 
in the arms of the Cemetery, 
of Preconceived Ideas, 
of Illusions of Death, 
to whom, we have been sold, 
by Destiny, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
74
even before we met, 
under the vault of a Horizon of Life.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43.   Taken by the strong stream 
 
 
Traces of shores of the lost Glances, 
they still guard, 
the Wrinkles of rivers of the Illusions of Memories, 
what have flowed,  
among the sharp cliffs of Questions, 
which have cut them the impulse of to confront, 
the cascades of a defiant and unforgiving time, 
in which we fell, 
taken by the strong stream, 
of Illusions of Happiness, 
from which we would have tried somewhere-sometime, 
to build us a house, 
of Eternity, 
which was taken by the waters of the Moments, 
indebted at the Illusions of Death, 
as soon as we looked into the Eyes of the World, 
where our Future was drowning,  
caught between the marshes of the Vanity, 
of a Tears, 
on which neither her own Destiny, 
he could not understand her anymore, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
75
as being, 
Love.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44.   At the buttons of the shirt 
 
 
How many fences we braided, 
in the hair of Eternity, 
which we should wear it, 
at the buttons of the shirt, 
to each Hope ?, 
from which we build us shield, 
against the Illusions of Death, 
which we polished them without wanting, 
until they become the Mirror, 
of the Soul of a Forgetfulness, 
in which we look us without wanting, 
the image of the Vanity, 
which should have become, 
Love, 
somewhere sometime, 
in an Existence of Nobody.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
76
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45.   Indifferent Time 
 
 
How many Traces I have collected for you, 
in the basket of the Illusion of the Memory, 
does not know, neither Eternity,   
which I have killed her, 
separating us from ourselves, 
on the forehead of the Wandering, 
in whose Wrinkles we drowned us, 
the Past, 
without to we can save him ever, 
in the Tear of a Love, 
which, even now, 
it drain careless, 
through the unforgiving veins, 
of the indifferent Time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
77
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46.   The Dust of Heart 
 
 
Replies sharp, 
they are fighting for life and death, 
with the Destiny, 
sold to the Illusions of Death, 
from which we feed, 
the Love, 
of a sinful Day, 
which avoided the Churches of Dreams, 
for to build in their place, 
the cold and indifferent Glances, 
of Forgetfulness, 
which neither the Time has not understood them, 
to the separation from the Illusion of Memory, 
which we forsaken, 
without realizing,  
how much we would have succeeded in understanding 
Him, 
on the God of Illusion of our Happiness, 
even if was, 
in the Glances which we have lost them, 
then when they collapsed, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
78
in the Dust of Heart, 
of some Doubts, 
of our Wanderings.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47.   Waiting for the Sacred Fire 
 
 
Lumps of Dreams, 
fall over the Horizons, 
bygone, 
of the Memories, 
from which we have carved us, 
the statues of some Moments, 
cold and impersonal, 
on which no breath of the Illusions of the Death , 
no matter how hot,  
would no longer succeed, 
it to warm them up enough, 
the Future, 
collapsed in the chaos of ices, 
where it is said, 
that it would be frozen, 
the body of Love,  
waiting for the Sacred Fire, 
which we have extinguished it, 
for fear of not burning us the Illusion of Happiness, 
believing in the Destiny, 
which we followed it, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
79
up to the cold face of Death, 
without we ever asking, 
if it were worth it, 
this. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48.   Destinies hit 
 
 
Fallen gods, 
from the rights of Churches of the Illusions of Life, 
they stay through the pubs of  Times, 
without ever succeeding, 
to they awaken from drunkenness, 
of Illusions of Death , 
from which they have built for them, 
the armours of Vanities required, 
to face, 
Destinies hit, 
by the Truth of an Illusion of the Happiness, 
on which the World, 
considers it to be the Future, 
of Love. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
80
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49.   To the throat of Luck 
 
 
The dice of Moment of Memory, 
mutilated by failed Days, 
of Waiting, 
of some winning numbers, 
which were killed by the broken roulette, 
of the Absolute Truth, 
of a Love, 
what seems, 
that it had no longer succeeded to resurrect itself, 
of an Eternity, 
becoming the millstone of Destiny, 
which was thrown, 
linked to the throat of Luck, 
  in the whirling waters of Illusions of Life, 
believing it would succeed in defeating, 
the Death, 
of, ourselves  
those left on the roads without return, 
of, the Illusions of Death.   
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50.  The dusty path 
 
 
Carnivals drained, 
by the dew of a World, 
in decomposition accentuated, 
on the floors, of the playrooms, 
of a Casino of the Vanity, 
where they win each time, 
the Illusions of Death, 
so rich in suffering, 
that no Life, 
it can not stand, 
in the dusty path of Compromises, 
with the Destiny, 
of, the Illusions of Happiness.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51.   Love tattooed 
 
 
Cold walls and full of mold, 
of the Illusion of a Memory, 
which grew indifferent, 
in the little dust, 
leaked out of the shriveled wall,   
of the Soul, 
who is still looking for, groping 
among the Illusions of Death, 
the Love, 
tattooed with the Lattices, 
of some graffiti, 
on the Tears that separate us, 
by the Illusion of Happiness.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
83
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52.  The Heart wasted 
 
 
How many stars, 
God would have drunk, 
that the drunkenness of Love 
has become so great, 
that the whole World, 
it drowned in the Future, 
which it considers him, 
that it would hide it from the Illusions of Death, 
in which we have gone astray, 
for to kiss the Glances of Horizon, 
from, the Eyes of Storm, 
of the Oceans of Blood, 
on which, we still navigate, 
in drift, 
toward an Unknown, 
comprised by the Eternity of Memory,  
from the Heart, wasted, 
of the Existence, 
of Illusions of some Happiness.  
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
84
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53.  They burn 
 
 
Days of smoke, 
burn on the pyres full, 
by, the embers of Feelings, 
which is barely flickering 
under the ashes of the Tears, 
which, they have hidden,  
somewhere sometime, 
an entire Ocean of Dreams, 
on which they sailed, 
the most imposing ships, 
of the Illusion of Happiness, 
with the sails of the remorses, injured, 
in the hot wind of Truth, 
for to end, 
burned by the Sacred Fire of the Illusions of Death, 
kindled by Horizons of the Future, 
in so much, 
that,  
nor a Word was not easy enough,  
to float on the sky of lead, 
of our souls, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
85
who still,  
are burning alive, 
in the oven, 
of the Illusions of some Memories.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
54.   A new testament 
 
 
How many times, 
the watches of Eternity, 
they beat the shy Moments, 
of Illusions of Life, 
which do not want to become Eternity ?, 
between the frames of the icons, 
of some Feelings,  
caught by the rusty nails of the Luck, 
on the cold and wet walls, 
of some churches, 
sold to Forgetfulness, 
through which the Saints of Illusion of Memories, 
they live their life, 
strange and rigid,  
of monks who were fasting continuously, 
after, 
your Eyes, 
for whom God, 
he should have written, 
a new testament, 
of the Love.  

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
86
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55.   Lost eyes 
 
 
Chains of Loves rusted, 
still more binds, 
the palms of some Heavens, 
forgotten by their own souls, 
who they rained, 
over the dust of some Happenings, 
slapping them with the Water of Life, 
of some Illusions of the Death, 
of which have budded, 
the Cemeteries of Promises, 
which they married with the Existence, 
giving birth, 
to the Consumption Society of the Vain Dreams , 
on which, neither a calendar, 
of, the Illusions of Happiness, 
no longer remembers her, 
in the right of a Day, 
of the Word hallowed, 
to give birth to the Absolute Truth, 
from the lost Eyes, 
of the wandered Time, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
87
from ourselves.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56.   In the closet of a Future 
 
 
How many slices of soil, 
more remain from our Promises, 
made by the Heaven of the Glances,  
whose Soul, 
can never be incarnate, 
in the Blood of the Sunsets, 
so lonely and cold, 
that they burn and now, 
giving us the flowers of ice, 
of, the Illusions of Memory, 
on which we do not hope, 
we to put them, 
in the vase of our Destiny, 
dusty and thrown, 
in the closet of a Future, 
of the Nobody.    
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
88
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57.   The Cemetery of Destiny 
 
 
Coffins of Tears, 
waits silently and resigned, 
molten lead crowns, 
of the Illusions of some Memories, 
once with the Helplessness, 
of to ever resurrect, 
from the Cemetery of Destiny, 
which gave us the Separation, 
of ourselves  
giving us a World, 
which no Star of the Love, 
it would not want to fall, 
for fear not to hurt,  
the Heaven alone and sad, 
of the Illusions of Happiness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58.   Moment empty and withered 
 
 
We are 
a flight of the Times, 
what seem to be abandoned, 
by the indifferent Time, 
but that weighs us accurately, 
every Memory of Lead, 
which falls hard and oppressive, 
over the Days of some Wings, 
fallen from the Heavens of Souls, 
debased 
even and from the rights, 
of Illusions of Happiness, 
precisely in the arms, 
 of Cemeteries of Expectations, 
of a, Resurrection, 
of Moment empty and withered, 
which will no longer pass us ever, 
threshold, 
of an Encounter.   
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59.   Dreaming at the World of beyond 
 
 
Why did God create, 
a World of Fences, 
where the bars of Lead Words, 
become an Illusion of a Memory, 
heavy and oppressive, 
which crushes us, 
the Soul of the Future, 
crucified on the pyre of some Times, 
which do not think,   
in the Sacred Fire of Illusions of Happiness, 
of a Moment, 
from which we would have carved our image,  
of a house unfenced, by any Cemetery, 
of Illusions of Death, 
on which the Blood of the Sunsets in us, 
still more washes them, 
dreaming, 
at, the World of beyond.   
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
91
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60.   Single and full of loneliness 
 
 
Ice bridges, 
they tear the Tears of the Day, 
in slices of cold and ruthless Sun, 
that melts our Eternity, 
turning it into the clouds of the Separation, 
that will flood with the rains of their Time, 
the future Illusions of Memories,  
who they will commit suicide, 
bound to the paltry fences of Forgetfulness, 
from which we will build for us, 
the breath of the heavy and indifferent Years, 
of a Sadness, 
on which no World, 
will never understand it, 
nor even then, 
when will light us pale, 
the bodies of the Illusions of Happiness, 
transformed now, 
in a single, 
and full of loneliness, 
Falling Star, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
92
who baptized us for eternity, 
Fate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61.   The bitter Ice 
 
 
Blades of Dreams, 
they pierce the mutilated bodies of the Days, 
drowned in the alcoholic Stars, 
of an Universe, 
where the God of Love, 
sleeps dead by drunk, 
under the tables of the Galaxies of Hopes, 
which are no longer sold on nothing, 
to the Illusions of Death , 
which become increasingly venomous, 
with their own Cemeteries, 
from the Feelings of our Love,   
cold and careless, 
with the traces of the Separations, 
which they will cover, 
with the bitter Ice, 
of the Forgetfulness, 
from the Tree of a Knowledge, 
on which no Illusion of Life, 
she would never want her.  
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
93
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62.   Whose blind Days 
 
 
Tell me, 
how many Illusions of Memories, 
poison their Eternities ?, 
for your steps, 
which trample nonchalants  
my transformed Dreams, 
in the graves of the Truths, 
in which no Lie of the Glances, 
it can no longer believe, 
so bent, became our Future, 
on which somewhere-sometime, 
we would have dyed him in the colors of Eternity,     
from which we would never have left, 
on the broken and creased paths, 
of the Calendar of Illusions of Happiness, 
whose blind Days, 
they can not even read, 
date number, 
which it represents, 
which to decompose them, 
in months and years and centuries, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
94
of a Time, 
which will no longer be ever, 
our.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63.   Lonely and ungrateful 
 
 
The regrets of the bouquets of the ice flowers, 
they poison us the windows of the Souls, 
and now, 
after it died us, 
the entire Eternity of the Moment, 
which we have killed, 
at the pillar of Infamy, 
throwing with the stones of Indifference, 
taken out of the river of some Illusions of Life, 
in which we no longer believed, 
wishing, with fervor, 
the Illusions of Death, 
in which we hoped to be able to shelter us, 
the Love, 
what just burned us on the pyre of Passion, 
until, 
the whole dust from our Words, 
has decomposed, 
remaining only the Absolute Truth, 
lonely and ungrateful, 
to some Illusions of Happiness. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
95
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64.   The Dawn of fulfilled Dreams 
 
 
And if, I would not cover myself, 
with the Heaven of your Heart, 
what horologe of Destiny, 
would beat me the exact time, 
of the Illusions of Happiness ?, 
reminding me that I must wake up, 
in the Dawn of the fulfilled Dreams, 
from which we have carved us, 
the whole Water of Life, 
to light up our Sacred Fire, 
of, the Stars, 
 which I have put them to you, 
in the hair of Days, 
and from whose flames, 
burn and now the Illusions of Life, 
in the hearth, 
of the our Thoughts, 
to which, 
we cook from time to time, 
together, 
the food of Death Illusions. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
96
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65.   Bricks of Churches 
 
 
A Chance is a Star, 
whose fall, 
it hits suddenly, 
by the forehead of a Destiny, 
of the Nobody, 
from which God, 
would have intended, 
he to make his,   
bricks of Churches, 
of Illusions of Life, 
on which he to put them, 
with great attention, 
through the Cemeteries of Words in us, 
that would have become for us, 
another Testament, 
of the Illusions of Death.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
97
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66.   The Stars of our Destinies 
 
 
When the Heaven, will begin, 
to dig its Horizons, 
with the nails of the Endlessness, 
until will burst, the Blood of the Sunsets , 
enchanted by the World, 
of the arrows from the Words of Love, 
on which he has found them, 
wandering at the feet, 
of the Freedom of Illusions of Death, 
then they will spring, 
the Tears of another Testament, 
dedicated to a Love, 
on which the Eternity, 
it wears it to the Stars, 
of our Destinies.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
98
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67.   Cups of Dreams from which we drink 
 
 
It will you ever succeed, 
the Heart of Heaven from your Eyes, 
to beat the Clouds of feelings, 
in so much, 
that the stelar dust, from the Blood of Love, 
to rises   
in the glories of Boundless, 
from which we sculpted us, 
the meaning of our own Existence, 
what seems lost, 
in the labyrinths of some Illusions of the Death, 
on which we are trying to cross them, 
creating for us, 
from the dust of the bodies, 
of some Tears,  
kneaded on the wheels of the potters, 
of some Feelings, 
Cups of Dreams, 
from which to we drink thirsty of Love, 
the Water of Eternity.  
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
99
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68.   The Blood of the Testaments 
 
 
The charms, 
caught in the straps of Destiny, 
they stand petrified in waiting, 
of new Illusions of Life, 
on which to cook them, 
at the copious lunch of Suffering, 
 being from abundance, 
on fields of the Illusions of Death, 
of this World, 
bathed in the Blood of the Testaments, 
what, they will not use than the Cemeteries,  
of the barefoot Steps, 
which I wore them in the back, 
of the Heaven of Souls, 
left as an inheritance by a God, 
of a Star, 
which still seems to shine today, 
for Nobody's Eyes.   
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69.   Still Before the World 
 
 
Wheels of Days, 
what seems to no longer spin ever, 
at the Great Bear of the Stars, 
of our Destiny, 
drowned in the glow of a galaxy, 
on which the Pain, 
it discovered it, 
still from the Times, 
from Before the World, 
when none of us, 
we were not even, 
a cursed fragment by Time, 
and thirsty, by the Churches, 
 on which Blasphemy calls them, 
Love, 
they stand stuck in, 
the Illusions of Death, 
of Hopes, 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
101
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to receive in the gift, 
a Cemetery of Thoughts, 
packed in the black hearses, 
of the Forgetfulness, 
which constantly digs, 
the cold tombs, 
of the Glances, 
in the Souls, 
born, 
for Vanity.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
102
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70.   A Sense of Immortality 
 
 
You hurt me the foreheads of Eternity, 
on which the Star of our Luck breathes it, 
if you think that only such, 
you will succeed, 
to leave us,  the Separation, 
of ourselves, 
which binds us, 
of a cold and paltry Moment, 
of the clowns of some Loves, 
on which no Truth, 
seems to never understand them, 
at the corner of the street, 
of Doubts,  
where they become deceptives  
when they divided with frenzy, 
new Days empty,  
from which they hope, 
to we make us, 
a Sense of Immortality, 
in which we thought, 
somewhere sometime. 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
103
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71.   So rarely 
 
 
When the Tears, cry, 
so rarely, 
in the arms of the Heaven of the Drought, 
from the veins of the Memories, 
on which no Present, 
it no longer want them, 
as the exchange currency of the Illusions of Death , 
I will look for you, 
among the graves of Dreams, 
until I find the Heart of the Star, 
which beat, 
somewhere sometime, 
and for the Eternity of our Love, 
about which the Vanity would have told me, 
that it would flow on the rivers of the Wrinkles, 
what have flooded with Pain, 
the abundant meal of a God, 
of the Nobody,  
who would be the father of a Creation, 
devastated by the Absurd, 
from which we were forced, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
104
to build our Destinies, 
of the Nobody.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72.   The taste of its own Time 
 
 
Baskets of Hopes, 
scattered on the Paths of Vanities, 
they have disheveled their long hair of the twigs, 
which have become, 
the sacred numbers of some Days, 
on which no willow of the Love, 
no matter how bent would be, 
over the sweat lakes of Memories, 
can no longer number, 
the waves of fallen branches, 
in the Water of Illusions of Life, 
which wash us the trunks of Glances, 
raised in a Moment, 
on which neither a Tear, 
it would no longer be able to forsaken her, 
no matter how bitter would be the Taste, 
of its own Time.  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
105
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73.   On broken wings 
 
 
Late regrets, 
they loose themselves, 
on the Night of Remorses, 
hit by the deserted Heaven, 
of the Sentiment, 
lost, 
on broken wings, 
of a deleted Address, 
from the phone book, 
of some Numbers, 
for which everything was banal and concrete, 
by paying the bills of Passions, 
with the napkins dirty by the lipstick of Sunsets, 
on which I saw for the last time, 
the forms of the traces, of your Kiss  
tearfully, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
106
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which rains me, 
over, the tablecloth, 
of the Heart, 
lost in the refined food, 
of a Future, 
cold and empty, 
on which Nobody, not invited him,  
at our Meeting, 
with the Past.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
107
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74.   The worldly ones 
 
 
How much quarrel they have sold us, 
the Regrets of Waves ?, 
which they hit us the shores of the Senses, 
with the Endlessness of the Ocean of Passions, 
on which we would have wanted to navigate, 
without to ever reach, 
in a port of the Conclusions, 
from which to achieve, 
how many Sunrises of Feelings, 
we went, 
on our way, 
toward a Sky of the Infinite, 
about which we were not aware of, 
that it could burn us,  
with the glow of the Absolute Truth, 
on which we would not have succeeded to understand him 
ever,  
however much he would have loved us, 
his God, 
who has preached us the Testament of the Separation, 
of Worldly ones, 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
108
to whom we were convinced, 
that we inspire them, 
the Divine Light of Love.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75.   The Absolute Vanity 
 
 
Waves detached, 
from the brightness of God 
of the Being, 
whom he never understood her, 
creating to her 
the bars of the Original Sin, 
through which to be certified, 
that the sufferings, 
are a necessity and not a mistake, 
when they guard, skilfully, 
the priestly garments, 
of a some Truth, 
said, the increasingly whispered, 
on at rusty gates, 
of the Absolute Vanity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
109
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76.   All Waves 
 
 
How much soul would have put, 
the Divinity of the Stranger from us, 
in the Rock of Destiny, 
that, has succeeded, 
to face all the Waves, 
which would have broken it, 
by, the shores of Vanity, 
breaking it, the hourglass of Love, 
in shards of Feelings, 
in which to cut us the veins of the Dreams, 
until the last drop of blood, 
of some Dawns, 
in which to we bathe, 
drowning us, 
the Immortality, 
what would have brought a new Day, 
which did not belong to us anymore.  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
110
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77.   Rashness 
 
 
Withered times, 
fall from the tree of Destiny, 
for to be collected by the Nothingness, 
lost through the Churches of Dreams, 
to which we have prayed, 
to the Illusions of Death , 
so they can be happy, 
in the World of beyond, 
of  the  Rashness, 
from which we braided us the Icons of Cemeteries, 
to which we worship, the Time, 
for to be sufficiently of humbled, 
before of the altars, of heavy Steps and undecided, 
of some Religions, 
on which, only the self-murderers, 
still can understand them.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
111
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78.   An endlessly of the Love 
 
 
Wings of Promises, 
burn the Feelings, 
of the World, 
of some Glances, 
which have fallen, 
in the depths of the Inferno, 
from ourselves, 
striking us with their weight of molten lead, 
of some Questions, 
on which Nobody has succeeded so far, 
to release them, 
by the Illusions of Death,  
of which they are bound, 
with the flames of some impossible Loves, 
born from the Eternity of an Universe, 
for which and a single Moment, 
means an Endlessly, 
of the Love.  
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
112
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79.   Crowns of Winners 
 
 
Statues of Gods, 
broken, 
on the inert cement of Remorses, 
from which we have built us, 
the crowns of Winners, 
of some Failures, 
for which the Religions fought, 
until the last particle, of Uncertainty, 
burning on the pyre of the Absolute Truth, 
the enchanted Eyes of the Heaven of Souls, 
which were given to us by the Destiny, 
for to be Feelings, 
from which we will create us, 
the own Histories, 
whose bricks of Feelings, 
we to put them at the pedestals of cathedrals, 
of the Love.  
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
113
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
114
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
115
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
116
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SORIN CERIN –   THE ILLUSION OF MEMORY   
- philosophical poems- 
 
 
 
117
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

