at ensuring that we get there, and in 
comfort. Nevertheless, I wonder if 
Weatherall is not over-optimistic; given 
epidemiology's discovery of one mega-
killer, no society has yet removed it. Dis-
tressingly, also, younger people are 
ignoring the message that cigarettes kill: 
the activists who recently occupied an oil 
rig were apparently an intelligent but 
puritan lot, except that they smoked like 
chimneys. 
Perhaps, 
though, 
such 
optimism 
reflects an ultimate failure of conviction 
on the author's part. For, although con-
cluding that the medical sciences are 
moving into their most exciting and pro-
ductive period, Weatherall seems sud-
denly to lose his nerve. To be sure, 
molecular biology and genetics will soon 
dominate human biology and medicine, 
but any benefits for the patient are 
uncertain and will, he thinks, take a long 
time. So he returns to talking about the 
art as well as the science, remembering 
that one of his teachers used "the quiet 
art", a quotation from Virgil, as the title 
for an anthology about medical practice. 
In the end we are left confused. 
Part of the uncertainty arises, I 
believe, because the author himself was 
divided about his book's message -
a 
polemic urging decision-makers to sup-
port non-targeted research, a popular 
exposition, or both? Moreover, the 
reader faces another difficulty: its length. 
On the one hand, Weatherall's details 
give a marvellous overview of the med-
ical sciences at a turning point, the sweep 
recalling such masterly syntheses for the 
general reader as Lancelot Hogben's 
Mathematics for the Millions, say, or H. G. 
Wells's An Outline of History. 
On the other hand, one has to echo 
the Austrian emperor on La Clemenza 
di Tito: "Too many notes, my dear 
Mozart!" 
Weatherall 
usually 
writes 
crisply and stylishly, but in these 348 
pages there is a book of 100 pages strug-
gling to get out. He acknowledges his 
secretary's help in transcribing his scrawl, 
but I suspect that (as busy men do) he 
dictated most of it into a tape recorder 
without alteration. He has been ill-served 
by his editors: creative editors still exist 
and would have excised the superfluous 
-
the heavy use of adjectives and 
adverbs, the predilection for sentences 
beginning with 'and' or 'but', and for the 
word 'seminal', as well as the academic 
asides and chuckles together with the 
repetitions (heart block and introns and 
exons, for example, both explained again 
within ten pages). This book is too 
important to be buried; somebody should 
lick it into shape. 
D 
Stephen Lock, formerly editor of the 
British Medical Journal, is at the Wei/come 
Institute for the History of Medicine, 183 
Euston Road, London NW1 2BN, UK. 
NATURE · VOL 375 · 22 JUNE 1995 
States of mind 
Karl J. Friston 
Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization 
of Brain and Behaviour. By J. A. Scott 
Kelso. 
MIT Press: 1995. Pp. 
334. 
$49.95, £44.95 
THIS charming and thought-provoking 
book looks at the brain and behaviour as 
pattern-forming dynamical systems. It cap-
tures, and gives substance to, a new theme 
in neuroscience, in which complexity is in 
the ascendancy and good old-fashioned 
chaos seems a thing of the past. Indeed, it 
is now almost passe to point out that com-
plex biological systems are chaotic. 
Complexity is brought sharply into focus 
when considering the relationship between 
functional segregation and functional 
integration of brain dynamics. Biological 
systems are found near phase-transitions, 
in regimes of metastability or at 'the edge 
of chaos'. This theme appears repeatedly in 
the sciences of complexity and evolutionary 
theory and (in this book) in the coordi-
nation dynamics of self-organizing systems. 
Central to Kelso's account is the role of 
critical points (regions of parameter space 
where the attractor changes qualitatively). 
Systems near critical points, or instabilities, 
show characteristic behaviours, such as 
critical slowing and critical fluctuations, 
phenomena expressed by the system's 
order parameters -
collective variables 
that embody the essential dynamics. Other 
:117 
BOOK REVIEWS 
people have reached a similar conclusion: 
Stuart Kauffman's self-organizing systems 
are found between low-order attractors 
and chaotic regimes of parameter space. 
Gerald Edelman and colleagues see a nec-
essary balance between a state of globally 
coherent integration and disintegrated 
functional segregation, where each brain 
area preserves its distinct dynamics. For 
Kelso the key to self-organization is insta-
bility, where the system is near crisis as it 
approaches 
a 
critical 
point. 
Self-
organization is simply the expression of 
dynamical patterns typical of nonlinear sys-
tems near critical points. These systems are 
generally characterized by loose couplings 
among their order parameters. Kelso 
frames this informational coupling in terms 
of coordination dynamics and, inspired by 
synergistics, the resulting dynamical fea-
tures. He carefully explains all these tech-
nical terms and demystifies the concept of 
self-organization with a series of lucid 
examples, starting with a pan of boiling oil 
in the kitchen with his daughter and ending 
with a spatial-mode analysis of multi-chan-
nel magnetoencephalography data. 
The book falls into three parts. After 
presenting a general and accessible 
account of dynamic pattern formation in 
simple nonlinear systems, Kelso demon-
strates the same principles and phenom-
ena in human sensorimotor coordination. 
He introduces the Haken-Kelso-Bunz 
model, which becomes an old friend as the 
book unfolds. The first part concludes by 
relating relative coordination (the incom-
plete entrainment of coupled systems, 
IvoRY first began to be extensively exploited in the seventeenth century, when the Dutch 
and English established themselves in Sierra Leone. This early Dutch map of Guinea 
reveals the European agenda. It is one of hundreds of pictures reproduced in Elephant: 
The Animal and Its Ivory in African Culture edited by D. H. Ross, which arose from an 
exhibition held in 1992 at the Fowler Museum of Cultural History, Los Angeles. 
University of California Press, $49 (pbk). 
643 

BOOK REVIEWS 
such as a father and son walking on a 
beach or two neurons in the extrastriate 
cortex) and intermittency in nonlinear 
dynamical systems. Kelso is clearly proud 
of this insight -
many of his original 
ideas pre-date the comfortable jargon 
(and mathematical formalism) of non-
linear dynamics. The second part of the 
book deals with intention, learning and 
perception. An interesting notion is that 
intentionality is meaningful only in terms 
of the system's order parameters. This 
precludes intention as a concept sep-
arable from the system enacting that 
intention. There is a seductive internal 
consistency here, but there is also a sense 
that some deep teleological question has 
been sidelined. Plasticity learning and 
memory are framed in terms of changes 
in the attractor landscape; although this 
is not as revolutionary as Kelso seems to 
think, his formulation of these changes 
in the language of coordination dynamics 
and synergistics is compelling. The final 
part addresses the brain as a self-
organizing 
(pattern-forming) 
system 
using earlier themes as well as explicit 
measures of brain activity such as magne-
to-encephalography. 
Is Kelso's account of brain and behav-
iour complete? It confronts the reader 
with many fundamental issues, such as 
the principles of pattern formation, the 
central role of instabilities and crisis in 
nonlinear systems, the brain as 
a 
self-organizing system, the fallacy of the 
computer-program metaphor, circular 
causality 
(where 
influences 
among 
different scales transcend notions such as 
top-down processing or reductionism) 
and learning as a plastic reshaping of the 
attractor manifold (where the learner is 
as important as what is learned). A 
mechanistic understanding is not one of 
Kelso's primary concerns, so the theory is 
a little incomplete when it comes to such 
questions as why the brain is poised in a 
state of metastability or what brings 
intentional systems to critical points and 
maintains them there. Answers to these 
questions have been proposed by authors 
referred to in the book but are not dealt 
with here in any great depth. For 
example, metastable systems may be 
more evolvable and, by selection for 
selectability, come to be a dominant phe-
notypic feature (such as Kauffman's 
"selective meta-dynamics"). Alternatively, 
metastability may be necessary for adap-
tive behaviour. Metastability itself could 
even be subject to selective pressure, with 
genetic mechanisms promoting it (such as 
Edelman's "value"). Whatever, Kelso's 
book will get you thinking. 
0 
Karl 
J. 
Friston 
is 
in 
the 
Wei/come 
Department 
of 
Cognitive 
Neurology, 
MRC 
Cyclotron 
Unit, 
Hammersmith 
Hospital, 150 DuCane Road, 
London 
W12 ONN, UK. 
644 
Constructing 
reality 
Tony Sudbery 
Schrodinger's Kittens and the Search for 
Reality. By John Gribbin. Weidenfeld and 
NicolsonjLittle, Brown: 1995. Pp. 261. 
£18.99, $23.95. 
IN In Search of Schrodinger's Cat, his 
previous popular book on quantum 
mechanics, John Gribbin emphasized the 
empirical successes of this strangest of 
physical theories and read the lesson that 
we must be prepared to accept its incom-
prehensibility and be grateful that it works 
so well. In this sequel he is less severe, 
promising an account of new work that 
successfully dispels the mystery and para-
dox of quantum mechanics. 
This is exciting news. To make it even 
more exciting, the mysteries of quantum 
mechanics have deepened and strength-
ened in the ten years since Gribbin wrote 
his earlier book. Advances in experimen-
tal techniques have brought many quan-
tum effects out of theory textbooks and 
into the laboratory; thought experiments 
have become actuality, and paradoxes 
have become effects. Quantum jumps can 
now be seen (with the naked eye) in a 
single atom; the two-slit experiment is a 
genuine laboratory experiment; and the 
quantum-mechanical 
theorem 
that 
repeated observation of a system freezes 
its development ("a watched pot never 
boils") has been verified by real observa-
tions of trapped atoms. 
Gribbin describes some of these experi-
mental developments (although not, I am 
sorry to say, Hans Dehmelt's beautiful 
experiment on quantum jumps) and some 
recent theoretical ideas such as quantum 
cryptography, after a historical introduc-
tion that traces, in particular, the history 
of theories of light. But then comes the 
problem of making sense of it all. Gribbin 
describes the usual approaches to this 
problem. His attitude, which many would 
share, is summarized by his chapter title: 
"Desperate Remedies". 
He is, on the whole, a reliable teller of 
this story, although there are disconcert-
ing moments when a mad glint comes into 
his eye as he thinks of the amazing 
denouement he has in store. The logic of 
his narrative, however, is weak. There are 
several points at which an uninformed 
reader would be lost, possibly without 
realizing it -
for example, in the story of 
the 'EPR paradox', David Bohm and John 
Bell. Particularly on matters of interpreta-
tion, I find Gribbin often confused or 
superficial or both: witness his description 
of recombining universes as a "neat devel-
opment beyond Everett's original idea" 
when it is clearly implicit in Everett's 
paper, or his apparent bafflement at 
David Deutsch's common-sense discus-
sion of time. But the greatest confusion 
comes in the penultimate chapter, where 
Gribbin turns to the sociology of knowl-
edge. 
One of my favourite pieces of uncon-
scious humour is the following quotation 
from Andrew Pickering's Constructing 
Quarks: "It is unproblematic that scientists 
produce accounts of the world that they 
find comprehensible: given their cultural 
resources, only singular incompetence 
could have prevented members of the 
[physics] community producing an under-
standable version of reality at any point in 
their history." 
Gribbin quotes this passage in order to 
endorse it, even though he has just 
devoted a chapter to physicists' failure to 
produce an understandable version of 
reality. He proceeds to the idealist conclu-
sion that "[r]eality is in very large measure 
what you want it to be". (I must get him to 
tell me what I'm doing wrong.) 
He now finds himself, at the opening of 
his final chapter, in an awkward position. 
Having lured us on throughout the book 
with the promise of the one true answer at 
last, he finds that he has just admitted that 
his goods are worthless. Somewhat feebly, 
and with the air of someone who has 
written all this stuff and is damned if he's 
going to waste it, he gives us the answer 
anyway. This is John Cramer's trans-
actional interpretation, which describes 
a 
negotiation between emitter and 
absorber, the latter sending its signals 
backwards in time. We are then left to 
decide whether this kind of market is 
what (in very large measure) we want 
reality to be. 
0 
Tony Sudbery is in the Department of Math-
ematics, University of York, Heslington, 
York Y01 5DD, UK. 
New in paperback 
The Collapse of Chaos: Discovering 
Simplicity in a Complex World by Jack 
Cohen and lan Stewart. Penguin, £8.99. In 
a review in Nature, John L. Casti wrote: "A 
host of new and thought-provoking ideas 
about the workings of complex systems ... 
as good an introduction to the science of 
the future as any you're likely to find". 
The Stuff of the Universe: Dark Matter, 
Mankind and Anthropic Cosmology by John 
Gribbin and Martin Rees. Penguin, £7.99. 
A journalist teams up with an internationally 
renowned astronomer in a discussion of 
the relationship between humankind and 
the cosmos. Originally published as Cosmic 
Coincidences in 1990. 
Atoms in the Family: My Life With Enrico 
Fermi by Laura Fermi. University of Chicago 
Press, $15.95, £11.25. A classic account 
of the career of one of the world's great 
atomic physicists, written in 1954 by 
his wife. 
NATURE · VOL 375 · 22 JUNE 1995 

