
VOLPE’S UNDERSTANDING 
EVOLUTION

This page intentionally left blank 

Seventh Edition
VOLPE’S UNDERSTANDING 
EVOLUTION
Peter A. Rosenbaum
State University of New York at Oswego

VOLPE’S UNDERSTANDING EVOLUTION, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the Americas, New York, 
NY 10020. Copyright © 2011 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Previous editions © 2000, 1985, and 
1981. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or 
retrieval system, without the prior written consent of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any 
network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the United States.
 This book is printed on acid-free paper containing 10% postconsumer waste.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
ISBN 987-0-07-338323-1
MHID 0-07-338323-6
Vice President & Editor-in-Chief: Martin Lange
Vice President, EDP: Kimberly Meriwether David
Publisher: Janice Roerig-Blong
Sponsoring Editor: Margaret Kemp
Marketing Manager: Heather Wagner
Development Editor: Wendy Langerud
Project Manager: Joyce Watters
Design Coordinator: Margarite Reynolds
Cover Designer: Nicole Dean
Photo Research: Lori Hancock
USE Cover Image: © Tone Stone Images
Production Supervisor: Laura Fuller
Compositor: Laserwords Private Limited
Typeface: 10/12 Times Roman
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rosenbaum, Peter Andrew, 1952-
  Volpe’s Understanding evolution / Peter A. Rosenbaum. — 7th ed.
   p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 987-0-07-338323-1 (alk. paper)
  1.  Evolution (Biology)—Textbooks.  I. Volpe, E. Peter (Erminio Peter).
 Understanding evolution. II. Title. III. Title: Understanding evolution. 
 QH366.2.V64 2010
 576.8—dc22
 
2009052287
www.mhhe.com

To Samantha and Sophia, my evolutionary legacies.

vi
BRIEF CONTENTS
Preface x
Prologue xiii
 1 Variation in Populations 
1
 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution 
12
 3 Heritable Variation 
23
 4 Mutation 
43
 5 Genetic Equilibrium 
61
 6 Concept of Selection 
67
 7 Selection in Action 
82
 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
94
 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow 
110
 10 Races and Species 
122
 11 Instantaneous Speciation 
135
 12 Adaptive Radiation 142
 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 152
 14 Origin of Life 166
 15 Molecular Evolution 182
 16 History of Life 197
 17 Emergence of the Human Species 214
 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and 
Cultural Evolution 237
Epilogue 248
Glossary 256
Index 271

vii
Preface  x
Prologue: Evidence for Evolution  xiii
C H A P T E R  
 1
VARIATION IN POPULATIONS  1
Environmental Modiﬁ cations  3
Lamarckism  5
Heritable Variation  7
Hypothetico-Deductive Reasoning  9
C H A P T E R  
 2
DARWINIAN SCHEME OF EVOLUTION  12
Mechanism of Evolution  15
Darwin’s Natural Selection  17
Differential Reproduction  21
Evolution Deﬁ ned  21
C H A P T E R  
 3
HERITABLE VARIATION  23
Mendel’s Principle of Segregation  24
Application of Mendelian Principles  27
Chromosomal Basis of Heredity  28
Mitosis and Meiosis  31
Mendel and the Chromosomal Theory of Heredity  35
Mendel’s Principle of Independent Assortment  36
Three or More Gene Pairs  36
Signiﬁ cance of Genetic Recombination  38
Linkage and Crossing Over  40
C H A P T E R  
 4
MUTATION  43
Causes of Mutation  43
Chemical Nature of the Gene  45
Replication of DNA  49
Molecular Mechanism of Spontaneous Mutation  50
Language of Life   50
Transcription of DNA  53
Frequency of Mutations in Human Disorders  55
Evolutionary Consequences of Mutations  57
Chromosomal Aberrations and Pregnancy Loss  58
C H A P T E R  
 5
GENETIC EQUILIBRIUM  61
Mendelian Inheritance  61
Random Mating  62
Gene Frequencies  64
Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium  64
Estimating the Frequency of Heterozygotes  65
Implications  66
C H A P T E R  
 6
CONCEPT OF SELECTION  67
Selection Against Recessive Defects  67
Signiﬁ cance of the Heterozygote  70
Interplay of Mutation and Selection  70
Partial Selection  71
Selection Against Dominant Defects  73
Concealed Variability in Natural Populations  75
CONTENTS

viii 
Contents
Genetic Load in Human Populations  75
General Effects of Selection  76
Natural Selection and Pregnancy Loss  77
Sexual Selection  78
C H A P T E R  
  7
SELECTION IN ACTION  82
Industrial Melanism  82
Cancer Cell Heterogeneity  84
Selection for Resistance  85
Multiple Antibiotic Resistance  87
Recombinant DNA  89
Prudent Use of Antibiotics  91
Evolutionary Implications  92
C H A P T E R  
  8
BALANCED POLYMORPHISM  94
Sickle-Cell Anemia  94
Sickle-Cell Hemoglobin  95
Theory of Balanced Polymorphism  97
Superiority of the Heterozygotes  100
Relaxed Selection  101
Tay-Sachs Disease  102
Cystic Fibrosis  103
Selection Against the Heterozygote  104
The Control of Rh Disease  108
Implications of Balanced Polymorphism  109
C H A P T E R  
  9
GENETIC DRIFT AND GENE FLOW  110
Role of Genetic Drift  110
Theory of Genetic Drift  112
Founder Effect  113
Religious Isolates  114
Amish of Pennsylvania  116
Consanguinity and Genetic Drift  117
Gene Flow  118
European Genes in African Americans  119
C H A P T E R  
10
RACES AND SPECIES  122
Variation Between Populations  122
Subspecies  123
The Species Concept  125
Formation of Species  126
Nomenclature  128
Reproductive Isolating Mechanisms  129
Origin of Isolating Mechanisms  131
Humans: A Single Variable Species  132
Microevolution and Macroevolution  132
Punctuated Equilibrium  133
C H A P T E R  
11
INSTANTANEOUS SPECIATION  135
Polyploidy in Nature  135
Wheat  138
Origin of Wheat Species  139
Mechanism of Speciation of Polyploidy  139
Experimental Veriﬁ cation  141
C H A P T E R  
12
ADAPTIVE RADIATION  142
Galápagos Islands  142
Darwin’s Finches   144
Factors in Diversiﬁ cation  145
Competitive Exclusion  148
Coexistence  148
Classiﬁ cation   150
C H A P T E R  
13
MAJOR ADAPTIVE RADIATIONS  152
Transition to Land  152
Conquest of Land  155
Adaptive Radiation of Reptiles   159
Extinction and Replacement  163
C H A P T E R  
14
ORIGIN OF LIFE  166
What Is Life?  167
Primitive Earth  167
Experimental Synthesis of Organic Compounds  168
Life’s Beginnings  169
Autotrophic Existence  172
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells  172
Organelles and Evolution  174

 
Contents 
ix
Forerunners of the Great Apes  217
Early Hominoids  218
Australopithecines: The First Hominids  221
Humans Emerge: Homo Habilis  225
Gathering-Hunting Way of Life  225
Homo Erectus: The Explorer  226
Flores Man  228
Evolution of Human Society   228
Status of the Neanderthals  230
Modern Humans: The Cro-Magnons  231
Origin of Modern Humans  232
Genomes of the Chimpanzees and Humans  233
C H A P T E R  
18
NATURAL SELECTION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, 
AND CULTURAL EVOLUTION  237
Group Selection  237
Kin Selection  238
Kin Selection in Humans  240
The Selﬁ sh Gene  242
Reciprocal Altruism  242
Parental Reproductive Strategies  243
Parent-Offspring Conﬂ ict  245
Memes  245
Cultural Evolution  246
EPILOGUE: THE CRUCIBLE 
OF EVOLUTION  248
Changing Worldviews  250
Scientiﬁ c Literacy  250
Darwin in the Courts  251
Closing Commentary  254
Glossary  256
Index  271
Classiﬁ cation of Organisms  176
Deep-sea Vents  179
Extraterrestrial Origins  180
C H A P T E R  
15
MOLECULAR EVOLUTION  182
Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution  182
Cytochrome c  183
Molecular Clock  184
Gene Duplication  185
Evolutionary History of Hemoglobin  187
Pseudogenes  188
Homeotic Genes  189
Ocular Malformations and Evolution  192
Multilegged Frogs Revisited  193
Mitochondrial Eve  194
Y-Chromosome Adam  195
C H A P T E R  
16
HISTORY OF LIFE  197
Geologic Ages  198
Fossil Record of Plants  200
Fossil Record of Animals  201
Convergence  203
The Plains-Dwelling Mammals  207
Evolutionary Stability  207
Mass Extinction  208
Holocene Extinction 209
C H A P T E R  
17
EMERGENCE OF THE HUMAN SPECIES  214
Primate Radiation  214
Adaptive Radiation of Humans  217

x
PREFACE
x
This new edition of Volpe’s Understanding 
Evolution, like earlier editions, is addressed to 
college students with no previous experience with 
the subject. It is meant to stand in good stead for use 
as a primary text for an introductory-level evolu-
tion course or as a supplement to a basic biology or 
anthropology course. In revising this time-honored 
volume, every effort has been made to provide a 
clear, simple, concise account of the scope, signiﬁ -
cance, and principles of evolution for the liberally 
educated citizen without burdening the reader with 
exhaustive detail. No apology is offered for draw-
ing many of the examples used in this text from our 
own species. This edition has been rewritten and 
expanded to transmit a wealth of new ideas in evo-
lution fostered by new discoveries in many ﬁ elds 
of science. To accommodate the changing body 
of knowledge, all chapters have been extensively 
revised, new chapters have been added, and many 
new illustrations have been added. In addition, this 
edition includes a concise glossary to aid the reader 
with the challenges of scientiﬁ c terminology.
The publication of Charles Darwin’s On the 
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, 
or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Strug-
gle for Life, Darwin’s “big book,” is one of the great 
landmarks in the history of science and laid the 
foundation for the theory of evolution via natural 
selection. This groundbreaking tome sold out on the 
ﬁ rst day of publication and was revised and reissued 
six times during Darwin’s lifetime. Unlike other 
scientiﬁ c ideas, evolution provides a framework for 
much of human knowledge spanning all of the nat-
ural sciences, the social sciences, and beyond and 
brought about one of the most remarkable and far-
reaching revolutions in human thought.
The Origin of Species shocked Victorian read-
ers and forever changed science. It profoundly 
altered and forever changed our conception of 
ourselves and our world, of the origins and history 
of life on our planet, and in doing so became and 
remains controversial to this day. Before Darwin’s 
Origin of Species, we presumed that humans occu-
pied an exalted position in the world. In its after-
math, we were no longer at the center stage of the 
Earth and were instead made part of the fabric of 
nature. Volpe’s Understanding Evolution is an effort 
to demystify evolution and provide the reader with a 
clear and concise grasp of this pivotal and ground-
breaking idea. Although Darwin’s monumental Ori-
gin of Species was initially greeted with a storm of 
criticism, his ﬁ ndings are now universally accepted.
Darwin’s thesis has been fortiﬁ ed by the ever-
expanding knowledge of the gene. One of the 
ﬁ nest triumphs of modern science has been the 
elucidation of the chemical makeup of the gene. 
The fundamental chemical component of the gene 
is the remarkable molecule deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA). This molecule contains a coded blueprint 
for all life in its molecular structure and is the 
universal alphabet for the book of life. The inte-
gration of genetics and evolution occurred in the 
early part of the twentieth-century and is often 
called “the synthesis” because of the unity of 

 
Preface 
xi
knowledge the melding of these two great bodies 
of knowledge brought to each other. Due to the 
importance of genetics to the study of evolution, 
Volpe’s Understanding Evolution rehearses those 
facets of genetics that are fundamental to the study 
and understanding of evolution. Today, most of 
the important contributions to evolution are com-
ing from genetics, developmental genetics, and the 
comparison of proteins (proteomics) and whole sets 
of chromosomes (genomics) among and between 
organisms. Modern DNA technology has so sharp-
ened the precision of molecular analysis that it has 
found application in virtually all ﬁ elds of scientiﬁ c 
inquiry, from medicine to paleontology to the evo-
lutionary history of the human species. Hence, the 
reader is asked to integrate the principles of genet-
ics with basic Darwinian tenets in order to under-
stand how important “the synthesis” was and is to 
our modern conceptualization of evolution.
The year 2009 marked the 200th birthday 
of Charles Darwin (February 12, 1809) and the 
150th anniversary of the ﬁ rst publication of The 
Origin of Species (November 24, 1859). These 
dates remind us that the theory of evolution has a 
long and complex history ﬁ lled with extraordinary 
discoveries and public controversies. Excellent 
companion books to this volume are Darwin’s orig-
inal books The Origin of Species (1859) and The 
Voyage of the Beagle (1839). Both were written for 
the laymen, the everyday person, living in Victorian 
England in Darwin’s day, and both were bestsell-
ers. The Origin of Species is one of the 300 most 
important books ever published in the history of 
the Western world—a collection of works spanning 
literature, philosophy, and science and including 
such giants as Homer, Dante, Hippocrates, Chaucer, 
Dickens, Melville, Aristotle, Shakespeare, Plato, 
Euripides, Copernicus, Euclid, Einstein, Galileo, 
Newton, Galen, Locke, Cervantes, Shaw, Orwell, 
and Dobzhansky.
Evolution is a central concept in science. In 
the 150-plus years since the publication of The 
Origin of Species, Darwin’s thesis has been for-
tiﬁ ed from many branches of science. No other 
scientiﬁ c idea has had a more unifying impact on 
the sciences, enabling scientists from a myriad of 
disciplines to better understand and integrate their 
science. In 1973 the renowned Columbia Univer-
sity evolutionist Theodosius Dobzhansky wrote a 
now-famous essay entitled “Nothing in Biology 
Makes Sense except in the Light of Evolution.” 
This essay could as easily have been entitled “Noth-
ing in the Natural Sciences Makes Sense except in 
the Light of Evolution.” More than any other sci-
entiﬁ c concept, evolution serves as a lattice for the 
natural sciences, providing both explanation and 
venues for prediction and hypothesis testing.
The word evolution is derived from the Latin 
evolutio, meaning “an unraveling” or “an unfold-
ing.” The term reminds us that throughout the his-
tory of the universe, change has been a constant 
motif, especially of the living world. In Darwin’s 
day, evolution was conceptualized by the word 
transmutation and it was only later that the term 
evolution gained acceptance. Throughout life’s 
history, organisms have constantly and endlessly 
changed. Change is the leitmotif, the recurring 
theme and idea, of all living things.
Coupled with the ever-increasing and rapid 
advances in science and technology is the need for 
scientiﬁ c literacy of the citizenry. Scientiﬁ c literacy 
is an essential part of a liberal arts education. With 
recent polls revealing that nearly half of U.S. citizens 
do not accept the tenets of evolutionary biology, the 
rationale for Volpe’s Understanding Evolution have 
never been more important. Many otherwise well-
educated people cannot describe the principles of 
evolution or articulate the vast body of evidence 
built up over the last 150 plus years since the publi-
cation of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species. In this 
book effort has been made to leave the reader a bet-
ter educated member of society capable of engaging 
in informed discussions in all manner of venues.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
 • A Prologue outlining the evidence for evolution.
 • An Epilogue describing the controversy of 
teaching evolution in the school, scientiﬁ c lit-
eracy and the legal history of teaching evolu-
tion in U.S. law.

xii 
Preface
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In the mid 1960s when science education was under-
going dramatic restructuring and innovation, Volpe’s 
Understanding Evolution was originally conceived 
as The Process of Evolution but ultimately went to 
press in 1967 under the title Understanding Evolu-
tion. Erminio “Peter” Volpe’s graceful use of lan-
guage and mastery as a teacher shows through in each 
paragraph and page. Much of the art used in the ﬁ rst 
edition was drawn by Peter’s wife, Carolyn Thorpe 
Volpe, some of which remains in the pages that fol-
low. My involvement with this text began roughly 
a decade ago in the preparation of the sixth edition. 
Volpe’s Understanding Evolution has enabled gen-
erations of students to better appreciate the basic 
tenets of evolutionary biology, and thus this new edi-
tion rests on broad shoulders with high expectations. 
This edition is the culmination of a promise I made 
to Peter Volpe, my professor, mentor, colleague, and 
friend, to keep Understanding Evolution in press 
for as long as I could. I owe an enormous debt of 
gratitude to the inspiration, mentorship, and trust that 
Peter Volpe placed in me to continue his extraordi-
nary contribution to science education.
I am indebted to the reviewers whose comments 
have helped improve this and previous editions.
Ronald Edwards, DePaul University
Joseph L. Fail Jr., Johnson C. Smith University
Teresa L. Felton, Southeastern University
Michael L. Foster, Eastern Kentucky University
Gerard M. Nadal, Dominican College
I would also like to thank the staff at McGraw-
Hill, including Janice Roerig-Blong, Marge Kemp, 
Wendy Langerud, Heather Wagner, Lori Hancock, 
and Joyce Watters.
I acknowledge and appreciate the enthusiastic 
support of my colleagues at the State University 
of New York–Oswego who have been most sup-
portive of my efforts toward this revision. Lastly, I 
owe a debt of gratitude to my spouse, Robin, who 
has bestowed love, emotional support, and under-
standing throughout this revision process.
Peter A. Rosenbaum
Oswego, New York
January 2010
 • A Glossary to aid in learning the vocabulary 
associated with evolutionary biology.
 • New and updated graphics throughout the 
chapters to clarify the concepts presented in 
the text.
 • Supporting text website that provides instruc-
tor tools, including slides of all ﬁ gures and 
tables as PowerPoint lectures and test ques-
tions for each chapter. Chapter outlines are 
available to students.
Chapter Revisions Include
 • A new section on the scientiﬁ c method 
(Chapter 1).
 • A new section of Darwin’s reluctance to 
publish the “Origin of Species” and a major 
revision of Darwin’s explanatory model for 
natural selection (Chapter 2).
 • Several new ﬁ gures and a new section of 
Gregor Mendel (Chapter 3).
 • New discussion of mutation supported by two 
new ﬁ gures (Chapter 4).
 • A revised description of the Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium (Chapter 5).
 • A new section on sexual selection and several 
new ﬁ gures (Chapter 6).
 • A revised section on the evolution of bacterial 
resistance to antibiotics (Chapter 7).
 • A new section on polyploidy in nature with 
several new ﬁ gures and tables (Chapter 11).
 • Major revisions and updating of material on 
adaptive radiation, including new sections and 
many new and revised ﬁ gures (Chapter 13).
 • Two new sections on the origin of life along with 
several new ﬁ gures and tables (Chapter 14).
 • New section of mass extinctions, revised text 
and many new ﬁ gures (Chapter 16).
 • Extensive revision and updates on human evo-
lution including several new ﬁ gures and a new 
discussion on Flores man and the genomic 
and chromosomal evolution of chimps and 
humans (Chapter 17).
 • Integration of three previous chapters, a revised 
section on cultural evolution and a new section 
on memes (Chapter 18).

xiii
There is no shortage of “evidence for evolu-
tion,” and in the pages that follow the reader will 
be exposed to nearly all of the many major group-
ings of information that form the basis of this 
topic. The following is a brief guide to help the 
reader better appreciate the many examples of evi-
dence for evolution provided herein.
ARTIFICIAL SELECTION
Chapter 2 describes several examples of artiﬁ cial 
selection. Darwin used insight from his observa-
tions of artiﬁ cial selection to develop his concept 
of natural selection. He reasoned that if humans 
could easily select different traits, so could nature. 
NATURAL SELECTION
Natural selection is the mechanism of evolution. 
Several examples of natural selection are provided 
in this volume. In chapter 6 the concept of selec-
tion is reviewed, and in chapter 7 several illustra-
tions of natural selection, such as the tale of the 
peppered moth, are provided. Chapter 8 includes 
the story of balanced polymorphism in humans, 
another example of natural selection.
COMMON DESCENT
Sprinkled throughout the chapters is the concept 
of common descent. Descent with modiﬁ cation is 
the most fundamental line of evidence in support 
of evolution. Exemplars of common descent come 
from genetics, comparative studies of anatomy, 
embryology, and molecular genetics. The occur-
rence of vestigial organs and evolutionary oppor-
tunism further strengthen these arguments.
GENES AND GENOMICS
In many respects, the single most powerful evi-
dence for common descent (and therefore evo-
lution) comes from genetics. The genetic code 
(chapter 4) is the same in all living organisms. 
There is no reasonable explanation for this uni-
versality except for inheritance from a common 
ancestor. As DNA sequencing has become com-
monplace, scientists have utilized these tools to 
compare organisms in the same way one would 
look at anatomy or any other observable feature. 
This is an especially exciting new ﬁ eld of study 
and has revolutionized the way in which we orga-
nize life (see chapters 15 and 16). As researchers 
come to compare genomes, it has become apparent 
that many basic kinds of patterns of development 
(for example) are highly conserved across broad 
ranges of organisms. As seen in chapter 15, it is 
extraordinary that nearly the same gene sequences 
code for eye development or body part develop-
ment in organisms as overtly divergent as fruit ﬂ ies 
and humans. Similarly, in chapter 17, comparison 
of chimp and human chromosomes demonstrate 
our common descent. This is hard evidence that 
humans are simply another branch on the tree of life. 
PROLOGUE
EVIDENCE FOR EVOLUTION

Cell wall
Animal cell
Plant cell
Cell membrane
Mitochondrion
Centriole
Chloroplast
Ribosomes
Endoplasmic reticulum
Nuclear membrane
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Chromosome
Vacuole
Golgi apparatus
Cytoplasm
Flagellum
(present in many animal
cells and plant reproductive cells)
Nuclear pore
Lysosome
Figure P.1 Cellular homology between plant and animal cells. Organelles and other cellular structures are similar 
due to common descent.
xiv 
Prologue
Likewise, as seen in the new three-domain system 
of organizing life (chapter 14), data from the com-
parison of genomes has helped us better under-
stand our relationship with the rest of life on the 
planet. Furthermore, these comparative studies 
have aided in our quest to better understand the 
origins of life (chapter 14).
PROTEINS AND PROTEOMICS 
Common descent is also observed in organic 
molecules such as proteins. Homology of protein 
structure (chapter 15) provides an important link 
in the reasoning of common descent. As with 
genes, why else would proteins be homologous 
and show homology over time (e.g., hemoglobin 
and myoglobin in chapter 15) if not for their com-
mon derivation from a common ancestor? The 
detailed comparison of proteins and linking their 
structure to their function (proteomics) is another 
new venue for documenting evolution.
CELLULAR HOMOLOGIES
The fact that all life is based on cells is another sup-
porting line of evidence for common descent. The 
identical organelles and other cellular structures in 
plant and animal cells bespeak of common descent 
(ﬁ g. P.1). Homologies found between prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes (Chapter 14) could only be true if 
these cells were linked through common ancestry. 
COMPARATIVE ANATOMY
The entire ﬁ eld of comparative anatomy is based 
on homology due to common descent. Why 
else would organisms have similar structure, if 
they were not related by common ancestry? The 

Figure P.2 Embryonic homology. Comparisons of early verebrate embryos reveal striking similarity. Each early embryo 
has the same number of gill arches (pouches below the head) and similar vertebral columns. During development, modiﬁ cations 
associated with adult forms become apparent.
 
Prologue 
xv
the vertebrate egg (chapter 13). Another example of 
a developmental homology is the anatomical simi-
larities between young vertebrate embryos (ﬁ g. P.2). 
These images do not require a trained eye to appreci-
ate. As with other homologies, what explanation can 
be offered to explain these obvious correspondences 
than other descent from a common ancestor?
VESTIGIAL ORGANS
Many modern organisms retain rudiments or ves-
tiges of structures that became obsolete over the 
exquisite example of the vertebrate limb is in 
chapter 13. The comparison of the skeletal ele-
ments shows that, bone for bone, the composi-
tion of these vastly dissimilar-looking limbs are 
derived from the same building blocks. 
COMPARATIVE EMBRYOLOGY
In chapter 15, developmental homology is illus-
trated with the account of homeotic genes such as 
the Hox and the Pax-6 genes. Homology is also seen 
in the common extra-embryonic membrane found in 

Figure P.3 Vestigial structures. The retention of pelvic bones in the modern whale reveals their common 
ancestry with the terrestrial mammals from which they evolved.
xvi 
Prologue
whales, harkening back to their ancestry as terres-
trial mammals (ﬁ g. P.3). Again the rhetorical ques-
tion must be asked: Why else would a whale have 
an embedded pelvic bone in the place its pelvis 
might be, had it not evolved from a terrestrial mam-
mal that once needed a pelvis to support its legs?
Examples of vestigial structures abound. Cave-
dwelling creatures tend to have reduced or absent 
eyes. Some snakes have rudimentary limbs dur-
ing development, and some, like boas and pythons 
retain limb buds as adults. Vestigial structures found 
in humans and the great apes include the greatly 
reduced tail bones, a few remnants of tail muscles, 
the third molar (wisdom teeth), and the vermiform 
appendix. All of these remnants and rudiments speak 
to common ancestry and descent with modiﬁ cation.
EVOLUTIONARY OPPORTUNISM
Another line of evidence in support of evolution are 
anatomical structures that have been appropriated 
course of evolutionary history. Where these struc-
tures are found, they provide further evidence of 
previously evolved structures that lost their utility. 
The existence of vestigial organs, anatomical struc-
tures with no apparent function but that resemble 
structures found in a presumed ancestor, is another 
line of evidence in support of evolution. As organ-
isms adapt to new environments, they carry with 
them the structures that evolved for some purpose 
that is no longer necessary. These structures are 
evolutionary baggage that reﬂ ects the journey from 
the past. Natural selection allots less energy to the 
maintenance of extraneous structures than to struc-
tures that enhance reproductive success. Further-
more, structures that have lost their original function 
may in fact be harmful to their owners and hence 
be selected against. With the passage of time, struc-
tures without function tend to diminish until only 
traces of their former size and function remain.
Excellent examples of vestiges from a past life 
are the pelvic girdles and rudimentary hind limbs in 

“Thumb”
V
IV
III
II
I
“Thumb”
(True thumb)
Figure P.4 The panda’s thumb. Giant pandas have enlarged wrist bones, the radical sesamoid 
bone, that appears to be a sixth-digit thumb.
 
Prologue 
xvii
been enlarged to adapt to the task of stripping bam-
boo leaves from their stalks. As such, the panda’s 
“thumb” is a hallmark of how sometimes the best 
evidence for evolution is found in the imperfec-
tions left behind by evolution and not in marvels 
of apparent perfection of design.
FOSSILS
Fossils are another line of evidence in support of 
evolution. Their existence provided important 
insights to Darwin, who brought back several fos-
sils from South America (chapter 2). The sequence 
of fossils in the strata of rocks is impossible to 
explain except in the light of evolution. As seen in 
table 16.1, the events that are chronicled in the geo-
logical strata are in the sequence predicted by evo-
lutionary theory. As expected, no human remains 
have ever been found among the dinosaur fossils.
TRANSITIONAL FOSSILS
Transitional fossils are fossils that ﬁ ll the “miss-
ing links” in the fossil record. Over time, the 
number of discoveries of transitional fossils has 
for novel purposes over the course of time. Imper-
fectly designed body parts exemplify the fact that 
evolution is based on contingency and that nature 
makes due with whatever starting materials are 
available. Perhaps the most famous such anatomi-
cal anomaly in evolutionary lore is the comman-
deering of a wrist bone fashioned to become the 
panda’s “thumb.” 
Giant pandas are exclusive to the high-
elevation bamboo forests of western China. Unlike 
the other members of the Order Carnivora (the 
other bears, cats, dogs, weasels, etc.), giant pan-
das survive by exploiting the abundant bamboo 
in the forests they inhabit as their sole source of 
nutrition. Dexterous thumbs are a trademark of 
primates, best exempliﬁ ed in humankind. By con-
trast, carnivores have forelimbs adapted for mobil-
ity and cutting, and their ﬁ ngers lack dexterity for 
ﬁ ne-motor manipulations.
When examined by comparative anatomists, 
the mystery of the panda’s thumb is revealed 
(ﬁ g. P.4). Anatomically, this “thumb” is not a true 
ﬁ nger but an enlarged wrist bone, the radial sesa-
moid bone. Opportunistically, over evolutionary 
time and under selective pressure from its environ-
ment, this wrist bone and associated muscles have 

Modern toothed whales
Rodhocetus kasrani
Ambulocetus natans
Pakicetus attocki
Figure P.5 Transitional cetaceans. Fossil whale ancestors that ﬁ ll in many gaps in the 
evolutionary transition from hoofed mammal to modern whales.
xviii 
Prologue
Ancestral human transitional forms are described 
in chapter 17.
A recently described series of transitional 
fossil closes many of the gaps between hoofed 
mammals and modern whale (ﬁ g. P.5). Three tran-
sitional cetacean (the mammalian Order of whales, 
increased, and in many instances it is difﬁ cult 
to ﬁ nd true missing links. Much of chapter 13 is 
devoted to discussions of transitional fossils such 
as Archaeopteryx, the transitional form between 
birds and dinosaurs, and Tiktaalik, an interme-
diary between aquatic and terrestrial tetrapods. 

 
Prologue 
xix
reasons for this not to be the case, such as pos-
sessing the capacity for great mobility (such as sea 
animals and birds) or being organisms recently 
redistributed by humans. Another reason for the 
observed distributional relationships has to do with 
the historical movement of the continents know as 
continental drift.
An illustration of this concept is the modern 
distribution of marsupials, which predominate in 
Australia, where they evolved before the evolution 
of placental mammals. Some marsupials are found 
in South and North America due to the fact that 
millions of years ago, South America, Antarctica, 
and Australia were once part of a large massive 
continent called Gondwanaland (ﬁ g. P.6). As the 
continents separated, marsupials were stranded 
in Australia and South America, where they then 
underwent their own adaptive radiation. Although 
largely outcompeted by placental mammals in the 
Americas, some highly adapted marsupials sur-
vive in South America and in North America, such 
as the opossum, a supreme generalist that can suc-
cessfully exploit a wide variety of habitats. 
CLOSING
In summary, as you read through the pages ahead, 
use this guide and your own mind to take note of 
the various lines of evidence supporting the fact of 
evolution. As discussed in chapter 1, a scientiﬁ c 
theory is a large body of tested ideas and not just a 
notion someone thought up one morning.
dolphins, and porpoises) fossils have collectively 
changed the way in which scientists view whale 
evolution.
The fossil cetacean Pakicetus was ﬁ rst discov-
ered in 1983 (a complete skeleton was unearthed 
in 2001). This wolf-size whale ancestor lived on 
land but showed many features found in modern 
whales, such as a cetacean inner ear. Crocodile-like 
Ambulocetus (meaning “walking whale”) fossils 
were discovered in the mid-1990s. Ambulocetus 
has structural features that suggest that it lived on 
land while also being well adapted for swimming. 
Rodhocetus fossils were discovered in 2001. They 
have even more whale-like features than either 
Ambulocetus or Paticetus, such as greatly reduced 
hind limbs that allowed them to swim with a 
motion similar to that of modern whales.
BIOGEOGRAPHY
Biogeography, the distribution of life over geo-
graphical areas, forms the basis of another line of 
evidence for evolution. Species that are closely 
related, such as the chimps, gorillas, and humans, 
are all known to have come from Africa. As spe-
cies colonize new habitats, they take on the dis-
tributions we see today. The adaptive radiations 
outlined in chapters 12 and 13 exemplify the con-
nection between geography and evolution.
On the whole, species that are distributed 
around the globe are generally most related to the 
other species in that vicinity unless there are good 

Cenozoic
era
Quaternary
Period
Epoch
Millions of 
years ago 
(m.y.a.)
Recent
Pleistocene
Pliocene
Miocene
Oligocene
Eocene
Paleocene
Late
Early
0.01–
1.55
5
25
38
54
65
100
138
205
240
290
360
410
435
505
590
2,500
4,600
Tertiary
Mesozoic
era
Paleozoic
era
Cretaceous
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Proterozoic
era
Archean era
and earlier
Precambrian time
Laurasia
Gondwanaland
Panthalassa
Pangaea
Today  Continents continue to drift apart
100–65 m.y.a.  Present-day continents form and begin to drift apart
181–135 m.y.a.  Two major continents form
280–200 m.y.a.  Global landmass and ocean
Figure P.6 Changing continents. Over geologic time, the position of the continents has shifted.
xx 
Prologue

1
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
1
In the fall of 1958, the folks of a quiet, rural 
community in the southern United States were 
startled and dismayed to ﬁ nd large numbers of 
multilegged frogs in an 85-acre artiﬁ cial lake on 
a cotton farm. Widespread newspaper publicity 
of this strange event attracted the attention of uni-
versity scientists, curiosity seekers, and gourmets. 
The lake supported a large population of bullfrogs, 
estimated at several thousand. Although reports 
tended to be exaggerated, there were undoubt-
edly in excess of 350 multilegged deviants. As 
illustrated in ﬁ gure 1.1, the extra legs were oddly 
positioned, but they were unmistakably copies of 
the two normal hind limbs. Incredibly, the extra 
limbs were functional, but their movements were 
perceptibly not in harmony with the pair of normal 
legs. The bizarre multilegged frogs were clumsy 
and graceless.
All the multilegged frogs appeared to be of the 
same age, approximately two years old, and of the 
same generation. These atypical frogs were found 
only during the one season and were not detected 
again in subsequent years. The multilegged frogs 
disappeared almost as dramatically as they had 
appeared. 
History repeated itself in August 1995, almost 
four decades later, with the appearance, in the wet-
lands of Minnesota and neighboring states, of many 
frogs with misshapen hind limbs (ﬁ g. 1.2). In this 
instance, these multilegged frogs gained instant noto-
riety, because information and pictures were heralded 
on the Internet. The Minnesota assemblage of variant 
frogs consisted of several different species. The most 
severely affected was the highly aquatic mink frog 
(taxonomically speaking, Lithobates  septentrionalis
(formerly Rana septentrionalis)), known for its dis-
tinct musky odor. Well over 200 malformed mink frogs 
were captured at one site in one year. Many differ-
ent malformations have been encountered— multiple 
legs, missing limbs (whole or in part), distorted limbs, 
missing eyes, and deformed jaws. Disconcertingly, 
the disﬁ gured frogs in the Minnesota environs have 
reappeared in successive years—as many as four 
years in several populations. This differs noticeably 
from the aforementioned multilegged bullfrogs (Lith-
obates catesbeiana) found in the Mississippi farm 
locality for only a relatively brief period.
Strange and exceptional events of this kind 
are of absorbing interest, and challenge us for 
an explanation. How do such oddities arise, and 
VARIATION IN POPULATIONS

Figure 1.1 Two multilegged frogs, each viewed from the back (dorsal) and front (ventral) surface. These bizarre bullfrogs 
were discovered in October 1958 in a lake near Tunica, Mississippi. Several hundred frogs with extra hind limbs were found at 
this locality. How does such an abnormality arise? Two reasonable interpretations are set forth in chapter 1. 
(Photographs by E. Peter Volpe, then at Tulane University.)
2 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 1 Variation in Populations 
3
point to the exquisitely sensitive nature of amphib-
ians with their wet skin that is in constant contact 
with its surrounding aquatic ecosystem. For our 
purposes in this book, we wish to limit our discus-
sion to the question of whether such anomalous 
variations might be  inherited, and leave the broader 
discussion of the environment to books and articles 
speciﬁ cally devoted to that subject. This does not 
mean that these matters are unimportant—quite 
the contrary. Rather, our goal here is to explore the 
nature and sources of variation, as Darwin did in his 
ﬁ rst chapters of his most famous book, The Origin 
of Species, which is also the subject of chapter 2.
ENVIRONMENTAL MODIFICATIONS
Inspection alone cannot reveal the underlying cause 
of the multilegged anomaly. We may thoroughly 
dissect the limbs and describe in detail the anatomy 
of each component, but no amount of dissection can 
tell us how the malformation arose. The deformity 
either was preordained by heredity or originated 
from injury to the embryo at a vulnerable stage in 
what factors are responsible for their ultimate 
disappearance in a natural population? In ancient 
times, bodily deformities evoked reverential awe 
and inspired some fanciful tales. Early humans 
constructed a number of myths to explain odd 
events totally beyond their control or comprehen-
sion. One legend said that deformities arose when 
masses of skeletons were reanimated and the bones 
of different animals mixed together. Another old 
idea is that grotesquely shaped frogs are throw-
backs to some remote prehistoric ancestor. These 
accounts are, of course, novelistic and illusory, but 
they do reveal the uniquely imaginative capacity 
of the human mind. Nevertheless, we should seek 
a completely different cause-and-effect sequence, 
relying more on our faculty for logical analysis.
Worldwide reports of massive amphibian 
extinctions and myriad instances and kinds of 
gross abnormalities point to a constellation of 
causes and synergies rather than any single causal 
factor. Many believe that recently observed extinc-
tion events and deformity syndromes reﬂ ect the 
“canary in the mineshaft,” foretelling deep-seated 
environmental problems facing our planet. They 
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2 Dorsal (a) and ventral (b) views of a multilegged mink frog (Rana septentrionalis) collected in the 
wetlands of Minnesota by David Hoppe of the University of Minnesota. Several extra hind limbs protrude from the sides.
Source: Photo by David Hoppe, The University of Minnesota (Morris campus).

Figure 1.3 Armless deformity in the newborn infant, 
resulting from the action of thalidomide, a sedative taken 
by his mother in her second month of pregnancy. 
Source: W. Lenz and K. Knapp, “Thalidomide Embryopathy,” Archives 
of Environmental Health 5 (1962):100–105. Courtesy of the publisher.
4 
Understanding Evolution
some American women did obtain the drug from 
 European sources. The thalidomide tragedy changed 
the attitude of the medical profession toward drug-
induced malformations. It also awakened the mass 
media; congenital defects rapidly became a subject 
of compelling interest to the public.
Thalidomide was banned worldwide in 1962. 
Strange as it may seem, the world’s most infamous 
drug has resurfaced in recent years. Commercial 
laboratories have been testing the drug for possi-
ble beneﬁ cial effects. In September 1997 the FDA 
approved the use of thalidomide for treatment of 
a severe complication of leprosy, for which no 
good alternative therapies are presently avail-
able. Ongoing research suggests that thalidomide 
may be useful in the treatment of certain types of 
cancerous growths (brain tumors) and the wast-
ing syndrome associated with AIDS, but there is 
gnawing apprehension about the distribution and 
marketing of the drug.
In different organisms—ﬁ sh, frogs, mice, and 
humans—anomalies can be caused by such diverse 
agents as extremes of temperature, alcohol con-
sumption, x rays, viruses, drugs, dietary deﬁ cien-
cies, and lack of oxygen. There is no longer the 
slightest doubt that environmental factors may be 
causal agents of speciﬁ c defects. A variation that 
development. We shall direct our attention ﬁ rst to 
the latter possibility and its implications.
Some external factor in the environment may 
have adversely affected the pattern of development 
of the hind limb region. The cotton ﬁ elds around 
the lake in Mississippi were periodically sprayed 
with pesticides to combat infestations of insects. 
Purulent airborne pollutants may have settled onto 
the landscape in Minnesota. It is also possible that 
excess ultraviolet radiation leaked through a thin-
ning protective ozone layer of the atmosphere and 
caused the limb deformities. It is likely that the 
widespread deformities and amphibian declines 
are the result of multiple causes, most likely 
induced by humans. In essence, it is not incon-
ceivable that the pesticides, pollutants, and even 
ultraviolet rays were potent teratogens—that is, 
chemical and physical agents capable of causing 
marked distortions of normal body parts.
That chemical substances can have detrimental 
effects on the developing organism is well docu-
mented. For example, the geneticist Walter Landauer 
demonstrated in the 1950s that a wide variety of 
chemicals, such as boric acid, pilocarpine, and insu-
lin (normally a beneﬁ cial hormone), can produce 
abnormalities of the legs and beaks when injected 
into chick embryos. This type of ﬁ nding cannot be 
dismissed complacently as an instance of a laboratory 
demonstration without parallel in real life. Indeed, in 
1961 medical researchers discovered with amaze-
ment amounting to incredulity that a purportedly 
harmless sleeping pill containing the drug thalido-
mide, when taken by a pregnant woman, particularly 
during the second month of pregnancy, could lead to 
a grotesque deformity in the newborn baby, a rare 
condition in humans called  phocomelia—literally, 
“seal limbs.” The arms are absent or reduced to tiny, 
 ﬂ ipperlike stumps (ﬁ g. 1.3).
More than 6,000 thalidomide babies were 
born in West Germany and at least 1,000 in other 
countries. The United States was largely spared 
the thalidomide disaster by the astute scientiﬁ c 
sense of Frances O. Kelsey of the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA): she blocked gen-
eral distribution of the drug. Despite her efforts, 

 
CHAPTER 1 Variation in Populations 
5
coming from the male parent and the other from 
the female parent. Stated another way, the sperm 
and egg each have half the number of genes of each 
parent. Fertilization restores the original number 
and the paired condition (ﬁ g. 1.4).
The underlying assumption in the cross 
depicted in ﬁ gure 1.4 is that the genes that inﬂ u-
ence the development of the hind limbs are normal. 
Of course, the multilegged parents themselves 
possess normal genes. It might seem strange that 
an abnormal character can result from a perfectly 
sound set of genes. However, normal genes can-
not be expected to act normally under all environ-
mental circumstances. A gene may be likened to a 
photographic negative. A perfect negative (normal 
gene) may produce an excellent or poor positive 
print (normal or abnormal trait), depending on such 
(environmental) factors as the quality or concen-
tration of the chemical solutions used in preparing 
the print. The environment thus affects the expres-
sion of the negative (gene), but the negative (gene) 
itself remains unaffected throughout the making of 
the print (trait).
We shall learn more about the nature of genes 
and the mechanism of inheritance in chapter 2. For 
the moment, the important consideration is that a 
given gene prescribes a potentiality for a trait and 
not the trait itself. Genes do not act in a vacuum. 
Genes always act within the conditioning frame-
work of the environment. The materialization of 
a trait represents the interplay of genetic determi-
nants and environmental factors.
LAMARCKISM
Few people would expect bodily deformities caused 
by harmful environmental factors to be heritable. 
And yet many people once believed that favorable 
or beneﬁ cial bodily changes acquired or devel-
oped during one’s lifetime are transmitted to the 
offspring—for example, that athletes who exercised 
and developed large muscles would pass down 
their powerful muscular development to their chil-
dren. This is the famous theory of the inheritance 
arises as a direct response to some external change 
in the environment, and not by any change in the 
genetic makeup of the individual, is called an envi-
ronmental modiﬁ cation.
If the multilegged anomaly in the bullfrog 
was environmentally induced, we may surmise 
that (as depicted in ﬁ g. 1.4) the harmful chemical 
or other causative factor acted during the sensitive 
early embryonic stage. Moreover, if some exter-
nal agent had brought about the abnormality in the 
bullfrog, this agent must have been effective only 
once, because the multilegged condition did not 
occur repeatedly over the years in the Mississippi 
region. It may be that the harmful environmental 
factor did not recur, in which case we would not 
expect a reappearance of the malformation.
Our suppositions could be put to a test by con-
trolled breeding experiments, the importance of 
which cannot be overstated. Only through breeding 
tests can the basis of the variation be ﬁ rmly estab-
lished. If the anomaly constituted an environmental 
modiﬁ cation, then a cross of two multilegged bull-
frogs would yield all normal progeny, as illustrated 
in ﬁ gure 1.4. In the absence of any disturbing envi-
ronmental factors, the offspring would develop 
normal limbs. This breeding experiment was not 
actually performed; none of the malformed frogs 
survived to sexual maturity. Nonetheless, we have 
brought into focus an important biological prin-
ciple: environmentally induced (nongenetic) traits 
cannot be passed on to another generation.
The elements that are transmitted to the next 
generation are two tiny cells, the egg and the sperm. 
These two specialized cells are often referred to 
as germ cells, because they are the beginnings, or 
germs, of new individuals. The germ cells are the 
only connecting thread between successive gen-
erations. Accordingly, the mechanism of heredi-
tary transmission must operate across this slender 
connecting bridge. The hereditary qualities of the 
offspring are established when the sperm unites 
with the egg. The basic hereditary determiners, 
the genes, occur in pairs in the fertilized egg. Each 
inherited characteristic is governed by at least 
one pair of genes, with one member of each pair 

Figure 1.4 Test for the noninheritance of an environmentally induced trait. If the 
malformation of the hind limbs arose from without by the action of an adverse environ-
mental agent (pesticide) and not from within by genetic change, then the abnormality 
would not be transmitted from parent to offspring. The multilegged parents, although 
visibly abnormal, are both genetically normal. Normal hind limbs are expected if, dur-
ing development, the offspring are not exposed to the same injurious environmental 
agents to which the parents were exposed.
6 
Understanding Evolution
practiced for well over 4,000 years. It is sufﬁ cient 
to state that the results of countless laboratory 
experiments testing the possibility of the inheri-
tance of acquired, or environmentally induced, 
bodily traits have been negative. 
The notion of the inheritance of acquired char-
acteristics became the cornerstone of Lamarck’s 
comprehensive, although incorrect, explanation 
of evolution. Lamarck’s theory is exempliﬁ ed 
of acquired characteristics, or Lamarckism (after 
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck, a French naturalist of 
the late 1700s and early 1800s). Lamarckism has 
no foundation of factual evidence. We know, for 
example, that a woman who has altered her body 
by having laser treatments to remove body hair 
does not pass this alteration on to her daughters. 
Circumcision is still a requisite in the newborn 
male, despite the fact that the rite that has been 

 
CHAPTER 1 Variation in Populations 
7
being the result of law, and not of miraculous 
interposition.
The foregoing considerations bear impor-
tantly on our bullfrog population. We have not 
been able to perform the critical breeding test to 
prove or disprove that the multilegged trait is a 
nonheritable modiﬁ cation. However, let us for the 
moment accept the thesis that the multilegged con-
dition was environmentally induced and examine 
the implications of this view on the population 
as a whole. Outwardly, a striking change in the 
bullfrog population seems to have occurred. But 
in actuality the composition of the population has 
remained essentially unaltered, because the basic 
hereditary materials, the genes, were not affected. 
In other words, there was no change of evolution-
ary signiﬁ cance in the population. Evolution can 
occur only where there is heritable variation. 
HERITABLE VARIATION
We shall now examine the possibility that the 
multilegged frogs were genetically abnormal. One 
or more of their genes may have been impaired. 
Unlike teratogens, which damage an already 
conceived offspring and affect only a single gen-
eration, deleterious genes are in the germ plasm 
before conception and may lie dormant for sev-
eral generations.
We may assume that the multilegged trait 
is due to an alteration in a single gene, which is 
transmitted in simple Mendelian fashion. We 
infer the existence of two alternative forms of the 
gene—namely, a normal version and a variant 
version. Geneticists use the Greek word allele to 
denote the normal and variant forms of a gene. In 
other words, the normal allele of a gene conveys 
appropriate instructions, whereas the variant allele 
of the gene conveys improper information.
We shall postulate that the variant allele for the 
multilegged condition is recessive to the normal 
allele. That is to say, the expression of the variant 
allele is completely masked or suppressed by the 
normal (or dominant) allele when the two are present 
together in the same individual (ﬁ g. 1.5). Such an 
by a fabled quotation from his book Philosophie 
Zoologique (1809):
The giraffe lives in places where the ground is 
almost invariably parched and without grass. 
Obliged to browse on trees it is continually forced 
to stretch upwards. This habit sustained over long 
periods of time by every individual of the race has 
resulted in the forelimbs becoming longer than the 
hind ones, and the neck so elongated that a giraffe 
can lift his head to a height of six metres [about 
20 feet] without taking his forelimbs off the ground.
Lamarck advocated that the organs of an ani-
mal became modiﬁ ed in appropriate fashion in 
direct response to a changing environment. The 
various organs became greatly improved through 
use or reduced to vestiges through disuse. Such 
bodily modiﬁ cations, he argued, could in some 
manner be transferred and impressed on the germ 
cells to affect future generations. Thus, Lamarck 
was arguing that the whale lost its hind limbs as a 
consequence of the inherited effects of disuse, and 
the wading bird developed its long legs through 
generations of sustained stretching to keep the 
body above the water level. Inheritance, in his 
view, was simply the direct transmission of those 
superﬁ cial bodily changes that arose within the 
lifetime of the individual owing to use or disuse. 
Lamarck’s views are unacceptable because we 
know of no mechanism that allows changes in the 
body to register themselves on the germ cells.
Although Lamarck was incorrect about the 
mechanism of evolution, he deserves great credit 
for formulating the ﬁ rst truly well-thought-out 
theory of organic evolution. In Lamarck’s day, 
like for Darwin, ideas that diverged from the bib-
lical account of creation and predestination were 
heretical and counter to the prevailing zeitgeist 
or worldview. Darwin properly credits Lamarck, 
 noting that:
Lamarck was the ﬁ rst man whose conclusions on 
the subject excited much attention. This justly 
celebrated naturalist ﬁ rst published his views in 
1801 . . . he ﬁ rst did the eminent service of arous-
ing attention to the probability of all changes in 
the organic, as well as in the inorganic world, 

Figure 1.5 Mating of two “carrier” parents resulting in the emergence 
of multilegged offspring. The multilegged trait is assumed to be controlled 
by a defective recessive gene. Both parents are normal in appearance, but each 
carries the defective gene, masked by the normal gene. The recessive gene 
manifests its detrimental effect when the offspring inherits one abnormal gene 
from each of its parents.
8 
Understanding Evolution
humans, known as the Ellis–van Creveld syndrome. 
Afﬂ icted individuals are disproportionately dwarfed 
(short-limbed), have malformed hearts, and pos-
sess six ﬁ ngers on each hand (ﬁ g. 1.6). The reces-
sive gene that is responsible for this complex of 
defects is exceedingly rare. Yet, as shown by the 
late geneticist Victor A. McKusick formerly of 
Johns Hopkins University, the Ellis–van Creveld 
anomaly occurs with an exceptionally high inci-
dence among the Amish people in Lancaster 
County, Pennsylvania. The variant recessive 
allele apparently was present in one member of 
the original Old Order Amish immigrants from 
Europe two centuries ago. For a few generations, 
individual, normal in appearance but harboring the 
detrimental recessive allele, is said to be a carrier. 
The recessive allele may be transmitted without 
any outward manifestation for several generations, 
continually being sheltered by its dominant partner. 
However, as seen in ﬁ gure 1.5, the deleterious reces-
sive allele ultimately becomes exposed when two 
carrier parents happen to mate. Those progeny that 
are endowed with two recessive alleles, one from 
each parent, are malformed. On the average, one-
fourth of the offspring will be multilegged.
Genetic defects transmitted by recessive genes 
are not at all unusual. Pertinent to the present dis-
cussion is an inherited syndrome of abnormalities in 

Figure 1.6 Six-digited hands, one of the manifesta-
tions of the Ellis–van Creveld syndrome in humans, a 
rare recessive deformity. Affected offspring generally 
come from two normal, but carrier, parents, each of 
whom harbors the abnormal recessive gene.
Courtesy of Victor A. McKusick, Johns Hopkins University.
 
CHAPTER 1 Variation in Populations 
9
harmful genes are brought to light through the 
mechanism of heredity. A trait absent for many 
generations can suddenly appear without warning. 
Once a variant character expresses itself, its fate 
will be determined by the ability of the individual 
displaying the trait to survive and reproduce in its 
given environment.
It is difﬁ cult to imagine that the grotesquely 
shaped frogs could compete successfully with 
their normal kin. However, we shall never know 
whether or not the multilegged frogs were capa-
ble of contending with the severities of climatic 
or seasonal changes, or of successfully escap-
ing their predators, or even of actively defending 
themselves. What we do know is that the multi-
legged bullfrogs did not survive to reproductive 
age. Despite diligent searches by many interested 
investigators in the Mississippi locale, no sexually 
mature abnormal frogs have been uncovered in the 
natural population. It seems that this unfavorable 
variant has been eliminated. In the next chapter, 
we will explore this situation in light of Darwin’s 
tenet of natural selection.
HYPOTHETICO-DEDUCTIVE 
REASONING
We have acted as objective and open-minded spec-
tators in observing and interpreting the events sur-
rounding the origin and demise of the multilegged 
frogs. We formulated a few hypotheses or, in the 
vernacular, educated guesses or hunches. One of 
the provisional conjectures for the Mississippi 
assemblage of bullfrogs was that a chance mat-
ing of two carrier parents resulted in genetically 
defective offspring. This hypothesis permitted 
the deduction that the unfavorable trait would not 
likely resurface in a subsequent breeding season. 
In essence, we rendered a hypothesis consistent 
with the observations, and deduced predictions or 
consequences from the hypothesis. 
We will accept, reject, or modify the hypoth-
esis in accordance with the degree of fulﬁ llment 
of the predictions. If the hypothesis is to become 
a scientiﬁ c explanation, we are obliged to test 
the harmful allele was passed down unobserved, 
masked by its normal partner allele. Since 1860, 
the Ellis–van Creveld deformity has appeared in at 
least 50 offspring. Ordinarily, it is uncommon for 
both members of a married couple to harbor the 
defective recessive allele. However, in the Amish 
community, marriages have been largely conﬁ ned 
within members of the sect with a resulting high 
degree of consanguinity. Marriages of close rela-
tives have tended to promote the meeting of two 
normal, but carrier, parents.
We know very little about the past history 
or breeding structure of the Mississippi bullfrog 
population in which the multilegged trait appeared 
with an exceptionally high frequency. We may 
suspect that all 350 or more multilegged frogs 
were derived from a single mating of two carrier 
parents. In contrast to humans, a single mated pair 
of frogs can produce well over 10,000 offspring. 
The similarity in age of the multilegged bullfrogs 
found in nature adds weight to the supposition that 
these frogs are members of one generation, and 
probably of one mating.
Much of the preceding discussion on the mul-
tilegged bullfrog is admittedly speculative. How-
ever, one aspect is certain: previously concealed 

Reject
Hypothesis
Refine
Question
Reject
Theory
Support
Hypothesis
Confirm
Results
More
Predictions
More
Experiments
More
Predictions
More
Experiments
Support
Hypothesis
Theory
Continue
Prediction
and
Experiments
Support
Real
World
Observation
Hypotheses
and
Predictions
Experiments
Refute
Hypothesis
Refute
10 
Understanding Evolution
Figure 1.7 Hypothetico-deductive reasoning, also called the scientiﬁ c method. This conceptual diagram illustrates how 
hypotheses and theories are generated in science. Scientists start with observations of the natural world, from which they gener-
ate a hypothesis (or several hypotheses). The hypothesis is then experimentally veriﬁ ed or rejected. At any point the hypothesis 
may be redeﬁ ned, based on new data or falsiﬁ cation of the original hypothesis. A hypothesis that is supported by experimentation 
is then repeatedly subjected to prediction and further experimentation. Only with the extensive support of numerous experiments 
are hypotheses considered to constitute a theory. Theories are continually used to make predictions that are repeated tested. 
When experiments fail to support predictions, the hypothesis or theory may again be redeﬁ ned and retested. If, after experimenta-
tion, hypotheses or theories are no longer supported, they are abandoned. The theory of evolution via natural selection has been 
repeatedly used to make predictions and to guide experimentation and has withstood 150 years of scrutiny.

 
CHAPTER 1 Variation in Populations 
11
were able to formulate critical tests that continually 
substantiate our deductions, our conﬁ dence would 
grow that a particular thesis is the most probable 
explanation. This explanatory statement would then 
be regarded as “true” and would become part of the 
arsenal of scientiﬁ c knowledge. 
Acceptance of a scientiﬁ c statement is the 
attainment of a high degree of conﬁ dence in its 
accuracy. But even the most deﬁ nitive statement is 
subject to revision. A statement acceptable at one 
moment of time is still open to possible exception 
and modiﬁ cation. The natural sciences disallow 
absolute certainty. Stated another way, there is no 
eternal or absolute truth in the natural sciences. 
This view offers shallow comfort to those persons 
who are uncomfortable with, or unaccustomed to, 
uncertainty.
When a hypothesis is recognized as having far-
reaching implications and is continually veriﬁ ed 
by observation and experimentation, the hypoth-
esis may then attain the status of a theory. A theory 
is, accordingly, a hypothesis sufﬁ ciently tested for 
a scientist to have complete conﬁ dence in its prob-
ability. A theory is not merely an untested opinion, 
as implied by the oft-heard recantation: “After all, 
evolution is only a theory!” The theory that life 
has evolved and is ever changing is founded on as 
much evidence as the broadly accepted generaliza-
tion that the Earth is round. 
Occasionally, but hesitatingly, a theory advances 
to a law. In the natural sciences, laws have question-
able utility. A law tends to connote that a phenom-
enon is absolutely certain. The famous Mendelian 
laws of inheritance remain fundamentally sound, 
but they are not, in fact, inviolate. Several dramatic 
exceptions have recently been uncovered, which 
Gregor Mendel could not have dared envision. 
Modern molecular biologists have attached several 
signiﬁ cant codicils to Mendel’s bequest.
the deductions by additional observations or by 
performing experiments. This mode of inquiry 
is the hypothetico-deductive style of reasoning 
that is the cornerstone of investigative sciences, 
particularly the natural sciences (ﬁ g. 1.7). This 
method of establishing explanations for observed 
phenomena has the goal of developing the habit 
of scientiﬁ c thinking, characterized by objectivity, 
open-mindedness, skepticism, and the willingness 
to suspend judgment if there is insufﬁ cient 
evidence. 
Our prediction was fulﬁ lled for the 1958 
population of malformed bullfrogs in the Missis-
sippi area: no such frogs were found again in sub-
sequent breeding seasons. The supposition that a 
heritable transmission of a faulty gene has been in 
play in the more recent Minnesota populations of 
mink frogs is less inviting, particularly in light of 
a fruitful experiment undertaken by David Hoppe 
of the University of Minnesota. He examined the 
outcome of dividing into two batches a cluster of 
freshly deposited frog eggs from a natural pond 
where malformed frogs had occurred. One batch 
was left at its site of collection and subject to the 
vicissitudes of nature. The second batch was reared 
in the laboratory in treated water known to be suit-
able for the growth of tadpoles. Accordingly, the 
two batches of eggs had the same genetic heritage 
but were submitted to different environmental expe-
riences. The informative result was that some of 
the eggs left in nature developed into froglets hav-
ing extra legs and other malformations, whereas all 
the laboratory-reared eggs developed into normal 
froglets. This suggests strongly that some endur-
ing noxious environmental agent, in or around the 
pond, has persisted in inducing abnormal develop-
ment of the frogs through the years.
We are not yet justiﬁ ed in accepting any 
hypothesis as the most probable explanation. If we 

12
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
More than a century and a half ago, in 1859, 
Charles Robert Darwin (ﬁ g. 2.1) gave the biological 
world the master key that unlocked all previous per-
plexities about evolution. His thesis of natural selec-
tion can be compared only with such revolutionary 
ideas as Newton’s law of gravitation and Einstein’s 
theory of relativity. The concept of natural selection 
was set forth clearly and convincingly by Darwin 
in his monumental treatise The Origin of Species.
This epoch-making book was the fruition of more 
than twenty years of meticulously sifting through 
the voluminous data he had accumulated.
In 1831, Charles Darwin, then 22 years old 
and fresh from Cambridge University, accepted 
the post of naturalist, without pay, aboard H.M.S. 
Beagle, a ship commissioned by the British Admi-
ralty for a surveying voyage around the world. 
Although Darwin was an indifferent student at 
Cambridge, he did show an interest in the natu-
ral sciences. He was an ardent collector of beetles, 
enjoyed bird watching and hunting, and was an 
amateur geologist.
It took the Beagle nearly ﬁ ve years—from 
1831 to 1836—to circle the globe (ﬁ g. 2.2). When 
Darwin ﬁ rst embarked on the voyage, he did not dis-
pute the dogma that every species of organism had 
come into being at the same time and had remained 
permanently unaltered. He shared the views of his 
contemporaries that all organisms had been created 
about 4000 B.C.—more precisely, at 9:00 A.M. on 
Sunday, October 23, in 4004 B.C., according to the 
bold pronouncement of Archbishop James Ussher 
in the seventeenth century. Darwin had, in fact, 
studied for the clergy at Cambridge University. But 
he was to make observations on the Beagle’s voyage 
that he could not reconcile with accepted beliefs.
Darwin’s quarters on the Beagle were 
cramped, and he took only a few books on board. 
One of them was the newly published ﬁ rst volume 
of Charles Lyell’s Principles of Geology, a parting 
gift from his Cambridge mentor, John Henslow, 
professor of botany. Lyell challenged the prevail-
ing belief that the Earth had been created by a 
divine plan merely 6,000 years ago. On the con-
trary, according to Lyell, the Earth’s age could be 
measured in hundreds of millions of years. Lyell 
argued that the Earth’s mountains, valleys, rivers, 
and coastlines were shaped not by Noah’s Flood 
DARWINIAN SCHEME 
OF EVOLUTION
2

 
CHAPTER 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution  
13
but by the ordinary action of the rains, the winds, 
earthquakes, volcanoes, and other natural forces. 
Darwin was impressed by Lyell’s emphasis on the 
great antiquity of the Earth’s rocks and gradually 
came to perceive that the characteristics of organ-
isms, as well as the face of the Earth, could change 
over a vast span of time.
The Voyage of the Beagle (1839) chronicles 
Darwin’s ﬁ ve-year voyage on H.M.S. Beagle, 
which set sail from Plymouth on the drizzling morn-
ing of December 27, 1831, the day after Christmas, 
with a crew of 75, under the leadership of Captain 
Robert Fitzroy. Fitzroy employed the young Mr. 
Darwin as his companion, and not, as many think, 
as the ship’s naturalist (Robert McCormick was the 
original ship’s naturalist and surgeon, but soon he 
jumped ship in Brazil). In those days, aristocrats of 
Captain Fitzroy’s status could not dine or converse 
with lowly crewmembers and often took along pas-
sengers of their own social class as companions, so 
as to not go mad on long, lonesome voyages (the 
ﬁ rst captain of the Beagle committed suicide). After 
McCormick’s hasty departure from the Beagle, 
Figure 2.1 Charles Darwin at the age of 31 (1840), 
four years after his famous voyage around the world as 
an unpaid naturalist aboard H.M.S. Beagle. 
Department of Library Services American Museum of Natural History.
Figure 2.2 Five-year world voyage of the H.M.S. Beagle. Darwin’s observations on this voyage 
convinced him of the reality of evolution. Particularly impressive to him were the fossil skeletons 
of mammals unearthed in the Argentine pampas (see ﬁ g. 2.3) and the variety of tortoises and birds 
in the small group of volcanic islands, the Galápagos Islands (see ﬁ g. 12.4).
North
America
Europe
Asia
Africa
Australia
South
America
Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle (1831–1836)
Valparaiso
Gala′pagos Is.
Tahiti
Bahia
Rio de Janeiro
Montevideo
Capetown
England
Azores Is.
Cape
Verde Is.
Ascension Is.
Mauritius Is.
Keeling Is.
Sidney
Tasmania
New
Zealand
Falkland Is.
King George’s Sound

Figure 2.3 Curious hoofed mammals (ungulates) that ﬂ ourished on the continent of 
South America some 60 to 70 million years ago and have long since vanished from the scene. 
Bones of these great mammals were found by Darwin on the ﬂ at treeless plains of Argentina.
Toxodon
Thoatherium
Pyrotherium
Macrauchenia
14 
Understanding Evolution
of its long neck. Other remarkable creatures were 
the huge Pyrotherium, resembling an elephant, and 
the light and graceful single-toed Thoatherium, 
rivaling the horse. The presence of Thoatherium 
testiﬁ ed that a horse had been among the ancient 
inhabitants of the continent. It was the Span-
ish settlers who reintroduced the modern horse, 
Equus, to the continent of South America in the 
sixteenth century. Darwin marveled that a native 
horse should have lived and disappeared in South 
America. This was one of the ﬁ rst indications that 
species gradually became modiﬁ ed with time and 
that not all species survived through the ages.
When Darwin collected the remains of giant 
armadillos and sloths on an Argentine pampa, he 
reﬂ ected on the fact that, although they clearly 
belonged to extinct forms, they were constructed 
on the same basic plan as the small living arma-
dillos and sloths of the same region. This experi-
ence started him thinking of the fossil sequence of 
a given animal species through the ages and the 
causes of extinction. He wrote: “This wonderful 
Charles did indeed assume the duties of the ship’s 
naturalist. The young Charles Darwin was plagued 
with severe seasickness and took every opportunity 
to leave the Beagle to explore and collect whenever 
it made port. His youthful vitality and keen person-
ality were extraordinary assets to Darwin, who eas-
ily made friends with aristocrats and native people 
alike. The thousands of specimens he shipped back 
to England helped establish Darwin as a man of 
science at the young age of 27.
The living and extinct organisms that Darwin 
observed in the ﬂ at plains of the Argentine pampas 
and in the Galápagos Islands sowed the seeds of 
Darwin’s views on evolution. From old river beds 
in the Argentine pampas, he dug up bony remains 
of extinct mammals. One fossil ﬁ nding was the 
massive Toxodon, whose appearance was lik-
ened to a hornless rhinoceros or a hippopotamus 
(ﬁ g. 2.3). Another fossil remain that attracted Dar-
win’s attention was the skeleton of Macrauchenia, 
which he erroneously thought was clearly related 
to the camel because of the structure of the bones 

 
CHAPTER 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution  
15
not only to each other but also to relatively large 
tortoises on the adjacent mainland of South Amer-
ica. All this revealed to Darwin that the island 
tortoises shared a common ancestor with the main-
land forms. The same was true of a group of small 
black birds, known today as Darwin’s ﬁ nches. 
Darwin observed that the ﬁ nches were different 
on the various islands, yet they were obviously 
closely related to each other. Darwin reasoned that 
the ﬁ nches were derived from an ancestral stock 
that had emigrated from the mainland to the volca-
nic islands and had undergone profound changes 
under the different conditions of the individual 
islands. Apparently, a single ancestral group could 
give rise to several different varieties or species.
MECHANISM OF EVOLUTION
When Darwin left England in 1831, he had accepted 
the established theory that different species had 
arisen all at once and remained unchanged and con-
stant. His scientiﬁ c colleagues did not deny the pres-
ence of fossil remains of species no longer extant. 
Such extinct species were thought to represent organ-
isms that had been periodically annihilated by sudden 
and violent catastrophes. Each cataclysmic destruc-
tion was said to be accompanied by the creation of 
new forms of life, each distinct from the fossilized 
relationship in the same continent between the 
dead and the living will, I do not doubt, hereaf-
ter throw more light on the appearance of organic 
beings on our Earth, and their disappearance from 
it, than any other class of facts.”
What Darwin had realized was that living 
species have ancestors. This fact is commonplace 
now, but it was a revelation then. On traveling from 
the north to the south of South America, Darwin 
observed that one species was replaced by similar, 
but slightly different, species. In the southern part of 
Argentina, Darwin caught a rare species of ostrich 
that was smaller and differently colored from the 
more northerly, common American ostrich, Rhea 
americanus. This rare species of bird was later 
named after him, Rhea darwini. Lore holds that 
Darwin and his shipmates had consumed much of 
the only specimen of this rare bird before Darwin 
realized what it was. Darwin preserved the uneaten 
parts and sent them back to England, where Sir 
Robert Owen would later identify the bird as a new 
species. It was scarcely imaginable to Darwin that 
several minor versions of a species would be cre-
ated separately, one for each locality. It appeared 
to Darwin that species change not only in time but 
also with geographical distance. He later wrote: “It 
was evident that such facts could only be explained 
on the supposition that species gradually became 
modiﬁ ed; and the subject haunted me.”
In the Galápagos Islands, Darwin’s scientiﬁ c 
curiosity was sharply prodded by the many dis-
tinctive forms of life. The Galápagos consist of an 
isolated cluster of rugged volcanic islands in the 
eastern Paciﬁ c, on the equator about 600 miles west 
of Ecuador. One of the most unusual animals is 
the giant land-dwelling tortoise, which may weigh 
as much as 550 pounds, grow to 6 feet in length, 
and attain an age of 200 to 250 years (ﬁ g. 2.4). 
The Spanish name for tortoise, galápago, gives 
the islands their name. Darwin noticed that the tor-
toises were clearly different from island to island, 
although the islands were only a few miles apart. 
Darwin reasoned that, in isolation, each popula-
tion had evolved its own distinctive features. Yet, 
all the island tortoises showed basic resemblances 
Figure 2.4 The giant tortoise, Geochelone 
elephantopus, found only on the Galápagos Islands.
Source: © Tess & David Young/Tom Stack & Assoc.

by the extensive domestication of animals and 
plants brought about by conscious human efforts. 
Throughout the ages, humans have been a pow-
erful agent in modifying wild species of animals 
and plants to suit our needs and whims. Through 
careful breeding programs, we determine which 
characteristics or qualities will be incorporated 
or discarded in our domesticated stocks. By con-
scious selection, we perfected the toylike Shetland 
pony, the Great Dane dog, the sleek Arabian race 
horse, and vast numbers of cultivated crops and 
ornamental plants.
Many clearly different domestic varieties have 
evolved from a single species through our efforts. 
As an example, we may consider the many vari-
eties of domestic fowl (ﬁ g. 2.5), all of which are 
derived from a single wild species of red jungle 
fowl (Gallus gallus) present at one time in northern 
India. The red jungle fowl dates back 
to 2000 B.C. and has been so modiﬁ ed 
as to be nonexistent today. The variety 
of fowls perpetuated by fowl fanciers 
range from the ﬂ amboyant ceremonial 
cocks (the Japanese Onaga-dori) to 
the leghorns, bred especially to deposit 
spotless eggs. In the plant world, horti-
culturists have evolved the astonishing 
range of begonias shown in ﬁ gure 2.6. 
The wild begonia, from which most of 
the modern varieties have been bred, 
was found in 1865 and still exists today 
in the Andes.
In the late 1830s, Darwin attended 
the meetings of animal breeders and 
int en tly read their publications. Animal 
bre eders were conversant with the vari-
ability in their pet animals and utilized 
the technique of artiﬁ cial selection. 
That is, the breeders selected and per-
petuated those variant types that inter-
ested them or seemed useful to them. 
The breeders, however, had only vague 
notions as to the origin, or inheritance, 
of the variable traits.
Darwin acknowledged the unlim-
ited variability in organisms but was 
species. The theory of successive episodes of cata-
strophic destruction and creation, formulated by the 
French anatomist Georges Cuvier, was accepted by 
most eighteenth-century scholars.
Upon his return to England in October 1836, 
Darwin was convinced of the truth of the idea of 
descent with modiﬁ cation—that all organisms, 
including humans, are modiﬁ ed descendants of 
previously existing forms of life. Darwin’s obser-
vations during his voyage assured him that animals 
and plants are not the products of special creation, 
as Victorian society believed. We can discern two 
stages in the development of Darwin’s thought: the 
ﬁ rst was the realization that the world of organisms 
is not ﬁ xed and unchangeable; the second was an 
explanation of the process of evolutionary change.
At home, Darwin assembled data relevant to 
the mechanism of evolution. He became intrigued 
Figure 2.5 Evolution under domestication. A variety of domes-
tic fowls have evolved from a single wild species (now extinct) as a 
result of the continual practice by humans of artiﬁ cial selection.
Frizzled sultan
rooster
Araucana
Onaga-dori cock
Birchen game
bantam
Full-sized and bantam
white leghorn
Black-tailed
Japanese bantam
Sebastopol goose
Crested white duck
16 
Understanding Evolution

DARWIN’S NATURAL SELECTION
Malthus’s writings provided the germ for Dar-
win’s theory of natural selection. In his famous 
An Essay on the Principle of Population, Malthus 
expressed the view that the reproductive capac-
ity of humankind far exceeds the food supply 
available to nourish an expanding human popula-
tion. Humans compete among themselves for the 
necessities of life. This unrelenting competition 
engenders vice, misery, war, and famine. It thus 
occurred to Darwin that competition exists among 
all living things. Darwin then envisioned that the 
“struggle for existence” might be the means by 
which the well-adapted individuals survive and 
the ill-adjusted are eliminated. Darwin was the 
ﬁ rst to realize that perpetual selection existed in 
nature in the form of natural selection. In natural 
selection, as contrasted to artiﬁ cial selection, the 
never able to explain satisfactorily how a 
variant trait was inherited. He and other 
naturalists were unaware of Gregor Men-
del’s contemporaneous discovery. Rather, 
Darwin followed Lamarck in assuming that 
biological variation is chieﬂ y conditioned 
by direct inﬂ uences of the environment on 
the organism. He believed that the changes 
induced by the environment became inher-
ited; that bodily changes in the parents 
leave an impression or mark on their germ 
cells, or gametes. Darwin thought that all 
organs of the body sent contributions to 
the germ cells in the form of particles, or 
gemmules. These gemmules, or minute 
delegates of bodily parts, were suppos-
edly discharged into the blood stream and 
became ultimately concentrated in the 
gametes. In the next generation, each gem-
mule reproduced its particular bodily com-
ponent. The theory was called pangenesis, 
or “origin from all,” since all parental 
bodily cells were supposed to take part in 
the formation of the new individual.
Having explained the origin of varia-
tion (although incorrectly),  Darwin won-
dered how artiﬁ cial selection (a term 
familiar then only to animal  breeders) 
could be carried on in nature. There was no 
breeder in nature to pick and choose. In 1837, 
Darwin wrote: “How selection could be applied to 
organisms living in a state of nature remained a 
mystery to me.” Slightly more than a year later, 
Darwin found the solution. In his autobiography, 
Darwin explained: “In October 1838, that is ﬁ fteen 
months after I had begun my systematic enquiry, I 
happened to read for amusement Malthus on Pop-
ulation . . . at once it struck me that under these 
circumstances favourable variations would tend 
to be preserved and unfavourable ones destroyed. 
The result of this would be the formation of a new 
species.” The circumstances mentioned by Darwin 
were those associated with the assertions of an 
English clergyman, Thomas Robert Malthus, that 
population is necessarily limited by the means of 
subsistence.
Figure 2.6 Arti  cial selection. In the hands of skilled horticul-
turists, several varieties of the begonia have been established.
Wild Begonia
Carnation
Rosebud
Marmorata
Picotee
Sunset
Camellia
 
CHAPTER 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution  
17

18 
Understanding Evolution
of Species remains the one book to be read by all 
serious students of nature.
Darwin’s reasons for not publishing The Ori-
gin of Species for over 20 years after returning 
from the voyage of the Beagle were complex. He 
described his anxiety to one friend by saying, “It 
is like confessing a murder.” Some of the speciﬁ c 
reasons for his delay were these:
 • Darwin believed that his theory was still lack-
ing sufﬁ cient evidence, and he wanted to 
gather more data.
 • He also feared that he would be ridiculed by 
the public and the established church, as oth-
ers with unconventional ideas were, and was 
determined to avoid that fate.
 • Darwin suffered from ill health, grief and 
depression brought on by the unexpected death 
of his 10-year-old daughter, Annie.
 • Darwin’s wife, Emma, a devout Christian, 
feared that her husband’s ideas would prevent 
them from being eternally united in heaven.
The idea of evolution—that organisms change—
did not originate with Darwin. There were many 
before him—notably Lamarck, Georges Buffon, 
and 
Charles 
Darwin’s 
grandfather, 
Erasmus 
Darwin—who recognized or intimated that animals 
and plants have not remained unchanged through 
time but are continuously changing. Indeed, early 
Greek philosophers, who wondered about everything, 
speculated on the gradual progression of life from 
simple to complex. It was reserved for Darwin to 
remove the doctrine of evolution from the domain of 
speculation. Darwin’s outstanding achievement was 
his discovery of the principle of natural selection. In 
showing how evolution occurs, Darwin endeavored 
to convince skeptics that evolution does occur.
As a whole, the principle of natural selection 
stems from ﬁ ve important observations made by 
Darwin and three deductions that logically follow 
from them. The ﬁ rst observation was that all living 
things tend to increase in number at a proliﬁ c rate. 
This observation was not unique to Darwin but was 
most clearly articulated by him, though it was surely 
inﬂ uenced by his early readings of William Paley 
and Thomas Robert Malthus. A single oyster may 
animal breeder or horticulturist is replaced by the 
conditions of the environment that prevent the sur-
vival and reproduction of certain individuals. The 
process of natural selection occurs without a con-
scious plan or purpose. Natural selection was an 
entirely new concept, and Darwin was its principal 
proponent.
It was not until 1844 that Darwin developed 
his idea of natural selection in an essay, but not 
for publication. He showed the manuscript to the 
geologist Charles Lyell, who encouraged him to 
prepare a book. Darwin still took no steps toward 
publishing his views. It appears that Darwin might 
not have prepared his famous volume had not a fel-
low naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace (in the Dutch 
East Indies), independently conceived of the idea 
of natural selection. Wallace had spent many years 
exploring and collecting in South America and the 
West Indies. Wallace was also inspired by reading 
Malthus’s essay, and the idea of natural selection 
came to him in a ﬂ ash of insight during a sudden 
ﬁ t of malarial fever. In June of 1858, Wallace sent 
Darwin a brief essay on his views. The essay was 
entitled On the Tendencies of Varieties to Depart 
Indeﬁ nitely from the Original Type. With the 
receipt of this essay, Darwin was then induced to 
make a statement of his own with that of Wallace.
Wallace’s essay and a portion of Darwin’s man-
uscript, containing remarkably similar views, were 
read simultaneously before the Linnaean Society in 
London on July 1, 1858. The joint reading of the 
papers stirred little interest. Darwin then labored 
for eight months to compress his voluminous notes 
into a single book, which he modestly called “only 
an Abstract.” Wallace shares with Darwin the honor 
of establishing the mechanism by which evolution 
is brought about, but it was the monumental The 
Origin of Species, with its impressive weight of 
evidence and argument, that left its mark on human-
kind. The full title of Darwin’s treatise was On the 
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or 
the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle 
for Life. The ﬁ rst edition, some 1,250 copies, was 
sold out on the very day it appeared, November 24, 
1859. The book was immediately both acidly 
attacked and effusively praised. Today, The Origin 

 
CHAPTER 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution  
19
was unknown to Darwin, he and the rest of the peo-
ple of his day had the vague notion that variation 
was in large part due to inherited factors (“obser-
vation” 5). Darwin concluded (deduction 2) that 
individuals endowed with the most favorable varia-
tions would have the best chance of passing their 
favorable characteristics on to their progeny. This 
differential survival or “survival of the ﬁ ttest” was 
termed natural selection (deduction 2). It was the 
British philosopher Herbert Spencer who proposed 
the expression survival of the ﬁ ttest, and Darwin 
accepted the notion of survival of the ﬁ ttest as 
being equivalent to natural selection. Over many 
generations, natural selection leads to changes in 
populations, which eventually leads to evolution 
(deduction 3). A conceptual model of Darwin’s 
tenet of natural selection is presented in ﬁ gure 2.7.
Darwin’s book appeared at a time when 
England embraced the Victorian economic doc-
trine of laissez-faire. This French phrase expresses 
the notion of letting people do what they choose. 
produce as many as 100 million eggs at one spawn-
ing; one tropical orchid may form well over a million 
seeds; a single salmon can deposit 28 million eggs in 
one season. It is equally apparent (the second obser-
vation) that no group of organisms swarm uncontrol-
lably over the surface of the Earth. In fact, the actual 
size of a given population of any particular organ-
ism remains relatively constant over long periods 
of time. Darwin’s third observation was that there 
are only a limited amount of resources available for 
organisms to use as they strive to live and reproduce. 
If we accept these readily conﬁ rmable observa-
tions, the conclusion necessarily follows that not all 
individuals that are produced in any given genera-
tion can survive. There is inescapably in nature an 
intense “struggle for existence” (deduction 1 ).
Darwin’s fourth observation was that individu-
als in a population are not alike but instead differ 
from one another in various features. That all living 
things vary is indisputable. Likewise, although the 
exact source of the variation between individuals 
Observation 3
Limited resources
Observation 1
Potential exponential
increase in populations
Observation 2
Steady state (stability)
of populations
Deduction 1
Struggle for existence
among individuals
Observation 4
Uniqueness of 
individuals
Observation 5
Variation is inherited
Deduction 2
Differential
survival
(i.e., natural
selection)
Deduction 3
Throughout
many
generations:
evolution
Figure 2.7 Darwin’s explanatory model of evolution via natural selection.

Figure 2.8 Cartoon in Punch’s Almanack (1882). The cartoon portrays the transition 
of worms into apes and gnomes, culminating in a gentleman with sartorial splendor 
paying facetious homage to Charles Darwin.
Source: Punch’s Almanack
20 
Understanding Evolution
process that operated in the ruthless English society 
where only the ﬁ ttest could survive the intolerable 
working and living conditions. Victorian England 
was also staunchly biblical. Science was linked in 
many devout minds with atheistic thinking, and 
Darwin’s book was denounced from fundamental-
ist pulpits. The Victorian press assailed Darwin for 
his arrogance in removing humans from an exalted 
position in the world of life (ﬁ g. 2.8). 
As used in economics, the doctrine deprecates any 
form of governmental interference intended to reg-
ulate labor, manufacturing, commerce, and ﬁ nan-
cial institutions. The Victorian era was one of ﬁ erce 
competition among manufacturers, merchants, and 
bankers. Herbert Spencer advocated that Darwin 
had discovered not merely the laws of biological 
evolution but also those governing human societ-
ies. Spencer gave science’s blessing to the selection 

 
CHAPTER 2 Darwinian Scheme of Evolution  
21
individuals who most successfully reproduce 
will predominate in the next generation. Because 
of unequal reproductive capacities of individuals 
with different hereditary constitutions, the genetic 
characteristics of a population become altered 
each successive generation. This is a dynamic 
process that has occurred in the past, occurs 
today, and will continue to occur as long as heri-
table variation and differing reproductive abilities 
exist. Under these circumstances, the composition 
of a population can never remain constant. This, 
then, is evolution—changes in the genetic com-
position of a population with the passage of each 
generation.
The outcome of the evolutionary process is 
the adaptation of an organism to its environment. 
Many of the structural features of organisms are 
marvels of construction. It is, however, not at all 
remarkable that organisms possess particular char-
acteristics that appear to be precisely and pecu-
liarly suited to their needs. This is understandable 
because the individuals who leave the most descen-
dants are most often those who are best equipped 
to cope with special environmental conditions. In 
other words, the more reproductively ﬁ t individu-
als tend to be those who are better adapted to the 
environment.
An important consideration is that evolution is a 
property of populations. A population is not a mere 
assemblage of individuals; it is a breeding commu-
nity of individuals. Moreover, it is the population 
that evolves in time, not the individual. An indi-
vidual cannot evolve, for he or she survives for only 
one generation. An individual, however, can ensure 
continuity of a population by leaving offspring. Life 
is perpetuated only by the propagation of new indi-
viduals who differ in some degree from their par-
ents. Natural selection is a term serving to inform 
us that some individuals leave more offspring than 
others. Natural selection is not purposeful or guided 
by a speciﬁ c aim; it does not seek to attain a speciﬁ c 
end. Natural selection is solely the consequence of 
the differences between individuals with respect to 
their capacity to produce progeny under a particular 
set of environmental conditions.
DIFFERENTIAL REPRODUCTION
The survival of favorable variants is one facet of 
the Darwinian concept of natural selection. Equally 
important is the corollary that unfavorable variants 
do not survive and multiply. Consequently, natu-
ral selection necessarily embraces two aspects, as 
inseparable as the two faces of the same coin: the 
negative (elimination of the unﬁ t) and the positive 
(perpetuation of the ﬁ t). In its negative role, natu-
ral selection serves as a conservative or stabiliz-
ing force, pruning out the aberrant forms from a 
population.
The superior, or ﬁ t, individuals are popu-
larly extolled as those who emerge victoriously 
in brutal combat. Fitness has often been naively 
confused with physical, or even athletic, prowess. 
This gloriﬁ cation is traceable to such seductive 
catch phrases as the “struggle for existence” and 
the “survival of the ﬁ ttest.” But what does ﬁ tness 
actually signify?
The true gauge of ﬁ tness is not merely survival 
but also the organism’s capacity to leave offspring. 
An individual must survive to reproduce, but not 
all individuals that survive do, or are able to, leave 
descendants. We have seen that the multilegged 
bullfrogs were not successful in propagating them-
selves. They failed to make a contribution to the 
next or succeeding generations. Therefore, they 
were unﬁ t. Hence, individuals are biologically unﬁ t 
if they leave no progeny. They are also unﬁ t if they 
do produce progeny, none of whom survives to 
maturity. The less spectacular normal-legged frogs 
did reproduce, and to the extent that they are repre-
sented by descendants in succeeding generations, 
they are the ﬁ ttest. Darwinian ﬁ tness, therefore, 
is measured as reproductive effectiveness. Natu-
ral selection can thus be thought of as differential 
reproduction, rather than differential survival.
EVOLUTION DEFINED
Any given generation is descended from only a 
small fraction of the previous generation. It should 
be evident that the genes transmitted by those 

22 
Understanding Evolution
Throughout the ages, appropriate adaptive 
structures have arisen as the result of gradual 
changes in the hereditary endowment of a popu-
lation. Admittedly, past events are not amenable 
to direct observation or experimental veriﬁ cation. 
There are no living eyewitnesses of very distant 
events. So, the process of evolution in the past 
must be inferred. Nevertheless, we may be conﬁ -
dent that the same evolutionary forces we witness 
in operation today have guided evolution in the 
past. The basis for this conﬁ dence is imparted in 
the chapters ahead.

23
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
Darwin recognized that the process of evo-
lution is inseparably linked to the mechanism of 
inheritance. But he could not satisfactorily explain 
how a given trait is transmitted from parent to off-
spring, nor could he account adequately for the sud-
den appearance of new traits. Unfortunately, Darwin 
was unaware of the great discovery in heredity made 
by a contemporary, the unpretentious Austrian monk 
and mathematics teacher, Gregor Johann Mendel.
Mendel carried out carefully controlled breed-
ing experiments on the common pea plant in his 
small garden at the monastery of Saint Thomas at 
Brünn in Moravia (now Brno, Czech Republic)
(ﬁ g. 3.1). He worked with large numbers of plants 
so that statistical accuracy could be assured. In 
1866, Mendel’s results appeared in a publication 
of the Brünn Society of Natural History. In the 
small compass of 44 printed pages, one of the most 
important principles of nature ever discovered is 
clearly revealed. Yet his paper elicited little interest 
or comment. No one praised or disputed Mendel’s 
ﬁ ndings. It is likely that nineteenth-century biolo-
gists were bafﬂ ed by Mendel’s mathematical, or 
statistical, approach to the study of hybridization. 
Botany and mathematics were strange bedfellows 
for that period.
Mendel was an excellent experimental scientist 
but was also very lucky. His research was successful 
for a number of reasons, including the following: 
 • He used excellent experimental techniques. 
 • For years he kept detailed records of his 
crosses. 
 • The data he collected was numerical. Ulti-
mately, the ratios of the crosses conﬁ rmed his 
theories. 
 • He was ahead of his time in his use of math-
ematical analysis. 
 • He picked a simple system with a few well-
deﬁ ned characters to study. Speciﬁ cally, because 
his characters all showed dominant and reces-
sive traits and behaved as though there was no 
linkage, his analysis was unambiguous. 
 • Fortunately, even though some of his char-
acters were on the same chromosome (i.e., 
linked), they were sufﬁ ciently far enough apart 
from each other that they appeared to assort 
independently. 
HERITABLE VARIATION

(a)
Figure 3.1 (a) George Mendel, 1822–1884,  Augustinian monk and scientist, father of genetics. (b) Mendel conducted his 
experiments on pea plants in a small garden adjacent to his monastery.
(b)
24 
Understanding Evolution
Mendel’s valuable contribution lay ignored 
or unappreciated until 1900, sixteen years after 
his death, when his obscure 1866 manuscript 
resurfaced. Mendel’s ﬁ ndings were independently 
rediscovered and veriﬁ ed almost simultaneously 
by three botanists: Hugo de Vries in Holland, 
Carl Correns in Germany, and Erich Tschermark 
in Vienna. Since then, Mendel has received scien-
tiﬁ c acclaim. The rediscovery of Mendel’s obscure 
manuscript at the turn of the twentieth century 
ushered in the science of genetics and ultimately 
led to our current understanding of heritable 
variation.
MENDEL’S PRINCIPLE 
OF SEGREGATION
Mendel’s profound inference was that traits are 
passed on from parent to offspring through the 
gametes, in speciﬁ c discrete units, or factors. The 
individual factors do not blend and do not con-
taminate one another. The hereditary factors of 
the parents can, therefore, be reassorted in var-
ied combinations in different individuals at each 
generation. Today, Mendel’s hereditary units are 
called genes. The almost inﬁ nite diversity that 
exists among individuals is attributable largely to 
the shufﬂ ing of tens of thousands of discrete genes 
that occurs in sexual reproduction.
Mendel reasoned that an individual has two 
copies of each gene, having received one copy of 
the gene from the gamete of the female parent and 
the other copy from the gamete of the male parent. 
Today, we refer to the contrasting forms of a given 
gene as alleles. Expressed in another way, all 
alternative sequences of a gene, including the nor-
mal and all variant sequences, are called alleles. In 
the most elementary case of inheritance, the trait is 
governed by a single gene that exists in two allelic 
forms—the normal (or typical) allele and the vari-
ant (or mutant) allele. Albinism in humans may 
be taken as an example of a trait under the simple 
control of a pair of alleles.
The word albino is derived from the Latin 
albus, meaning “white,” and refers to the paucity or 
absence of pigment (melanin) in the skin, hair, and 
eyes. The skin is often very light (“milk white”), 
and the hair whitish yellow. The eyes appear pink-
ish because the red blood vessels give the otherwise 
colorless iris a rosy cast. Contrary to popular opin-
ion, albinos are neither blind nor mentally retarded. 
They often have poor vision, are acutely sensitive to 
sunlight, and are prone to life-threatening skin can-
cer. In some cultures, as among the natives of the 
Archipelago Coral Islands, albinos are believed to 
have a mesmeric aura (ﬁ g. 3.2).
The absence of melanin is the consequence of 
a variant allele. Speciﬁ cally, albinism arises only 
when the individual is endowed with two variant 

Figure 3.2 Albino person showing the complete absence of pigment in the eyes, hair, and skin. 
Natives of the Archipelago Coral Islands (100 miles east of the New Guinea mainland) are said to take care 
of their “pure white” relatives who can hardly see in the glare of the tropical sun.
(Wide World Photos)
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
25
a pair of normal alleles—then all offspring will be 
normally pigmented (cross 1). When both parents 
are albino and accordingly each has a pair of variant 
genes, all offspring will be afﬂ icted with  albinism 
(cross 2). The persons involved in either of these 
two crosses are said to be homozygous, since they 
each possess a pair of similar, or like, alleles. The 
normal individuals in cross 1 are homozygous for 
the normal allele, and the albino individuals in 
cross 2 are homozygous for the variant allele.
Looking at cross 3, we notice that one of the 
parents (the female) carries an unlike pair of alleles: 
one member of the pair is normal; its partner allele is 
variant. This female parent, possessing unlike alleles, 
is heterozygous. This parent has normal coloration, 
which leads us to deduce that the expression of the 
alleles, one from each parent. A cardinal fact of 
inheritance is that each gamete (egg or sperm) con-
tains one, and only one, member of a pair of alleles. 
Thus, when the egg and sperm unite, the two alleles 
are brought together in the new individual. Dur-
ing the production of the gametes, the members of 
a pair of alleles separate, or segregate, from each 
other. It bears emphasizing that a given gamete can 
carry only one allele but not both. This fundamental 
concept that only one member of any pair of alleles 
in a parent is transmitted to each offspring is Men-
del’s ﬁ rst principle—the principle of segregation. 
As seen in ﬁ gure 3.3, there are nine possible 
matings with respect to the pair of alleles determin-
ing the presence or absence of melanin. If both par-
ents are perfectly normal—that is, each possesses 

26 
Understanding Evolution
CROSS 1
AA
AA
AA
100% Normal homozygotes
AA
AA
A
A
A
A
a
a
a
a
a
AA
×
CROSS 2
aa
aa
aa
100% Albino
aa
aa
aa
×
CROSS 3
AA
AA
Aa
100% Normal
(50% normal homozygotes;
50% normal heterozygous carriers) 
AA
Aa
A
A
A
a
Aa
×
CROSS 4
Aa
AA
AA
100% Normal
(50% normal homozygotes;
50% normal heterozygous carriers)
Aa
Aa
A
a
A
A
AA
×
CROSS 5
AA
Aa
Aa
100% Normal heterozygous carriers
Aa
Aa
A
A
a
a
aa
×
CROSS 6
aa
Aa
Aa
100% Normal heterozygous carriers
Aa
Aa
a
a
A
A
AA
×
CROSS 7
Aa
Aa
Aa
50% Normal heterozygote
carriers, 50% Albino
50% Normal heterozygous
carriers, 50% Albino
75% Normal, 25% Albino
(25% normal homozygotes; 
50% normal heterozygous carriers, 
and 25% Albino)
aa
aa
A
a
a
a
aa
×
CROSS 8
aa
Aa
aa
Aa
aa
a
a
A
a
Aa
×
CROSS 9
Aa
AA
Aa
Aa
aa
A
a
A
a
Aa
×
Figure 3.3 The segregation of a single pair of alleles. The nine possible matings with 
respect to the recessive trait for albinism show the operation of Mendel’s principle of segregation.

 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
27
the recessive allele (AA); one-half are normal but 
carriers like the parents (Aa); and the remaining 
one-fourth exhibit the albino anomaly (aa). The 
probabilities of occurrence are the same as those 
illustrated by the tossing of a coin. If two coins 
are repeatedly tossed at the same time, the result 
to be expected on the basis of pure chance is that 
the combination “head and head” will fall in 
one-fourth of the cases, the combination “head 
and tail” in one-half of them, and the combina-
tion “tail and tail” in the remaining one-fourth. 
The ratio of genetic constitutions among the 
offspring may be expressed as 1/4 AA : 1/2 Aa : 
1/4 aa, or 1 AA : 2 Aa : 1 aa. 
Geneticists continually have to make a distinc-
tion between the external, or observable, appearance 
of the organism and its internal hereditary constitu-
tion. They call the former the phenotype (visible 
type) and the latter the genotype (hereditary type). 
In our last cross (no. 9), there are three different 
genotypes: AA, Aa, and aa. The dominant homozy-
gote (AA) cannot be distinguished by inspection 
from the heterozygote (Aa). Thus, AA and Aa geno-
types have the same phenotype. Accordingly, on 
the basis of phenotype alone, the progeny ratio is 
3/4 normal : 1/4 albino, or 3 normal : 1 albino.
If we disregard the sexes of the parents, the 
nine crosses in ﬁ gure 3.3 become reducible to six 
possible types of matings. The six possible crosses 
and their offspring are set forth in table 3.1.
APPLICATION OF MENDELIAN 
PRINCIPLES
Our interpretation of the mode of inheritance of the 
multilegged trait in the bullfrog was based on Men-
del’s principles. In chapter 1, we postulated a cross 
between two normal, but heterozygous, frogs (see 
ﬁ g. 1.5). The expectation for multilegged offspring 
from two heterozygous parents is 25 percent, in 
keeping with Mendel’s 3:1 ratio. This cross, using 
appropriate genetic symbols, is shown graphically 
by “checkerboard” analysis in ﬁ gure 3.4. The con-
venient checkerboard method of analysis, called 
variant allele is completely masked or suppressed 
by the normal allele. In genetical parlance, we say 
that the normal allele is dominant over its partner, 
the recessive allele. The dominant allele is custom-
arily symbolized by a capital letter (in our case, A); 
the recessive allele, by a corresponding small letter 
(a). The heterozygous parent is depicted as Aa, and 
is referred to as heterozygote or a carrier.
When the heterozygote (Aa) mates with a 
dominant homozygote (AA), all the offspring will 
be outwardly normal, but half the offspring will be 
carriers (Aa) like one of the parents (cross 3). The 
ratio of AA to Aa offspring may be expressed as 
1/2 AA : 1/2 Aa or simply 1 AA : 1 Aa. Cross 4 
differs from cross 3 only in that the male parent is 
the carrier (Aa) and the female parent is the domi-
nant homozygote (AA). The outcome is the same: 
all children are normal in appearance; but half of 
them are carriers. Thus, with respect to albinism, 
the males and females are equally likely to have or 
to transmit the trait. (There are traits, such as hemo-
philia and red-green color blindness, in which trans-
mission is inﬂ uenced by the sex of the parents.)
All offspring will be carriers from the mating 
(crosses 5 and 6) of a dominant homozygote (AA) 
and an albino parent (aa). Examining crosses 5 and 6 
(ﬁ g. 3.3), we again notice that males and females are 
equally affected. The mating of a heterozygous per-
son (Aa) and an albino (aa) gives rise to two types 
of progeny, in equal numbers (crosses 7 and 8). 
Half the offspring are normal but carriers (Aa); the 
remaining half are albino (aa).
The outcome of the last of the crosses (no. 9) 
in ﬁ gure 3.3 is comprehensible in terms of Men-
del’s law of segregation. Both parents are nor-
mal in appearance, but each carries the variant 
allele (a) masked by the normal allele (A). The 
male parent (Aa) produces two kinds of sperm 
cells; half the sperm carry the A allele; half carry 
the a allele. The same two kinds occur in equal 
proportions among the egg cells. Each kind of 
sperm has an equal chance of meeting each kind 
of egg. The random meeting of gametes leads to 
both normal and albino offspring. One-fourth of 
the progeny are normal and completely devoid of 

28 
Understanding Evolution
Stated another way, the 3:1 and 1:1 ratios 
reveal the risk or odds of a given child having the 
particular trait involved. If the ﬁ rst child of two 
heterozygous parents is an albino, the odds that 
the second child will be an albino remain 1 out 
of 4. These odds hold for each subsequent child, 
irrespective of the number of previously affected 
children. Each birth is an entirely independent 
event. If this still appears puzzling, consider once 
again the tossing of a coin. The ﬁ rst time a coin 
is tossed, the chance of obtaining either a head 
or a tail is 1 in 2. Whether the toss is repeated 
immediately or nine months later, the chance 
of the coin falling head or tail is still 1 in 2, or 
50 percent.
CHROMOSOMAL BASIS 
OF HEREDITY
Each organism has a deﬁ nite number of chro-
mosomes, ranging in various species from 2 to 
more than 1,000. Humans, for example, have 46 
microscopically visible, threadlike chromosomes 
in the nucleus of every body cell (ﬁ g. 3.5). Not 
the Punnett square, was devised by the British 
geneticist R. C. Punnett. The eggs and sperm are 
listed separately on two different sides of the check-
erboard, and each square represents an offspring that 
arises from the union of a given egg cell and a given 
sperm cell. The “reading” of the squares discloses 
the classical Mendelian phenotypic ratio of 3:1.
It should be understood that the 3:1 phenotypic 
ratio resulting from the mating of two heterozy-
gous persons, or the 1:1 ratio from the mating of a 
heterozygote and a recessive person, are expecta-
tions based on probability, and are not invariable 
outcomes. The production of large numbers of off-
spring increases the probability of obtaining, for 
example, the 1:1 progeny ratio, just as many tosses 
of a coin improve the chances of approximating 
the 1 head: 1 tail ratio. If a coin is tossed only two 
times, a head on the ﬁ rst toss is not invariably fol-
lowed by a tail on the second toss. In like manner, 
if only two offspring are produced from a mating 
of heterozygous (Aa) and recessive (aa) parents, 
it should not be thought that one normal offspring 
is always accompanied by one recessive offspring. 
With small numbers of progeny, as is characteristic 
of humans, any ratio might arise in a given family.
TABLE 3.1 Simple Recessive Mendelian Inheritance, Involving a Single Pair of Alleles 
(Normal Pigmentation vs. Albinism)
Mating Types
Gametes
Offspring
Genoptypes
Phenotypes
First 
Parent
Second 
Parent
Genotypes
Phenotypes
50%
50%
50%
50%
AA  AA
Normal  Normal
A
A
A
A
100% AA
100% Normal
AA  Aa
Normal  Normal
A
A
A
a
  50% AA
  50% Aa
100% Normal
Aa  Aa
Normal  Normal
A
a
A
a
  25% AA
  50% Aa
  25% aa
  75% Normal
  25% Albino
AA  aa
Normal  Albino
A
A
a
a
100% Aa
100% Normal
Aa  aa
Normal  Albino
A
a
a
a
  50% Aa
  50% aa
  50% Normal
  50% Albino
aa  aa
Albino  Albino
a
a
a
a
100% aa
100% Albino

X
Normal (heterozygous) parents
3/4 Normal : 1/4 Multilegged
Two kinds of eggs
Two kinds of sperm
Aa
A
a
AA
Aa
aa
Aa
Aa
A
a
Figure 3.4 Cross of two heterozygous carrier frogs. One-fourth of the offspring 
are normal and completely devoid of the recessive allele (AA); one-half are normal 
but carriers, like the parents (Aa); and the remaining one-fourth exhibit the multilegged 
anomaly (aa).
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
29

CHROMOSOMES
Viewed under
microscope
Slide preparation from a
culture of blood cells
1
6
7
D
F
G
E
8
13
19
21
22
X Y
20
16
17
18
14
15
9
10
11
12
2
A
B
3
C
Arranged in sequence (Karyotype)
4
5
30 
Understanding Evolution
and to distinguish one kind from the other. An 
important consideration is that chromosomes in 
a zygote occur in pairs. The signiﬁ cance of the 
double, or paired, set of chromosomes cannot be 
only are the numbers of chromosomes constant 
for a given species, but the shapes and sizes of 
the chromosomes in a given species differ sufﬁ -
ciently for us to recognize particular chromosomes 
Figure 3.5 Normal complement of 46 chromosomes prepared from a culture of blood cells of a 
human male. Each metaphase chromosome consists of two strands (chromatids) joined at the centromere. When 
the chromosomes are arranged in a sequence (karyotype), the male set consists of 23 pairs, including the XY.

Bone
2n
Muscle
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
mitosis
2n
Skin
2n
Nerve
2n
Gland
2n
Blood
2n
Other cells
2n
Immature
Reproductive
Cell
2n
Egg
n
meiosis
Egg
n
Fertilized Egg
n
n
Sperm
spermatogenesis
oogenesis
or
Sperm
Figure 3.6 Mitosis ensures that each new cell of the developing organism has a complete 
set of the chromosomes (diploid, or 2n) found in the fertilized egg cell. Through the process of 
meiosis, gametes (egg and sperm) come to possess only half the number of chromosomes (haploid, or 1n).
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
31
female has two X chromosomes of equal size 
and no Y  chromosome. Thus, the complement 
of 46 human chromosomes comprises 22 pairs 
of autosomes plus the sex chromosome pair, XX 
in normal females and XY in normal males. In 
current nomenclature, the female is described as 
“46,XX” and the male, “46,XY.” 
MITOSIS AND MEIOSIS
The formation of new cells by mitosis is a con-
tinual process in the human body, although cer-
tain cells divide more often than others, and some 
not at all. Mitosis is the means by which two new 
cells receive identical copies of the chromosome 
complement of the pre-existing cell (ﬁ g. 3.6). If 
gametes were to be produced by the usual mitotic 
overstated: each parent contributes one member of 
each pair of chromosomes to the offspring. 
The chromosomes can be systematically 
arranged in a sequence known as a karyotype 
(ﬁ g. 3.5). In preparing the karyotype, the chro-
mosomes are paired and classiﬁ ed into groups 
according to their length. There are 22 match-
ing pairs of human chromosomes that are called 
autosomes. The autosome pairs are numbered 
1 to 22 in descending order of length, and fur-
ther classiﬁ ed into seven groups, designated by 
capital letters, A through G. In addition, there 
are two sex chromosomes, which are unnum-
bered. As seen in ﬁ gure 3.5, the male has one 
X chromosome and one unequal-sized Y chro-
mosome, called sex chromosomes. The X is of 
medium size, and the Y is one of the smallest 
chromosomes of the complement. The human 

mitosis
Fertilization
(a)
Haploid male gamete (n)
Haploid female gamete (n)
Zygote (2N)
Adult
(2n)
meiosis
(spermatogenesis)
meiosis
(oogenesis)
32 
Understanding Evolution
where n stands for a deﬁ nite number. As earlier 
mentioned, a given chromosome has a mate that 
is identical in size and shape. The two identical 
members of a pair are called homologous chro-
mosomes, or simply homologues. Duplicated 
chromosomes after replication are called sister 
chromatids. Figure 3.8 is a graphic representation 
of the concepts of homologous chromosomes and 
sister chromatids. With this orientation, we can 
explore the mechanism of meiosis. 
Meiosis is not a single division but rather two 
successive ones, the ﬁ rst and second meiotic divi-
sions. Figure 3.9 reveals the essential features in a 
simpliﬁ ed “stick” representation involving merely 
one pair of homologous chromosomes. The pro-
cess begins with each member of the pair duplicat-
ing itself to form two sister strands (technically, 
called sister chromatids). Then, an event that is 
unique to meiosis occurs: the homologous chromo-
somes actually come to lie alongside one another. 
The mutual attraction, or pairing, of homologues is 
known as synapsis.
Because two homologous chromosomes 
pair, and because each chromosome of a homol-
ogous pair has duplicated itself, the result is a 
quadruple chromatid structure known as a tetrad 
(Greek, tetras, “a collection of four”). For the four 
process, and, accordingly, if they had the same 
number of chromosomes as body cells, then the 
union of sperm and egg would necessarily double 
the number of chromosomes in each generation. 
Such progressive increase is forestalled, however, 
by a special kind of division that guarantees that the 
gametes contain half the number of chromosomes 
characteristic of body cells. This distinctive type of 
division is referred to as meiosis. The term “meio-
sis” is derived from the Greek word meion, mean-
ing “to make smaller.” Meiosis is thus a diminution 
process, referring speciﬁ cally to a reduction in the 
number of chromosomes. In humans, the number 
of chromosomes is reduced from 46 to 23 during 
the formation of gametes. Figure 3.7a shows the 
relationship between mitosis and meiosis as part of 
the generalized life cycle. Figure 3.7b applies these 
concepts to the more familise human.
Somatic (or body) cells, possessing twice the 
number of chromosomes as gametes, are said to be 
diploid (Greek, diploos, “twofold” or “double”). 
In contrast, the gametic number of chromosomes 
is haploid (Greek, haploos, “single”) or, as some 
investigators prefer, monoploid (Greek, monos, 
“alone”). This can be expressed in abbreviated 
form by saying that body cells contain 2n chromo-
somes and germ cells contain 1n chromosomes, 

 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
33
It would be instructive to amplify these remarks 
as we re-examine ﬁ gure 3.9. During the ﬁ rst mei-
otic division, it may be seen that the tetrad is sepa-
rated into two dyads (Greek, dyas, “a couple”). The 
ﬁ rst meiotic division is concerned with the separa-
tion of the original synaptic mates, or the original 
chromatids to be distributed individually into four 
haploid cells, two divisions would be required. 
This is exactly what takes place. The two divisions 
accomplish (1) separation of the homologous 
chromosomes that had paired and (2) separation of 
the duplicated strands of each chromosome.
Germ-line
cells
Somatic
cells
FERTILIZATION
MITOSIS
MITOSIS
Sperm
(haploid) n
Egg
(haploid) n
Zygote
(diploid) 2n
Adult female
(diploid) 2n
Adult male
(diploid) 2n
Germ-line
cells
(b)
MEIOSIS
(spermatogenesis)
MEIOSIS
(oogenesis)
Figure 3.7 (a) Generalized life cycle: The relationship between mitosis (growth) 
and meiosis (gamete formation) and fertilization. (b) Sexual cycle in humans: In 
humans and many other animals, the fertilized diploid (2n) egg (zygote) undergoes 
mitotic divisions (growth), giving rise to the adult. Germ cells produce gonads (ovaries 
and testes), which produce haploid (n) eggs and sperms via meiosis.

Centromeres
Centromeres
Homologous chromosomes
Homologous chromosomes
Replication
Sister chromatids
Sister chromatids
Figure 3.8 Homologous chromosomes and sister chromatids during mitosis: Homologous 
chromosomes are maternal and paternal copies of the same chromosomes (e.g., chromosome 4). Sister 
chromatids are replicas of single chromosomes held together by their centromere after DNA replication.
Second
meiotic
division
Pairing of
homologues
to form
a tetrad
Separation of
homologues
into dyads
Separation of
chromatids
Four
haploid
cells
(sperm)
First
meiotic
division
Duplication
of each
chromosome
Homologous
chromosomes
Figure 3.9 The process of meiosis depicted for only two chromosomes. Duplicated members of the pair of  homologous 
chromosomes come to lie side by side in a four-stranded conﬁ guration (tetrad). Two successive divisions then result in formation 
of four haploid cells (sperm, in this case).
34 
Understanding Evolution

alternative allele, a, occurs at the identical locus in the 
other homologous chromosome. The alternative forms 
of a given gene, occupying a given locus, are termed 
alleles. Thus, A is an allele of a, or we may also say 
that A is allelic to a. In summary, an allele is one of 
two or more alternative forms of a gene, which is a 
sequence of DNA nucleotides on a chromosome that 
encodes a protein, whereas the locus is the position or 
place on a chromosome where an allele is located.
The heterozygote (Aa) produces two types of 
gametes, A and a, in equal numbers. It should be 
homologous members of the chromosomal pairs. 
The second meiotic division involves the separation 
of the chromatids, which had arisen earlier by dupli-
cation of the chromosomes. The overall outcome of 
meiosis is the formation of four haploid cells from 
one diploid cell. Each of the four haploid cells 
has half as many chromosomes as the original 
parent cell. 
MENDEL AND THE CHROMOSOMAL 
THEORY OF HEREDITY
We shall now endeavor to relate 
Mendel’s work to our present knowl-
edge of chromosomes. Mendel, of 
course, was unaware that his heredi-
tary factors were carried in the chro-
mosomes. It was Walter Sutton in 
1902 who ﬁ rst called attention to the 
parallelism in the behavior of genes 
and chromosomes. We have learned 
that chromosomes occur in pairs and 
that the members of a pair separate, 
or segregate, from each other dur-
ing meiosis. Mendel’s experiments 
reveal that the hereditary factors 
occur in pairs and that the mem-
bers of each pair of factors separate 
from each other in the production 
of gametes. Evidently, then, the 
most reasonable inference is that the 
genes are located in chromosomes. 
Extensive studies have provided 
conﬁ rmation that the chromosomes 
do carry the genes. Indeed, chromo-
somes are the vehicles for transmit-
ting the blueprints of traits to the 
offspring.
Figure 3.10 shows the separation 
of the pair of homologous chromo-
somes during meiosis of a heterozy-
gote carrying the A and a alleles. The 
allele A occupies a particular site, or 
locus, in one of the chromosomes. The 
Immature sex cell
(Homologous
chromosomes)
Meiosis in F1 hybrid male
FIRST
MATURATION
DIVISION
SECOND
MATURATION
DIVISION
Four haploid gametes
1/2 A
Duplication
of each
chromosome
Prophase I
Metaphase I
Prophase II
Telophase II
Separation of
homologues
into dyads
Separation of
chromatids
Pairing of
homologues
to form
a tetrad
A
a
a
a
a
A
A
A
A
a
a
A
1/2 a
A
A
a
a
Figure 3.10 Chromosomal basis of monohybrid inheritance. When 
one chromosome of a pair carries a given gene (A, in this case) and its 
homologue carries the alternative form of the gene (a), then meiosis 
results in production of two distinct kinds of gametes in equal propor-
tion, A and a.
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
35

36 
Understanding Evolution
carried n, of which half contained G and half g 
(or 25 percent nG and 25 percent ng). The four 
kinds of egg cells and the four kinds of sperm cells 
can unite in 16 possible ways, as shown graphi-
cally in the “checkerboard” in ﬁ gure 3.11.
The above cross illustrates Mendel’s principle 
of independent assortment, which states that one 
trait (one allelic pair) segregates independently of 
another trait (another allelic pair). The separation 
of the Nn pair of alleles and the simultaneous inde-
pendent separation of the Gg pair of alleles occurs 
because the two kinds of genes are located in 
two different pairs of chromosomes. Figure 3.12 
shows how the four types of gametes are produced 
with equal frequency in terms of the behavior of 
two pairs of chromosomes during meiosis. When 
the two pairs of alleles N,n and G,g are inserted at 
appropriate loci in the two pairs of chromosomes, 
it becomes apparent that four types of gametes, 
NG, Ng, nG, and ng are produced in equal num-
bers. The parallelism in the behavior of genes and 
chromosomes is striking.
THREE OR MORE GENE PAIRS
When individuals differing in three characteristics 
are crossed, the situation is naturally more complex, 
but the principle of independent assortment still is 
true. An individual heterozygous for three indepen-
dently assorting pairs of alleles (for example, Aa, 
Bb, and Cc) produces eight different types of gam-
etes in equal numbers, as illustrated in ﬁ gure 3.13. 
Random union among these eight kinds of gametes 
yields 64 equally possible combinations. Stated 
another way, Punnett’s checkerboard method of 
analysis would have 64 (8 × 8) squares. An analysis 
of the offspring reveals that, among the 64 possible 
combinations, there are only eight visibly different 
phenotypes. You may wish to verify that the pheno-
typic ratio is 27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1.
The use of the Punnett square for three or 
more independently assorting genes is cumber-
some. Here we will introduce one of the cardi-
nal rules of probability: The chance that two or 
more independent events will occur together is the 
evident from ﬁ gure 3.10 that the gametic ratio of 
1A:1a is a consequence of the separation of the two 
homologous chromosomes during meiosis, one chro-
mosome containing the A allele and its homologue 
carrying the a allele. The behavior of chromosomes 
also explains another feature of Mendel’s results—
the independent assortment of traits.
MENDEL’S PRINCIPLE 
OF INDEPENDENT ASSORTMENT
The fruit ﬂ y (Drosophila melanogaster), approxi-
mately one-fourth the size of a house ﬂ y, has long 
been a favorite subject for genetical research. 
Numerous varieties have been found, affecting 
all parts of the body. For example, the wings 
may be reduced in length to small vestiges, the 
result of action of a recessive vestigial allele. Two 
heterozygous normal-winged ﬂ ies, each harbor-
ing the recessive allele for vestigial wings, can 
produce two types of offspring: normal-winged 
and vestigial- winged, in a ratio of three-to-one. 
Now suppose that these same parents have a sec-
ond concealed recessive allele, namely, ebony. 
This recessive allele, when homozygous, modi-
ﬁ es the normal gray color of the body to black, 
or ebony.
Two normal-winged, gray-bodied parents, each 
heterozygous (NnGg), can give rise to four types of 
offspring phenotypically, as seen in ﬁ gure 3.11. Two 
of the phenotypes are like the original parents, and 
two are new combinations (normal-winged, ebony 
and vestigial-winged, gray). The four phenotypes 
appear in the classical Mendelian ratio of 9:3:3:1. 
For such a ratio to be obtained, each parent (NnGg) 
must have produced four kinds of gametes in equal 
proportions: NG, Ng, nG, and ng. Stated another 
way, the segregation of the members of one pair 
of alleles must have occurred independently of the 
segregation of the members of the other allelic pair 
during gamete formation. Thus, 50 percent of the 
gametes received N, and of these same gametes, 
half obtained G and the other half g. Accordingly, 
25 percent of the gametes were NG and 25 per-
cent were Ng. Likewise, 50 percent of the gametes 

NG
NNGG
NNGg
NnGG
NnGg
NNGG
nngg
Normal wings,
Gray body
Vestigial wings,
Ebony body
NnGg
100% Normal wings, Gray body
X
F1
Gametes
PARENTAL
(P)
FIRST FILIAL
(F1)
SECOND FILIAL
(F2)
9/16 Normal, Gray
3/16 Normal, Ebony
3/16 Vestigial, Gray
1/16 Vestigial, Ebony
NNGg
NNgg
NnGg
Nngg
NnGG
NnGg
nnGG
nnGg
NnGg
Nngg
nnGg
nngg
Ng
ng
nG
ng
NG
Ng
nG
ng
NG
Egg
Sperm
Figure 3.11 Mendel’s principle of independent assortment, as revealed in the inheri-
tance of two pairs of characters in the fruit ﬂ y. A pure normal-winged ﬂ y with gray body mated 
with a vestigial-winged, ebony-bodied ﬂ y produces all normal-winged, gray-bodied ﬂ ies in the 
ﬁ rst generation (F1). When these F1 ﬂ ies are inbred, a second generation (F2) is produced that 
displays a phenotypic ratio of 9:3:3:1.
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
37

combining together (AaBBcc) is 
the product of their separate prob-
abilities, as follows:
1/2 × 1/4 × 1/4 = 1/32.
SIGNIFICANCE 
OF GENETIC 
RECOMBINATION
The Mendelian principles per-
mit a genuine appreciation of the 
source of heritable variation in 
natural populations of organisms. 
An impressively large array of 
different kinds of individuals can 
arise from the simple processes 
of segregation and recombina-
tion of independently assorting 
genes. Figure 3.14 considers a 
few of the independently assort-
ing traits in the fruit ﬂ y. It is seen 
that the number of visibly dif-
ferent classes (phenotypes) of 
offspring is doubled by each addi-
tional heterozygous pair of inde-
pendently assorting alleles. Each 
additional heterozygous allelic 
pair multiplies the number of vis-
ibly different combinations by 
a factor of two. Thus, if the par-
ents are each heterozygous for ten 
pairs of genes (when dominance 
is complete), the number of different phenotypes 
among the progeny becomes 210, or 1,024. For 
humans with 23 pairs of chromosomes, the num-
ber of different phenotypes among the progeny is 
223 or 4,194,304.
Other mathematical regularities are evident 
as we increase the number of heterozygous pairs 
(table 3.2). As the number of heterozygous traits 
increases, the chance of recovering one of the paren-
tal types becomes progressively less. Thus, when 
a single heterozygous pair (Aa) is involved, 1 in 4 
will resemble one of the original parents in both 
product of their chances of occurring separately. 
As an example, what proportion of the offspring of 
the cross AaBbCc × AaBbCc would be expected to 
have the genotype AaBBcc? The individual com-
putations are as follows, treating each character 
(or event) independently:
 1. The chance that an individual will be Aa = 1/2.
 2.  The chance that an individual will be BB = 1/4.
 3. The chance that an individual will be cc = 1/4.
Assuming independence among these three 
pairs of alternatives, the chance of the three 
n
n
N
N
G
G g
g
CHROMOSOMAL BASIS OF INDEPENDENT ASSORTMENT
Meiosis in the Dihybrid
One Arrangement of Tetrads
FIRST
MATURATION
DIVISION
SECOND
MATURATION
DIVISION
1/4 NG
1/4 ng
1/4 Ng
1/4 nG
N
N
G
G
N
G
N
G
n
g
n
g
N
g
N
g
n
G
n
G
n
n
n
n
N
N
g
gG
G
Alternative Arrangement:
Equally Probable
g
g
N
N
g
g
n
n
G
G
Figure 3.12 Chromosomal basis of dihybrid inheritance. The two pairs 
of genes, N, n and G, g are located in two different pairs of chromosomes. When a 
dihybrid (NnGg) undergoes meiosis, there are two equally likely ways the tetrads 
may line up. The outcome is the formation of four kinds of gametes, in equal num-
bers (NG, Ng, nG, and ng).
38 
Understanding Evolution

TRIHYBRID
MEIOSIS
GAMETES
a
b
B
c
C
A
c
C
A
B
C
A
B
c
A
b
C
A
b
c
a
B
C
a
B
c
a
b
C
a
b
c
c
C
c
C
c
C
B
A
b
b
a
B
Figure 3.13 Gamete formation in an individual heterozygous for three pairs of alleles (“tri-
hybrid”). The members of the three different pairs of alleles assort independently of each other 
when gametes are formed. The separation of the Aa pair, Bb pair, and the Cc pair, respectively, can 
be treated as independent events. The outcome is eight genetically different gametes.
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
39
TABLE 3.2  Characteristics of Crosses Involving Various Pairs of Independently 
Assorting Alleles
Number of 
heterozygous pairs 
involved in the cross
Number of different 
types of gametes 
produced by the 
heterozygote
Number of visibly 
different progeny 
(that is, phenotypes)*
Number of  
genotypically different 
combinations (that is, 
genotypes)
Chance of recovering an 
individual that is either 
homozygous dominant 
or recessive for all traits
1
2
2
3
1 in 4
2
4
4
9
1 in 16
3
8
8
27
1 in 64
4
16
16
81
1 in 256
10
1,024
1,024
59,049
1 in 1,048,576
n
2n
2n
3n
1 in 4n
*Assumes complete dominance in each pair.

PARENTS
Aa
Aa
Aa Bb
Aa Bb
Aa Bb Cc
Aa Bb Cc
1/4
3/4
1/16
3/16
3/16
9/16
3/64
9/64
9/64
27/64
1/64
3/64
3/64
9/64
OFFSPRING
2
4 or 22
8 or 23
Number of
Different Phenotypes
Figure 3.14 Inheritance of traits in the fruit ﬂ y, when the parents are each heterozygous for one (Aa) inde-
pendently assorting trait and for two (AaBb) and three (AaBbCc) independently assorting traits. The allele for long 
wings (A) is dominant over the allele for vestigial wings (a); the allele for gray body (B) is dominant over the allele 
for ebony (b); and the allele for normal eyes (C) is dominant over the allele producing the eyeless condition (c). 
The number of visibly different classes (phenotypes) of offspring increases progressively with each additional pair 
of traits. The generalized formula for determining the number of  different phenotypes among the offspring (when 
dominance is complete) is 2n, where n stands for the number of different heterozygous pairs of alleles.
40 
Understanding Evolution
appearance and genotype (AA or aa). When four 
heterozygous traits are involved, only 1 in 256 will 
be genotypically like either of the original parents. 
Evidently, no single genetic constitution is ever likely 
to be exactly duplicated in a person (save in identical 
twins). Each individual is genetically unique.
LINKAGE AND CROSSING OVER
Mendel’s principle of independent assortment is 
based on the assumption that each gene for a trait 
is carried on a different chromosome. However, 
the number of chromosomes is appreciably less 
than the number of genes. Accordingly, many 
genes must be carried in a single chromosome. 
Genes located together in any one chromosome 
are said to be linked, and the linked genes tend 
to remain together during their hereditary trans-
mission. It was a most fortuitous circumstance 
that Mendel did not encounter linked genes in his 
breeding experiments. If Mendel had happened 
to work on two linked genes, he certainly would 
have come upon some puzzling ratios among the 
offspring. 

B
A
b
a
B
A
b
a
B
A
B
A
b
a
b
a
b
A
B
A
b
a
B
a
b
A
B
a
Linked Genes
Crossing Over
Gametes
Figure 3.15 Crossing over the chromosomal material during the tetrad stage of 
meiosis. If the two pairs of genes were not linked, the hybrid individual (AaBb) would 
produce four genetically different gametes in equal proportions (AB, Ab, aB, and ab). 
A hybrid containing the two pairs of linked genes also produces four genetically dif-
ferent gametes as a consequence of crossing over, but the new combinations of linked 
genes, or recombination types (Ab and aB), arise less frequently than the original com-
bination types (AB and ab). The magnitude of deviation from a 1:1:1:1 ratio depends on 
the frequency with which crossing over occurs between the linked genes.
 
CHAPTER 3 Heritable Variation 
41
into four linkage groups corresponding to the four 
pairs of chromosomes. Humans have 23 linkage 
groups. 
The effect of linkage is to decrease variability, 
but an intricate mechanism exists for rearranging 
the linked genes. As a result of the mechanism 
of crossing over—the exchange of segments of 
homologous chromosomes during meiosis—the 
original combination of genes in a particular chro-
mosome can be broken up. In essence, crossing 
over permits different alleles of one gene to be 
tested in new combinations with alleles of other 
genes. In an illustrative example (ﬁ g. 3.15), if the 
two pairs of genes had been so closely linked as to 
preclude any crossing over between them, only two 
Some modern authors assert that Mendel 
likely encountered linkage but never reported 
those data. Interestingly, we now know that some 
of Mendel’s pea plant characters are in fact linked 
but, fortuitously, are sufﬁ ciently far enough apart 
from each other that crossing makes them appear 
to assort independently. Perhaps had Mendel 
reported all of his data, he would have also dis-
covered linkage!
The principle of linkage was ﬁ rmly estab-
lished in the early 1900s by T. H. Morgan and his 
students through studies on the fruit ﬂ y. The fruit 
ﬂ y (Drosophila melanogaster) has only four pairs 
of chromosomes. Several hundred different genes 
have been identiﬁ ed in the fruit ﬂ y, and all fall 

42 
Understanding Evolution
genes through crossing over, may be compared, on 
a very modest scale, to the shufﬂ ing and dealing 
of playing cards. One pack of 52 cards can yield 
a large variety of hands. And, just as in poker a 
full house is far superior to three of a kind, so in 
organisms certain combinations of genes confer a 
greater reproductive advantage to their bearer than 
other combinations. Natural selection favors the 
more reproductive genotypes.
classes of gametes would have been formed; one 
gamete containing AB, and the other, ab. However, 
as a consequence of crossing over, four genetically 
different types of gametes are produced. Thus, 
crossing over provides a mechanism for increas-
ing variability—that is, rearranging genes in new 
combinations.
The reshufﬂ ing of genes by independent 
assortment, coupled with the recombination of 

43
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
In the opening pages of The Origin of Species,
Charles Darwin declared, “Any variation which is 
not inherited is unimportant for us.” This and other 
incisive statements show that Darwin understood 
the importance of inherited variability. He was, 
however, eternally assailed by doubts as to how 
new varieties initially arise. Today we know that the 
ultimate source of genetic variation is mutation.
Each gene of an organism may assume a vari-
ety of forms. A normal gene may change to another 
form and produce an effect on a trait different from 
that of the original gene. An inheritable change in 
the structure of the gene is known as a mutation. 
Variant traits, such as albinism in humans and vesti-
gial wings in the fruit ﬂ y, are traceable to the action 
of altered, or mutant, genes. All differences in the 
genes of organisms have their origin in mutation. 
CAUSES OF MUTATION
New mutations arise from time to time, and the 
same mutations may occur repeatedly.  Mutations 
are not uncommon and may occur each time the 
billions of building blocks of DNA, called nucle-
otides, are copied during cell division. Thus, as we 
age, mutations inevitably build up in our cells. It 
is often difﬁ cult to distinguish between new muta-
tions and old ones that occurred previously and 
were carried concealed in ancestors. A recessive 
mutant gene may remain masked by its normal 
dominant allele for many generations and reveal 
itself for the ﬁ rst time only when two heterozygous 
carriers of the same mutant gene happen to mate.
Each gene runs the risk of changing to an alter-
native form. The causes of naturally occurring, or 
spontaneous, mutations are complex (table 4.1). In 
addition to spontaneous mutations, mutations may 
be induced by chemical and physical agents. The 
environment contains a background of inescap-
able radiation from natural sources (such as radon 
gas, radioactive elements, cosmic rays, and gamma 
rays) and human made sources (such as medical 
x rays and scans) as well as an increasingly large 
number of chemical agents that are common in our 
daily lives (table 4.2). Background radiation and 
other physical agents (table 4.2) account for only a 
small fraction of spontaneous mutations. We may 
MUTATION

44 
Understanding Evolution
say that spontaneous variations are random and 
unpredictable.
In 1927 the late Nobel laureate Hermann J. 
Muller of Indiana University announced that genes 
are highly susceptible to the action of x rays. By 
irradiating fruit ﬂ ies with x rays, he demonstrated 
that exposure to radiation can enormously speed 
up the process of mutation. The production of 
mutations is directly proportional to the total dos-
age of x rays. Stated another way, the greater the 
 dosage, the greater the mutation rate. In this lin-
ear, or straight-line, relationship, the mutation rate 
increases proportionately to the amount of expo-
sure to x rays.
It has long been held that the mutagenic effect 
is the same whether the dose is given in a short 
time or spread over a long period. In other words, 
low intensities of x rays over long periods of time 
produce as many mutations as the same dose 
administered in high intensities in a short period 
of time. Recent experiments on mice have cast 
some doubt on this view, for it has been shown (at 
least in mice) that the mutagenic effect of a sin-
gle exposure to the germ cells is greater than the 
effect of the same exposure administered in sev-
eral smaller doses separated by intervals of time. 
Nevertheless, there does not appear to be a criti-
cal, or threshold, dose of radiation below which 
there is no effect. In essence, no dose is so low (or 
so “safe”) as to carry no risk of inducing a muta-
tion. Modern workers stress that any amount of 
radiation, no matter how little, can cause a muta-
tion. Natural and man-made sources of radiation 
are shown in table 4.3.
Common causes of mutations
Description
Spontaneous:
Errors in DNA replication
A mistake by DNA polymerase may cause a point mutation.
Toxic metabolic products
The products of normal metabolic processes may be a reactive chemicals such as free 
radicals that can alter the structure of DNA.
Spontaneous changes in 
nucleotide structure
On rare occasions, the linkage between purines and deoxyribose can spontaneously 
break. Also, changes in base structure (isomerization) may cause mispairing during DNA 
replication.
Transposons
Transposons are small segments of DNA that can insert at various sites in the genome. 
If they insert into a gene, they may inactivate the gene.
Induced:
Chemical agents
Chemical substances, such as benzo(a)-pyrene, a chemical found in cigarette smoke, may 
cause changes in the structure of DNA.
Physical agents
Physical agents such as UV (ultraviolet) light and x rays can damage DNA.
TABLE 4.1 Some Common Causes of Gene Mutations
Mutagen
Source
Aﬂ atoxin B
Fungi growing on peanuts and 
other foods
2-amino 5-nitrophenol
Hair dye components
2,4-diaminoanisole
"
2,5-diaminoanisole
"
2,4-diaminotoluene
"
p-phenylenediamine
"
Furylfuramide
Food additive
Nitrosamines
Pesticides, herbicides, cigarette 
smoke
Proﬂ avine
Antiseptic in veterinary 
medicine
Sodium nitrite
Smoked meats
Tris (2,3-dibromopropyl 
phosphate)
Flame retardant in children’s 
sleepwear
TABLE 4.2 Commonly Encountered 
Mutagens

Increasing energy
Increasing wavelength
0.0001 nm
Gamma rays
X rays
Ultra-
violet
Infrared
Visible light
Violet
Radio waves
Radar
TV
FM
AM
0.01 nm
10 nm
400 nm
500 nm
600 nm
700 nm
1000 nm
0.01 cm
1 cm
1 m
100 m
Indigo
 Blue
Green
Yellow
Red
 Orange
Figure 4.1 Electromagnetic spectrum. The higher-energy portions of the spectrum, such as x rays and gamma rays, 
are potent mutagens.
 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
45
somatic damage and genetic damage (ﬁ g. 4.2). 
Injury to the body cells of the exposed individu-
als themselves constitutes somatic damage. On the 
other hand, impairment of the genetic apparatus of 
the sex cells (germ-line cells) represents genetic 
damage or germinal mutations. Typically, the 
genetic alterations do not manifest themselves in 
the immediate persons but present a risk for their 
descendants in the next or succeeding generations. 
In this way, germinal mutations are more impor-
tant to evolution because heritable mutation serves 
as the fuel of evolution.
CHEMICAL NATURE OF THE GENE
During the early decades of the twentieth cen-
tury, the picture of genes that had emerged was 
that of discrete entities, strung together along the 
chromosome, like individual beads on a string. 
In discussing the sources (table 4.3) and 
hazards of x rays and other ionizing radiations 
(ﬁ g. 4.1), we must be careful to distinguish between 
Natural Sources
(%)
Radon gas
54
Human body
11
Rocks and soil
8
Cosmic ray from space
  8
81
Man-Made Sources
Medical x rays
11
Nuclear medicine
4
Consumer products
3
Other (nuclear fallout, occupational)
  1
19
TABLE 4.3 Sources of Radiation

simply, chromosomes are primarily 
long strands of DNA, and genes are 
coded sequences of the DNA molecule. 
Genes specify the structure of individual 
proteins. The diverse genes in a single 
fertilized human egg can code an esti-
mated 20,000 to 30,000 proteins. The 
once theoretical gene has ﬁ nally been 
placed on a material (chemical) level.
The two scientists who worked 
together in the early 1950s to propose 
a conﬁ guration for the DNA molecule 
were Francis H.C. Crick, a biophysi-
cist at Cambridge University, and 
James D. Watson, an American student 
of virology who was then studying 
chemistry at Cambridge on a post-
doctoral fellowship. With the invalu-
able aid of x-ray diffraction pictures 
of DNA crystals prepared by Maurice 
H. F. Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin at 
King’s College in London, Watson and 
Crick built an inspired metal model of 
the DNA’s conﬁ guration. This achieve-
ment won Watson, Crick, and Wilkins 
the coveted Nobel Prize for physiology 
or medicine in 1962. The other deserv-
ing scientist, Rosalind Franklin, unfortunately died 
of cancer before the Nobel Prize (awarded only to 
living  persons) was announced.
The remarkable feature of DNA is its simplic-
ity of design. The double-stranded DNA molecule 
is shaped like a twisted ladder (ﬁ g. 4.3). The two 
parallel supports of the ladder are made up of 
alternating units of sugar (deoxyribose) and phos-
phate molecules, while the cross-links, or rungs, 
are composed of speciﬁ c nitrogen-containing 
ring compounds, or nitrogenous bases. Each rung 
of the ladder consists of one pair of nitrogenous 
bases, held together by speciﬁ c hydrogen bonds. 
Hydrogen bonds are weak bonds. However, the 
sum total of the hydrogen bonds between the two 
strands assures that the two strands of the double 
helix are ﬁ rmly associated with each other under 
conditions commonly found in living cells.
This portrayal carried with it the implication that 
genes were not pure abstractions, but actual particles 
of living matter. Yet, until the 1950s the chemical 
nature of the gene remained enigmatic.  Biochemists 
wondered whether there existed an elaborate 
organic molecule with a simple string-like form.
One of the masterly feats of modern science 
has been the elucidation of the chemical nature of 
the gene. The transmission of traits from parents 
to offspring depends on the transfer of a speciﬁ c 
giant molecule that carries a coded blueprint in its 
molecular structure. This complex molecule, the 
basic chemical component of the chromosome, 
is deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA (ﬁ gs. 4.3 and 
4.4). The information carried in the DNA mol-
ecule can be divided into a number of separable 
units, which we now recognize as the genes. Stated 
(a) Germ-line mutation
(b) Somatic cell mutation
Germ-line
mutation
Gametes
(sperm or egg)
Embryo
Somatic
mutation
Patch of
affected
area
Organism
Entire
organism
carries the
mutation
Gametes
of the
organism
All of the
gametes
carry the
mutation
None of the
gametes
carry the
mutation
Figure 4.2 Germ-line versus somatic mutation. Somatic mutations 
damage body cells, whereas germ-line mutations injure gonads (ovaries or 
testes) or gametes (eggs and sperm). 
46 
Understanding Evolution

C
C
T
T
A
A
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
G
G
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
O
O
O
O
O
CH2
CH3
O
N
N
T
H
H
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
CH2
H
O
N
N
N
C
H
H
H
N
H
H
O
N
N
N
C
H
H
P
O
O
O
O
O
CH2
CH3
N
N
H
H
H
N
N
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
CH2
H2C
OH
A
H
N
H
N
N
O
N
H
N
H
G
O
H
N
H
N
N
N
H
H
N
H
N
H
G
H
O
N
N T
H
H
P
O
O
O
O
H2C
O
P
O
O
O
O
H2C
O
N
H
N
N
H
N A
P
O
O
O
O
H2C
O
Figure 4.3 Watson-Crick double-stranded helix con  guration of deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA). The backbone of each twisted strand consists of alternating sugar (S) and 
phosphate (P) residues. Enlarged view on right shows that the larger, two-ring purines 
(adenine or guanine) lay opposite the smaller, one-ring pyrimidines (cytosine or thymine). 
The nitrogenous bases are held together by hydrogen bonds, three between cytosine (C) 
and guanine (G), and two between adenine (A) and thymine (T).
 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
47
along one chain is given, then the sequence along 
the other is automatically determined, because of 
the precise pairing rule (A=T and G=C). The com-
bination of one purine and one pyrimidine to make 
up each cross connection is conveniently called a 
base pair.
The DNA molecule has a structure that is suf-
ﬁ ciently versatile to account for the great variety 
of different genes. The four bases (A, C, G, and 
T) may be thought of as a four-letter alphabet or 
code. The uniqueness of a given gene would then 
relate to the speciﬁ c order or arrangement of the 
There are two classes of nitrogenous bases, the 
larger, two-ring purines and the smaller, one-ring 
pyrimidines (ﬁ g. 4.4). In making up the model, 
Watson and Crick found that the nitrogenous bases 
could be accommodated best if the double-ring 
purines (adenine or guanine) lay opposite the 
 single-ring pyrimidines (thymine or cytosine). The 
arrangement of the bases is not haphazard: adenine 
(A) in one chain is typically coupled to thymine (T) 
in the other chain, and guanine (G) is preferentially 
linked with cytosine (C). Along one chain, any 
sequence of the bases is possible, but if the sequence 

Five-carbon sugar
Deoxyribose
DNA
only
H
C
O
C
OH
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
HO
OH
H
RNA
only
H
C
O
C
OH
H
H
C
OH
C
H
H
HO
OH
H
Ribose
Phosphate group
P
O
O−
O−
−O
Cytosine
(both DNA and RNA)
Purines
Pyrimidines
Nitrogenous base
Adenine
Guanine
Thymine
(DNA only)
Uracil
(RNA only)
C
N
C
C
C
H
N
N
N
C
H
H
NH2
NH2
N
C
C
C
H
N
N
N
C
H
H
O
C
N
H
C
C
H
H
C
N
NH2
O
H
C
N
H
C
C
H3C
H
C
N
O
O
H
C
N
H
C
C
H
H
C
N
O
C
O
Figure 4.4 DNA and RNA are composed of three subunits. A ﬁ ve-carbon sugar (deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA), a phosphate group, and a 
nitrogenous base. Purines pair with pyrimidines to form complementary base pairs, (A-T, G-C in DNA; A-U, C-G in RNA).
48

 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
49
portion of the new chain. Eventually, the entire 
original double helix has produced two exact 
replicas of itself. If the original two chains are 
bases, just as words in our language differ accord-
ing to the sequence of letters of the alphabet or as 
a telegraphic message becomes comprehensible 
by the varied combinations of dots 
and dashes. The number of ways 
in which the nitrogenous bases can 
be arranged in the DNA molecule 
is exceedingly large. The fertilized 
human egg contains 46 chromosomes 
with over 6 billion base pairs of DNA. 
As a generalization, a single gene is 
a linear sequence of approximately 
1,500 base pairs.
REPLICATION OF DNA
One fundamental property that has 
long been ascribed to the gene is 
its ability to make an exact copy of 
itself. If the gene is really a linear 
sequence of base pairs, then the 
Watson-Crick model of DNA must 
be able to account for the precise 
reproduction of the sequences of 
the bases. The replication machin-
ery is quite complicated, but con-
ceptually the self-copying of the 
double helix can be visualized with 
little difficulty. 
The DNA molecule consists 
of two chains, each of which is the 
 complement of the other. Accord-
ingly, each single chain serves as a 
mold, or template, to guide the for-
mation of a new companion chain 
(ﬁ g. 4.5). The two parallel chains 
separate, breaking the hydrogen 
bonds that hold together the paired 
bases. Each chain then attracts new 
base units from among the supply of 
free units always present in the cell. 
As disassociation of the strands takes 
place, each separated lengthwise por-
tion of the chain can begin to form a 
A
S
S
C
T
G
P
P
S
S
P
P
A
S
S
G
T
C
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
P
A
S
S
C
T
G
P
P
S
S
P
P
A
S
S
G
T
C
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
P
A
S
S
C
T
G
P
P
S
S
P
P
A
S
S
G
T
C
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
A
S
S
C
T
G
P
P
S
S
P
P
A
S
S
G
T
C
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
P
A
S
S
C
T
G
P
P
S
S
P
P
A
S
S
G
T
C
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
T
P
S
P
S
T
C
P
S
P
P
A
S
C
P
S
P
A
S
G
P
S
P
P
DNA
double stranded
Separated
single strand
Attraction of
complementary
bases 
Replication
completed.
Two
double-stranded
units. 
G
P
Figure 4.5 Replication of DNA. The parental strands separate, each 
serving as a guide or template for the synthesis of a new daughter strand. 
Each new DNA molecule contains one parental and one daughter strand.

50 
Understanding Evolution
or interfere with the active sites for binding sub-
stances. For example, in the hemoglobin molecule, 
alterations in the amino acid sequence can impact 
on the shape of the red blood cell itself or on the 
ability of hemoglobin to bind oxygen. 
As indicated in ﬁ gure 4.6, a point mutation 
that results in the replacement of one amino acid 
for another is called a missense mutation. If the 
triplet coding of the amino acid changes to a termi-
nation codon (which signals the termination of the 
formation of the polypeptide chain), the change is 
called a nonsense mutation.
Additions or deletions of bases in the DNA 
molecule typically result in an altered sequence 
of amino acids in the protein. For example, if the 
base sequence ATGCTTCTC is normally read 
[ATG] [CTT] [CTC], then an insertion of the base 
C between [ATG] and [CTT] would lead to a shift 
in the “reading frame” as follows: [ATG] [CTT] 
[TCT] [C..]. Such modiﬁ cations are called frame-
shift mutations.
Some point mutations are said to be “silent” 
because they do not alter the amino acid sequence, 
due to the duplication or redundancy in the genetic 
code.  For example, the DNA triplet TCG codes 
for the amino acid serine. If base G changes to A, 
the triplet TCA will still code for serine. In fact, 
the amino acid serine can be speciﬁ ed by six DNA 
triplets (or six RNA codons). One of the surprises 
in recent years has been the discovery that the 
number of silent base substitutions during the evo-
lutionary divergence of some protein molecules 
has been as high as 40 percent!
LANGUAGE OF LIFE
Cellular proteins are key components of living 
matter. Proteins are composed of 20 basic building 
blocks, the amino acids, arranged in long chains, 
called polypeptides. Each polypeptide chain may 
be several hundred amino acid units in length. 
The number of possible arrangements of the dif-
ferent amino acids in a given protein is unbeliev-
ably large. In a polypeptide chain made up of 
designated A and B, the old A will direct the for-
mation of a new B and the old B will guide the 
production of a new A. Where one AB molecule 
existed previously, two AB molecules, exactly 
like the original, exist afterward. This complex 
process is carried out by speciﬁ c proteins called  
enzymes. Enzymes are proteins that catalyze 
chemical reactions.
Although the replication of a DNA strand is 
remarkably accurate, errors do occur in the posi-
tioning, or insertion, of the nitrogenous bases 
in a growing chain. The cell has several repair 
(“proofreading”) mechanisms by which incor-
rectly inserted bases, or otherwise altered bases, 
are replaced by the appropriate bases. Occasion-
ally, however, the cell’s DNA repair program 
fails, and an accidental mistake endures. Such a 
sustained error qualiﬁ es as a base substitution or 
point mutation. Indeed, the vast majority of single 
base changes occur during DNA replication. (See 
Molecular Mechanism of Spontaneous Mutation.)
MOLECULAR MECHANISM 
OF SPONTANEOUS MUTATION
Mutations may be thought of as spontaneous mis-
haps or mistakes that occur as part of the copy-
ing of DNA from one generation to the next.  In 
its simplest form, mutations alter DNA base pairs, 
which in turn alter amino acids, which thus alter 
proteins. As we will see later in this chapter, each 
amino acid is coded for by a group (triplet) of 
three nitrogenous bases. As shown in ﬁ gure 4.6, 
the code is read linearly, starting at one end, in 
consecutive blocks of three bases. Accordingly, 
the reading of the code could be modiﬁ ed if an 
error occurred, such as a substitution, addition, 
or elimination (deletion) of a nitrogenous base. A 
substitution of one of the DNA bases constitutes a 
gene (point) mutation.
Point mutations have a more profound effect 
on the protein function if they alter the confor-
mational folding property of the protein or cause 
the protein sequence to prematurely terminate 

DNA
Normal
Missense
Substitution
Nonsense
Substitution
Missense
Insertion
Missense
Deletion
AAA
Replace C with T
Replace C with A
ATG
CTT
CTC
CAA
GAT
Amino acids
Phe
Tyr
Glu
Glu
Val
Leu
AAA
ATG
TTT
CTC
CAA
GAT
ATG
ATG
ATT
CTC
CTT
CTC
CAA
CAA
Phe
Tyr
Phe
Tyr
No amino acid coded:
polypeptide synthesis stops.
Change in
sequence
Change in
sequence
Lys
Glu
Val
Leu
DNA
Amino acids
DNA
AAA
Insertion of C
Deletion of C
GAT
Amino acids
 Original DNA
 Original DNA
AAA
C
CAA
GAT
Altered DNA
Altered DNA
Amino acids
Amino acids
Frameshift mutations
AAA
ATG
CCT
TCT
CCA
AGA
Phe
Tyr
Gly
Arg
Gly
Ser
AAA
ATG
TT
CTC
CAA
GAT
AAA
ATG
TTC
TCC
AAG
Phe
Tyr
Lys
Arg
Phe
Figure 4.6 The molecular basis of point mutation. Each substitution, deletion, or insertion is a mutational 
event that alters the DNA sequence and, in turn, the polypeptide (protein) product.
 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
51
amino acid is dictated by one sequence of three 
bases in the DNA molecule. As an example, the 
sequence cytosine-thymine-thymine (CTT) in the 
DNA molecule might designate that a particular 
amino acid (glutamic acid) be incorporated in the 
formation of a protein molecule, such as hemoglo-
bin (ﬁ g. 4.7). Thus, the DNA code is to be found 
in triplets—that is, three bases taken together code 
one amino acid. It should be noted that only one 
of the two strands of the DNA molecule serves 
as the template for the genetic code. Biochemical 
500 amino acid units, the number of possible 
patterns (given 20 different amino acids) can be 
expressed by the number 1 followed by 1,100 
zeros. How, then, does a cell form the particular 
amino acid patterns it requires out of the colossal 
number of patterns that are possible?
We may presume that the sequence of bases 
of the DNA molecule is in some way the master 
pattern, or code, for the sequence of the amino 
acids composing polypeptides. In 1954, the Brit-
ish physicist George Gamow suggested that each 

Figure 4.7 The abnormal hemoglobin that occurs in sickle-cell anemia (hemoglobin S) is the 
consequence of an alteration of a single base of the triplet of DNA that speciﬁ es a particular amino acid 
(glutamic acid) in normal hemoglobin (hemoglobin A). A simple base-pair switch, or mutation, in the 
DNA molecule results in the replacement of glutamic acid in hemoglobin A by another amino acid, 
valine, in hemoglobin S. 
(Based on studies by Vernon M. Ingram.)
52 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
53
The DNA molecule, like a tape recording, car-
ries speciﬁ c messages for the synthesis of a wide 
variety of proteins. We shall see presently that 
DNA does not directly form protein but works in 
an intriguing way through a secondary form of 
nucleic acid, ribonucleic acid, or RNA. At this 
point, it is important to recognize that a gene is a 
coded sequence in the DNA molecule. From a func-
tional point of view, we may say that a gene is a 
section of the DNA molecule (about 1,500 base 
pairs) involved in the determination of the amino 
acid sequence of a single polypeptide chain of a 
protein.
TRANSCRIPTION OF DNA
It has been said that hemoglobin served as the 
Rosetta stone in revealing the hereditary language. 
It was the hemoglobin molecule that provided the 
ﬁ rst direct proof of the relationship of the gene 
to protein synthesis. Proteins are not synthesized 
directly on the DNA template. The genetic infor-
mation (genetic code) of DNA is ﬁ rst transcribed 
to ribonucleic acid (RNA). The RNA molecule 
resembles the DNA molecule in structure except 
in three important respects. The pyrimidine base, 
 uracil, is found in RNA, which replaces the thy-
mine that is characteristic of DNA. Secondly, the 
sugar in RNA is ribose, which contains one more 
oxygen atom than does the deoxyribose sugar 
(ﬁ g. 4.4). Thirdly, RNA has only a single strand 
instead of two.
As seen in ﬁ gure 4.8, one of the two strands 
of DNA (always the same one for a given gene) 
forms a complementary strand of RNA. The same 
rules of pairing hold as in replicating a copy of 
DNA, except that adenine attracts uracil instead of 
thymine. This RNA strand, which is responsible 
for carrying DNA’s instructions out into the cyto-
plasm, is appropriately termed messenger RNA, or 
mRNA. The amino acids of a polypeptide chain 
are speciﬁ ed by the messenger RNA. In a large 
sense, then, the genetic code applies to RNA rather 
than to DNA itself.
chaos would result if both complementary strands 
of DNA were to encode information.
The importance of the genetic code cannot be 
overstated. Let us assume the following sequence 
of bases in one of the strands of the DNA mole-
cule: ... CGT ATC GTA AGC ..., and that these 
triplets specify four amino acids, designated R, 
I, P, and E. In other words, the following code 
exists: CGT=R, ATC=I, GTA=P, and AGC=E. 
This section of the DNA molecule thus speciﬁ es 
RIPE, and the message to make RIPE is passed 
on by this particular sequence from the nucleus to 
the cytoplasm of the cell. The message continues 
to ﬂ ow out in the living cell, and RIPE will be 
made, copy after copy.
But what if a chance mishap occurs in one of 
the triplets? Let us say that T in the second triplet 
is substituted for A, so that the triplet reads TTC 
instead of ATC, which would specify an O instead 
of I. The word would now be ROPE instead of 
RIPE. This makes quite a difference, especially if 
the word is continually printed incorrectly through-
out a novel. Just as a misprinted word can alter or 
destroy the meaning of a sentence, so an altered 
protein in the body fails to express its intended pur-
pose. Sometimes the error is not tragic, but often the 
organism is debilitated by the misprint.
As a striking example, we may consider the 
case of individuals afﬂ icted with sickle-cell anemia. 
The full story of sickle-cell anemia is narrated in 
chapter 8. For the moment, it sufﬁ ces to say that 
the hemoglobin molecule in sickle-cell anemic 
patients is biochemically abnormal. The sole dif-
ference in chemical composition between normal 
and sickle-cell hemoglobin is the substitution of 
only one amino acid unit among several hundred. 
Speciﬁ cally, at one site in a particular polypeptide 
chain of the sickle-cell hemoglobin molecule, the 
amino acid glutamic acid has been replaced by 
valine. The detrimental effect of sickle-cell anemia 
is thus traceable to an exceedingly slight alteration 
in the structure of the protein molecule. This, in 
turn, is associated with a simple base-pair switch, 
or mutation, in the DNA molecule in the chromo-
some (ﬁ g. 4.7).

represents for the chemist. It may 
be noted that three of the codons 
(UAA, UAG, and UGA) do not code 
for any of the 20 amino acids. They 
were originally, perhaps facetiously, 
described as “nonsense codons,” but 
they are now known to function as 
terminating codons (or stop codons). 
They serve to signal the termination 
of a polypeptide chain.
One of the most impressive ﬁ nd-
ings is that the genetic code is essen-
tially universal. The same codon 
calls forth the same amino acid in 
organisms as widely separate phylo-
genetically as a bacterium (E. coli), a 
ﬂ owering plant (wheat), an amphibian 
(the South African clawed frog), and 
mammals (guinea pig, mouse, and 
human). The essential  universality 
of the genetic code supports the view 
that the code had its origin at least by 
the time bacteria evolved, 3 billion 
years ago. The genetic code may be 
said to be the oldest of languages. 
In this regard, the universality of the 
genetic code represent perhaps the 
best evidence for evolution.
The ﬂ ow of genetic informa-
tion is sketched in summary form in 
ﬁ gures 4.9 and 4.10. The DNA mol-
ecule has the capacity to replicate as 
well as transcribe. The transcription of DNA into 
messenger RNA is the means by which genetic 
information is communicated from the nucleus to 
the cytoplasm. The transfer of information from 
messenger RNA to proteins is termed translation.
We may now take a closer look at sickle-cell 
hemoglobin in light of our knowledge of transcrip-
tion and translation. This abnormal hemoglobin is 
caused by a mutation in one gene that codes a poly-
peptide chain, the so-called β-globin chain that is 
146 amino acid residues in length. As we learned 
earlier, the mutation alters only one amino acid unit 
in the entire chain, changing a glutamic acid pres-
ent in normal hemoglobin into another amino acid, 
Scientists have broken the genetic code in its 
main elements. Each three-letter unit of the mes-
senger RNA is called a codon. Each of the twenty 
main amino acids, ranging from alanine to valine, 
is speciﬁ ed by at least one codon. In fact, most 
amino acids have more than one codon. Serine, 
for example, has six codons; glycine has four; and 
lysine has two. Only methionine and tryptophan 
have one each. Because most amino acids are spec-
iﬁ ed by more than one codon, the code is claimed 
to be degenerate. However, this kind of degeneracy 
is welcome since it ensures that the code works.
Details of the code are shown in table 4.4. 
This table of the genetic code represents for the 
biologist what the periodic table of the elements 
Figure 4.8 The language of life. The DNA molecule forms a single strand 
of messenger RNA that carries DNA’s instructions out into the cell. The four 
bases of DNA (A, T, C, and G) are responsible for the 3-letter code words, or 
codons, of messenger RNA. Each of the twenty amino acids that make up the 
variety of body proteins is speciﬁ ed by at least one codon.
54 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
55
humans varies, and in our present state of knowl-
edge the mutation rate for any single human gene 
must be considered as a rough estimate. It is likely 
that all human offspring contain at least two to ﬁ ve 
newly mutated genes capable of having an adverse 
effect. 
Different species have different mutation rates, 
as do different proteins. This will be important to 
our later discussion of molecular clocks (chap-
ter 15). For example, a large-size gene with many 
bases has a greater likelihood of experiencing a 
mutational change than does a small-size gene, just 
as in a manuscript a long sentence is more likely to 
contain a misspelling than in a short sentence.
It may be noted that the mutation rate for a 
recognizable human disorder is higher than the 
estimate, stated earlier in this chapter, of the fre-
quency of uncorrected base changes in the DNA 
molecule. This reﬂ ects the fact that not all single-
base changes (mutations) within a given gene have 
adverse effects or cause overt disease. Indeed, 
valine. The substitution of valine for glutamic acid 
can be accounted for by an alteration of a single 
base change of the triplet of DNA that speciﬁ es 
the amino acid, as depicted in ﬁ gure 4.11. If the 
DNA triplet responsible for transcription in normal 
hemoglobin is CTT, then a single base change to 
CAT would alter the codon of messenger RNA to 
GUA. Accordingly, the amino acid speciﬁ ed by 
the codon GUA would be valine. The replacement 
of the glutamic acid by the valine causes a change 
in the conformation of the hemoglobin molecule. 
This, in turn, causes a distortion in the morphology 
(“sickling”) of the red blood cell.
FREQUENCY OF MUTATIONS 
IN HUMAN DISORDERS
Most mutations present in an individual are inher-
ited from the previous generation. The rate at 
which new disease-causing mutations arise in 
TABLE 4.4     The Three-Letter Codons of RNA and the Amino Acids Speci  ed by the Codons*
AAU 
CAU 
GQU 
UAU
AAC 
CAC 
GAC 
UAC
AAA 
CAA 
GAA 
UAA
AAG 
} Asparagine
} Lysine
 
CAG 
} Histidine
} Glutamine
 
GAG 
} Aspartic acid
} Glutamic acid
 
UAG 
} Tyrosine
} (Terminator)†
ACU 
CCU 
GCU 
UCU
ACC 
CCC 
GCC 
UCC
ACA 
CCA 
GCA 
UCA
ACG } 
Threonine
 
CCG } 
Proline
 
GCG } 
Alanine
 
UCG } 
Serine
AGU 
CGU 
GGU 
UGU
AGC 
CGC 
GGC 
UGC
AGA 
CGA 
GGA 
UGA
AGG 
} Serine
} Arginine
 
CGG } 
Arginine
 
GGG } 
Glycine
 
UGG 
} Cysteine
  (Terminator)
†
  Tryptophan
AUU 
CUU 
GUU 
UUU
AUC 
CUC 
GUC 
UUC
AUA 
CUA 
GUA 
UUA
AUG } Isoleucine
  Methionine
 
CUG } 
Leucine
 
GUG } 
Valine
 
UUG 
} Phenylalanine
} Leucine
* The genetic code is a triplet RNA code that speciﬁ es the 20 essential amino acids, three stop or termination sequences (UAA, UAG, and UGA) and 
one start sequence (AUG which codes for the amino acid methionine). Most amino acids are coded for by more than one triplet sequence, called a 
codon. The start codon initiates translation and termination or “stop” codons signal the end of the formation of a polypeptide chain.
† Terminating codons signal the end of the formation of a polypeptide chain.

several hundred different base changes are 
known to occur in the genes that code for hemo-
globin, but many of them are inconsequential 
to the properties or activity of the hemoglo-
bin molecule and are, accordingly, innocuous. 
There are, however, approximately 400 hemo-
globin variants that have been identiﬁ ed as hav-
ing a clinical impact. Sickle-cell anemia, earlier 
discussed, is a prominent example of a single 
base change resulting in a marked impairment 
of the hemoglobin molecule. 
The mutation responsible for achondro-
plasia is notable in that it constitutes one of 
the most mutable single-base changes in the 
human genome. Achondroplasia is transmitted 
as an autosomal dominant trait. Affected indi-
viduals are small and disproportionate, with 
relatively long trunks and short arms and legs. 
Achondroplasia is a congenital defect, a defect 
present at birth. With an estimated prevalence 
of 1 per 40,000 live births, it is one of the more 
common Mendelian disorders. 
Many achondroplastic dwarfs are stillborn 
or die in infancy; those surviving to adulthood 
produce fewer offspring than normal. About 
80 percent of the children born with this condi-
tion in one generation will not replace them-
selves in the next generation. Given the high 
mortality and low fecundity, the frequency of 
the disorder would steadily decrease from one 
generation to the next, if it were not for the 
high mutability of the gene involved. In fact, 
more than 90 percent of affected individuals 
have newly arisen mutations. Interestingly, an 
increased paternal age at the time of concep-
tion has been observed. That is to say, de novo 
mutations occur more often in older fathers 
than in older mothers. Indeed, in several other 
dominantly inherited disorders, normal parents 
more often produce an affected child when the 
father is older at the time of conception. 
Achondroplasia is like sickle-cell anemia in 
that it is caused by a single, speciﬁ c amino acid 
substitution. However, this dominant disorder 
differs markedly from sickle-cell anemia in that 
A
T
T
A
G
C
G
C
G
C
G
C
A
A
C
T
G
G
G
C
T
old strand
old strand
T
G
A
C
DNA
Polymerase
new strands
coding strand of DNA
strand of RNA
transfer
RNAs
carboxy
terminus
nascent polypeptide chain
amino
terminus
Methionine
Asparagine
Glycine
Alanine
Tryptophan
messenger RNA
Replication
Transcription
C
C
G
A
T
T
G
A
C
C
C
G
A
A
C
T
G
G
G
C
T
RNA
Polymerase
T
A
A
U
C
G
C
G
C
G
C
G
T
A
T
A
G
C
A
U
C C C G A
A
U
U
A
G
C
G
C
G
C
G
C
A
U
A
U
C
G A C C C G A
U G G G C U
Translation
Figure 4.9 Stepwise   ow of information from DNA to 
RNA to protein. DNA not only copies itself by the act of repli-
cation with the aid of an enzyme (DNA polymerase), but expresses 
its information by generating a single-stranded RNA whose nucle-
otide sequence is coded by one of the two strands of the DNA 
duplex. The transcription of DNA into RNA is accomplished with 
the aid of an RNA polymerase. In the act of translation, the nucle-
otide sequence of the RNA transcript (messenger RNA) directs 
the sequence of amino acids comprising a protein. Transcription 
of DNA into RNA and translation of messenger RNA into protein 
are compartmentalized activities, the former event occurring in the 
nucleus and the latter in the cytoplasm.
56 
Understanding Evolution

new mutations account for 90 percent of 
the cases. The mutation rate for the achon-
droplastic gene has been placed as high as 
about 4 mutations in every 100,000 gametes 
produced in a generation. This particular 
site is said to be a mutational “hot spot.”
EVOLUTIONARY 
CONSEQUENCES 
OF MUTATIONS
By far, most of the gene mutations aris-
ing today in organisms are not likely to be 
beneﬁ cial. Existing populations of organ-
isms are products of a long evolutionary 
past. The genes that are now normal to 
the members of a population represent the 
most favorable mutations selectively accu-
mulated over eons of time. The chance that 
a new mutant gene will be more advanta-
geous than an already established favorable 
gene is slim. Nonetheless, if the environ-
ment were to change, the mutant gene 
might prove to be beneﬁ cial in the new 
environmental situation. The microscopic 
water ﬂ ea, Daphnia, thrives at a tempera-
ture of 20°C and cannot survive when the 
temperature rises to 27°C. A mutant strain 
of this water ﬂ ea is known that requires 
temperatures between 25°C and 30°C and 
cannot live at 20°C. Thus, at high tempera-
tures, the mutant gene is essential to the 
survival of the water ﬂ eas. This little epi-
sode reveals an important point: A muta-
tion that is inferior in the environment in 
which it arose may be superior in another 
environment. Skeptics might contend that 
this proverbial declaration has no relevancy 
to complex higher organisms, including 
humans. Interestingly, the maxim derives 
overwhelming support from the varied 
frequencies of the gene for sickle-cell ane-
mia in human populations. The obviously 
harmful sickling gene may actually confer 
RNA
Protein
Translation
Transcription
Reverse
transcription
DNA
Replication
Figure 4.10 Simpli  ed representation of the   ow of 
genetic information showing the relationship between DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis. DNA is transcribed into RNA and 
then RNA is translated into proteins. Some RNA viruses, called 
retroviruses, can convert RNA into DNA using the enzyme reverse 
transcriptase.
Normal Action
(Hb A)
DNA
mRNA
codon
GLUTAMIC
ACID
G
A
A
Amino
acid
Defective Action
(Hb S)
Beta Hemoglobin Gene
DNA
mRNA
codon
VALINE
G
U
A
Amino
acid
G
A
A
C
T
T
G
T
A
C
A
T
Figure 4.11 Derivation of abnormal hemoglobin S from 
normal hemoglobin A by a single nucleotide change in the triplet 
of DNA bases that normally codes for glutamic acid.
 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
57

58 
Understanding Evolution
between chromosomes (translocation), the rever-
sal of the order of a chromosome by turning a part 
of it upside down (inversion) or the loss of a part of 
a chromosome (deletion). Once considered excep-
tionally rare and relatively unimportant, chromo-
somal aberrations now loom as a prominent cause 
of the prenatal loss of human embryos.
It may be disconcerting to learn that in 
humans there is a large natural (spontaneous) loss 
of embryos in early pregnancy, a level that far 
exceeds the incidence in most mammalian species. 
Of spontaneous abortions that occur before preg-
nancy has been diagnosed, most are due to gross 
chromosomal aberrations.
The data are too imprecise to provide a true 
rate of pregnancy loss in the human female, but 
available information does permit a mathemati-
cal estimation that appears to reliably approxi-
mate natural events. A table of intrauterine death 
(table 4.5) explores what happens to 100 eggs 
an advantage to its carriers in certain geographical 
localities (see chapter 8).
The process of mutation furnishes the genetic 
variants that are the raw materials of evolution. Ide-
ally, mutations should arise only when advantageous, 
and only when needed. This, of course, is fanciful 
thinking. Mutations occur irrespective of their use-
fulness or uselessness. The mutations responsible 
for achondroplasia and retinoblastoma (malignant 
eye tumors) in humans are certainly not beneﬁ cial. 
But novel heritable characters arise repeatedly as a 
consequence of mutation. Only one mutation in sev-
eral thousands might be advantageous, but this one 
mutation might be important, if not necessary, to the 
continued success of a population. The harsh price 
of evolutionary potentialities for a population is the 
continual occurrence and elimination of mutant 
genes with detrimental effects. Thus, in evolution-
ary terms, a population, if it is to continue to evolve, 
must depend on the occasional errors that occur in 
the copying process of its genetic material.
CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS 
AND PREGNANCY LOSS
Our discussion thus far has concentrated on 
changes at the molecular level within the gene, the 
so-called point (or gene) mutations. Grosser altera-
tions involving large parts of the chromosomes 
have been termed chromosomal aberrations. Some 
of the chromosomal aberrations are numerical, 
affecting the amount of chromosomal material. A 
cell, for example, may have three sets of chromo-
somes (the triploid state) rather than the customary 
two chromosomal sets (the standard diploid state). 
Another example of a numerical abnormality is 
when there is an extra chromosome, or trisomy 
(2n+1). The most common human trisomy is Down 
syndrome (or trisomy 21), where the individual has 
an extra chromosome 21. In general, missing a 
chromosome is less compatible with survival than 
having an extra chromosome. Other gross chromo-
somal deviations are classiﬁ ed as structural, as rep-
resented by the transfer of chromosomal segments 
TABLE 4.5  Table of Intrauterine Deaths 
per 100 Ova Exposed to the 
Risk of Fertilization
 Weeks after ovulation 
Survivorsa 
Failuresb
 
 
100 
16c
 
0 
84d 
15
 
1 
69e 
27
 
2f 
42 
5.0
 
6 
37 
2.9
 
10 
34.1 
1.7
 
14 
32.4 
0.5
 
18 
31.9 
0.3
 
22 
31.6 
0.1
 
26 
31.5 
0.1
 
30 
31.4 
0.1
 
34 
31.3 
0.1
 
38 
31.2 
0.2
 
Live births 
31 
a Pregnancies still in progress.
b Spontaneous abortions.
c Not fertilized.
d Number fertilized.
e Number implanted.
f Expected times of menses.

In one study, an examination of the incidence 
of chromosomal anomalies in human abortuses 
found that among 1,097 specimens between the 
second and seventh weeks of gestation, 724, or 
produced by women who are 
reproducing naturally. Sixteen of 
the 100 eggs will fail to be fer-
tilized, even under optimal con-
ditions. Of the 84 eggs that are 
fertilized, 15 will fail to implant. 
Of the 69 embryos implanted at 
the end of the ﬁ rst week, 27 of 
these characteristically will ﬁ nd 
the uterine lining inhospitable. 
Thus, up to the second week after 
ovulation, only 42 eggs of the 
original 100 will still be viable. 
Stated another way, by the time 
pregnancy is recognizable, more 
than half of the eggs have been 
lost. At 8 weeks’ gestation, when 
the embryo is termed a fetus, 
about 65 eggs of the original 100 
will have failed to survive. The 
incidence of spontaneous abortion 
during the fetal period is very low. 
By the end of gestation, the proba-
bility of a live birth is only 0.31, or 
31  percent. For ease of comprehen-
sion, the numerical information in 
table 4.5 is pictorially represented 
in ﬁ gure 4.12, in which the base-
line is an original 20 eggs rather 
than 100 eggs. 
With the rapid advances 
in chromosome methdology, it 
became possible to examine the 
human 
chromosome 
comple-
ment in the cells of spontane-
ous abortuses. To most scientists, 
the results of the analysis were 
astonishing. 
Several 
thorough 
investigations have revealed that 
50 to 70  percent of ﬁ rst- trimester 
spontaneous abo rtuses are chro-
mosomally abnormal. The data convincingly 
demonstrate that chromosomal aberrations are the 
major etiologic agents responsible for naturally 
occurring abortions. 
20.0
16.8
13.8
8.4
7.0
6.2
Numbers surviving
of original 20
Eggs in
contact with
sperm
(100%)
Successful
fertilization
(84%)
Successful
implantation
(69%)
Successful
development
4th week
(42%)
Successful
development
8th week
(35%)
Fetuses
coming to
 term
(31%)
Figure 4.12 The fate of 20 eggs produced by women who are reproducing 
naturally. Under conditions optimal for fertilization and development, only 
6.2 eggs (31%) of the original 20 develop successfully to term.
 
CHAPTER 4 Mutation 
59

Number of specimens studied
100
0
2
3
4
5
6
Weeks of development
724/1097
25/108
7
8
9 10–12
200
300
400
Karyotype normal
Karyotype abnormal
66%
23%
Figure 4.13 Frequency of chromosomal abnormali-
ties in spontaneous abortuses in relation to weeks of 
development.
60 
Understanding Evolution
their development to eliminate organisms that are 
not likely to survive. Gross chromosomal abnor-
malities is thus the primary cause of pregnancy 
loss of conceptuses that would not survive outside 
the womb.
There is evidence that there is an optimal 
interval in humans between the delivery of one 
child and the conception of the next—that is, an 
interval associated with the greatest probability of 
a normal infant being born at full term. It can be 
argued that it is in the best interests of both the 
parents and offspring to expand the birth interval 
so that the parents can expend a greater effort on 
each child to better ensure the survival and ulti-
mate ﬁ tness of each child. The investment of 
energy per child is likely to be less in situations 
in which successive births are very close to one 
another. Conversely, each child is likely to receive 
greater attention when the time period between 
births is extended. Research supports the notion 
that both short birth intervals (less than 6 months) 
and a long birth intervals (over 120 months) are 
associated with an increased risk of a variety of 
unfavorable birth outcomes. This has lead to the 
suggestion that the optimal birth-to-conception 
interval for safeguarding against adverse birth 
outcomes is approximately 2 years. This approxi-
mation ﬁ ts with the concept that a prolonged birth 
interval may have been especially important dur-
ing the nomadic hunting and gathering period in 
human evolution when having multiple children 
who could not walk during periods of nomadic 
migration was highly disadvantageous. Under this 
view, there may have been selective pressures on 
early humans to adapt an optimal birth interval 
to provide the greatest chance of infant survival. 
Whatever the case may be, it is certain that the 
length of the birth interval and the incidence of 
gross chromosomal aberration at birth have been 
the subject of selective pressure during the evolu-
tion of our species.
66 percent, had an abnormal karyotype (ﬁ g. 4.13). 
The incidence of chromosomal abnormalities fell 
to 23 percent among the 108 abortuses between 8 
and 12 weeks of age. Most types of chromosomal 
aberrations are incompatible with survival to an 
advanced stage of pregnancy. It has been conserva-
tively estimated that 1 in 5 of all human conceptuses 
carries a chromosome abnormality. At birth, the 
incidence declines dramatically to about 1 in 200. 
In other words, natural selection acts early in preg-
nancy before much energy is expended toward 

61
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
5
The opening chapter introduced us to natu-
ral populations of bullfrogs that conspicuously 
contained at one time several hundred multilegged 
variants. One of the hypotheses offered was that 
the multilegged anomaly is an inherited condition, 
transmitted by a detrimental recessive gene. The 
multilegged bullfrogs disappeared in nature as dra-
matically as they appeared. They unquestionably 
failed to reproduce and leave descendants. Now, 
let us imagine that the multilegged frogs were as 
reproductively ﬁ t as their normal kin. Would the 
multilegged trait eventually still be eliminated 
from the population?
A comparable question was posed to the Eng-
lish geneticist R. C. Punnett at the turn of the twenti-
eth century. He was asked to explain the prevalence 
of blue eyes in humans in view of the acknowl-
edged fact that the blue-eyed condition was a reces-
sive characteristic. Would it not be the case that the 
dominant brown-eyed trait would in time supplant 
the blue-eyed state in the human population? The 
answer was not self-evident, and Punnett sought out 
his colleague Godfrey H. Hardy, the astute math-
ematician at Cambridge University. Hardy had 
only a passing interest in genetics, but the prob-
lem intrigued him as a mathematical one. The 
solution, which we shall consider below, ranks as 
one of the most fundamental theorems of genet-
ics and evolution. As fate would have it, Hardy’s 
formula was arrived at independently in the same 
year (1908) by a physician, Wihelm Weinberg, 
and the well-known equation presently bears both 
their names.
MENDELIAN INHERITANCE
We may recall that the genetic constitutions, or 
genotypes, of the normal and multilegged bullfrogs 
have been designated as AA (normal), Aa (normal 
but a carrier), and aa (multilegged). The kinds and 
proportions of offspring that can arise from mat-
ings involving the three genotypes are illustrated 
in ﬁ gure 5.1. Six different types of matings are 
possible. The mating AA × AA gives rise solely to 
normal homozygous offspring, AA. Two kinds of 
progeny, AA and Aa in equal proportions, result 
from the cross of a homozygous normal parent 
GENETIC EQUILIBRIUM

62 
Understanding Evolution
(AA) and a heterozygous parent (Aa). The mating 
of two heterozygotes (Aa × Aa) produces AA, Aa, 
and aa offspring in the classical Mendelian ratio 
of 1:2:1. Only heterozygous offspring (Aa) emerge 
from the mating AA × aa. Both 
heterozygous (Aa) and recessive 
(aa) progeny, in equal numbers, 
arise from the cross of a heterozy-
gous parent (Aa) and a recessive 
parent (aa). Lastly, two recessive 
parents (aa × aa) produce only 
recessive offspring (aa).
These principles of Men del-
ian inheritance merely inform us 
that certain kinds of off spring can 
be expected from certain types of 
matings. If we are interested in 
following the course of a popu-
lation from one generation to the 
next, then additional factors enter 
the scene.
RANDOM MATING
One important factor that inﬂ u-
ences the genetic composition of 
a population is the system of mat-
ing among individuals. The sim-
plest scheme of breeding activity 
in a population is referred to as 
random mating, wherein any one 
individual has an equal chance of 
pairing with any other individual. 
Random mating does not mean 
promiscuity; it simply means that 
those who choose each other as 
mating partners do not do so on 
the basis of similarity or dissimi-
larity in a given trait or gene.
The absence of preferen-
tial mating in a population has 
interesting consequences. Let us 
suppose that random mating pre-
vails in our particular population 
of bullfrogs. This assemblage of 
frogs is ordinarily very large, numbering several 
thousand individuals. For ease of presentation, 
however, the size of the population is reduced to 
48 males and 48 females. Moreover, for each sex, 
Aa
Aa
Aa
Aa
Aa
Aa
Aa
Aa
100%
50%
50%
50%
50%
100%
25%
25%
100%
50%
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
aa
aa
aa
aa
aa
aa
aa
Figure 5.1 Six possible mating types with respect to one pair of genes, and 
the kinds and percentages of offspring from each type of mating. Normal frogs are 
either homozygous dominant (AA) or heterozygous (Aa); multilegged frogs are 
recessive (aa). The sex of the parent is not denoted; in crosses of unlike genotypes 
(such as AA × Aa), either genotype may be the male or the female.

 
CHAPTER 5 Genetic Equilibrium 
63
Our next step is to ascertain the kinds and pro-
portions of offspring from each mating. We shall 
assume that each mated pair yields the same num-
ber of offspring—for simplicity, four offspring. 
(This is an inordinately small number, as a sin-
gle female bullfrog can deposit well over 10,000 
eggs.) We also take for granted that the genotypes 
of the four progeny from each mating are those 
that are theoretically possible in Mendelian inher-
itance (see ﬁ g. 5.1). For example, if the parents 
are Aa × Aa, their offspring will be 1 AA, 2 Aa, 
and 1 aa. In another instance, if the parents are 
AA × Aa, then the offspring will be 2 AA and 2 Aa. 
The outcome of all crosses is shown in table 5.2. 
It is important to note that the actual numbers of 
offspring recorded in table 5.2 are related to the 
frequencies of the different types of matings. For 
example, the mating of an AA female with an Aa 
male occurs six times; hence, the numbers of off-
spring are increased sixfold (from 2 each of AA 
and Aa to 12 each of the two genotypes).
An examination of table 5.2 reveals that the 
kinds and proportions of individuals in the new gen-
eration of offspring are exactly the same as in the 
we may simplify the mathematical computations 
by assuming that 36 are normal (12 AA and 24 Aa) 
and 12 are multilegged (aa). Accordingly, one-
quarter of the individuals of each sex are homozy-
gous dominant, one-half are heterozygous, and 
one-quarter are recessive. Now, if mating occurs 
at random, will the incidence of multilegged frogs 
decrease, increase, or remain the same in the next 
generation?
The problem may be approached by deter-
mining how often a given type of mating occurs. 
Here we will bring into play the multiplication 
rule of probability: The chance that two indepen-
dent events will occur together is the product of 
their chances of occurring separately. The propor-
tion of AA males in our arbitrary bullfrog popula-
tion is 1/4. We may also say the chance that a male 
bullfrog is AA  is 1/4. Likewise the probability that 
a female bullfrog is AA is 1/4. Consequently, the 
chances that an AA male will “occur together,” or 
mate, with an AA female are 1/16 (1/4 × 1/4). The 
computations for all types of matings can be facili-
tated by coupling the males and females in a mul-
tiplication table, as shown in table 5.1.
Table 5.1 shows that there are nine combina-
tions of mated pairs and that some types occur 
more frequently than others. It may be helpful to 
express the frequencies in terms of actual num-
bers. Thus, for a total of 48 matings, 3 (=1/16 × 
48) would be AA × AA, 6 (=1/16 X 48) would 
be AA × Aa, 12 (= 4/16 × 48) would be Aa × 
Aa, and so forth. The numbers of each type of 
mating are listed in table 5.2.
TABLE 5.1  Random Mating 
of Individuals
Male ()
Female 
()
1/4 AA
2/4 Aa
1/4 aa
1/4 AA
1/16 AA × AA
2/16 AA × Aa
1/16 AA × aa
2/4 Aa
2/16 Aa × AA
4/16 Aa × Aa
2/16 Aa × aa
1/4 aa
1/16 aa × AA
2/16 aa × Aa
1/16 aa × aa
TABLE 5.2  First Generation 
of Offspring
Type of 
Mating 
(Female 
× Male)
Number of 
Each Type 
of Mating*
Number of Offspring
 
AA 
Aa 
aa
AA × AA
3
12
AA × Aa
6
12
12
AA × aa
3
12
Aa × AA
6
12
12
Aa × Aa
12
12
24
12
Aa × aa
6
12
12
aa × AA
3
12
aa × Aa
6
12
12
aa × aa
3
    
    
12
48
96
48
(25%)
(50%)
(25%)
* Based on a total of 48 matings.

Sperm
Eggs
0.25 AA
0.5 A
0.5 A
0.5 a
0.5 a
0.25 Aa
0.25 Aa
0.25 aa
Figure 5.2 Random union of eggs and sperm yields 
the same outcome as the random mating of parents 
(refer to table 5.2).
64 
Understanding Evolution
HARDY-WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM
A population in which the proportions of geno-
types remain unchanged from generation to gen-
eration is in equilibrium. The fact that a system of 
random mating leads to a condition of equilibrium 
was uncovered independently by G. H. Hardy and 
W. Weinberg, and has come to be widely known 
as the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. This theo-
rem states that the proportions of AA, Aa, and aa 
genotypes, as well as the proportions of A and a 
alleles, will remain constant from generation to 
generation, provided that the bearers of the three 
genotypes have equal opportunities of producing 
offspring in a large, randomly mating population.
The above statement can be translated into a 
simple mathematical expression. If we let p be the 
frequency of allele A in the population, and q equal 
to the frequency of the alternative allele, a, then the 
distribution of the genotypes in the next genera-
tion will be p2AA : 2pq Aa : q2 aa. This relation-
ship may be veriﬁ ed by the use, once again, of a 
genetical checkerboard (ﬁ g. 5.3). Mathematically 
inclined readers will recognize that p2 : 2pq : q2 is 
the algebraic expansion of the binomial (p + q)2. 
The frequencies of the three genotypes (0.25 AA : 
0.50 Aa : 0.25 aa) in our bullfrog  population under 
parental generation. There has been no change in 
the ratio of normal frogs (75 percent AA and Aa) to 
multilegged frogs (25 percent aa). In fact, the pro-
portions of phenotypes (and genotypes) will remain 
the same in all successive generations, provided 
that the system of random mating is continued.
GENE FREQUENCIES
There is a less tedious method of arriving at the 
same conclusion. Rather than ﬁ gure out all the 
matings that can possibly occur, we need only to 
consider the genes (alleles) that are transmitted by 
the eggs and sperm of the parents. Let us assume 
that each parent produces only 10 gametes. The 
12 homozygous dominant males (AA) of our arbi-
trary initial population can contribute 120 sperm 
cells to the next generation, each sperm contain-
ing one A allele. The 24 heterozygous males (Aa) 
can transmit 240 gametes, 120 of them with A and 
120 with a. The remaining 12 recessive males (aa) 
can furnish 120 gametes, each with an a allele. 
The total pool of alleles provided by all males will 
be 240 A and 240 a, or 50 percent of each kind. 
Expressed as a decimal fraction, the frequency of 
allele A is 0.5; of a, 0.5.
Since the females in our population have 
the same genetic constitutions as the males, their 
gametic contribution to the next generation will 
also be 0.5 A and 0.5 a. The eggs and sperm can 
now be united at random in a genetical checker-
board (ﬁ g 5.2).
It should be evident from ﬁ gure 5.2 that the 
distribution of genotypes among the offspring is 
0.25 AA : 0.50 Aa : 0.25 aa. The random union of 
eggs and sperm yields the same result as the ran-
dom mating of parents (refer to table 5.2). Thus, 
using two different approaches, we have answered 
the question posed in the introductory remarks to 
this chapter. If the multilegged frogs are equally as 
fertile as the normal frogs and leave equal numbers 
of offspring in each generation, then these anoma-
lous frogs will persist in the population with the 
same frequency from one generation to the next.

Sperm
Eggs
p2 AA
p A
p A
q a
q a
pq Aa
pq Aa
q2 aa
Figure 5.3 The distribution of genotypes in the next 
generation is p2 AA : 2pq : Aa : q2aa (Hardy-Weinberg 
formula).
 
CHAPTER 5 Genetic Equilibrium 
65
It should also be clear that a recessive trait, 
such as blue eyes in humans, will not become 
rare just because it is governed by a recessive 
gene. Nor can the dominant brown-eyed condition 
become widespread simply by virtue of its domi-
nance. Whether a given gene is common or rare 
is controlled by other factors, particularly natural 
selection.
ESTIMATING THE FREQUENCY 
OF HETEROZYGOTES
It comes as a surprise to many readers to discover 
that the heterozygotes of a rare recessive abnor-
mality are rather common instead of being com-
paratively rare. Recessive albinism may be used 
as an illustration. The frequency of albinos is 
about 1/20,000 in human populations. When the 
frequency of the homozygous recessive (q2) is 
known, the frequency of the recessive allele (q) 
can be calculated, as follows:
 
q2 = 1/20,000 = 0.00005
 
q = √ 0.00005  = 0.007
 
=  about 1/140 
(frequency of recessive allele).
The heterozygotes are represented by 2pq in 
the Hardy-Weinberg formula. Accordingly, the 
frequency of heterozygous carriers of albinism can 
be calculated as follows:
 
q = 0.007
 
p = 1 – 0.007 = 0.993.
 
 ∴2pq = 2(0.993 × 0.007) = 0.014 
 
=  about 1/70 (frequency of 
heterozygote).
Thus, although 1 person in 20,000 is an albino 
(recessive homozygote), about 1 person in 70 is a 
heterozygous carrier. There are 280 times as many 
carriers as affected individuals! It bears emphasiz-
ing that the rarity of a recessive disorder does not 
signify a comparable rarity of heterozygous car-
riers. In fact, when the frequency of the recessive 
gene is extremely low, nearly all the recessive 
genes are in the heterozygous state.
the system of random mating is the expanded 
binomial (0.5 + 0.5)2.
We may consider another arbitrary popula-
tion in the equilibrium state. Suppose that the 
population consists of 16 AA, 48 Aa, and 36 aa 
 individuals. We may assume, as before, that 
10 gametes are contributed by each individual to the 
next generation. All the gametes transmitted by 
the 16 AA  parents (numerically, 160) will contain 
the A allele, and half the gametes (240) provided 
by the Aa parents will bear the A allele. Thus, of 
the 1,000 total gametes in the population, 400 will 
carry the A allele. Accordingly, the frequency of 
allele A is 0.4 (designated p). In like manner, it can 
be shown that the frequency of allele a is 0.6 (q). 
Substituting the numerical values for p and q in 
the Hardy-Weinberg formula, we have:
 
p2 AA : 2pq Aa : q2aa
 
(0.4)2 AA : 2(0.4) (0.6) Aa : (0.6)2 aa
 
0.16 AA : 0.48 Aa : 0.36 aa.
Hence, the proportions of the three  genotypes 
are the same as those of the preceding genera-
tion. Note that the frequency of the “A” allele 
(p) and the frequency of the “a” allele (q) are 
in a  relationship such that p + q = 1.0. Like-
wise, the binomial expansion of this expression 
(p + q)2 = p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1. This simply means 
that the total of all gene or genotypic frequencies 
equals 100%.

66 
Understanding Evolution
theorem thus depicts a static situation which is 
not the state of nature.
An understanding of Hardy-Weinberg equi-
librium provides a basis for recognizing the forces 
that permit evolutionary change. The more obvi-
ous factors that prevent a natural population from 
attaining stationary equilibrium are: (1) muta-
tion, (2) non-random mating, (3) natural selec-
tion, (4) chance events in small populations (e.g., 
genetic drift) and (5) migration. These factors or 
forces may profoundly modify the gene frequen-
cies in natural populations. In essence, the Hardy-
Weinberg theorem represents the cornerstone of 
population genetic studies, since deviations from 
the Hardy-Weinberg expectations direct attention 
to the evolutionary forces that upset the theoreti-
cal expectations. Evolution can be plausibly 
deﬁ ned as the disturbance of, or shift in, the Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium.
IMPLICATIONS
The Hardy-Weinberg theorem is entirely theo-
retical. The set of underlying assumptions can 
scarcely be fulﬁ lled in any natural population. 
We implicitly assume the absence of recurring 
mutations (no mutation), the absence of any 
degree of preferential matings (random mating), 
the absence of differential mortality or fertility 
(no selection), the absence of immigration or 
emigration of individuals (no gene ﬂ ow), and the 
absence of ﬂ uctuations in gene frequencies due 
to sheer chance (theoretically, an inﬁ nitely large 
population). But therein lies the signiﬁ cance of 
the Hardy-Weinberg theorem. In revealing the 
conditions under which evolutionary change can-
not occur, it brings to light the possible forces 
that could cause a change in the genetic com-
position of a population. The Hardy-Weinberg 

67
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
6
We have remarked that the multilegged 
anomaly which arose in a local bullfrog popula-
tion in Mississippi in 1958 has not been detected 
since its initial occurrence. One of our supposi-
tions was that the multilegged trait is governed by 
a recessive mutant gene. We might presume that 
the mutant gene responsible for the abnormal-
ity has disappeared entirely from the population. 
But can a detrimental mutant gene be completely 
eradicated from natural populations of organisms, 
even in the face of the severest form of selection? 
Most persons are frankly puzzled when they are 
informed that the answer is no. Yet our knowl-
edge of the properties of mutation and selection 
expressly permits a ﬁ rm negative reply.
SELECTION AGAINST 
RECESSIVE DEFECTS
In the preceding chapter, in our consideration of the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, we assumed that the 
mutant multilegged frogs (aa) were as reproduc-
tively ﬁ t as their normal kin (AA and Aa) and left 
equal numbers of living offspring each generation. 
Now, however, let us presume that all multilegged 
individuals fail to reach sexual maturity generation 
after generation. Will the incidence of the multi-
legged trait decline to a vanishing point?
We may start with the same distribution of 
individuals in the initial generation as postulated 
in chapter 5, namely, 24 AA, 48 Aa, and 24 aa,
with the sexes equally represented. Since the mul-
tilegged frogs (aa) are unable to participate in 
breeding, the parents of the next generation com-
prise only the 24 AA and 48 Aa individuals. The 
heterozygous types are twice as numerous as the 
homozygous dominants; accordingly, two-thirds 
of the total breeding members of the population 
are Aa and one-third are AA. We may once again 
employ a genetic checkerboard (table 6.1) to 
ascertain the different types of matings and their 
relative frequencies.
The frequencies of the different matings 
shown in table 6.1 may be expressed as whole 
numbers rather than fractions. Given a total of 
36 matings, 4 (= 1/9 × 36) would be AA  × AA , 
8 (=  2/9 × 36) would be AA  × Aa , and 16 
(= 4/9 × 36) would be Aa  × Aa . These num-
bers are recorded in table 6.2.
CONCEPT OF SELECTION

68 
Understanding Evolution
Our next task is to determine the outcome 
of each type of cross. We shall assume that each 
mated pair contributes an equal number of prog-
eny to the next generation (say, four offspring). 
As revealed in table 6.2, the offspring are distrib-
uted according to Mendelian ratios, and the actual 
numbers of offspring reﬂ ect the frequencies of the 
different kinds of matings. For example, a single 
AA  × Aa  mating yields 4 offspring in the Men-
delian ratio of 2 AA : 2 Aa. There are, however, eight 
matings of this kind; the numbers of offspring are 
correspondingly increased to 16 AA and 16 Aa.
Even though all the multilegged frogs fail to 
reproduce, the detrimental recessive genes are still 
transmitted to the ﬁ rst generation. The emergence 
of multilegged frogs in the ﬁ rst generation stems 
from the matings of two heterozygous frogs. How-
ever, as seen from table 6.2, the frequency of the 
multilegged trait (aa) decreases from 25 percent 
to 11.11 percent in a single generation.
The effects of complete selection against the 
multilegged frogs in subsequent generations can 
be determined by the foregoing method of calcu-
lation, but the lengthy tabulations can be weari-
some. At this point we may apply a formula that 
will establish in a few steps the frequency of the 
recessive allele after any number of generations of 
complete selection:
qo
qn =             .
1 + nqo
In the above expression, qo represents the ini-
tial or original frequency of the recessive allele, 
and qn is the frequency after n generations. Thus, 
with the initial value qo = 0.5, the frequency of 
the recessive allele after two generations (n = 2) 
will be:
qo
0.5
0.5
q2 =             =                =       = 0.25.
1 + 2qo
1 + 2(0.5)
2.0 
If the frequency of the recessive allele (a) is q, 
then the frequency of the recessive individual (aa) 
is q2. Accordingly, the frequency of the recessive 
homozygote is (0.25)2, or 0.0625 (6.25 percent). 
In the second generation, therefore, the incidence 
of the multilegged trait drops to 6.25 percent.
If we perform comparable calculations 
through several generations, we emerge with a 
comprehensive picture that is tabulated in table 6.3 
and portrayed in ﬁ gure 6.1. In the third genera-
tion, the frequency of the recessive homozygote 
declines to 4.0 percent. Progress in terms of the 
elimination of the multilegged trait is initially 
rapid but becomes slower as selection is contin-
ued over many successive generations. About 
20 generations are required to depress the incidence 
of the multilegged trait to 2 in 1,000 individuals 
(0.20 percent). Ten additional generations are nec-
essary to effect a reduction to 1 in 1,000 individuals 
(0.10 percent). Thus, as a recessive trait becomes 
TABLE 6.1   Matings and 
Relative Frequencies
Female
()
Male ()
1/3 AA
2/3 Aa
1/3 AA
1/9 AA × AA
2/9 AA × Aa
2/3 Aa
2/9 Aa × AA
4/9 Aa × Aa
TABLE 6.2  First Generation 
of Offspring After 
Complete Selection
Type of 
Mating 
(Female 
 Male)
Number of 
Each Type 
of Mating*
Number of Offspring
AA
Aa
aa
AA × AA
4
16
AA × Aa
8
16
16
Aa × AA
8
16
16
Aa × Aa
16
16
32
16
64
64
16
(44.44%)
(44.44%)
(11.11%)
* Based on a total of 36 matings.

100
AA
Aa
aa
PERCENTAGE
GENERATIONS
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
5
10
20
30
50
100
Figure 6.1 Effects of complete selection against recessive homozygotes (aa)  occurring 
 initially (“0” generation) at a frequency of 25 percent. The effectiveness of selection in  reducing 
the incidence of the recessive trait decreases with successive generations. The frequency of 
recessive homozygotes drops markedly from 25 percent to 6.25 percent in two generations. 
 However, 8 generations are required to reduce the incidence of the recessive trait to 1.0 percent, 
30  generations are needed to achieve a reduction to 0.1 percent, and approximately 100 generations 
to depress the frequency to 0.01 percent.
 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
69
is sheltered from selection by its normal dominant 
partner (A). By contrast, rare lethal dominant alleles 
are eliminated in a single generation (ﬁ g. 6.2) and 
their subsequent frequency is a function of their 
rate of spontaneous mutation.
rarer, selection against it becomes less effective. 
The reason is quite simple: very few recessive 
homozygotes are exposed to the action of selec-
tion. The now rare recessive allele (a) is carried 
mainly by heterozygous individuals (Aa), where it 
TABLE 6.3     Effects of Complete Selection Against a Recessive Trait
Generations
Recessive 
Allele 
Frequency
Recessive 
Homozygotes 
%
Heterozygotes 
%
Dominant 
Heterozygotes 
%
0
0.500
25.00
50.00
25.00
1
0.333
11.11
44.44
44.44
2
0.250
6.25
37.50
56.25
3
0.200
4.00
32.00
64.00
4
0.167
2.78
27.78
69.44
8
0.100
1.00
18.00
81.00
10
0.083
0.69
15.28
84.03
20
0.045
0.20
8.68
91.12
30
0.031
0.10
6.05
93.85
40
0.024
0.06
4.64
95.30
50
0.020
0.04
3.77
96.19
100
0.010
0.01
1.94
98.05

frequency of heterozygous carriers is many times 
greater than the frequency of homozygous individ-
uals afﬂ icted with a trait. Thus, an extremely rare 
disorder like alkaptonuria (blackening of urine) 
occurs in 1 in one million persons. This detrimen-
tal gene, however, is carried in the hidden state 
by 1 out of 500 persons. There are 2,000 times as 
many genetic carriers of alkaptonuria as there are 
individuals affected with this defect. For another 
recessive trait, cystic ﬁ brosis, 1 out of 2,500 indi-
viduals is affected with this homozygous trait. One 
of 25 persons is a carrier of cystic ﬁ brosis. In mod-
ern genetic counseling programs, an important 
consideration has been the development of simple, 
inexpensive means of detecting heterozygous car-
riers of inherited disorders.
INTERPLAY OF MUTATION 
AND SELECTION
Ideally, if the process of complete selection against 
the recessive homozygote were to continue for 
several hundred more generations, the detrimen-
tal recessive gene would be completely eliminated 
and the population would consist uniformly of nor-
mal homozygotes (AA). But, in reality, the steadily 
diminishing supply of deleterious recessive genes is 
continually being replenished by recurrent mutations 
from normal (A) to abnormal (a). Mutations from A 
to a, which inevitably occur from time to time, were 
not taken into account in our determinations. Muta-
tions, of course, cannot be ignored.
All genes undergo mutations at some deﬁ n-
able rate. If a certain proportion of A alleles are 
converted into a alleles in each generation, the 
population will at all times carry a certain amount 
of the recessive mutant gene (a) despite selection 
against it. Without any sophisticated calculations, 
it can be shown that a point will be reached at 
which the number of the variant recessive alleles 
eliminated by selection just balances the number 
of the same variant recessive alleles produced 
by mutation. An analogy shown in ﬁ gure 6.3A 
will help in visualizing this circumstance. The 
SIGNIFICANCE OF 
THE HETEROZYGOTE
When the frequency of a detrimental recessive 
gene becomes very low, most affected offspring 
(aa) will come from matings of two heterozy-
gous carriers (Aa). For example, in the human 
population, the vast majority of newly arising 
albino individuals (aa) in a given generation 
(more than 99 percent of them) will come from 
normally pigmented heterozygous parents. Con-
siderations of this kind led us to postulate in 
chapter 1 that the multilegged frogs that appeared 
suddenly in the natural population were derived 
from normal-legged heterozygous parents (refer 
to ﬁ g. 1.5).
Detrimental recessive genes in a popula-
tion are unquestionably harbored mostly in the 
heterozygous state. As shown in table 6.4, the 
1.00
0.0
10
Generation
0
0.50
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Recessive
Dominant
Percent
Figure 6.2 Total selection against rare lethal 
alleles. This graph shows the rate at which rare lethal alleles 
are eliminated by natural selection. Lethal dominant alleles 
are immediately exposed to natural selection and eliminated 
within a single generation after they appear. Rare lethal 
 recessive alleles are reduced slowly, protected from selec-
tion by their dominant partner. In both instances, the graph 
assumes an initial allelic frequency of 1%, complete (100%) 
selection, and no new mutations.
70 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
71
and copious chemical compounds promote a higher 
incidence of mutations. We may return to our anal-
ogy (ﬁ g 6.3B). The increased rate of mutation may 
be envisioned as an increased input of water. The 
water level in the beaker will rise and water will 
escape more rapidly through the hole in the side of 
the beaker. Similarly, mutant genes will be found 
more frequently in a population, and they will be 
eliminated at a faster rate from the population. 
As before, a balance will be restored eventually 
between mutation and selection, but now the popu-
lation has a larger store of deleterious genes and a 
larger number of afﬂ icted individuals arising each 
generation.
The supply of defective genes in the human 
population has already increased through the 
greater medical control of recessive disorders. 
The outstanding advances in modern medicine 
have served to prolong the lives of  individuals 
who might otherwise not have survived to repro-
ductive age. This may be compared to  partially 
plugging the hole in the side of the beaker 
(ﬁ g. 6.3C). The water level in the beaker will obvi-
ously rise, as will the amount of deleterious genes 
in a population.
PARTIAL SELECTION
We have treated above the severest form of selec-
tion against recessive individuals. Complete, or 
100  percent, selection against a recessive homozy-
gote is often termed lethal selection, and the mutant 
gene is designated as a lethal gene. A lethal gene 
does not necessarily result in the death of the individ-
ual but does effectively prevent that individual from 
reproducing or leaving offspring. Not all mutant 
genes are lethal; in fact, the majority of them have 
less drastic effects on viability or fertility. A mildly 
handicapped recessive homozygote may reproduce 
but may be inferior in fertility to the normal indi-
vidual. When the reproductive capacity of the reces-
sive homozygote is only half as great as the normal 
type, he or she is said to be semi-sterile, and the 
mutant gene is classiﬁ ed as semi-lethal. A subvital 
TABLE 6.4  Frequencies of Recessive 
Homozygotes and 
Heterozygous Carriers
 Frequency of 
Frequency of
 Homozygotes 
Heterozygous 
Ratio of Carriers
 
(aa) 
 Carriers (Aa) 
to Homozygotes
1 in 500 
1 in 10 
50:1
(Sickle-Cell Anemia)a
1 in 2,500 
1 in 25 
100:1
(Cystic Fibrosis)
1 in 6,000 
1 in 40 
150:1
(Tay-Sachs Disease)b
1 in 20,000 
1 in 70 
286:1
(Albinism)
1 in 25,000 
1 in 80 
313:1
(Phenylketonuria)
1 in 50,000 
1 in 110 
455:1
(Acatalasia)c
1 in 1,000,000 
1 in 500 
2,000:1
(Alkaptonuria)
aBased on incidence among African Americans. Sickle-cell anemia is 
later described (chapter 8) as a co-dominant trait.
bIn the United States, the disease occurs once in 6,000 Jewish births and 
once in 500,000 non-Jewish and Cajun American births.
cBased on prevalence rate among the Japanese.
water level in the beaker remains constant when 
the rate at which water enters the opening of the 
beaker equals the rate at which it leaves the hole 
in the side of the beaker. In other words, a state 
of equilibrium is reached when the rate at which 
the recessive gene is replenished by mutation 
equals the rate at which it is lost by selection. It 
should be clear that it is not mutation alone that 
governs the incidence of deleterious recessives 
in a population. The generally low frequency 
of harmful recessive genes stems from the dual 
action of mutation and selection. The mutation 
process tends to increase the number of detri-
mental recessives; the selection mechanism is the 
 counteracting agent.
What would be the consequences of an 
increase in the mutation rate? Humans today live 
in an environment in which high-energy radiation 

Figure 6.3 Interplay of detrimental mutant genes (water from faucet) and their 
elimination by selection (water escaping through hole) in a population (beaker) containing a pool 
of the harmful genes (water in beaker). A. State of genetic equilibrium (constant water level in 
beaker) is reached when the rates at which water enters and leaves the beaker are equal. B. The 
effect of an increase in the mutation rate (increased ﬂ ow of faucet water) as might be expected 
from the continued widespread use of ionizing radiation. A new equilibrium (new constant water 
level) is established, but the frequency of the detrimental gene in the population is higher (higher 
water level in beaker). C. The effect of reducing selection pressure (decreased exit of water) 
as a consequence of improving the reproductive ﬁ tness of genetically defective individuals by 
modern medical practices. The mutation rate (inﬂ ow of water) is the same as in A. The inevitable 
result is a greater incidence of the harmful mutant genes in the population (higher level of water 
in the beaker).
72 
Understanding Evolution
0.25 percent. Selection against a subvital gene (for 
example, 10 percent selection) results in a consid-
erably slower rate of elimination of the recessive 
 homozygotes. When the homozygote is at a very 
slight reproductive disadvantage (1.0 percent selec-
tion), only a small decline of 0.03 percent (from 
1.0 percent to 0.97 percent) occurs after 20 gen-
erations. It is evident that mildly harmful recessive 
genes may remain in a population for a long time.
These considerations are shown in table 6.5 
also. Here, the results are expressed in terms of 
the value s, or the selection coefﬁ cient. The selec-
tion coefﬁ cient is a measure of the contribution 
of one genotype relative to the contributions of 
the other genotypes. Thus, an s value of 1 means 
that an individual leaves no offspring; the reces-
sive homozygote is lethal. An s value of 0.10 sig-
niﬁ es that the aa homozygote contributes only 
recessive gene is one that, in double dose, impairs an 
individual to the extent that his or her reproductive ﬁ t-
ness is less than 100 percent but more than 50  percent 
of normal proﬁ ciency.
The action of selection varies correspondingly 
with the degree of detrimental effect of the reces-
sive gene. Figure 6.4 shows the results of different 
intensities of selection in a population that initially 
contains 1.0 percent recessive homozygotes. With 
complete (lethal) selection, a reduction in the inci-
dence of the recessive trait from 1.0 percent to 
0.25 percent is accomplished in 10 generations. 
Twenty generations of complete selection reduces 
the incidence to 0.11 percent. When the recessive 
gene is semilethal (50 percent selection), 20 gen-
erations, or twice as many generations as under 
complete selection, are required to depress the 
frequency of the recessive homozygote to about 

SELECTION AGAINST 
DOMINANT DEFECTS
If complete selection acts against 
an abnormal trait caused by a domi-
nant allele (A) so that none of the 
AA or Aa individuals leave any 
progeny, than all the A genes are 
at once eliminated (ﬁ g. 6.2). In the 
absence of recurrent mutation, all 
subsequent generations will consist 
exclusively of homozygous reces-
sive (aa) individuals.
However, we must contend again 
with ever-occurring mutations and 
the effects of partial selection. The 
late geneticist Curt Stern provides 
us with a simple, clear model of this 
situation. Imagine a population of 
500,000 individuals, all of whom 
are initially homozygous recessive 
(aa). Thus, no detrimental dominant 
genes (A) are present and the popu-
lation as a whole contains 1,000,000 
recessive genes (a). In the ﬁ rst gen-
eration, 10 dominant mutant genes 
arise as a result of the recessive gene’s mutating to 
the dominant state at a rate of 1 in 100,000 genes. 
We shall now assume that the dominant mutant gene 
is semilethal; in other words, only 5 of the newly 
arisen dominant genes are transmitted to the next, 
or second, generation. For ease of discussion, this 
is pictorially shown in ﬁ gure 6.5 and represented 
also in table 6.6. It can be seen that the second 
generation would contain a total of 15 dominant 
genes—5 brought forth from the ﬁ rst generation 
and 10 new ones added by mutation. In the third 
generation, the 5 dominant genes carried over 
from the ﬁ rst generation would be reduced to 2.5, 
the 10 dominant alleles of the second generation 
would be depressed to 5, and 10 new abnormal 
alleles would arise anew by mutation. The total 
number of dominant genes would increase slightly 
with each subsequent generation, until a point 
is reached (about 12 generations) where the rate 
90 offspring to the next generation as compared 
with AA and Aa individuals, each of whom contrib-
utes 100 offspring. It may be noticed, once again, 
that the rate of decline of the recessive homozy-
gotes becomes slower as the selection coefﬁ cient 
decreases in value.
 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
1% Selection
10% Selection
50% Selection
Complete Selection
Generations
Recessive Homozygotes (%)
Figure 6.4 Different intensities of selection against recessive homozy-
gotes occurring initially (“0” generation) at a frequency of 1.0 percent. The 
elimination of recessive individuals per generation proceeds at a slower pace as 
the strength of selection decreases.
 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
73
TABLE 6.5  Declines in Frequencies 
of Recessive Homozygotes 
Based on Different Values of 
the Selection Coefficient(s)
 Generations 
s = 1.0 
s = 0.50 
s = 0.10 
s = 0.01
 
0 
1.00* 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00
 
10 
0.25 
0.46 
0.84 
0.98
 
20 
0.11 
0.26 
0.71 
0.97
* The initial frequency of the recessive homozygote in all cases is 
1 percent, as in ﬁ gure 6.4.

20
15
10
5
0
Generations
Number of Dominant Genes (A)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
100
Figure 6.5 Establisment of a constant level of a semilethal dominant gene (A) in a 
population over the course of several generations. The ﬁ xed number of new dominant genes 
introduced each generation through mutations from a to A eventually exactly balances the 
number of dominant genes selectively eliminated each generation. In this particular case, an 
equilibrium is reached (after about 12 generations) when the total number of dominant genes 
is approximately 20.
TABLE 6.6  Equilibrium Frequency of a Dominant Gene
Conditions:  1.  Size of Population: 500,000 Individuals
  
  2.  Mutation Rate (a           A): 1 in 100,000
  
  3.  Selection Coef  cient (s) : 0.5 (semilethal)
 
Dominant Gene A
 
 
Recessive 
Left Over from 
Newly
 Generation 
Gene a 
Former Generations 
Mutated 
Total
 
0 
1,000,000 
— 
— 
—
 
1 
1,000,000* 
— 
10 
10
 
2 
1,000,000 
5  
10 
15
 
3 
1,000,000 
5 + 2.5  
10 
17.5
 
4 
1,000,000 
5 + 2.5 + 1.25 
10 
18.75
 
5 
1,000,000 
5 + 2.5 + 1.25 + 0.625  
10 
19.375 
 
∝ 
1,000,000 
5  + 2.5  + 1.25  + 0.625 + 0.3125 +… 
10 
20.00
*The total number of recessive genes should be reduced by the total number of dominant genes each generation, but this minor correction would be 
inconsequential.
74 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
75
pair of chromosomes were thus all exposed in the 
homozygous state. All kinds of recessive genes 
were uncovered in different chromosomes, as 
exempliﬁ ed by those unmasked in one particu-
lar chromosome, known simply as “the second.” 
About 33 percent of the second chromosomes har-
bored one or more recessive genes that proved to 
be lethal or semilethal to ﬂ ies carrying the second 
chromosome in duplicate. An astonishing number 
of second chromosomes—93 percent—contained 
genes that produced subvital or mildly incapacitat-
ing effects when present in the homozygous state. 
Other unmasked recessive genes resulted in steril-
ity of the ﬂ ies or severely retarded the developmen-
tal rates of the ﬂ ies. All these ﬂ ies were normal in 
appearance when originally taken from nature. It 
is apparent that very few, if any, outwardly normal 
ﬂ ies in natural populations are free of hidden detri-
mental recessive genes.
GENETIC LOAD IN 
HUMAN POPULATIONS
The study of the concealed variability, or genetic 
load, in humans cannot be approached, for obvious 
reasons, by the experimental breeding techniques 
used with fruit ﬂ ies. Estimates of the genetic load in 
the human population have been based principally 
on the incidence of defective offspring from  matings 
of close relatives (consanguineous matings). It can 
be safely stated that every human  individual con-
tains at least one newly mutated gene. It can also 
be accepted that any crop of gametes contains, in 
addition to one or more mutations of recent origin, 
at least 10 mutant genes that arose in the individu-
als of preceding generations and that have accu-
mulated in the population. The average person is 
said to harbor four concealed lethal genes, each of 
which, if homozygous, is capable of causing death 
between birth and maturity. The most conservative 
estimates place the incidence of deformities to det-
rimental mutant genes in the vicinity of 2 per 1,000 
births. It is evident that humans are not exempt 
from their share of detrimental genes. 
of elimination of the abnormal dominant gene 
balances the rate of mutation. In other words, 
the inﬂ ow of new dominant alleles by mutation 
in each generation is balanced by the outﬂ ow or 
elimination of the dominant genes in each genera-
tion by selection.
The equilibrium frequency of a detrimental 
dominant gene in a population can be altered by 
changing the rate of loss of the gene in question. 
In humans, retinoblastoma, or cancer of the eye 
in newborn babies, has until recently been a fatal 
condition caused by a dominant mutant gene. With 
modern medical treatment, approximately 95 per-
cent of the afﬂ icted infants can be saved. The effect 
of increasing the reproductive ﬁ tness of the survi-
vors is to raise the frequency of the detrimental 
dominant gene in the human population. The accu-
mulation of deleterious genes in the human gene 
pool has been a matter of awareness and concern.
CONCEALED VARIABILITY 
IN NATURAL POPULATIONS
From what we have already learned, we should 
expect to ﬁ nd in natural populations a large num-
ber of deleterious recessive genes concealed in 
the heterozygous state. It may seem that this 
expectation is based more on theoretical deduc-
tion than on actual demonstration. This is not 
entirely the case. Penetrating studies by a number 
of investigators of several species of the fruit ﬂ y 
Drosophila have unmistakably indicated an enor-
mous store of recessive mutant genes harbored by 
individuals in nature. We may take as an illustra-
tive example the kinds and incidence of reces-
sive genes detected in Drosophila pseudobscura 
from California populations. The following data 
are derived from the studies of the late geneticist 
Theodosius Dobzhansky.
Flies were collected from nature, and a series 
of elaborate crosses were performed in the labo-
ratory to yield offspring in which one pair of 
chromosomes carried an identical set of genes. 
The formerly hidden recessive genes in a given 

Fitness for
Fitness for
A. Directional selection
B. Stabilizing selection
Fitness for
C. Disruptive selection
Figure 6.6 Schematic representation of three types of selection and their effects. Each curve represents the nor-
mal distribution of the trait in a population. From top to bottom, the lower curves show the expected distribution after the impact 
of selection. (A) Directional selection. The adaptive norm changes as less adapted genotypes are replaced by better adapted 
genotypes. (B) Stabilizing selection. The intermediate values for a given trait are favored (preserved) and the shape of the 
curve narrows through the elimination of the carriers of the extreme values. (C) Disruptive selection. Two adaptive norms are 
generated when the population exists in a heterogeneous environment.
76 
Understanding Evolution
selection. The curve of distribution shifts to the 
right (ﬁ g. 6.6A) as the darker varieties supplant the 
formerly abundant light-colored moths.
The selection process may take other forms. 
Stabilizing selection acts to reduce the array of 
gene complexes that can be expressed in a popula-
tion. As seen in ﬁ gure 6.6B, the shape of the curve 
tends to narrow through the continual elimination 
of the less-adapted individuals at the extremes 
of the distribution curve. Stated differently, the 
GENERAL EFFECTS OF SELECTION
In our discussion thus far, we have seen that the 
selection process favors individuals who are best 
adapted to new situations or to new ecological 
opportunities. Such selection is said to be direc-
tional because the norm for the population is 
shifted with time in one direction (ﬁ g. 6.6A). The 
selection for melanic varieties of moths in indus-
trial areas (see chapter 7) exempliﬁ es directional 

 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
77
the highest ﬁ tness and the intermediate values are 
relatively disadvantageous in terms of reproduc-
tive effectiveness. It is, essentially, selection for 
diversiﬁ cation with respect to a trait. The shell 
patterns of limpets (marine molluscs) form a con-
tinuum ranging from pure white to dark tan. Lim-
pets typically dwell in one of two distinct habitats, 
attaching to either white gooseneck barnacles or 
tan-colored rocks. As might be expected, the light-
colored limpets seek the protection of the white 
barnacles, whereas the tan limpets live by choice 
almost exclusively on the dark rocks. Limpets of 
intermediate shell patterns are conspicuous and 
are intensely selected against by predatory shore 
birds. If this disruptive type of selection (favoring 
the extremes) were to be accom-
panied by the sexual isolation of 
the two types of limpets, two new 
species could arise. The mode 
of origin of species is treated in 
detail in a subsequent chapter.
NATURAL SELECTION 
AND PREGNANCY LOSS
We remarked earlier (chapter 4) 
that there is a large natural loss 
of human embryos in pregnancy. 
The important consideration now 
is the high efﬁ ciency with which 
nature eliminates chromosomally 
abnormal embryos during the 
course of pregnancy. For every 
1,000 chromosomal abnormali-
ties that are present in embryos 
in the uterus, only 6 are expected 
to survive to the point of a live 
birth. Thus 99.4 percent of the 
chromosomal abnormalities are 
eliminated 
naturally 
through 
spontaneous abortion.
We may direct our attention 
to the 0.6 percent of newborn 
infants affected with a chromo-
somal abnormality. As seen in 
intermediate values for a given trait are favored 
over the extreme values. The birth weight of new-
borns provides an instructive example of a human 
characteristic that has been subjected to stabilizing 
selection (ﬁ g. 6.7). The optimum birth weight is 
7.3 pounds; newborn infants less than 5.5 pounds 
and greater than 10 pounds have the highest prob-
ability of mortality. Given the strong stabilizing 
inﬂ uence of weeding out the extremes, the opti-
mum birth weight is associated with the lowest 
mortality. The curve for mortality is virtually the 
complement of the curve for survival.
Disruptive selection is the most unusual of 
the three types of selection (ﬁ g. 6.6C). This form 
of selection occurs when the extreme values have 
20
15
10
5
10
20
30
50
70
100
5
7
3
2
2
3
4
5
6
Birth weight in pounds
Percent of births in population
Percent infant mortality
7
8
9
10
births in population
infant mortality
Figure 6.7 The distribution of birth weights of human newborns and the 
mortality of the various birth-weight classes. The histogram shows the proportions of 
the population falling into the various birth-weight classes. The mean birth weight is 
7.1 pounds. The curve of mortality in relation to birth weight reveals that the lowest 
mortality is associated with the optimum birth weight (7.3 pounds). Recent medical 
advances have reduced mortality rates for small and larger babies. 
(Based on data by Karn and Penrose, 1951.)

Conception
Selective Forces Operating in Humans
Pregnancy loss
Lethal
• Most monosomics
• Trisomics
• Polyploids
Liveborn
Viable
semisterile
Balanced
translocations
Viable
fertile
• XXX
• XYY
Viable but
nonreproductive
• Trisomy 13
• Trisomy 18
• Trisomy 21
Viable
sterile
• XO
• XXY
Figure 6.8 Natural selection operates in human populations to ensure the reduced survival and 
minimal reproductive potential of individuals with major chromosomal abnormalities.
Source: Data from Chandley, 1981.
78 
Understanding Evolution
Nature has created a great barrier to the per-
petuation of chromosomally abnormal offspring. 
Natural selection is not perfect, however. Some 
chromosomally abnormal fetuses escape nature’s 
screening mechanism and survive to term. 
SEXUAL SELECTION
Thus far we have focused on Darwin’s concept of 
natural selection. In Darwin’s seminal 1859 work, 
The Origin of Species the notion of sexual selection 
was ﬁ rst conceived. Later, in 1871, Darwin reﬁ ned 
his ideas and devoted much of The Descent of Man 
and Selection in Relation to Sex to this subject. 
Darwin proposed sexual selection as the mecha-
nism to explain the accentuation of apparently non-
essential features to increase an individual’s chance 
of reproducing. In The Origin of Species, Darwin 
described sexual selection as the “struggle between 
the individuals of one sex, generally the males, for 
the possession of the other sex”. In The Desent of 
Man, Darwin further noted: 
The sexual struggle is of two kinds: in the one it 
is between the individuals of the same sex, gener-
ally the males, in order to drive away or kill their 
rivals, the females remaining passive; while in 
the other, the struggle is likewise between the 
ﬁ gure 6.8, some members of this affected group 
comprise the 45 XO (Turner Syndrome) and 47 XXY 
(Klinefelter Syndrome) conditions. These individu-
als are effectively eliminated from the reproductive 
pool by their sterility. In contrast, semisterile carriers 
of balanced translocation tend to be normal pheno-
typically but are at risk of having abnormal children. 
The risk, however, is reduced appreciably by the 
segregation of unbalanced chromosome comple-
ments in gametes that are likely to be inviable.
From the perspective of natural selection, 
the XXX females and the XYY males represent 
an instructive group. Both types of individuals are 
usually fertile, and their children are chromoso-
mally normal (XX daughters and XY sons). Some 
mechanism operates during meiosis to eliminate 
the extra X chromosome from the egg, or the 
extra Y chromosome from the sperm. Thus, natu-
ral selection has modiﬁ ed the meiotic divisions to 
ensure that only normal haploid gametes are pro-
duced by XXX females and XXY males.
The salient feature of the foregoing consider-
ations is the efﬁ cacy with which natural selection 
eliminates chromosomally abnormal conceptuses— 
largely through pregnancy loss and by sterility 
or special forms of meiosis that eliminate chro-
mosome complements with extra chromosomes. 

 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
79
Sexual selection is about Darwinian ﬁ tness 
in the strictest possible way. The measure of Dar-
winian ﬁ tness is the production of fertile offspring 
who themselves reproduce. Survival is a necessary 
prerequisite for mating, but in sexual selection, 
who actually mates is paramount. Sexual selection 
differs from natural selection in that it relates to 
selection occurring within a species (intraspeciﬁ c 
selection) rather than selection occurring between 
species (interspeciﬁ c selection). Thus, while 
natural selection typically involves some type of 
interaction (such as competition for resources) 
between different species or between a species and 
the forces of nature, in sexual selection the inter-
actions are framed completely within one spe-
cies and revolve around reproduction rather than 
survival.
Sometimes sexual selection appears to be in 
opposition to natural selection. Darwin was keenly 
aware of this phenomenon and used the peacock as 
a prime example. In 1860 Darwin wrote his Amer-
ican friend, botanist Asa Gray, saying, “The sight 
of a feather in a peacock’s tail, whenever I gaze at 
it, makes me sick.” Darwin wondered whether the 
expenditure of effort and energy necessary to grow 
and maintain the most elaborate plumage to attract 
admiring pea hens might endanger the adorned 
males and thus ultimately make possessing these 
qualities disadvantageous to general ﬁ tness.
The contentious handicap principle, ﬁ rst 
articulated by Israeli zoologist Amotz Zahavi in 
the 1970s and since then by others, has been evoked 
to explain this apparent paradox. The basic tenet 
of the handicap principle is that sending false 
information is disadvantageous (i.e., that it is in 
the best interest of all concerned that informa-
tion communicated between organisms is honest). 
According to Zahavi, 
An individual with a well developed sexually 
selected character [such as a peacock’s ﬂ ashy tail] 
is an individual which has survived a test. . . . 
Females which selected males with the most 
developed characters can be sure that they have 
selected from among the best genotypes of the 
male population. 
individuals of the same sex, in order to excite or 
charm those of the opposite sex, generally the 
females, which no longer remain passive, but 
select the more agreeable partners.
In other words, for Darwin, sexual selection 
is a two-sided coin, male–male competition (also 
called intrasexual selection) resulting in horns, 
antlers, and other armaments for males to ﬁ ght 
and compete for sexual access to passive females, 
and female choice (also called intersexual selec-
tion) in which characteristics such as a male bird’s 
elaborate plumage attract the attention of observ-
ing females, resulting in the most attractive male 
suitor being selected as mate by the proactive 
female. Victorian England was not quite ready for 
the notion of female choice and largely ignored 
Darwin’s offensive suggestions.
In intrasexual selection (male–male compe-
tition), selection favors those characteristics that 
make males better able to compete with one another 
for access to females. Females have no choice in the 
mating process; they are the sexual possession of 
whichever male wins the ritualized or actual ﬁ ghts 
between rival males. Male success is typically a 
function of overall size and the enlargement of the 
anatomical features used for ﬁ ghting or display, 
such as teeth, antlers, and tusks. In intersexual selec-
tion (female choice), nature selects for traits that 
make males more attractive to the female, who then 
chooses which male or males have the most attrac-
tive traits. These sexy traits often translate into desir-
able genes that beneﬁ t the female and her offspring.
A female’s control over reproduction may not 
end with copulation. One extreme form of female 
choice, called “cryptic female choice,” is the notion 
that females of some species may be able to select 
which male sperm fertilizes her eggs. The concept 
of cryptic female choice posits that there are post-
copulatory mechanisms by which females inﬂ u-
ence which of several sexual partners fathers her 
offspring, such as by choosing which size sperm or 
which sperm packet she uses to fertilize her eggs. 
While highly controversial, cryptic female choice 
has been described in a variety of species and may 
be a common aspect of reproduction.

Head hair
Facial hair
Larynx
Shoulders
Chest
Arms
Body hair
Breasts
Muscles
Pubic hair
Hips
Hands
Feet
Overall
size
Overall
size
Figure 6.9 Generalized human secondary sex characteristics: Although there is a great deal of 
variation in secondary sex characteristics between the sexes and among different populations, there are many 
generalizable differences associated with mature adult males versus mature adult females. Table 6.7 lists some 
of the most common variations.
80 
Understanding Evolution
are truly best adapted to the environment. An 
alternative resolution to the peacock dilemma is 
that reproductive success trumps survival if the 
end result is leaving more offspring, the deﬁ ning 
principle of Darwinian ﬁ tness. In this way “sur-
vival of the ﬁ ttest” does not necessarily select 
for the biggest, strongest, or even the most intel-
ligent, but for the sexiest, even if that phenotype 
lasts only long enough to win the war of repro-
duction and pass more genes to the following 
generation.
We can reconcile elaborate sexual displays 
that put its owner at risk if those traits are in fact 
reliable indicators of ﬁ tness. In the case of the 
peacock, by maintaining such an elaborate dis-
play the male peacock demonstrates that he must 
be relatively free of infection, poor nutrition, 
parasites, and truly possess other real-life indict-
ors of ﬁ tness. The handicap hypothesis argues 
that sexual selection is simply another form of 
natural selection in which sexiness equates with 
not only reproductive prowess, but to genes that 

 
CHAPTER 6 Concept of Selection 
81
are many well-known examples of secondary sex 
characteristics, including the ornamental feathers 
in birds, the presence or absence of horns, tusks, 
and antlers, the lion’s mane, variation in body size 
(smaller vs. larger), different coloration, and so 
on. In humans, sexual dimorphism is initiated by 
the hormonal changes that coincide with puberty. 
Although human secondary sex characteristics 
show tremendous normal variation between indi-
viduals and across populations, there are many 
generalizable differences between mature adult 
males and mature adult females, such as modest 
body size differences, variation in breast develop-
ment, voice tone, larynx growth, hormonal domi-
nance (androgenic vs. estrogenic), distribution and 
amount of hair, distribution of sweat glands, fat 
distribution, and so on, as illustrated in ﬁ gure 6.9 
and listed in table 6.7.
Phenotypic variation between the sexes of the 
same species is known as sexual dimorphism, from 
the Greek (di  two; morphism  form or mor-
phology). Secondary sex characteristics evolved 
to provide reproductive advantages to their pos-
sessors by making them more attractive or better 
able to win competition between rivals for mates.  
Most sexually dimorphic traits arise or are asso-
ciated with sexual maturation and are called sec-
ondary sexual characteristics (as compared to 
primary sexual characteristics, such as ovaries 
and testes). The appearance of secondary sexual 
characteristics is determined by sex hormones. In 
many species, especially long-lived species such 
as humans and turtles, it takes many years or even 
decades before secondary sex characteristics are 
apparent. Secondary sex characters are advertise-
ments of sexuality and sexiness and hence are 
pivotal to mating and reproductive success. There 
Characteristic
Males
Females
Head Hair
More prone to balding with age
Less prone to balding with age
Facial Hair
Robust, prominent throughout life
Faint, increases with age
Overall Size
Taller and heavier
Smaller and lighter
Larynx (Adam’s apple)
Larger
Smaller
Shoulder
Broader, squarer
Rounded, sloping
Chest
Larger in all dimensions
Smaller in all dimensions
Body Hair
Prominent, especially chest, abdomen and arms
Sparse
Breasts
Unenlarged breasts
Enlarged breasts and nipples
Muscles
Larger, more obvious
Smaller, largely hidden
Arms
Longer, thicker
Shorter, thinner
Pubic Hair
Triangle-shaped
V-shaped
Hips
Narrower
Wider, rounded
Hands & Feet
Larger, stouter
Smaller, narrower
Hormones
Androgenic
Estrogenic
Voice Change at Puberty
Pronounced change, deeper
None
Fat Deposits
Mainly abdomen and waist
Buttocks, thighs, hips
Body Shape
Apple
Pear
Skin Texture
Coarser
Smoother
TABLE 6.7 Human Secondary Sex Characteristics

82
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
7 SELECTION IN ACTION
We have seen that many generations of 
persistent selection are required to drastically 
reduce the frequency of an unfavorable mutant 
gene in a population. Likewise, it generally takes 
an inordinately long period of time for a new 
favorable mutant gene to replace its allele through-
out a large population. Yet, we have encountered 
situations in nature in which a favorable mutation 
has spread through a population in a compara-
tively short span of years. We shall look at some 
outstanding examples in which we have actually 
observed evolution in progress.
INDUSTRIAL MELANISM
One of the most spectacular evolutionary changes 
witnessed by us has been the emergence and pre-
dominance in modern times of dark, or melanic,
varieties of moths in the industrial areas of England 
and continental Europe. Slightly more than a cen-
tury ago dark-colored moths were exceptional. The 
typical moth in the early 1800s had a light color pat-
tern, which blended with the light coloration of tree 
trunks on which the moths alighted. But then the 
industrial revolution intervened to alter materially 
the character of the countryside. As soot and other 
industrial wastes poured over rural areas, the veg-
etation became increasingly coated and darkened by 
black smoke particles. In areas heavily contaminated 
with soot, the formerly abundant light-colored moths 
were gradually supplanted by the darker varieties. 
This dramatic change in the coloration of moths has 
been termed industrial melanism. At least 70 spe-
cies of moths in England have been so affected by 
the human disturbance of the environment.
Beginning in the late 1930s and 1940s sev-
eral scientists, particuarly E. B. Ford and H. B. D. 
Kettlewell at the University of Oxford, analyzed 
the phenomenon of industrial melanism. Kettlewell 
photographed the light and dark forms of the pep-
pered moth, Biston betularia, against two different 
backgrounds (ﬁ g. 7.1). The light variety is con-
cealed and the dark form is clearly visible when the 
moths rest on a light lichen-coated trunk of an oak 
tree in an unpolluted rural district. Against a sooty 
black oak trunk, the light form is conspicuous and 
the dark form is well camouﬂ aged. Records of the 

 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
83
dark form of the peppered moth date back to 1848, 
when its occurrence was reported at Manchester 
in England. At that time, the dark form comprised 
less than 1 percent of the population. By 1898, 
only 50 years later, the dark form had come to 
dominate the Manchester locale, having attained a 
remarkably high frequency of occurrence estimated 
at 95 percent. In fact, the incidence of the melanic 
type has reached 90 percent or more in most Brit-
ish industrial areas.
The rapid spread of the dark variety of moth 
is certainly understandable. The dark variants are 
protectively colored in the smoke-polluted indus-
trial regions. They more easily escape detection by 
predators, namely, insect-eating birds. Actual ﬁ lms 
taken by Kettlewell and Niko Tinbergen revealed 
that birds prey on the moths in a selective manner. 
That is to say, in woodlands polluted by industry, 
predatory birds more often capture the conspicu-
ous light-colored moths. In a single day, the num-
bers of light forms in an industrial area may be 
pared by as much as one-half by bird predation.
Experimental breeding tests have 
demonstrated that the two varieties dif-
fer principally by a single gene, with 
the dark variant dominant to the light 
one. The dominant mutant allele was ini-
tially disadvantageous. However, as an 
indirect consequence of industrializa-
tion, the mutant allele became favored 
by natural selection and spread rapidly 
in populations in a comparatively short 
period of time. In unpolluted or nonin-
dustrial areas in western England and 
northern Scotland, the dominant mutant 
allele does not confer an advantage on 
its bearers and the light recessive moth 
remains the prevalent type.
One of the many impressive fea-
tures of Kettlewell’s studies lies in the 
unequivocal identiﬁ cation of the select-
ing agent (bird predation). Selection, 
we may recall, has been deﬁ ned as dif-
ferential reproduction. The act of selec-
tion in itself does not reveal the factors 
or agencies that enable one genotype to leave 
more offspring than another. We may demonstrate 
the existence of selection, yet remain bafﬂ ed as to 
the precise causative agent of selection. We might 
have reasonably suspected that predatory birds 
were directly responsible for the differential suc-
cess of the melanic forms in survival and repro-
duction, but Kettlewell’s laboriously accumulated 
data provided that all-important, often elusive 
ingredient: veriﬁ able evidence.
If the environment of the peppered moth were 
to become altered again, natural selection would 
be expected to favor the light variety again. In the 
1950s, the British Parliament passed the Clean Air 
Act, which decreed, among other things, that fac-
tories must switch from soft high-sulfur (sooty) 
coal to less smoky fuels. The enforcement of this 
enlightened smoke-abatement law has led to a 
marked reduction in the amount of soot in the 
atmosphere. In the 1970s, University of Manchester 
biologist L. M. Cook and his colleagues reported a 
small but signiﬁ cant increase in the frequency of 
Figure 7.1 Dark and light forms of the peppered moth (Biston 
betularia) clinging to a soot-blackened oak tree in Birmingham, England 
(right) and to a light, lichen-coated oak tree in an unpolluted region (left). 
Arrow points to a barely visible light peppered moth.

The different cell types do not survive fortuitously. 
Rather, they have been selected for their favorable 
attributes in perpetuating the existence of the cancer-
ous growth, much to the detriment of the host. Evi-
dently, the process of selection is not conﬁ ned only 
to populations of organisms—selection operates on 
the cellular level as well!
Carcinogen-induced change
Normal cell
Tumor cell
Tumor cell
variants
Human solid
malignancy
Nonantigenic
Invasive
Metastatic
Requiring fewer
growth factors
Clonal expansion of
surviving cell
variants
Figure 7.2 Tumor cell heterogeneity. New subpopulations arise 
continually from the descendants of the original malignant cell. Some 
subpopulations persist; those that survive and expand differ from each 
other in certain properties but all are adept at evading host defenses.
the light-colored peppered moth in the Manchester 
area. This is further substantiation of the action 
and efﬁ cacy of natural selection. In response to 
recent criticism of Kettlewell’s work, University 
of Cambridge geneticist Michael E. N. Majerus 
replicated this classic experiment, concluding that 
“differential bird predation here is a major factor 
responsible for the decline of carbonaria (the dark 
colored moth) frequency in Cambridge between 
2001 and 2007,” thus vindicating this enduring 
example of natural selection in action.
CANCER CELL 
HETEROGENEITY
Until recently, there has been a tendency 
to focus almost exclusively on envi-
ronmental factors or carcinogens in the 
search for the causes of cancer. It can-
not be denied that environmental pollut-
ants, such as hydrocarbons, are involved 
in the etiology of malignancy. But, there 
is also the realization that carcinogens 
damage DNA, and that the roots of can-
cer reside in the genes. Current infor-
mation indicates that the development 
of malignancy is a multi-step process 
involving sequential changes at the 
DNA level. The process begins when a 
cell’s DNA is altered by some form of 
mutation which disrupts the harmonious 
checks and balances that regulate nor-
mal cell growth.
Human tumors are clonal—that is, 
they are derived from a single progeni-
tor cell. However, as the tumor grows, the 
constituent cells become extremely hetero-
geneous. The heterogeneity represents the 
emergence of subpopulations, or subclones, 
of variant cell types. These subclones dif-
fer in chromosome numbers, invasiveness, 
growth rate, responsiveness to blood-borne 
antibodies, and ability to metastasize, or 
invade other areas of the body (ﬁ g. 7.2). 
84 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
85
development in the ﬁ eld of infectious diseases 
over the past decade. Bacteria now pass on their 
resistance to antibiotics faster than people spread 
the infectious bacteria.
Mutations have occurred in bacterial popula-
tions that enable the mutant bacterial cells to sur-
vive in the presence of the drug. Here again we 
notice that mutations furnish the source of evolu-
tionary changes and that the fate of the mutant 
gene is governed by selection. In an environment 
free of antibiotics, organisms that are resistant to 
antibiotic are rare and generally go undetected. In 
an environment changed by the addition of a drug, 
the drug-resistant mutants are favored and sup-
plant the previously normal bacterial strains. 
It might be thought that the mutations confer-
ring resistance are actually caused or induced by 
the drug. This is not the case. Drug-resistant muta-
tions arise randomly in bacterial cells, irrespective 
of the presence or absence of the drug. An experi-
ment devised by the geneticist Joshua Lederberg 
provides evidence that the drug acts as a selecting 
agent, permitting preexisting mutations to express 
themselves. As seen in ﬁ gure 7.3, colonies of 
bacteria were grown on a streptomycin-free agar 
medium in a petri plate. When the agar surface of 
this plate was pressed gently on a piece of ster-
ile velvet, some cells from each bacterial colony 
clung to the ﬁ ne ﬁ bers of the velvet. The imprinted 
velvet could now be used to transfer the bacte-
rial colonies onto a second agar plate. More than 
one replica of the original bacterial growth can be 
made by pressing several agar plates on the same 
area of velvet. This ingenious technique has been 
appropriately called replica plating. 
In preparing the replicas, Lederberg used agar 
plates containing streptomycin. On these agar 
plates, only bacterial colonies resistant to strep-
tomycin grew. In the case depicted in ﬁ gure 7.3, 
one colony was resistant. Signiﬁ cantly, this one 
resistant colony was found in exactly the same 
position in all replica plates. If mutations arose 
in response to exposure to a drug, it is hardly to 
be expected that mutant bacterial colonies would 
arise in precisely the same site on each occasion. 
The subpopulations of cells in a solid tumor 
are continually changing. New variant subpopula-
tions arise unceasingly, each population attempt-
ing to gain a growth advantage over the earlier 
population. The numbers of chromosomes become 
altered with time; in fact, chromosomal changes 
are almost a rule in cancer lineages. Most sub-
populations are eliminated because of metabolic 
disadvantage or immunologic destruction. Those 
that prevail, or are selectively favored, have the 
greatest resistance to anticancer drugs.
The selection process is vividly revealed by 
the tumor’s ability for angiogenesis and metasta-
sis. As a solid tumor grows beyond the diameter of 
2 millimeters, its nutritional requirements cannot 
be satisﬁ ed solely by the process of diffusion. Sub-
clones of cell types within the tumor actually elicit 
the growth of new blood vessels from surround-
ing host tissue. The new growth of blood vessels is 
termed angiogenesis. The tumor cells themselves 
synthesize and release the growth factors that 
stimulate the formation of microvessels. Thus, the 
progression of cancer is dependent on the selection 
of potent cells that actually synthesize and secrete 
their own factors for the growth of blood vessels 
from pre-existing vessels. Similarly, the metastasis 
of a tumor to a distant site awaits the emergence 
of cell types that can direct the tumor to particular 
organs in the body. The organ chosen is usually 
one that provides a highly favorable environment 
for growth of the tumor. 
SELECTION FOR RESISTANCE
Penicillin, sulfonamides (sulfa drugs), strepto-
mycin, and other modern antibiotic agents made 
front-page headlines when ﬁ rst introduced. These 
wonder drugs were exceptionally effective against 
certain disease-producing bacteria and contrib-
uted immeasurably to the saving of human lives in 
World War II. However, the effectiveness of these 
drugs has been reduced by the emergence of resis-
tant strains of bacteria. Medical authorities regard 
the rise of resistant bacteria as the most serious 

Spontaneous origin of mutation
Plate 1
Bacterial colonies 
imprinted on velvet
Bacteria grown in
absence of streptomycin
Remaining colonies
on plate
Only one
colony grows
Plate pressed on imprinted velvet;
colonies adhere to plate
Sterile plate
with streptomycin
Plate 2
Isolation and test of colonies
Original
plate 1
All tubes contain streptomycin
Growth
(streptomycin-resistant)
No growth
(streptomycin-sensitive)
Figure 7.3 Experiment by Joshua Lederberg revealing that drug-resistant 
mutations in bacterial cells had not been induced by the drug but had already 
been present prior to exposure of the bacteria to the drug.
86 
Understanding Evolution

Chloramphenicol
Tetracycline
Streptomycin
Sulfanilamide
Bacterial
plasmids
 
E. coli
Bacterial
main DNA
Figure 7.4 A simpli  ed map of an R plasmid, showing four genetic determinants of 
resistance to four different antibiotics.
 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
87
the presence of a particular antibiotic. The mutation 
of a gene from sensitivity to resistance would be 
expected to occur about once in several million divi-
sions, and cells containing the mutant gene would 
be expected to be resistant to only one particular 
antibiotic. It would therefore come as an unforeseen 
surprise to encounter bacteria that instantaneously 
become resistant to several antibiotics.
In 1955, a Japanese woman curtailed her visit 
to Hong Kong because of an unmanageable case 
of bacillary dysentery, an intestinal inﬂ ammation 
caused by bacteria of the genus Shigella. Upon cul-
ture, her intestinal Shigellae proved to be unusual. 
They were found to be resistant simultaneously to 
four antibiotics commonly used to control bacte-
rial infections—namely, sulfanilamide, streptomy-
cin, chloramphenicol, and tetracycline. Since the 
late 1950s, there have been innumerable outbreaks 
of intractable dysentery in Japan, all reﬂ ecting the 
rapid increase of multiply drug-resistant Shigella 
dysenteriae. Today, many more strains of bacteria 
are resistant to multiple antibiotics and their inci-
dence is increasing at an alarming rate.
A bacterial cell contains a main, large circu-
lar strand of DNA and smaller circular pieces of 
DNA called plasmids (ﬁ g. 7.4). Plasmids do not 
have the same sequences of nucleic acid bases 
as the main (“chromosomal”) DNA and replicate 
In other words, a haphazard or random distribution 
of resistant bacterial colonies, without restraint or 
attention to location in the agar plate, would be 
expected if the mutations did not already exist in 
the original bacterial colonies.
Now, we can return to the original plate, as 
Lederberg did, and test samples of the original 
bacterial colonies in a test tube for sensitivity or 
resistance to streptomycin (bottom part of ﬁ g. 7.3). 
It is noteworthy that the bacterial colonies on the 
original plate had not been previously in contact 
with the drug. When these original colonies were 
isolated and tested for resistance to streptomycin, 
only one colony proved to be resistant. This one 
colony occupied a position on the original plate 
identical with the site of the resistant colony on the 
replica plates. The experiment demonstrated con-
clusively that the mutation had not been induced 
by streptomycin but was already present before 
exposure to the drug.
MULTIPLE ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria 
appears deceptively simple. As described above, a 
spontaneous mutation conferring resistance permits 
the selective multiplication of mutant bacteria in 

resistance to antibiotics has become a serious 
problem in human and veterinary medicine.
Remarkably, the resistance genes of a plasmid 
can become integrated into the bacterial “chromo-
some” (main DNA) and move from one plasmid 
to another. Resistance genes are found in highly 
mobile elements that molecular geneticists refer 
to as transposable elements, or transposons. As 
seen in ﬁ gure 7.5, a transposon has an appealing 
architecture. The resistance gene (for tetracy-
cline, in this example) is ﬂ anked on both sides by 
nucleotide sequences that are complementary to 
each other. These repeated sequences are called 
insertion sequences, since they are involved only 
in the insertion of a gene (resistance gene, in this 
case) into DNA molecules. The complementary 
sequences form the stem of a “lollipop” during 
the insertion of the gene, which resides in the 
head of the lollipop. Strange as it may seem, we 
identify the existence and position of a transposon 
by the lollipop conﬁ guration in a DNA prepara-
tion. Transposons can move readily between plas-
mids as well as integrate into bacterial or viral 
“chromosomes.” 
independently of the main DNA. A single bacterial 
cell can harbor as many as 25 plasmids, and each 
plasmid can carry from 4 to 250 genes, depending 
on the size of the ring. Plasmids may be viewed 
as accessory “chromosomes” serving varied func-
tions. One type of plasmid, dubbed the resistance 
(R) plasmid, is clearly adapted to providing the 
bacterium with substantial resistance to antibiotics. 
As shown in ﬁ gure 7.4, four resistance genes, each 
coding an enzyme that inactivates a speciﬁ c antibi-
otic, are linked together on a single R plasmid.
The genetic determinants of an R factor plas-
mid can be transferred rapidly from one bacterium 
to another bacterium by cell-to-cell contact, in a 
process called conjugation. Ironically, R plasmids 
act like infectious agents as they expeditiously 
pass copies of themselves to other bacteria during 
conjugation. In a single conjugation event, several 
resistance genes can be instantly transferred. New 
bacterial strains evolved in a matter of months dur-
ing epidemics of bacterial dysentery in Japan. In 
1953, only 0.2 percent of the Shigellae isolated 
from Japanese patients were resistant to antibi-
otics. By 1965, the level had risen to 58 percent, 
with virtually all the pathogenic bacteria 
being resistant to the four aforementioned 
antibiotics.
Many of the patients who harbored 
drug-resistant Shigellae also quartered 
strains of the relatively harmless, common 
colon bacillus Escherichia coli, strains 
which were equally resistant to the four anti-
biotics. It is quite possible that the Shigel-
lae obtained their R plasmids from E. coli. 
There is now experimental evidence that 
resistance factors can be transferred indis-
criminately among different species—for 
example, E. coli can impart its R plasmids 
to Shigella dysenteriae, as well as to Sal-
monella typhosa (the causative agent of 
typhoid fever), Klebsiella pneumoniae 
(responsible for a virulent form of pneu-
monia), and Pasturella pestus (the bac-
terium involved in bubonic plague). The 
rise of pathogenic bacteria with multiple 
Tetracycline
CGTA
TACG
GCAT
5′
3′
3′
5′
CGTA
GCAT
CGTA
GCAT
ATGC
Figure 7.5 The structure of a transposon bearing a resistance 
gene for tetracycline and its conversion into a stem-loop 
conﬁ guration (“lollipop”).
88 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
89
DNA. The plasmids can be manipulated in such 
a fashion that they can carry genes from very 
distantly related organisms, including frogs, rab-
bits, and humans. This sophisticated technology 
involves the use of a special class of enzymes 
called restriction endonucleases. These enzymes 
act as chemical scissors; they cut a DNA strand at 
precise points.
Restriction endonucleases occur widely within 
the true bacteria and the extremophile bacteria or 
archaea (See chapter 14) where they function as 
a primitive immune systems defending prokary-
otic cells from foreign DNA originating in invad-
ing viruses. Over 3,500 different varieties of these 
enzymes have been identiﬁ ed and several hundred 
are commercially available. This makes restriction 
enzymes one of the largest group of enzymes that 
have the same basic function. This feature, along 
with their remarkable lack of sequence similarity, 
make them ideal subjects for evolutionary research.  
Each of these enzymes recognizes a particular short 
nucleotide sequence in any DNA exposed to it and 
snips the DNA at that point. If the sequence occurs 
more than once, as it generally does, the DNA 
molecules are cut in several fragments. The endo-
nucleases were originally discovered in bacteria in 
1970 by Werner Aber of the University of Basel 
(Switzerland) and by the team of Daniel Nathans 
and Hamilton D. Smith at Johns Hopkins University, 
for which achievement the three received the 1978 
Nobel Prize for Medicine. Among the ﬁ rst restric-
tion enzymes puriﬁ ed were EcoRI and EcoRV, from 
Escherichia coli, and HindII and HindIII, from 
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae. Some restriction enzymes 
and the base sequences they cleave are listed in 
table 7.1. As an example, EcoRI will cut a DNA 
molecule from any source at any point at which 
the nucleotide sequence GAATTC is encountered. 
Restriction enzymes get their names and number 
from the genus, species and strain in which they 
were found. For example, HindII was the second 
restriction enzyme found in Haemophilus inﬂ uen-
zae. These enzymes are also palindromes meaning 
that they read the same way forward and in reverse, 
like the English phrase “never odd or even”.
The transposable elements are not merely a 
curiosity of bacteria. Transposable elements have 
been discovered in yeast, the fruit ﬂ y, corn, and 
primates, including humans. Transposons are 
frequently spoken of as jumping genes. The pio-
neering studies on jumping genes in corn were 
performed in the 1940s by Barbara McClintock 
of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York. 
One cannot do justice to the analytical power of 
the innovative experiments conceived by her. It 
merits attention that on December 10, 1983, the 
Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology was 
awarded to Barbara McClintock for her discovery 
of unstable jumping genes. It took nearly 40 years 
for the genetic community to accept McClintock’s 
heterodox genes, since the notion that genes were 
unstable both in their location and in their function 
was too disruptive to accept.
There are many mutiples of relatively short 
sequences of nucleotides in the human genome, 
which we may call simply repetitive DNA. The 
large number of repetitive nucleotide sequences 
in humans represents an awesome potential for 
the jumping of genes from one segment of the 
DNA molecule to another. The short repeats can 
promote their own movement from one location 
in the DNA molecule to another. These jumping 
repeats tend to inactivate genes in their new loca-
tion or, at least, modify the expression of the genes 
in which they lodge. A stream of new information 
implicates transposable elements in several human 
genetic disorders, notably hemophilia A and type 1 
neuroﬁ bromatosis. In its usual location, the repeti-
tive piece of DNA lacks the capacity to direct the 
production of a protein. Its insertion, however, 
into a gene that does code for a protein leads to an 
abnormal protein product and the expression of a 
genetic defect. In large measure, jumping genes in 
humans act as mutagenic agents. 
RECOMBINANT DNA
The painstaking studies of bacterial plasmids by 
a host of investigators have paved the way for the 
imaginative use of plasmids as carriers of foreign 

Circular plasmid
DNA molecule
Linear plasmid DNA molecule
with cohesive ends
Plasmid DNA molecule
containing foreign DNA insert
Cleavage by
restriction
endonuclease
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
CC
C
C
C
C
C
C
CC
C
CC
C
Foreign gene sequence produced
by cutting chromosomal DNA with
the same restriction endonuclease
G
G
G
G
C
C
C
C
C
C
Figure 7.6 A recombinant DNA molecule, containing both plasmid (bacterial) DNA and human DNA. The circular 
plasmid DNA is cut by a restriction endonuclease that leaves cohesive single-stranded ends. A foreign (human) DNA sequence is 
generated by the same restriction endonuclease and, accordingly, has complementary cohesive ends that permit base-pair interactions.
90 
Understanding Evolution
of gene exchange between bacteria and archaea. 
The genes for restriction enzymes, like the genes 
for drug resistance, shufﬂ e between bacterial 
strains. Natural selection for variety continually 
occurs. This results in never-ending cycles of 
adaptation by both the bacteria and viral variants. 
As viruses mutate and make new attempts to evade 
the bacteria’s restriction enzymes, new generations 
of bacteria must either adapt (via the acquisition of 
new mutations) or fall victim to viral attack. This, 
in turn, selects for the next generation of viruses 
and the cycle continue like an arms race between 
warring armies.
Tens of thousands of human genes have 
already been isolated and cloned. An isolated 
human gene can be spliced into a plasmid that has 
been experimentally fragmented at speciﬁ c points 
by a restriction endonuclease (ﬁ g. 7.6). The out-
come is a new DNA circle, or recombinant DNA 
molecule, which contains both plasmid DNA and 
human DNA. This newly formed recombinant 
DNA molecule, when reintroduced into a bac-
terium, can replicate precisely and be passed on 
to daughter bacterial cells for many generations. 
Since their discovery, scientists have debated 
whether restriction enzymes evolved only once 
or arose independently more than once. Molecu-
lar data supports the view that this enzyme group 
evolved only once and then diversiﬁ ed. This process 
is believed to have been hastened by various types 
TABLE 7.1  Some Restriction Enzymes 
and the Base Sequences 
They Cleave
Bacterial source 
Enzyme 
Sequence*
Escherichia coli 
EcoRV 
5′ . . . G A T A T C . . . 3′
 
 
 
3′ . . . C T A T A G . . . 5′
Escherichia coli 
EcoRI 
5′ . . . G A A T T C . . . 3′ 
 
 
 
3′ . . . C T T A A G . . . 5′
Haemophilus  
HhaI 
5′ . . . G C G C . . . 3′ 
haemolyticus 
 
3′ . . . C G C G . . . 5′
Providencia 
PstI 
5′ . . . C T G C A G . . . 3′ 
stuarti 
 
3′ . . . G A C G T C . . . 5′
* The upstream portion of a gene sequence is referred to as the 5′ end; 
the downstream portion, the 3′ end. The lines show the location in DNA 
strands where the restriction enzymes cleaves the DNA.

Bacterial
plasmids
Restriction
site
Numerous daughter cells with
exogenous DNA sequences
Plasmid
Plasmid with
spliced DNA
Exogenous DNA
(gene for human
growth hormone)
Engineered
bacterial cell
Recombinant DNA
Bacterial
main DNA
E. coli
Figure 7.7 Production of virtually limitless quantities of an exogenous gene product (human growth factor, for 
example) is accomplished by inserting the exogenous gene in a bacterial plasmid.
 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
91
PRUDENT USE OF ANTIBIOTICS
The increasing number of bacteria that have 
evolved resistance to antibiotics is one of the best 
examples of evolution via natural selection in our 
daily lives.  When antibiotics were ﬁ rst discovered 
and later mass produced, they were exquisitely 
effective at rendering harmless a broad spectrum 
of formerly lethal bacteria. Most of us alive today 
do not remember the times before antibiotics when 
patients with bacterial infections were provided 
only palliative care because it was up to their own 
immune systems to effectively ﬁ ght their bacterial 
infections. The lack of prudent use of antibiotics has 
resulted in a situation that is almost unimaginable. 
Where would we be without effective antibiotics? 
How would we deal with widespread pandemics? 
Certainly there would be some adaptation. Some 
of us carry with us the legacy of bacterial resis-
tance. We are, after all, the descendants of those 
who survived the ravages of repeated plagues and 
other epidemics caused by bacterial disease. Some 
of us have strong and robust immune systems. And 
Given that a bacterial cell can divide every 30 to 
40 minutes, a single bacterium, under ideal grow-
ing conditions, can produce almost 70 billion new 
cells in 24 hours. At the same time, billions of 
copies of the product of the human gene become 
available!
This ingenious technique has permitted the 
large-scale transmission of genes that code for 
commercially indispensable molecules. As an 
admirable example, the insertion of the human 
insulin-producing gene into Escherichia coli 
has made possible the production of insulin in 
large quantities. Another notable example is the 
production of human growth hormone. In this 
instance, the genes coding for the polypeptide 
chains of the growth hormone were actually syn-
thesized chemically in the laboratory. The syn-
thetically created genes were incorporated into 
E. coli and efﬁ cient synthesis of human growth 
hormone was achieved (ﬁ g. 7.7). In addition to 
human insulin and growth hormone, many other 
valuable proteins have been produced by recom-
binant DNA technology.

92 
Understanding Evolution
and is a bellwether of microorganisms’ growing 
resistance to our dwindling arsenal of antibiot-
ics. Another nightmare from the past, tuberculosis 
(TB), is now increasingly being found in a multi-
drug-resistant form. Antibacterial soaps are ubiqui-
tous in our environment and may be a new danger 
on the horizon, selecting for an entirely new class 
of resistant bacteria. Whether this is a matter of 
concern is hotly debated. The recent installation of 
waterless handwash stations in most medical facil-
ities, hospitals, and some grocery stores appears to 
be a helpful public health initiative, but it may be a 
mechanism to provide additional opportunities for 
mutated bacteria to surface.
Greater education efforts focused on patients 
and medical personnel has brought about increased 
awareness and some change in behavior, especially 
within the medical community. The same cannot 
be said of the agricultural industry, which contin-
ues the widespread use of subtherapeutic doses of 
antibiotics as growth enhancers. These low-dose 
uses are especially good at selecting for resistant 
bacterial stains.
EVOLUTIONARY IMPLICATIONS
The evolutionary implications of increasing bac-
terial resistance to antibiotics are instructive. As 
with all organisms, bacteria are constantly evolv-
ing and changing so as to better survive in their 
environment. Hence, under conditions of wide-
spread use of antibiotics, mutated genes that 
provide resistance to antibiotics are relentlessly 
selected for by natural selection. Once mutated, 
only antibiotic resistant bacteria survive and mul-
tiply.  Work to create new antibiotics is slow. This 
is partly because these drugs are relatively unprof-
itable to pharmaceutical companies.  Compared to 
a new drug to lower hypertension or cholesterol, or 
for treating pain or depression, new antibiotics are 
relatively low-proﬁ t enterprises. Similarly, most 
research on creating new antibiotics is focused 
on highly dangerous pathogens such as smallpox, 
plague, and anthrax.
some of us may, by chance, already have some 
resistance to new bacterial diseases. Neverthe-
less, we stand at the threshold of a world without 
effective antibiotics. Although some progress has 
been made, many human advocacy groups, both 
private and public, have clamored for a compre-
hensive program to monitor the use of antibiotics 
and forestall the seemingly endless emergence of 
antibacterial resistance. Leadership and change 
from government, the agricultural industry, and 
the medical profession has been slow.
The causes of increased bacterial resistance 
are varied and complex and include the wide-
spread use of antibiotics—even when they are not 
needed. Physicians and patients must be educated 
to reduce this unnecessary use of these lifesaving 
drugs. Each time a bacterial population is exposed 
to an antibiotic, it is possible that one cell among 
billions carries a mutation allowing it to survive 
in the presence of that antibiotic. Over time, the 
likelihood increases that some bacterial cells 
will, by chance, contain a mutation that permits 
them to survive under antibiotic assault. Addi-
tional reasons for concern include the extensive 
use of antibiotics in the breeding of animals for 
food, the promiscuity of bacteria, and (as we have 
seen earlier in this chapter), bacteria’s ability to 
exchange or swap DNA. Likewise, as the length of 
hospital stays has declined from weeks to hours, 
the likelihood of bacterial resistance has skyrock-
eted. Finally, increased travel, especially overseas 
travel, facilitates the potential rapid movement of 
resistant bacteria from one part of the world to 
another.
Prominent examples of antibiotic resistance 
are emerging new diseases, such as methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus, better known as 
MRSA (also sometimes called multiple resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus), which is a virulent bacte-
ria that has evolved resistance to many antibiotics, 
including the various penicillins (e.g., ampicillin, 
dicloxacillin, and methicillin) and the cepha-
losporins, a large group of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics. Once limited to hospital settings, MRSA is 
increasingly common throughout the environment 

 
CHAPTER 7 Selection in Action 
93
minute  60 minutes per hour  24 hours per 
day  365 days in a year  1,051,200). Sixty-
ﬁ ve years is thus over 65 million bacterial gen-
erations or the human equivalent of (based on 
a 20 years generation time for humans) over a 
BILLION years.
During most of the history of human civi-
lization, pathogenic bacterial diseases, such as 
plague, smallpox, and diphtheria, repeatedly rav-
aged human populations, often killing as much as 
50 percent or more of the population each time 
they swept through an area. Even though many 
of our ancestors developed natural immunities to 
these diseases in the same way that modern bac-
teria have developed resistance to antibiotics, the 
selective environment is now different and many 
of us might be unable to ward off bacterial infec-
tions without the assistance of antibiotics. Regard-
less, the return to the days when bacterial diseases 
simply ran their course, and you either survived or 
didn’t, is a world that is hard to imagine. That said, 
bacteria are a normal and essential component of 
the envelope that covers the inside and outside of 
our bodies. Most bacteria are not pathogenic—
quite the opposite, they are necessary to our very 
existence. Humans and bacteria evolved together, 
and although we have sometimes been at war, we 
have frequently achieved a state of détente.
Most antibiotics are created from microscopic 
organisms that have been waging the war against 
pathogenic bacteria for longer than we have. These 
molds and other organisms have developed resis-
tance to antibiotics over many eons of exposure.
Penicillin, the ﬁ rst of the antibiotics, was 
discovered, somewhat accidentally, by Scottish 
bacteriologist and later Nobel laureate Alexander 
Fleming. In 1928 Fleming arrived at his labo-
ratory to ﬁ nd a zone of inhibition around an 
incubating container of virulent Staphylococ-
cus where a mold (in the genus Penicillium) 
was growing. He quickly realized what he had 
inadvertently stumbled upon. He is famous for 
his quip that “chance favored the prepared mind” 
alluding to the fact that he appreciated what he 
found because of his training and background. It 
was not until late in World War II that penicil-
lin became widely used. Today, just a little more 
than 65 years later, natural selection has had more 
than sufﬁ cient time to allow bacteria to evolve 
resistance to countless antibiotics. To emphasize 
this point, let us calculate the approximate num-
ber of bacterial generations that have occurred 
during the roughly 65 years that antibiotics have 
been in use. Assuming a bacterial generation 
time of 30 minutes, each year represents over a 
million bacterial generations (2 generations per 

94
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
8 BALANCED POLYMORPHISM
The concepts presented in Chapter 7 led us to 
believe that selection operates at all times to reduce 
the frequency of a detrimental gene to a low equilib-
rium level. This view is not entirely accurate. We are 
aware of genes with deleterious effects that occur 
at fairly high frequencies in natural populations. 
A striking instance is the high incidence in certain 
human populations of a mutant gene that causes 
a curious and life-threatening form of blood cell 
destruction, known as sickle-cell anemia. It might 
be presumed that this harmful gene is maintained at 
a high frequency by an exceptionally high mutation 
rate. There is, however, no evidence to indicate that 
the sickle-cell gene is unusually mutable. We now 
know that the maintenance of deleterious genes at 
unexpectedly high frequencies involves a unique, 
but not uncommon, selective mechanism, which 
results in a type of population structure known as 
balanced polymorphism.
SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA
This disease was discovered by the American 
physician James B. Herrick, who in 1904 made an 
ofﬁ ce examination of an anemic African American 
male residing in Chicago. The patient’s blood 
examined under the microscope showed the pres-
ence of numerous crescent-shaped erythrocytes 
(red blood cells). The peculiarly twisted appear-
ance of the red blood cell is shown in ﬁ gure 8.1. 
The patient was kept under observation for six 
years, during which time he displayed many of the 
distressing symptoms we now recognize as typical 
of the disease (ﬁ g. 8.2).
The bizarre-shaped red cells in the form of a 
sickle blade cannot easily negotiate the thin spaces 
of the capillaries and cause miniature “log jams.” 
The clogging of small blood vessels can occur 
anywhere in the body, denying vital oxygen to the 
tissues and bringing about the painful crises and 
other debilitating symptoms (ﬁ g. 8.2) that are so 
characteristic of the disease. Life expectancy is 
reduced—half the victims succumb before the age 
of 20 and most do not survive beyond 50. The clin-
ical picture, however, is quite variable, with some 
patients having only few crises and mild pains for 
many years, while others become severely dis-
abled or die at an early age. 
Sickle-cell anemia occurs predominantly 
among African Americans but is also found in 

Figure 8.1 Peculiarly twisted shape of red blood 
cells of an individual suffering from sickle-cell anemia 
(top), contrasted with the spherical appearance of 
normal red blood cells (bottom). 
(World Wide Photos.)
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
95
other populations such as Hispanics of Caribbean 
ancestry, persons of Mediterranean ancestry (e.g. 
Turkey, Greece and Italy), as well as people from 
parts of India and Saudi Arabia. The incidence 
at birth of the disabling sickle-cell anemia in 
the United States varies by ethnicity. In African 
Americans, the incidence is approximately 2 per 
1000 live births and in Hispanic Americans it 
is approximately 1 in 35,000 live births. In the 
United States, nearly 70,000 people are afﬂ icted 
with sickle cell disease. Roughly 2 million or 
1 in 12 African Americans is a carrier of this dis-
ease. It was not until after World War II that the 
hereditary basis of sickle cell disease was eluci-
dated. The irregularity was shown in the late 1940s 
by James V. Neel of the University of Michigan 
to be inherited as a simple Mendelian character. 
The sickle-cell anemic patient inherits two variant 
(sickling) alleles, one from each parent (ﬁ g. 8.3). 
Individuals with one normal and one variant allele 
are generally healthy but are carriers—they are said 
to have sickle-cell trait. If two heterozygous carri-
ers marry, the chances are one in four that a child 
will have sickle-cell anemia, and one in two that a 
child will be a carrier (ﬁ g. 8.3).
Since the homozygous state of the detrimen-
tal allele is required for the overt expression of 
the disease, sickle-cell anemia may be considered 
to be recessively determined. However, although 
heterozygous individuals are, on the whole, normal, 
even the red cells of the heterozygotes can undergo 
sickling under certain circumstances, producing 
clinical manifestations. As an instance, heterozy-
gous carriers have been known to experience acute 
abdominal pains at high altitudes in unpressurized 
planes. The lowering of the oxygen tension is suf-
ﬁ cient to induce sickling. The abdominal pains can 
be traced to the packing of sickled erythrocytes in 
the small capillaries of the spleen. 
According to some authors, since the detri-
mental gene can express itself in the heterozygous 
state (by producing a positive sickling test under 
certain circumstances), the gene should be consid-
ered dominant. This reveals that “dominance” and 
“recessiveness” are somewhat arbitrary concepts 
that depend on one’s point of view. Indeed, from 
a molecular standpoint, the relation between the 
normal and variant allele in this case may best be 
described as codominant. This means that at the 
molecular level neither allele masks the expression 
of the other. As we shall see the next section “Sickle-
Cell Hemoglobin”, the heterozygote produces both 
normal and abnormal hemoglobin. There is no 
blending of inheritance at the molecular level.
SICKLE-CELL HEMOGLOBIN
In 1949, the late distinguished chemist and Nobel 
laureate Linus Pauling and his co-workers made the 
important discovery that the detrimental sickling 

Individual homozygous
for sickle-cell allele
Sickle-cell (abnormal) hemoglobin
Abnormal hemoglobin crystallizers,
causing red blood cells to become sickle shaped
Sickle cells
Physical
weakness
Anemia
Heart
failure
Pain and
fever
Brain
damage
Spleen
damage
Damage to
other organs
Breakdown of
red blood cells
Clumping of cells
and clogging of
small blood vessels
Accumulation of
sickled cells in spleen
Impaired
mental
function
Paralysis
Pneumonia
and other
infections
Rheumnatism
Kidney
failure
Figure 8.2 Sickle-cell anemia. In affected individulas, sickle-cell anemia causes a 
constellation of symptoms in many different organs of the body.
96 
Understanding Evolution
from a heterozygous individual can actually be 
duplicated experimentally by mechanically mixing 
the hemoglobin taken from blood cells of a normal 
person and a sickle-cell anemic patient. The mixed 
solution separates in an electric ﬁ eld into the same 
two hemoglobin components as those characteristic 
of a heterozygous person with the sickle-cell trait.
Further chemical analysis revealed that sickle-
cell hemoglobin differed only slightly in its che-
mical constitution from normal hemoglobin. As 
mentioned earlier (chapter 4), a glutamic acid 
residue at a speciﬁ c site in normal hemoglobin 
is replaced by valine in sickle-cell hemoglobin 
(ﬁ g. 8.5). The substitution of valine for glutamic 
acid can be accounted for by an alteration of a sin-
gle base change of the triplet of DNA that speci-
ﬁ es the amino acid, as depicted in ﬁ gure 8.6. If the 
allele alters the conﬁ guration of the hemoglobin 
molecule. Pauling used the then relatively new 
technique of electrophoresis, which characterizes 
proteins according to the manner in which they 
move in an electric ﬁ eld. The hemoglobin molecule 
travels toward the positive pole. Hemoglobin from 
a sickled cell differs in speed of migration from 
normal hemoglobin; it moves more slowly than the 
normal molecule (ﬁ g. 8.4). The variant allele thus 
functions differently from the normal allele, and, in 
fact, acts independently of its normal partner allele. 
As a result, the heterozygote does not produce an 
intermediate product, but instead produces both 
kinds of hemoglobin in nearly equal quantities—
the normal type (designated hemoglobin A, or 
Hb A) and the sickle-cell anemic variety (Hb S). 
The dual electrophoretic pattern of hemoglobin 

DNA triplet responsible for transcription 
in normal hemoglobin (Hb A) is CTT, then 
a single base change to CAT would alter 
the codon of messenger RNA to GUA. 
Accordingly, the amino acid speciﬁ ed by 
the codon GUA would be valine. The sub-
stitution of a glutamic acid by valine causes 
the abnormal hemoglobin molecule (Hb S) 
to aggregate or polymerize into strands. 
The strands are laid down to form cable-
like ﬁ bers. As greater numbers of ﬁ bers 
accumulate, the large aggregates or poly-
mers of linearly arranged ﬁ bers attain suf-
ﬁ cient length and rigidity to distort the cell 
membrane into an odd, crescent shape.
THEORY OF BALANCED 
POLYMORPHISM
Natural selection confers survival and 
selective advantages to certain alleles 
under speciﬁ c environmental conditions. 
Of the alleles known to cause human 
genetic diseases (table 8.1), several have 
been identiﬁ ed in which the heterozy-
gotes exhibit resistance to speciﬁ c infec-
tious diseases (environmental conditions). 
Normal
Sickle-cell
trait
Sickle-cell
trait
Sickle-cell
anemia
CARRIER
(Sickle-cell trait)
CARRIER
(Sickle-cell trait)
sperm
Normal Gene
Defective Gene
eggs
Figure 8.3 Types of children that can result from a marriage of two 
heterozygous carriers of sickle-cell anemia. Individuals homozygous for 
the variant gene suffer from sickle-cell anemia: the benign heterozygous 
state is referred to as the sickle-cell trait.
Hemoglobin electrophoretic pattern
Origin
–
+
Origin
–
+
Normal
Sickle-cell anemia
Sickle-cell trait
Figure 8.4 Electrophoretic patterns of hemoglobins. The hemoglobin of the heterozygous person with 
sickle-cell trait is not intermediate in character, but is composed instead of approximately equal proportions of 
the normal hemoglobin and the sickle-cell anemia variety. [Based on studies by Linus Pauling, in Pauling, Itano, 
Singer, and Wells, “Sickle-Cell Anemia: A Molecular Disease,” Science 110 (25 November 1949): 543–548.]
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
97

sickle-cell trait is not conﬁ ned to the 
African continent. What can account 
for the high incidence of the sickle-
cell allele, particularly in light of its 
detrimental action?
For simplicity in the presenta-
tion of the population dynamics, we 
will consider the sickling allele to be 
recessive. Accordingly, we can sym-
bolize the normal allele as A and its 
allele for sickling as a. The explana-
tion for the high level of the deleteri-
ous sickle-cell allele is to be found in 
the possibility that the heterozygote 
(Aa) is superior in ﬁ tness to both 
homozygotes (AA and aa). In other 
words, selection favors the heterozygote, and both 
types of homozygotes are relatively at a disadvan-
tage. Let us examine the theory behind this form of 
selection.
Figure 8.7 illustrates the theory. The classical 
case of selection discussed in chapters 6 and 7 is 
portrayed in the ﬁ rst part of the ﬁ gure. In this case, 
when AA and Aa individuals are equal in repro-
ductive ﬁ tness, and the aa genotype is completely 
selected against, the recessive allele will be elimi-
nated. Barring recurring mutations, only A genes 
will ultimately be present in the population.
Let us assume in another situation (case II in 
ﬁ g. 8.7) that both homozygotes (AA as well as aa) 
are incapable of leaving surviving progeny. The 
only effective members in the population are the 
Sickle-cell anemia is a model of this phenomenon, 
which is called balanced polymorphism.
Until recently, most people with sickle-cell 
anemia did not survive to reproductive age, and 
thus it might be expected that the detrimental allele 
would pass rapidly from existence. Each failure of 
the homozygous anemic individual to transmit his or 
her alleles would result each time in the loss of two 
aberrant alleles from the population. And yet the 
sickle-cell allele reaches remarkably high frequen-
cies in the tropical zone of Africa. In several African 
populations, 20 percent or more of the individuals 
have the sickle-cell trait, and frequencies as high as 
40 percent have been reported for some African 
tribes. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the 
valine
valine
threonine
glutamic
acid
lysine
histidine
leucine
glutamic
acid
proline
Sickle-cell
hemoglobin
Normal
hemoglobin
Figure 8.5 Amino acid sequences in a small section of the normal hemoglobin molecule and of 
the sickle-cell hemoglobin. The substitution of a single amino acid, glutamic acid by valine, is respon-
sible for the abnormal sickling  of human red blood cells. 
(Based on studies by Vernon Ingram.)
GLUTAMIC
ACID
Coding
strand
mRNA
Amino
acid
Normal Hb A Gene
G
A
A
C
T
T
G
A
A
VALINE
Double-
stranded
DNA
Sickle Cell Hb S Gene
G
T
A
C
A
T
G
U
A
Figure 8.6 The CTT in the sixth triplet of the coding strand of the 
normal gene changes to CAT. This leads to a change from GAA to GUA in the 
sixth codon of the beta-globulin mRNA of sickle cells. This, in turn, results 
in the insertion of a valine in the sixth amino acid position of sickle-cell beta 
globulin, where a glumatic acid normally is present.
98 
Understanding Evolution

Gene A
Gene a
Case I
Case II
Case III
Case IV
Equilibrium Frequency (%)
Genotypes
100
80
60
40
20
0
AA
Aa
aa
Reproductively Fit
Reproductively Fit
Lethal
Lethal
Reproductively Fit
Lethal
Semi-lethal
Reproductively Fit
Lethal
Lethal
Reproductively Fit
Semi-lethal
Figure 8.7 Equilibrium frequencies of two alleles (A and a) under different conditions of 
selection (ignoring mutation). In contrast to case I (complete selection and total elimination of a), 
the recessive gene can be retained at appreciable frequencies in a population when the heterozy-
gote (Aa) is superior in reproductive ﬁ tness to both homozygotes (cases II, III, and IV, showing 
different relative ﬁ tnesses of the two homozygotes, AA, and aa).
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
99
Disease
Protects Against
Carrier 
Frequency
Target 
Population (S)
Mechanism
Sickle-Cell Anemia
Malaria
1/4–1/12
varies
Agricultural Africans
Mediterraneans
Parasite cannot exist in abnormal 
RBC
G6PD
Malaria
1/5
1/3–1/20
African, Middle 
Eastern & S. Asian
Parasites unable to reproduce in 
abnormal RBC
Thalassemia
Malaria
1/30
Mediterranean
Greece and Italy
Makes RBC unsuitable for lethal host 
parasite
PKU
Fungal
infection of fetuses
1/23
European Caucasian
Inactivation of fungal toxin by high 
levels of phenylalanine
Tay-Sachs Disease
Tuberculosis
1/30
Ashkenazi Jews
Unknown
Cystic Fibrosis
Diarrheal disease
(Cholera, Typhus)
1/23
European Caucasians
Water loss prevented by reduced 
chloride channels
TABLE 8.1 Balanced Polymorphism and Human Disease
heterozygotes (Aa). Obviously, the frequency of 
each allele, A and a, will remain at a constant level 
of 50 percent. The inviability of both homozy-
gous types probably never exists in nature, but the 
scheme does reveal how a stable relation of two 
alleles at high frequencies is possible. If, as in case 
III, the AA genotype leaves only half as many prog-
eny as the heterozygote, and the recessive homozy-
gote is once again inviable, it is apparent that more 
A alleles are transmitted to each new generation 

100 
Understanding Evolution
were relatively resistant to infection with Plas-
modium falciparum. The heterozygous carriers 
were infected less often with the parasite than the 
homozygous dominant nonsicklers. Moreover, 
among those heterozygotes that were infected, the 
incidence of severe, or fatal, attacks of malaria was 
strikingly low. The evidence is strong that the sickle-
cell allele affords young children some degree of 
protection against malarial infection. Hence, in 
areas where malaria is common, children possess-
ing the sickle-cell trait will tend to survive malaria, 
and are more likely to pass on their genes to the 
next generation. The heterozygotes (Aa) are thus 
superior in ﬁ tness to both homozygotes, which are 
likely to succumb from either anemia on the one 
hand (aa) or malaria on the other (AA). 
The spread of the sickling allele was greatly 
enhanced by the development of agriculture in 
Africa. The clearing of the forest in the prepara-
tion of ground for cultivation provided new breed-
ing areas for the mosquito Anopheles gambiae, 
the vector, or carrier, of the malaria plasmodium. 
The spread of malaria has been responsible for the 
spread of the selective advantage of the sickle-cell 
allele, which in the heterozygous state imparts 
resistance to malaria. In essence, the selective 
advantage of the heterozygote tends to increase in 
direct proportion to the amount of malaria pres-
ent in a given area. Hunting populations in Africa 
show a very low incidence of malaria and an equally 
low frequency of the sickling allele. The Pygmies 
of the Ituri Forest constitute a good example.
Communities in Africa with the greatest reli-
ance on agriculture (rather than on hunting or 
animal husbandry) tend to have the highest fre-
quencies of the sickle-cell trait. A high incidence 
of the sickle-cell trait in an intensely malarious 
environment has the consequence of reducing the 
number of individuals capable of being infected by 
the malarial parasite and, accordingly, of lowering 
the mortality from such infections. More human 
energy, or greater “manpower,” is thus made 
available for raising and harvesting crops. Ironi-
cally, then, the sickle-cell trait carries with it the 
beneﬁ cent effect of enabling tribes to develop and 
than a alleles. Eventually, however, the A allele 
will reach an equilibrium point at 0.67 percent. 
Note that although the recessive homozygote is 
lethal, the frequency of the recessive allele (a) is 
maintained at 0.33 percent. In the last illustrative 
example (case IV), the recessive homozygote is 
not as disadvantageous as the dominant homozy-
gote, but both are less reproductively ﬁ t than the 
heterozygote. Here also, both alleles remain at rel-
atively high frequencies in the population. Indeed, 
the recessive allele (a) will constitute 67 percent of 
the gene pool.
We have thus illustrated in simpliﬁ ed form the 
selective forces that serve to maintain two alleles at 
appreciable frequencies in a population. This phe-
nomenon is known as balanced polymorphism. The 
loss of a deleterious recessive allele through deaths 
of the homozygotes is balanced by the gain resulting 
from the larger numbers of offspring produced by 
the favored heterozygotes. Balanced polymorphism 
results in a stable equilibrium of the two alleles; 
their equilibrium frequencies are determined by the 
relative ﬁ tness of the two homozygotes.
SUPERIORITY OF 
THE HETEROZYGOTES
The high frequency of the sickle-cell allele in cer-
tain African populations can be explained by assum-
ing that the heterozygotes (individuals with the 
sickle-cell trait) have a selective advantage over 
the normal heterozygotes (ﬁ g. 8.8). What might be 
the nature of the advantage? Field work undertaken 
in Africa by the British geneticist Anthony Allison 
revealed that the incidence of the sickle-cell trait is 
high in regions where malignant subtertian malaria 
caused by the parasite Plasmodium falciparum is 
hyperendemic—that is, transmission of the infection 
occurs throughout most of the year. Thus, the popu-
lation is almost constantly reinfected with malaria. 
Under such circumstances, relative immunity to fal-
ciparum malaria would be most beneﬁ cial. 
Allison examined blood from African chil-
dren and found that carriers of the sickle-cell trait 

Sickle-cell
allele in Africa
1–5%
5–10%
10–20%
malaria
Geographic
distribution of 
P. falciparum
Normal red
blood cells
Sickled red
blood cells
Figure 8.8 Balanced polymorphism and heterozygote advantage. This illustration compares of 
the frequency of sickle-cell anemia and the distribution of malaria (Plasmodium falciparum) in Africa. 
Carriers of the sickle-cell allele do not have impaired health but are resistant to the malaria parasite. This is 
an example of heterozygote superiority, also called balanced polymorphism.
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
101
one inherits something that is bad (hemolytic dis-
ease) to afford protection against something that 
is worse (malaria). Malaria apparently has had a 
profound inﬂ uence on human events.
RELAXED SELECTION
We should expect the frequency of the sickle-cell 
allele to be low in malaria-free areas, where the 
selective advantage of the heterozygote would be 
removed. We do ﬁ nd that the lowest frequencies of 
maintain an agricultural culture rather than adhere 
to a hunting or pastoral existence. This is a curious 
but striking instance of the interplay of biological 
change and socioeconomic adaptation.
In a similar ﬁ nding, evidence exists that persons 
whose red blood cells are deﬁ cient in the enzyme 
G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase) are 
less likely to be affected by malaria. Data also 
show a strong correlation between the incidence of 
malaria and the frequency of thalassemia (another 
type of anemia) in the Mediterranean peninsula 
and in Sardinia. In all these situations, it is as if 

102 
Understanding Evolution
gene on chromosome 15. The basic defect is the 
abnormal accumulation of a fatty substance (speciﬁ -
cally, ganglioside GM2) in the brain cells as a conse-
quence of the absence of a particular enzyme (beta 
hexosaminidase A), which plays an essential role in 
the spinal cord and brain. The storage of massive 
amounts of the lipid in the brain leads to profound 
mental and motor deterioration. Affected children 
appear normal and healthy at birth. Within six 
months, however, motor weaknesses become obvi-
ous as the muscles twitch and the infant experiences 
periodic convulsions. The muscles deteriorate until 
the infant becomes completely helpless, unable to sit 
up or stand. At the age of one year, the child lies still 
in the crib. The child becomes mentally retarded, 
progressively blind, and ﬁ nally paralyzed. The dis-
ease exacts its lethal toll by the age of three to four 
years. There are no known survivors and no cure. 
A feature of special interest is that 9 out of 
10 affected children are of Jewish heritage. It is 
especially common among the Ashkenazi Jews of 
northeastern European origin, particularly from 
provinces in Lithuania and Poland. In the United 
States, Tay-Sachs disease is about 100 times more 
prevalent among the Ashkenazi Jews than among 
other Jewish (Sephardi) groups and non-Jewish 
populations. It is estimated that 1 of 30 Jewish per-
sons is a heterozygous carrier, whereas only about 
1 of 300 non-Jewish persons is a heterozygous car-
rier. If the high incidence of heterozygotes is main-
tained by mutation alone, then an extraordinarily 
the sickle-cell allele occur consistently in regions 
free of malaria. The frequency of the sickle-cell 
allele has fallen to relatively low levels in the Afri-
can American populations of the United States. The 
frequency of the sickle-cell trait among African 
Americans is currently about 9 percent, correspond-
ing to an allele frequency of 0.045. This places the 
frequency of the recessive homozygote (sickle-cell 
anemia) at 0.002, or 2 per 1,000 individuals.
The relaxation of selection in this case is 
eugenic; that is, the changes occur in the desired 
direction. The disappearance of malaria disrupts the 
balanced polymorphic state, and the allele for sickle-
cell anemia begins to decline at a slow rate. Table 8.2 
presents computations of the gene frequencies of the 
heterozygotes and the recessive homozygotes, start-
ing with the frequency of the carrier at 18 percent. 
It may be noted that 30 generations are required 
for the incidence of the heterozygous carrier to 
be depressed from 18.0 to 6.5 percent. At present, 
medical researchers are attempting to ﬁ nd a cure for 
sickle-cell anemia. If sickle-cell anemic individuals 
could be completely cured, then obviously the selec-
tive process would be thwarted and the sickle-cell 
allele would no longer decline in frequency.
TAY-SACHS DISEASE
Tay-Sachs disease is a very rare, recessively inher-
ited condition that is untreatable and always fatal. 
The disease results from mutations on the HEXA 
TABLE 8.2  Selection Relaxation Against Sickle-Cell Anemia (in Nonmalarial Areas)
Conditions:  Initial   tness of recessive homozygote: 0.33
Initial gene frequency of sickling gene: 0.10
Initial frequency of heterozygote: 0.18
 
Generation 
% Heterozygote (Sickle-Cell Trait) 
% Recessive Homozygote (Sickle-Cell Anemia)
 
0 
18.0 
1.0
 
1 
17.0 
0.88
 
3 
15.3 
0.70
 
10 
11.4 
0.37
 
30 
6.5 
0.11
 
100 
2.6 
0.02 

 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
103
most cases, when parents have discovered through 
screening and subsequent prenatal diagnosis that 
they have conceived an affected child, they have 
opted to terminate the pregnancy. The decision 
is generally not thought of as a choice between 
life and death for the affected fetus. The choice 
is between prenatal death and a lingering, pain-
ful, postnatal death. At issue is not the saving of 
the life of an affected child, but the prevention of 
undeniable suffering.
Interestingly, the same mutation found in 
Ashkenazi Jews has been discovered, also at an 
unusually high incidence (1/30), in the ethnically 
and linguistically isolated American Cajuns who 
live in south Louisiana. There has been diverse spec-
ulation as to why this same mutation occurs in such 
diverse populations as Ashkenazi Jews and Cajuns, 
but no deﬁ nitive resolution to this phenomenon has 
emerged. What is known is that Cajun Tay-Sach’s 
mutation can be traced to an apparently non-Jewish 
eighteenth-century couple from France.
Intriguingly, another Tay-Sachs mutation, 
with similar pathology and frequency (1/30), is 
also known in French Canadian families and has 
been traced to a single seventeenth-century fam-
ily from southern Quebec. In both the Cajuns and 
the French Canadians, the strikingly high preva-
lence of the Tay-Sachs gene variants is the result 
of a founder effect, a kind of genetic drift that is 
discussed in chapter 9. No similar relationship to 
natural selection has thus far emerged for these 
two populations.
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Cystic ﬁ brosis (CF) is not a rare genetic condition; 
one child in 2,000 Caucasians is affected, making 
it the most common autosomal recessive disease 
in Caucasian Americans of European descent. The 
frequency of carriers vary across ethnicities, being 
highest (1 in 23) among Caucasians and rarer in 
Hispanic Americans (1 in 46), African Americans 
(1 in 66), and Asian Americans (1 in 150), making 
the overall frequency about 1 in 3,900 live births 
high mutation rate of the detrimental recessive 
allele would have to be postulated. However, some 
reproductive advantage for the heterozygote car-
rier would seem the most plausible explanation.
It has been suggested that the Ashkenazi Jews, 
who have lived for many generations in the urban 
ghettos in Poland and the Baltic states, have been 
exposed to different selective pressures than other 
Jewish groups (for example, those who have lived 
in countries around the Mediterranean and Near 
East). The densely populated urban ghettos may 
have experienced repeated outbreaks of infectious 
diseases. In 1972 the geneticist Ntinos Myrian-
thopoulos of the National Institutes of Health in 
Bethesda, Maryland, presented data that shows that 
pulmonary tuberculosis is virtually absent among 
grandparents of children afﬂ icted with Tay-Sachs 
disease, although the incidence of Jewish tuber-
culosis patients from eastern Europe is relatively 
high. The ﬁ ndings suggest that the heterozygous 
carrier of Tay-Sachs disease is resistant to pulmo-
nary tuberculosis in regions where this contagious 
disease is prevalent.
In terms of theoretical expectations, one can 
calculate (in the absence of genetic screening) 
that 50 children will be born with the disorder 
each year in the United States, of whom 45 will 
be of Ashkenazi Jewish origin. Yet the number of 
actual cases of affected newborns is far less than 
expected. Indeed, since genetic screening program 
began in the early 1970s the incidence of births of 
children afﬂ icted with Tay-Sachs disease has been 
so dramatically reduced that less than a dozen 
cases are now known in North America, nearly 
all of whom are not of Jewish ancestry. Through 
genetic screening (below) this disease has ostensi-
bly been eliminated in the Jewish population.
The dramatic reductions in births of affected 
infants reﬂ ects a voluntary, widespread adult 
screening program initiated in 1971 among the 
Jewish population with the objective of detecting 
carriers of the fatal recessive gene. The screen-
ing for heterozygotes has been followed by the 
intrauterine monitoring of the fetus in instances 
where both parents are heterozygous carriers. In 

104 
Understanding Evolution
through channels in the cells lining of the intes-
tinal tract into the lumen of the digestive tract. In 
a curious manner, it may be that the heterozygous 
carrier of cystic ﬁ brosis is resistant to cholera in 
regions where this contagious, infectious disease 
is, or once was, prevalent.
In 1989 the gene responsible for cystic ﬁ bro-
sis was identiﬁ ed on the long arm of chromosome 
7, caused by a mutation in a gene called the cys-
tic ﬁ brosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR). The CFTR gene controls the chloride ion 
channel, which is needed in creating sweat, diges-
tive juices, and mucus. Knowledge of the precise 
location of the mutant allele for cystic ﬁ brosis has 
permitted the development of a diagnostic test 
for family members at risk. The thrust for pre-
natal screening may well be a two-edged sword. 
The survival of patients with cystic ﬁ brosis has 
improved dramatically in recent decades. In the 
mid-1960s, affected children could not look for-
ward to reaching the age of 10 years, despite the 
best efforts of the medical profession. Today this 
disorder still remains a burden to children, but a 
limited life span is no longer foreboding or inevi-
table. Presently, with increased clinical awareness 
and aggressive therapeutic measures, more than 
half the babies born with this disorder can expect to 
live at least to their late thirties (ﬁ g. 8.9), although 
this is highly variable, depending on the severity 
of the disease. Cystic ﬁ brosis has graduated from 
the pediatric clinic and has become a disease of 
adults. The disorder, however, still retains its dis-
tressing aspects, and the greater longevity may be 
viewed as imposing greater rather than lesser bur-
dens on the patients and their families. 
SELECTION AGAINST 
THE HETEROZYGOTE
The mother-child blood incompatibility in humans, 
erythroblastosis fetalis, represents an interesting 
case of selection against the heterozygote. This 
unique hemolytic disorder is often referred to 
simply as Rh disease because it involves the Rh 
per year in the United States. Approximately 2,500 
affected newborns may be expected each year in 
the United States. 
Cystic ﬁ brosis (CF) is a multisystem disease, 
affecting many parts of the body. Speciﬁ cally, 
cystic ﬁ brosis is identiﬁ ed by a triad of abnormal 
conditions—a highly elevated concentration of 
chloride in sweat, pancreatic insufﬁ ciency, and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Almost 
equally consistent is azoospermia (lack of sperm 
in the semen), seen in more than 95 percent of men 
with cystic ﬁ brosis. Almost universally, the sperm 
ducts atrophy, or degenerate, as a consequence of 
prolonged blockage by thick mucus secretions. 
The female patient does not have a comparable 
anatomical abnormality. However, her fertility 
is below normal, as the thick desiccated cervical 
mucus tends to be inhospitable to the sperm cells. 
One in every three affected females is married, and 
among affected women who become pregnant, 
there is an increased incidence of premature birth 
and perinatal death.
The frequency of heterozygous carriers is many 
times greater than the frequency of affected homo-
zygous individuals. Assuming that 1 of 25 persons 
is a carrier of CF, the chance of having the dis-
ease is 100 times greater than of being a carrier. 
Like the other diseases discussed in this chapter, 
CF’s relatively high frequency in certain popula-
tions may be explained by the concept of balanced 
polymorphism. A reproductive advantage for the 
heterozygote (Aa) over the normal homozygote 
(AA) would account for the high frequency of 
the disabling recessive allele for cystic ﬁ brosis in 
Caucasian populations. The hypothesis currently 
favored is that heterozygous carriers are more 
resistant to infantile gastroenteritis (inﬂ amma-
tion of the stomach and intestines) than noncarri-
ers. The basic defect expressed in cystic ﬁ brosis 
is a failure of transport of chloride ions across 
cell membranes. Ironically, the same chloride ion 
channels are involved in another devastating dis-
ease with high mortality, cholera. This disease is 
marked by excessive diarrhea and vomiting, asso-
ciated with the profuse passage of chloride ions 

1950
1940
1940
10
20
30
40
0
1960
1959
1966
1972
16
19
28
10.6
4
<2
1980
1990
32
2000
36.8
2005
38.45
2008
Calendar year
Median age at death of CF patients (years)
1970
1980
1990
2000 2005 2008
Figure 8.9 Medical advances in recent decades have enhanced the life span of infants affected with cystic ﬁ brosis.
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
105
homozygous (RR) or heterozygous (Rr) state. All 
Rh-negative individuals carry two recessive alleles 
(rr) and are incapable of producing the Rh antigen. 
The inheritance on the Rh antigen follows simple 
Mendelian principles (ﬁ g. 8.10). A mother who is 
Rh-negative (rr) need not fear having Rh-diseased 
offspring if her husband is likewise Rh-negative. If 
the husband is heterozygous (Rr), half of the off-
spring will be Rh-negative (rr) and none of these 
will be afﬂ icted. The other half will be Rh-positive 
(Rr), just like the father, and are potential victims 
of hemolytic disease. If the Rh-positive father is 
homozygous (RR), then all the children will be 
Rh-positive (Rr) and potential victims. In essence, 
an Rh-positive child carried by an Rh-negative 
mother is the setting for possible, though not inev-
itable, trouble.
The chain of events leading to hemolytic dis-
ease begins with the inheritance by the fetus of the 
dominant R allele of the father. The Rh antigens 
are produced in the red blood cells of the fetus. 
antigen on the red blood cell. Rh disease was once 
an alarming thorn to procreation. The conquest of 
this curious incompatibility between mother and 
child is one of the more notable accomplishments 
of modern medicine.
A relation between the Rh antigen and hemo-
lytic disease was ﬁ rst postulated by Dr. Philip 
Levine and his colleague Dr. B. E. Stetson in 1939, 
when they discovered a then unknown antibody in 
the serum of a woman who had recently delivered 
a stillborn infant. The antibody was subsequently 
identiﬁ ed as anti-Rh, which is produced by the 
mother in response to, and directed against, the Rh 
antigen of the blood cells of her own fetus. Clini-
cal records reveal that the mothers of affected new-
borns lack the Rh antigen (that is, are Rh-negative) 
whereas their husbands and affected infants possess 
the Rh antigen (that is, are Rh-positive).
The Rh antigen in the blood cell is controlled 
by a dominant allele, designated R. An Rh-positive 
person has the dominant allele, either in the 

Rh-negative
Rh-positive
(heterozygous)
rr
Rh-negative
rr
Rh-negative
Rr
Second Rh-positive
(potential victim)
Rr
First Rh-positive
(mother sensitized))
rr
Rr
R
r
r
r
Figure 8.10 Offspring that may arise from a marriage of an Rh-negative woman 
and an Rh-positive man (in this case, heterozygous). The mother must be sensitized to the 
Rh antigen before delivering a child affected with Rh disease.
106 
Understanding Evolution
generally conceded that sensitization of the mother 
takes place shortly after the delivery of the ﬁ rst 
Rh-positive child. Accordingly, the ﬁ rstborn is 
rarely affected, unless the mother had previously 
developed antibodies from having been transfused 
with Rh-positive blood or has had a prior preg-
nancy terminating in an abortion.
The antibodies remain in the mother’s sys-
tem, and may linger for many months or years 
(ﬁ g. 8.11). If the second baby is also Rh-positive, 
the mother may send sufﬁ cient antibodies into the 
fetus’ bloodstream to destroy the fetal Rh-positive 
red cells. The majority of affected fetuses survive 
The fetal red cells bearing the Rh antigens escape 
through the placental barrier into the mother’s cir-
culation, and stimulate the production of antibod-
ies (anti-R) against the Rh antigens on the fetal 
red cells (ﬁ g. 8.11). The mother having produced 
antibodies, is said to be immunized (or sensitized) 
against her baby’s blood cells. The maternal anti-
bodies hardly ever attain a sufﬁ cient concentra-
tion during the ﬁ rst pregnancy to harm the fetus. 
In fact, although fetal cells cross the placenta 
throughout pregnancy, they enter the maternal 
circulation in much larger numbers during deliv-
ery, when the placental vessels rupture. It is now 

Second pregnancy
If an Rh– woman is 
carrying an Rh+ 
fetus:
Rh+ cells enter 
her bloodstream
during pregnancy
or childbirth.
She produces
Rh+ antibodies.
Antibodies
Foreign antigen
stimulates woman’s 
body to make
antibodies.
Anti-Rh+ antibodies
bind antigen on
red blood cells of
fetus.
Fetus’s red blood
cells are destroyed.
Rh+
fetus
Rh+
fetus
Rh–
woman
Rh–
woman
First pregnancy
Figure 8.11 Rh incompatibility. Fetal cells entering the pregnant woman’s bloodstream can stimulate her immune 
system to make anti-Rh antibodies. If the fetus is Rh and she is Rh. A drug called RhoGAM prevents attacks on 
subsequent fetuses.
 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
107
condition, produce vast numbers of “unﬁ nished” 
red blood cells. Unattended, erythroblastosis feta-
lis leads to stillborn or neonatal death. Many of the 
erythroblastotic babies are saved by exchange trans-
fusion of Rh-negative blood; others, however, die 
despite treatment. Exchange transfusions are essen-
tially a ﬂ ushing-out process, whereby the infant’s 
blood is gradually diluted with Rh-negative donated 
blood until, at the end of the procedure, most of 
the infant’s circulating blood is problem free. In 
severe cases, where it has been predicted that the 
fetus would die before it was mature enough for 
premature delivery, intrauterine transfusions have 
been used successfully.
As might have been anticipated, the Rh gene 
has turned out to be more complex than initially 
envisioned. There are several variant alleles, and 
for the usual gestation period but are born in critical 
condition from anemia. Severely anemic individuals 
are likely to be jaundiced and develop heart failure. 
A grave threat to the newborn infants is bilirubin, 
which is a product of red cell destruction. During 
pregnancy, fetal bilirubin is transported across the 
placenta and eliminated by the mother. From the 
time of birth, however, bilirubin accumulates as 
the affected infant fails to dispose of it. Bilirubin 
has been shown to be highly toxic to the soft brain 
tissues; the brain may be permanently damaged.
Another aspect of the hemolytic condition, 
responsible for its original name (erythroblastosis 
fetalis), is the presence of an extraordinarily large 
number of immature red cells (the erythroblasts) 
in the circulating blood. It is as if the liver and the 
spleen, in an attempt to combat the severe anemic 

108 
Understanding Evolution
THE CONTROL OF RH DISEASE
In the 1960s Drs. Vincent Freda and John Gorman 
at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in 
New York and Dr. William Pollack at the Ortho 
Research Foundation in New Jersey sought the 
means of suppressing the production of antibod-
ies in Rh-negative mothers who had recently 
delivered an Rh-positive infant. Experiments 
performed 50 years earlier by the distinguished 
American bacteriologist, Dr. Theobald Smith, fur-
nished an important clue to the solution. In 1909, 
Smith arrived at the general principle that passive 
immunity can prevent active immunity. That is, an 
antibody given passively by injection can inhibit 
the recipient from producing its own active anti-
body. After ﬁ ve years of experimentation and 
testing, Drs. Freda, Gorman, and Pollack success-
fully developed an immunosuppressant consisting 
of a blood fraction (gamma globulin) rich in Rh 
antibodies. Injected into the bloodstream of the 
Rh-negative mother no later than three days after the 
birth of her ﬁ rst Rh-positive child, the globulin-Rh 
antibody preparation (known as RhoGAM) sup-
presses the mother’s antibody-making activity. 
Countless numbers of mothers have received the 
preparation; none have formed active antibodies. 
More impressive, many of them have delivered a 
second Rh-positive baby and none of the babies 
has been afﬂ icted with Rh disease. The evidence 
is overwhelming that the immunosuppressant is 
very effective.
The immunosuppressant does not prevent 
hemolytic disease if maternal antibody is already 
present by earlier pregnancies or by previous trans-
fusions of Rh-positive blood. For this reason the 
preparation is administered only to Rh-negative 
women who do not have anti-Rh in their sera at the 
time of delivery. With each delivery, opportunity 
for exposure to Rh-positive fetal cells is repeated. 
The protection given at the delivery of the ﬁ rst 
infant does not protect the mother from exposure 
to the antigen received at a subsequent pregnancy. 
Hence, the immunosuppressant must be given 
immediately following each pregnancy.
there is a corresponding diversity of antigenic 
constitutions. This diversity need not concern us 
here. The most common antigen is the one that 
was ﬁ rst recognized, known more speciﬁ cally now 
as Rh0, or D. It is the presence of Rh0 that is tested 
in ordinary clinical work.
Among Caucasians in the United States, the 
incidence of Rh-negative persons is approximately 
16 percent. In certain European groups, such as the 
Basques in Spain, the frequency of Rh-negative 
individuals rises as high as 34 percent. Non-
Caucasian populations are relatively free of Rh 
hemolytic disease. The incidence of Rh-negative 
persons among the full-blooded Native Americans, 
Eskimos, African blacks, Japanese, and Chinese 
is 1 percent or less. In contrast, the frequency of 
Rh-negative African Americans is high (9 percent), 
which reﬂ ects the historical consequences of 
intermarriages.
We can now appreciate the reasons for viewing 
Rh disease as an instance of selection against the 
heterozygote. The erythroblastotic infant is always 
the heterozygote (Rr). Each death of an erythroblas-
totic infant (Rr) results in the elimination of one R 
and one r gene. In such a situation, where selection 
continually operates against the heterozygote, the 
rarer of the two genes should ultimately become lost 
(or decline to a low level to be maintained solely by 
mutation). In populations where the R gene is much 
more common that the r allele, we should be wit-
nessing a gradual dwindling of the r gene.
No decline in the frequency of the r gene is 
evident, however. One counterbalancing factor is 
the tendency of parents who have lost infants from 
erythroblastosis to compensate for their losses by 
having relatively large numbers of children. Thus, 
if a father is heterozygous (Rr) and the mother is 
homozygous (rr), there is an even chance that the 
infant will be rr and unaffected. Each unaffected 
child born restores two r genes lost by the death 
of two Rr erythroblastotic sibs. Accordingly, an 
excess of homozygous children (rr) counterbal-
ances the r genes lost through erythroblastosis. 
This consideration alone overrides the selective 
force against the heterozygote.

 
CHAPTER 8 Balanced Polymorphism 
109
of genetically polymorphic loci (i.e., the number 
of loci where two or more allelic forms occur) 
varies across species and between regions of 
the genome that code for proteins (genes) and 
those that do not code for genes. If the alterna-
tive alleles at these polymorphic loci are main-
tained by selection that favors the heterozygote, 
then low ﬁ tness would have to be assigned to an 
unusually large number of homozygous loci. In 
other words, an unreasonably high level of unﬁ t-
ness would prevail in the population because of 
the selective disadvantage of many alleles in the 
homozygous state.
The possibility exists that most of the alter-
native alleles at polymorphic loci are selectively 
neutral—that is, the different alleles at one locus 
confer neither selective advantage nor disad-
vantage to the individual. Much of the observed 
variation, then, would represent merely the accu-
mulation of neutral mutations. The notion of 
selectively neutral alleles has been much debated. 
Are there mutant alleles whose effects on ﬁ tness 
are not at all different from the more frequent 
alleles that lead to a normal phenotype? And, can 
some of these neutral mutant alleles, purely by 
chance, reach frequencies as high as the frequen-
cies that characterize the state of balanced poly-
morphism? We will attempt to resolve these vexing 
queries in subsequent chapters.
Since the management and prevention of 
Rh disease have advanced considerably, we have 
witnessed the end of Rh disease as a trouble-
some clinical problem. We can also anticipate 
that the recessive r allele will not disappear from 
the human gene pool, but rather endure. In other 
words, the r allele will be perpetuated by the now-
surviving heterozygotes.
IMPLICATIONS OF 
BALANCED POLYMORPHISM
According to the classical concept of selection 
(discussed in chapter 6), a deleterious gene has a 
harmful effect when homozygous and virtually no 
expression in the heterozygous state. Deleterious 
genes will, by selection, be reduced in frequency 
to very low levels and will be maintained in the 
population by recurrent mutations. The ﬁ ttest indi-
viduals are homozygous for the normal, or “wild 
type”, allele at most loci. Stated another way, the 
ﬁ ttest individuals carry relatively few deleterious 
genes in the heterozygous state.
In this chapter, we have considered examples 
of genes that impair ﬁ tness when homozygous 
and actually improve ﬁ tness in the heterozygous 
state. To what extent are individuals heterozy-
gous at their gene loci? Estimates of the number 

110
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
9 GENETIC DRIFT 
AND GENE FLOW
The peculiar multilegged condition of the 
bullfrog (see ﬁ g. 1.1) is a rarity in nature. Yet, we 
witnessed in a particular locality an exception-
ally high incidence of this trait. We surmised that 
the deformity may have been caused by a reces-
sive mutant gene. Since harmful recessive genes 
in a population tend to be carried mostly in the 
heterozygous state, the multilegged frogs probably 
arose from matings of heterozygous carriers. The 
probability that two or more carriers will actually 
meet is obviously greater in a small population than 
in a large breeding assemblage. In fact, the number 
of matings of carriers of a particular recessive allele 
in a population is mainly a function of the size of 
the population. Most populations are not inﬁ nitely 
large, and many ﬂ uctuate in size from time to time.
During a period when a population is small, 
chance matings and segregations could lead to an 
uncommonly high frequency of a given recessive 
gene. For example, it is not unthinkable that an 
unduly harsh winter sharply reduced the size of our 
particular bullfrog population. By sheer chance, an 
unusually large proportion of heterozygous carri-
ers of the multilegged condition might have sur-
vived the winter’s severity and prevailed as parents 
in the ensuing spring’s breeding aggregation. In 
this manner, the “multilegged” gene, although not 
at all advantageous, would occur with an extraor-
dinarily high incidence in the new generation of 
offspring. Such a fortuitous change in the genetic 
makeup of a population that may arise when the 
population becomes restricted in size is known as 
genetic drift.
ROLE OF GENETIC DRIFT
Examination of a natural situation that may be 
illustrative of genetic drift will lead us into a sim-
pliﬁ ed mathematical consideration of the concept. 
Coleman Goin, a naturalist at the University of 
Florida, studied the distribution of pigment vari-
ants of a terrestrial frog, known impressively as 
Eleutherodactylus planirostris. We shall refer to 
the frog simply by its vernacular name, the green-
house frog. This frog may possess either of two 
pigmentary patterns, mottled or striped (ﬁ g. 9.1). 
A unique feature of the greenhouse frog is the ter-
restrial development of its eggs. That is, the eggs 
need not be submerged completely in water, but 

Mottled
Striped
Greenhouse Frog
Figure 9.1 Distribtion of the greenhouse frog in Florida, and the relative  frequencies 
of the two pattern variants, mottled and striped. Immediately after their  initial introduction, the 
populations were small and isolated and differed appreciably in the  incidences of mottled and 
striped forms. The varied frequencies were likely not be due to natural selection but represented 
the outcome of chance ﬂ uctuations of genes, or genetic drift. 
(Based on studies by Coleman Goin.)
 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
111
can develop in moist Earth. This important qual-
ity has a considerable bearing on the dispersal of 
the frogs. Goin successfully reared eggs in ﬂ ower 
pots two-thirds ﬁ lled with beach sand and placed 
in a ﬁ nger bowl of water. The analysis of a large 
number of progeny hatched from many different 
clutches of eggs revealed that the striped pattern is 
dominant to the mottled pattern. 
The aptly named greenhouse frog is native to 
Cuba, the Cayman Islands and the northern Baha-
mas and later became established in Florida. Cuba 
was the center of dispersal from which the Florida 
populations is derived. In recent decades this tiny 
frog has become much more widespread throughout 
southern Florida, and disjunct colonies have been 
introduced into Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Alabama, Missouri, Oklahoma, and even Hawaii. 
However, shortly after its introduction into Florida, 
the greenhouse frog population consisted of a series 
of small isolated colonies, as shown in ﬁ gure 9.1. 
The proportions of the two patterns varied in differ-
ent colonies in Florida. In several colonies, only the 
mottled type occurred, while in other colonies only 
the striped type could be found. Most populations 
consisted of a mix of the two types of frog. What 
could account for the local preponderance of one or 
the other pattern, or even the absence of one of the 
contrasting patterns?
Goin conjectures that the greenhouse frog was 
introduced into Florida by means of clutches of 
eggs accidentally included, as stowaways, in ship-
ments of tropical plants and landscaping material 
from Cuba, a distinct possibility in view of the ter-
restrial development of the eggs that undoubtedly 
accounts for its introduction into other U.S. states. 
Thus, a single clutch of introduced eggs could ini-
tiate a small colony that, in turn, would establish at 
the outset a given pattern or proportion of patterns. 
The presence of only mottled forms in a popula-
tion may be due to the chance circumstance that 
only mottled eggs were introduced. Or perhaps 
both striped and mottled eggs were included in the 
shipment, but by sheer accident one type was lost 
in succeeding generations.

112 
Understanding Evolution
produces only two offspring. The possible geno-
types of the progeny, and the chance associations of 
the genotypes, are shown in table 9.1.
Several meaningful considerations emerge 
from table 9.1. For example, the chance that the ﬁ rst 
offspring from a cross of two heterozygous parents 
will be AA is 1/4. The second event is independent 
of the ﬁ rst; hence, the chance that the second off-
spring will be AA is also 1/4. The chance that both 
offspring will be AA is the product of the separate 
probabilities of the two independent events, 1/4 × 
1/4, or 1/16.
We may now ask: What is the probability of 
producing two offspring, one AA and the other Aa, 
in no particular order? From table 9.1, we can 
see that the chance of obtaining an AA individual 
followed by an Aa individual is 2/16. Now, the 
wording of our question requires that we consider 
a second possibility, that of an Aa offspring fol-
lowed by an AA offspring (also 2/16). These two 
probabilities must be added together to arrive at the 
chance of producing the two genotypes irrespective 
of the order of birth. Hence, in the case in question, 
the chance is 2/16 + 2/16, or 4/16. In like manner, it 
may be ascertained that the expectation of obtaining 
one AA and one aa offspring (in no given order) is 
2/16 and that of producing one Aa and one aa (in 
any sequence) is 4/16.
The essential point is that any one of the above 
circumstances may occur in a given colony. We 
It should be understood that Goin did not prove 
that the unusual distribution and frequency of the 
two pigment patterns were due solely to chance. 
The demonstration of genetic drift in any natural 
population is an extremely difﬁ cult task. Genetic 
drift of the variant pigment patterns is, however, a 
reasonable explanation. Today the greenhouse frog 
has a much more extensive distribution, making 
for a much more complex state of affairs.
THEORY OF GENETIC DRIFT
The theory of genetic drift was systematically devel-
oped in the 1930s by the distinguished American 
geneticist Sewall Wright. In fact, the phenomenon 
of drift is frequently called the Sewall Wright effect. 
The Sewall Wright effect refers speciﬁ cally to the 
random ﬂ uctuations (or drift) of gene frequencies 
from generation to generation in a population of 
small size. Because of the limited size of the breed-
ing population, the gene pool of the new generation 
may not be at all representative of the parental gene 
pool from which it was drawn. 
The essential features of the process of drift 
may be seen in the following modest mathematical 
treatment. Let us assume that the numerous isolated 
colonies in Florida were each settled by only two 
frogs, a male and a female, both of constitutions 
Aa. Let us further suppose that each mated pair 
TABLE 9.1     Chance Distribution of Offspring of Two Heterozygous Parents (Aa  Aa)
 Genotype of 
Probability of 
Genotype of 
Probability of
   rst offspring 
  rst event 
second offspring 
second event 
Total Probability
 
AA 
1/4 
AA 
1/4 
Both offspring AA, 1/16
 
AA 
1/4 
Aa 
2/4 
AA followed by Aa, 2/16
 
AA 
1/4 
aa 
1/4 
AA followed by aa, 1/16
 
Aa 
2/4 
AA 
1/4 
Aa followed by AA, 2/16
 
Aa 
2/4 
Aa 
2/4 
Both offspring Aa, 4/16
 
Aa 
2/4 
aa 
1/4 
Aa followed by aa, 2/16
 
aa 
1/4 
AA 
1/4 
aa followed by AA, 1/16
 
aa 
1/4 
Aa 
2/4 
aa followed by Aa, 2/16
 
aa 
1/4 
aa 
1/4 
Both offspring aa, 1/16 

 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
113
the possibility exists that none of the prehistoric 
 immigrants happened to be of blood group B. It 
is also conceivable that a few individuals of the 
migrant band did carry the I B allele but they failed 
to leave descendants. 
The interpretation based on genetic drift should 
not be considered as deﬁ nitive. The operation of 
natural selection cannot be ﬂ atly dismissed. Most 
Native Americans possess only blood group O, 
or stated another way, contain only the recessive 
blood allele i. With few exceptions, the North 
American Indian tribes have lost not only blood 
group allele I B but also the allele that controls type 
A blood I A. The loss of both alleles, I A and I B, by 
sheer chance, perhaps deﬁ es credibility. Indeed, 
many modern students of evolution are convinced 
that some strong selective force led to the rapid 
elimination of the I A and I B genes in the Native 
American populations. If this is true, it would offer 
an impressive example of the action of natural 
selection in modifying the frequencies of genes in 
a population. 
Native Americans are also known to have 
a high frequency of albinism. The incidence 
of albinism among the Cuna Indians of the San 
Blas Province in Panama is about 1 in 200, which 
contrasts sharply with the 1 in 20,000 ﬁ gure 
for European Caucasians. The Hopi of Arizona 
and the Zuni of New Mexico, like the Cuna, are 
also remarkable in their high numbers of albino 
individuals. 
Because these Native American populations 
are small, one might suspect the operation of 
genetic drift, notwithstanding the adverse effects 
of the albino allele. It is difﬁ cult to imagine, how-
ever, that by chance alone this detrimental allele 
could reach a high frequency independently in 
several Native American populations. Charles 
M. Woolf, geneticist at Arizona State University, 
has suggested that the high incidence of albinism 
among the Hopi of Arizona reﬂ ects an inimitable 
form of selection that he terms cultural selection. 
Albinos have been highly regarded in the tradi-
tional Hopi society and actually have enjoyed 
appreciable success in sexual activity. The albino 
may concentrate on one situation. The probability 
that a colony will have only two AA offspring is 
1 in 16. Thus, by the simple play of chance, the 
parents initiating the colony might not leave an aa 
offspring. The a gene would be immediately lost in 
the population. Subsequent generations descended 
from the ﬁ rst-generation AA individuals would 
contain, barring mutation, only AA types. Chance 
alone can thus lead to an irreversible situation. 
A gene once lost could not readily establish itself 
again in the population. The decisive factor is the 
size of the population. When populations are small, 
striking changes can occur from one generation to 
the next. Some genes may be lost or reduced in fre-
quency by sheer chance; others may be accidentally 
increased in frequency. Thus, the genetic architec-
ture of a small population may change irrespec-
tive of the selective advantage or disadvantage of 
a trait. Indeed, a beneﬁ cial gene may be lost in a 
small population before natural selection has had 
the opportunity to act on it favorably.
FOUNDER EFFECT
When a few individuals or a small group migrate 
from a main population, only a limited portion of 
the parental gene pool is carried away. In the small 
migrant group, some genes may be absent or occur 
in such low frequency that they may be easily lost. 
The unique frequencies of genes that arise in pop-
ulations derived from small bands of colonizers, 
or “founders,” has been called the founder effect. 
This expression emphasizes the conditions or cir-
cumstances that foster the operation of genetic 
drift. 
The American Indians afford a possible 
example of the loss of genes by the founder prin-
ciple. North American Indian tribes, for the most 
part, surprisingly lack the allele (designated I B) 
that governs type B blood. However, in Asia, the 
ancestral home of the American Indian, the I B 
allele is widespread. The ancestral population that 
migrated across the Bering Strait to North  America 
might well have been very small. Accordingly, 

114 
Understanding Evolution
blood types. In addition, data were accumulated on 
the incidences of four external traits—namely, the 
conﬁ guration of the ear lobes (which either may be 
attached to the side of the head or hang free), right- 
or left-handedness, the presence or absence of hair 
on the middle segments of the ﬁ ngers (mid-digital 
hair), and “hitchhiker’s thumb,” technically termed 
distal hyperextensibility (ﬁ g. 9.2).
The frequencies of many of these traits are 
strikingly different in the Dunker community from 
those of the general United States and West Ger-
man populations. Blood group A is much more 
frequent among the Dunkers; the O group is some-
what rarer in the Dunkers; and the frequencies of 
groups B and AB have dropped to exceptionally 
low levels in the Dunker community. In fact, the 
I B allele has almost been lost in the isolate. Most 
of the carriers of the I B allele were not born in the 
community but were converts who entered the iso-
late by marriage.
A noticeable change has also occurred in 
the incidences of the M and N blood types in the 
Dunker community. Type M has increased in fre-
quency, and type N has dwindled in frequency as 
compared with the incidences of these blood types 
in either the general United States population or 
the West German population. Only in the Rh blood 
groups do the Dunkers conform closely to their 
surrounding large population.
In physical traits, equally striking differ-
ences are found. Brieﬂ y, the frequencies of mid-
digital hair patterns, distal hyperextensibility of 
the thumb, and attached ear lobes are signiﬁ cantly 
lower in the Dunker isolate than in the surrounding 
American populations. The Dunkers do, however, 
agree well with other large populations in the inci-
dence of left-handedness. It would thus appear that 
the peculiar constellation of gene frequencies in 
the Dunker community—some uncommonly high, 
others uniquely low, and still others, unchanged 
from the general large population—can be best 
attributed to chance ﬂ uctuations, or genetic drift.
There is no concurrence of opinion among 
evolutionists concerning the operation of genetic 
drift in natural populations, but few would deny 
male has been admired, and some have become 
legendary for leaving large numbers of offspring. 
Woolf further notes that the fading of old customs 
among the Hopi is beginning to nullify any repro-
ductive advantage held by albino males in past 
generations. The frequency of albinism may be 
expected to decline with the dissolution of the tra-
ditional Hopi way of life.
RELIGIOUS ISOLATES
The most likely situation to witness genetic drift 
is one in which the population is virtually a small, 
self-contained breeding unit, or isolate, in the midst 
of a larger population. This typiﬁ es the Dunkers, a 
very small religious sect in eastern Pennsylvania. 
The Dunkers are descendants of the Old German 
Baptist Brethren, who came to the United States 
in the early eighteenth century. In the 1950s, 
Bentley Glass, a professor at Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, studied the community of Dunkers in 
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, which then num-
bered about 300 individuals. In each generation, 
the number of parents has remained stable at about 
90. The Dunkers live on farms intermingled with 
the general population, but are genetically isolated 
by rigid marriage customs. The choice of mates is 
restricted to members within the religious group.
Glass, with his colleagues, compared the 
frequencies of certain traits for the Dunker com-
munity, the surrounding heterogeneous American 
population, and the population in western Germany 
from which the Dunker sect had emigrated cen-
turies ago. Such a comparison of a small isolate 
with its large host and parent populations should 
reveal the effectiveness, if any, of genetic drift. In 
other words, if the small isolated population shows 
aberrant gene frequencies as compared to the large 
parent population, and if the other forces of evolu-
tion can be excluded, then the genetic differences 
can be ascribed to drift.
Analyses were made of the patterns of inheri-
tance of three blood group systems—the ABO 
blood groups, the MN blood types, and the Rh 

Attached Lobe
Free Lobe
Hyperextensibility
of Thumb
Mid-digital
Hair
Left-handedness
Figure 9.2 Inheritable physical traits—nature of ear lobes, “hitchhiker’s thumb,” 
mid-digital hair, and left-handedness—studied by Bentley Glass and his co-workers in 
members of the small religious community of Dunkers in Pennsylvania. The distinc-
tive frequency of most of these traits in the Dunker population suggests the operation of 
genetic drift.
 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
115

116 
Understanding Evolution
that began about 1720 and continued until about 
1850. The vast majority of Amish live in rela-
tively isolated colonies in Pennsylvania, Ohio, 
and Indiana. Each community is descended from 
a small immigrant stock, as attested by the rela-
tively few family names in a given community. 
Analyses have shown that eight names account 
for 80 percent of the Amish families in Lancaster 
County,  Pennsylvania. Other Amish communi-
ties also have a high frequency of certain family 
names, as table 9.2 shows.
Marriages have been largely conﬁ ned within 
members of the Amish sect, with a resulting 
high degree of consanguinity. Matings of close 
relatives have tended to promote the meeting of 
two normal, but carrier, parents. Four recessive 
 disorders manifest themselves with uncommonly 
high frequencies, each in a different Amish group: 
the Ellis–van Creveld syndrome, pyruvate kinase-
deﬁ cient hemolytic anemia, hemophilia B (Christ-
mas disease), and a form of limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy (Troyer syndrome).
We may consider in some detail the Ellis-van 
Creveld syndrome, which occurs in the Lancaster 
County population (see ﬁ g.1.6). Dozens of affected 
persons have been identiﬁ ed in a small number of 
sibships, most of which have unaffected parents. 
that small religious isolates have felt the effect of 
random sampling. It should be clear, however, that 
genetic drift becomes ineffectual when a small 
community increases in size. Fluctuations or shifts 
in gene frequencies in large populations are deter-
mined almost exclusively by selection.
AMISH OF PENNSYLVANIA
We have seen that gene frequencies in small reli-
gious isolates may differ signiﬁ cantly from the 
original large populations from which the isolates 
were derived. Another feature of small isolates is 
the occurrence of rare recessive traits in greater 
numbers than would be expected from random 
mating in a large population. This is witnessed 
among the Old Order Amish societies in the east-
ern United States. 
The Amish sect is an offshoot of the 
 Mennonite Church; both religious groups set-
tled in the United States to escape persecu-
tion in Europe in past centuries. The Amish are 
plain dressed, rural-living people who cultivate 
the religious life apart from the world, resisting 
modern conveniences. Present-day communities 
were founded by waves of Amish immigration 
TABLE 9.2     Old Order Amish Family Names in Three American Communities*
 
Lancaster Co., Pa. 
Holmes Co., Ohio 
Mif  in Co., Pa.
 
Stolzfus** 
23% 
Miller 
26% 
Yoder 
28%
 
King 
12% 
Yoder 
17% 
Peachey 
19%
 
Fischer 
12% 
Troyer 
11% 
Hostetler 
13%
 
Beiler 
12% 
Hershberger 
5% 
Byler 
6%
 
Lapp 
7% 
Raber 
5% 
Zook 
6%
 
Zook 
6% 
Schlabach 
5% 
Speicher 
5%
 
Esh*** 
6% 
Weaver 
4% 
Kanagy 
4%
 
Glick 
  3% 
Mast 
  4% 
Swarey 
  4%
 
 
81% 
 
77% 
 
85%
  
Totals:
  
1,106 families, 1957 
1,611 families, 1960 
238 families, 1951
*From data compiled by Victor A. McKusick of John Hopkins University.
**Including Stolzfoos.
***Including Esch.

 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
117
consanguineous marriages are not made by choice, 
the limited size of the Amish population restricts 
the availability of potential mates and virtually 
forces marriages of close relatives. Indeed, second-
cousin and third-cousin marriages are rather com-
mon among the Amish. The relationship between 
genetic drift and inbreeding thus becomes clear: the 
closed nature of a small population creates a situ-
ation wherein few nonrelatives are present in the 
population. Because matings of genetically related 
individuals increase the probability of homozygos-
ity in the progeny, a relatively large number of rare 
recessive homozygotes are expected, and do occur 
in endogamous populations.
The smaller the population and the longer it 
has been isolated, the greater the chance that most 
members of the population are related to each 
other through common ancestors. This is exempli-
ﬁ ed by the isolated island of Tristan da Cunha in 
the South Atlantic (ﬁ g. 9.3). This small island is 
of historical interest. In 1816, a British military 
Pedigree analysis has revealed that Samuel King 
and his wife, who immigrated in 1744, are ances-
tral to all parents of the sibships. Either Samuel 
King or his wife carried the recessive gene. None 
of their children were affected, but subsequent 
generations were. Evidently, previously concealed 
detrimental recessive genes are brought to light by 
the increased chances of two heterozygotes meet-
ing in a small population.
CONSANGUINITY 
AND GENETIC DRIFT
Small populations not only provide opportunities 
for genetic drift but for consanguinity as well. As 
witnessed among the Amish, offspring afﬂ icted 
with recessive disorders arise more often from 
unions of close relatives than from matings between 
unrelated persons. Yet the Amish sternly frown 
on ﬁ rst-cousin marriages. Nonetheless, although 
Ascension I.
(St. Helena)
St. Helena I.
(U.K.)
TRISTAN
DA CUNHA GROUP
(St. Helena)
Arquipélago de
Fernando de Noronha
(Brazil)
Ilha da Trindade
(Brazil)
Ilhas Martin Vaz
(Brazil)
SOUTH
AMERICA
AFRICA
S o u t h  A t l a n t i c  O c e a n
I n d i a n
O c e a n
Gough I.
Nightingale I.
Tristan I.
Inaccessible I.
Figure 9.3 Tristan da Cunha and its near neighbors Inaccessible Island, Nightingale Island, and Gough Island 
make up the most remote inhabited archipelago in the world. These volcanic islands in South Atlantic Ocean are 
1,750 miles (2,816 kilometers) from South Africa and 2,088 miles (3,360 kilometers) from South America.

Figure 9.4 Gradient of frequencies of the IB blood-group gene from central Asia to 
western Europe. 
(Based on studies by A. E. Mourant.)
25–30%
Atlantic Ocean
Mediterranean Sea
20–25%
15–20%
10–15%
5–10%
0–5%
Turkey
North Africa
Scandinavia
Portugal
Spain
Pyrenees
Italy
France
Eastern Europe
Russia
United Kingdom
118 
Understanding Evolution
Rather, random mating prevails, but the mar-
riages prove to be consanguineous because most 
of the potential mates are already relatives by 
common descent.
GENE FLOW
A rich archeological record reveals appreciable 
movement on the part of early human populations. 
Some migrations were sporadic, in small groups; 
others were more or less continual streams involv-
ing large numbers of people. Large-scale immi-
grations followed by interbreeding have the effect 
of introducing new genes to the host populations. 
The diffusion of genes into populations through 
migrations is referred to as gene ﬂ ow.
The graded distribution of the IB blood-
group allele in Europe represents the historical 
consequence of invasions by Mongolians who 
pushed westward repeatedly between the sixth 
garrison was established on Tristan for the sole 
purpose of safeguarding against the escape of 
Napoleon from the neighboring, though distant, 
St. Helena. Within a few months, it became glar-
ingly apparent that Tristan was inconsequential 
to Napoleon’s safekeeping. The battery of sol-
diers was hastily withdrawn, but a Scots corporal, 
William Glass, his family, and a few soldiers 
remained behind. From 1817 until 1908, women 
from St. Helena and shipwrecked sailors joined 
the community to bring the total to a mere 15 indi-
viduals. The population of roughly 270 traces their 
origin to the 15 early  settlers.
The English geneticist D. F. Roberts has 
calculated that in Tristan the probability is high 
that any two young individuals contemplating 
marriage share numerous genes due to the com-
mon ancestry of their parents. Roberts stresses 
that the relatively high level of consanguinity 
on the island does not reﬂ ect a conscious pref-
erence for marriage between close relatives. 

 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
119
United States, the long-range effect of Chinese-
American intermarriage is a reduction in the inci-
dence of hemolytic disease of the newborn. 
EUROPEAN GENES 
IN AFRICAN AMERICANS
Increasingly, people today question the need for 
and validity of the term race when applied to 
humans. This is due, in part, to the realization that 
there is more genetic diversity within so-called 
human races than between races. Likewise, stud-
ies continue to show that all people are closely 
related and have a common ancestor that is less 
than 200,000 years old (see chapter 17). Nonethe-
less, people still self-identify as being part of a 
particular racial group.
For nearly four centuries, admixture, or the 
interchange of genes among populations, between 
American Caucasians of European ancestry and 
African Americans has been commonplace and 
widespread. The forced migration of African 
American slaves to the New World can be traced 
to 1619, when slaves ﬁ rst arrived at Jamestown 
Virginia; Spanish expeditions likely ﬁ rst brought 
African slaves to this country as early as 1526 
but no permanent settlements resulted from those 
 forays to North America. 
Over the past 300 plus years, the extent of 
Caucasian–African American admixture has been 
variable. The recent mobility of peoples from one 
part of the country to another has diminished the 
variability in admixture measures compared to 
earlier studies done in the 1950s and 1960s. With 
advances in DNA technology, the ability to mea-
sure this phenomenon has become more reﬁ ned. 
Historically, geneticists and anthropologists used 
single blood groups, such as the Duffy blood factor 
gene, but now there are more informative genetic 
markers for measuring admixture.
During the peak of the Atlantic slave trade, 
the majority of the African slaves originated from 
the coastal regions of western and central Africa. 
Anthropological geneticist Mark D. Shriver of 
Pennsylvania State University and colleagues esti-
mated the European genetic contribution to nine 
and sixteenth centuries (ﬁ g. 9.4). There is a high 
frequency of the IB allele in central Asia. In 
Europe, the frequency of the IB gene diminishes 
steadily from the borders of Asia to a low level 
of 5 percent or less in parts of Holland, France, 
Spain, and Portugal. The Basque peoples, who 
inhabit the region of the Pyrenees in Spain and 
France, have the lowest frequency of the IB allele 
in Europe—below 3 percent. From a biological 
standpoint, the Basque community of long stand-
ing is a cohesive, endogamous mating unit. The 
exceptionally low incidence of the IB gene among 
the Basques may be taken to indicate that there 
has been little intermarriage with surrounding 
populations. It is possible that a few centuries ago 
the IB allele was completely absent from the self-
contained Basque community.
The exchange of genes between populations 
may have dramatic consequences. Until recently, Rh 
disease was virtually unknown in China. Less than 
80 years ago, all Chinese women were Rh-positive 
(RR). However, intermarriage between immigrant 
Americans and the native Chinese has led to the 
introduction of the Rh-negative allele (r) in the 
Chinese population. No Rh disease would be wit-
nessed in the immediate offspring of American 
men and Chinese women. By contrast, all mar-
riages of Rh-negative American women (rr) and 
Rh-positive Chinese men (RR) would be of the 
incompatible type. All children by these Chinese 
fathers would be Rh-positive (Rr) and potential 
victims of hemolytic disease.
Whereas American immigrants introduce 
the Rh-negative allele (r) into Chinese popula-
tions where it formerly was not present, Chinese 
immigrants (all of whom are RR) introduce more 
Rh-positive genes (R) into the American popula-
tions, thus diluting the Rh-negative gene pool in 
the United States. Initially, the Rh-positive Chi-
nese men (RR) married to Rh-negative American 
women (rr) would result in an increased incidence 
of Rh-diseased infants. In later generations, how-
ever, the frequency of Rh-negative women in the 
United States would be lower, inasmuch as women 
of mixed Chinese-American origin would be either 
RR or Rr, predominantly the former. Thus, in the 

120 
Understanding Evolution
epidemiology. Three of the nine genes studied 
are shown in table 9.3. They provide examples 
of the extraordinary variability in modern genetic 
markers and the varying amount of admixture 
between Europeans and African Americans. 
For example, in the FY-NULL*1 gene, there is 
U.S. African American populations using nine 
autosomal DNA markers. Shriver used highly 
variable DNA markers capable of differentiat-
ing major geographic and ethnic groups. These 
“population speciﬁ c alleles” have great utility 
for studying population genetics, forensics, and 
Population
Allelic Frequency 
for APO*1
Allelic Frequency 
for FY-NULL*1
Allelic Frequency 
for GC-15
Mean 
Admixture
African
Nigeria 1
0.409
0.000
0.081
*
Nigeria 2
0.480
0.000
0.085
*
Central African Republic
0.435
0.000
0.067
*
African Average
0.441
0.000
0.078
*
European
England
0.934
1.000
0.622
*
Ireland
0.915
1.000
0.633
*
Germany
0.933
1.000
0.567
*
European Average
0.927
1.000
0.607
*
African American
1. Non-Southern
Detroit
0.533
0.133
0.177
16.3
Maywood, Ill.
0.520
0.185
0.200
18.8
New York
0.522
0.210
0.146
19.8
Philadelphia
0.499
0.153
0.142
12.9
Pittsburg
0.551
0.217
0.129
20.2
Baltimore
0.505
0.141
0.176
15.5
2. Southern
Charleston, S.C.
0.500
0.112
0.133
11.6
New Orleans
0.593
0.200
0.215
22.5
Houston
0.525
0.188
0.313
16.9
Caribbean
Jamaica
0.511
0.065
0.113
6.8
European Americans
Detroit
0.935
0.990
0.564
*
Pittsburg
0.917
0.983
0.569
*
Louisiana (Cajuns)
0.935
0.989
0.628
*
Compiled from Parra, E., Marcini, A., Akey, J., Martinson, J., Batzer, M., Cooper, R., Forrester, T., Allison, D. B., Deka, R.,  Ferrell, R. E., and 
Shriver, M. D. (1998) Estimating African-American Admixture Proportions by use of Population-Speciﬁ c Alleles Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:1839-1851.
TABLE 9.3 Frequencies of Population-Speci  c Alleles in African, Jamacan, and American 
Populations and Estimates of Genetic Contribution to U.S. African American 
Populations from Europeans

 
CHAPTER 9 Genetic Drift and Gene Flow  
121
from that of other regions of the American South. 
Louisiana, and especially New Orleans, was a 
bastion for African Americans who could escape 
harsh slavery if they could ﬁ nd their way there. 
Since early colonial days, African Americans and 
people of mixed racial ancestry lived freely among 
Europeans in New Orleans, and many were able 
to establish  themselves as “free people of color” 
(les gens de couleur libres). Historically known 
as Creoles or Creoles of Color, this population 
had and still has great inﬂ uence on the ethos of 
this culturally unique American city. Although 
some people take offense to the use of the term 
Creole, it is not considered a racially derogatory 
term in New Orleans and South Louisiana—quite 
the opposite. The Creole culture has contributed 
immensely to the culture and traditions of New 
Orleans, and native New Orleanians and tourists 
alike relish in the food, architecture, and other cul-
tural features that “Creoles of Color” have brought 
to the Crescent City.
100 percent divergence between Africans and 
Europeans, making it an especially discerning tool 
for differentiating between populations. For the 
other genes, APO*1 and GC-15, the divergence 
is not quite as great but they do show signiﬁ cant 
divergence, allowing them to serve as effective 
tools for differentiating between populations.
By using a combination of DNA markers, 
called a haplotype, Shriver was easily able to dif-
ferentiate populations and more powerfully mea-
sure the amount of genetic admixture in each 
population than would be possible with any single 
genetic marker. Overall, the amount of admix-
ture in U.S. populations varies from the lowest, 
11.6 percent in Charleston, South Carolina, to the 
highest of 22.5 percent in New Orleans.  By com-
parison, the Caribbean island of Jamaica has a dra-
matically lower rate of admixture of 6.8 percent. 
New Orleans has the highest level of admix-
ture of the cities studied, and the history of slav-
ery in Louisiana territory is markedly different 

122
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
10
Any large assemblage of a particular organ-
ism is generally not distributed equally nor uni-
formly throughout its territory or range in nature. 
A widespread group of plants or animals is typi-
cally subdivided into numerous local populations, 
each physically separated from the others to some 
extent. The environmental conditions in different 
parts of the range of an organism are not likely to 
be identical. We may thus expect that a given local 
population will consist of genetic types adapted to a 
speciﬁ c set of prevailing environmental conditions. 
The degree to which each population maintains 
its genetic distinctness is governed by the extent 
to which interbreeding between the populations 
occurs. A free interchange of genes between popula-
tions tends to blur the differences between the popu-
lations. But what are the consequences when gene 
exchange between populations is greatly restricted 
or prevented? This chapter addresses itself to this 
question.
VARIATION BETWEEN POPULATIONS
Our ﬁ rst consideration is to demonstrate that heri-
table variations exist among the various breeding 
populations in different geographical localities of 
an organism. Jens Clausen, David Keck, and Wil-
liam Hiesey of the Carnegie Institution of Wash-
ington at Stanford, California, demonstrated that 
each of the populations of the yarrow plant Achillea
lanulosa from different parts of California are each 
adapted to their respective habitat. As ﬁ gure 10.1 
shows, the variations in height of the plant are 
correlated with altitudinal differences. The short-
est plants are from the highest altitudes, and the 
plants increase in height in a gradient fashion with 
decreasing altitude. The term cline, or character 
gradient, has been applied to such situations where 
a character varies more or less continuously with a 
gradual change in the environmental terrain.
The observation by itself that the yarrow plants 
are phenotypically dissimilar at different eleva-
tions does not indicate that they are genetically 
different. If the observed variations are claimed as 
local adaptations resulting from natural selection, 
then a hereditary basis for the differences in height 
should be demonstrated. It is often difﬁ cult to 
obtain data that discloses the hereditary nature of 
population differences. In this respect, the studies 
of Clausen and his co-workers are commendable. 
RACES AND SPECIES

cm.
cm.
ft.
ft.
100 
100 
12,000
12,000 
8,000
4,000
8,000 
50 
50 
Achillea Ianulosa
Mather
Aspen
Valley
Sierra Nevada Range
Great Basin Plateau
Yosemite
Creek
Tenaya
Lake
Tuolumne
Meadows
Big Horn
Lake
Timberline
Conway
Summit
Leevining
Figure 10.1 Clinal variation in the yarrow plant, Achillea lanulosa. The increase in height of 
the plant is more or less continuous with decreasing altitude. The plants shown here are representatives 
from different populations in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California that were grown in a uniform 
garden at Stanford, California. Each plant illustrated is one of the average height for the given popula-
tion; the graph adjacent to the plant reveals the distribution of heights within the population. 
(From Clausen, Keck, and Hiesey, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 581, 1948.)
 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
123
The plants shown in ﬁ gure 10.1 had actually been 
grown together in a uniform experimental garden 
at Stanford, California. Transplanted from various 
localities, the plants developed differently from 
one another in the same experimental garden, 
revealing that each population had evolved its own 
distinctive complex of genes. At each environ-
mental gradient, local populations are genetically 
adapted to narrow selective pressures.
SUBSPECIES
The variation pattern in organisms may be dis-
crete, or discontinuous, particularly when the 
populations are separated from each other by 
pronounced physical barriers. This is exempliﬁ ed 
by the varieties of the carpenter bee (Xylocopa 
nobilis) in the Celebes and neighboring islands of 
Indonesia (ﬁ g. 10.2). As shown by the studies of 
J. van der Vecht of the Museum of Natural  History 
at Leiden in the  Netherlands, there are three dif-
ferent  varieties of carpenter bee on the mainland 
of Celebes and at least three kinds on the adjacent 
small islands. These geographical variants  differ 
conspicuously in the coloration of the small, soft 
hairs that cover the surface of the body. The ﬁ rst 
abdominal segment is invariably clothed with 
bright yellow hairs. However, each variety has 
evolved a unique constellation of color on the 
other abdominal segments and also on the thorax.
The variations in the carpenter bees within 
and between islands are well deﬁ ned and easily 
distinguishable. One may refer to populations with 
well-marked discontinuities as race or  subspecies. 
Races are simply geographical aggregates of 
populations that differ in the incidence of genetic 

Yellow
Rust
Brown
Black
Sangiho Is.
Sula Is.
Tukanbeai
Is.
Celebes
Figure 10.2 Geographic variation of color patterns in females of the carpenter bee, 
Xylocopa nobilis, in the Celebes and neighboring islands in Indonesia. Each geographic 
subspecies has evolved a distinctive constellation of colors. 
(Based on studies by J. van der Vecht.)
124 
Understanding Evolution
frogs from widely different localities. He wished 
to ascertain the limits of temperatures that the 
embryos can endure or tolerate. The ﬁ ndings on 
four different geographic populations in the east-
ern United States are shown in ﬁ gure 10.3.
Embryos of northern Lithobates pipiens pop-
ulations are more resistant to low temperatures 
and less tolerant of high temperatures than are 
embryos from southern populations. Embryos of 
populations from Vermont and New Jersey have 
traits. How genetically different two assemblages 
of  populations must be to warrant racial designa-
tions is an open question.
Some of the problems inherent in delimiting 
races are exempliﬁ ed by the different temperature-
adapted populations of the North American leop-
ard frog, Lithobates pipiens. The late John A. 
Moore, then at Columbia University and later at 
the University of California, tested the effects of 
temperature on the development of the embryos of 

comparable ranges of temperature tolerances. 
These northern embryos can resist temperatures as 
low as 5 °C. Embryos from Florida differ markedly 
from those of northern populations. Embryos from 
southern Florida (latitude 27 °N) can tolerate tem-
peratures as high as 33 °C, but are very susceptible 
to low temperatures. Hence, northern and south-
ern populations have become adapted to different 
environments in their respective territories.
Since Moore’s classic 1940s experiments on 
leopard frog embryonic temperature tolerance, 
other more telling attributes have been studied in 
this broad-ranging amphibian. As it turns out, the 
diversity of mating calls across thermal and geo-
graphic clines reduces or eliminates interbreeding. 
Vermont
5° – 28° 
New Jersey
5° – 28° 
Northern Florida
9° – 33° 
Southern Florida
11° – 33° 
Figure 10.3 Limits of temperature tolerance of 
embryos of the leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens) from 
different geographical populations. Embryos of north-
ern populations are more resistant to low temperatures 
and less tolerant of high temperatures than are embryos 
from southern populations. 
(Based on studies by John A. Moore.)
 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
125
Using a combination of physical, biochemical, 
genetic, and behavioral characters, scientists have 
been able to deduce a more uniﬁ ed picture of the 
relationship among the various American leopard 
frogs. Today scientists recognize that what were 
once thought to be northern and southern races or 
subspecies of leopard frogs are distinct species: 
the southern leopard frog (Lithobates utricularia) 
and the northern leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens). 
Males of the northern species call to their waiting 
females with “a deep rattling snore interspersed 
with clucking grunts,” lasting about a second, 
while the southern species invites its mate with 
“short chuckle-like guttural trill.” Mating calls 
are excellent examples of prezygotic (ethological/
behavioral) isolating mechanisms, which are dis-
cussed in the section ‘Reproductive Isolating 
Mechanisms’ later in this chapter. Using similar 
criteria, a plains leopard frog (Lithobates blairi) 
and a Rio Grande leopard frog (Lithobates ber-
landieri) have also been recognized as distinct 
species within what used to be considered a large 
species complex with several geographic races or 
subspecies (ﬁ g. 10.4). This example demonstrates 
how new information leads to the re-evaluation of 
hypotheses and the formulation of new models, 
as discussed in chapter 1 regarding hypothetico-
deductive reasoning and the scientiﬁ c method.
Conceptually, subspecies may be best thought 
of as units of organization below the species level. In 
other words, subspecies may be considered as stages 
in the transformation of populations into species. But 
what constitutes a species? Up to this point, we have 
assiduously avoided the use of the term species. A 
discussion of the process leading to the formation of 
species will facilitate understanding of the term itself.
THE SPECIES CONCEPT
In recognition of the centrality of the species con-
cept to modern biology, Harvard evolutionist and 
two-time Pulitzer Prize winner Edward O. Wilson 
declared the species “the atomic unit” of biology. 
Darwin likewise recognized the paramount impor-
tance of the species concept but, like present-day 

scientists, found that no single deﬁ nition is satis-
factory to all situations observed in nature.
Darwin said it this way:
No one deﬁ nition has satisﬁ ed all naturalists; yet 
every naturalist knows vaguely what he means 
when he speaks of a species.
Darwin’s solution was to trust the experts: 
In determining whether a form should be ranked 
as a species or a variety, the opinion of natural-
ists having sound judgment and wide experience 
seems the only guide to follow. 
In other words, for Darwin the best remedy to 
the species dilemma was to leave the deﬁ nition of 
what is or is not a species to the experts who study 
Northern leopard frog 
(Lithobates pipiens)
Southern leopard frog 
(Lithobates utricularia)
Plains leopard frog (Lithobates blairi)
Rio Grande leopard frog 
(Lithobates berlandieri)
Figure 10.4 Leopard frogs. Based on Moore’s 1940 
breeding experiments examining defective embryos, leopard 
frogs were initially considered to be subspecies of a single, 
highly variable species. Modern classiﬁ cation based on male 
mating call variation (a prezygotic isolating mechanism) and 
genetic data now recognizes several reproductively isolated 
species.
126 
Understanding Evolution
that group of organisms. Although this is not a sci-
entiﬁ cally rigorous deﬁ nition, this is largely how 
today’s scientists deal with the process of naming 
organisms. Ultimately, any new species, or name 
change of an existing species, or other species des-
ignation becomes accepted and valid when other 
experts agree with each other and, most impor-
tantly, start using a particular species name in their 
professional communications.
Today, there are many deﬁ nitions of a species 
used in different contexts to describe particular 
observations. The most traditional deﬁ nition of a spe-
cies, the biological species concept, was articulated 
by one of evolutionary biology’s giants,  Harvard’s 
German-born Ernst Mayr, who deﬁ ned a species as 
a group of actually or potentially interbreeding 
natural populations, which are reproductively 
isolated from other such groups.
Mayr’s species concept emphasizes reproductive 
isolation (see Reproductive Isolating Mechani sms) 
and posits that, over time and via natural selection, 
populations accumulate sufﬁ cient differences that 
if or when these populations are again pro ximate for 
interbreeding, they can no longer do so.
FORMATION OF SPECIES
Let us imagine a large assemblage of land snails 
subdivided in three geographical aggregations or 
races, A, B, and C, each adapted to local environ-
mental conditions (ﬁ g. 10.5). There are initially 
no gross barriers separating the populations from 
each other, and where A meets B and B meets C, 
interbreeding occurs. Zones of intermediate indi-
viduals are thus established between the races, and 
the width of these zones depends on the extent to 
which the respective populations intermingle. It is 
important to realize that races are fully capable of 
exchanging genes with one another.
We may now visualize (ﬁ g. 10.5) some striking 
feature, such as a great river, forging its way through 
the territory and effectively isolating the land snails 
of race C from those of B. These two assemblages 
may be spatially separated from each other for 
an indeﬁ nitely long period of time, affording an 

One species
Race A
Geographical variation
Removal of geographic barrier
Isolation action of geographical barrier
C′
C′
C
Hybrid
Hybrid
Race B
Race C
Original species
New species
Race A
Hybrid
Race B
Zones of intermediates
Zones of intermediates
No interbreeding
Figure 10.5 Model for the process of geographic speciation. Members of populations (or race) C had diverged 
genetically during geographical isolation in ways that have made them reproductively incompatible with race B 
when they met again. Race C has thus transformed into a new species, C′.
 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
127

(b)
(a)
Figure 10.6 Carolus Linnaeus. (a) Portrait of Carolus 
Linnaeus (1707–1778), Swedish-born physician, botanist, 
and zoologist who is best known for creating the modern 
binomial (two-name) system of classiﬁ cation. (b) Cover page 
of the 1758 tenth edition of Systema Naturae (System of 
Nature), Linnaeus’s pathbreaking volume on the classiﬁ cation 
of organisms.
Courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.
128 
Understanding Evolution
the genus remains the same since the two species 
are closely related. The genus, therefore, denotes a 
group of interrelated species. Taxonomists choose a 
given latinized species name for a variety of reasons, 
and more often than not, the latinized name does not 
connote much information about the organism itself. 
Thus, the student should not imagine that the key 
features of each species are encoded in the name, 
any more than a person’s given name is particularly 
revealing of his or her attributes. The names are 
important, however, in revealing relationships.
The binomial (“two-named”) system of 
nomenclature, universally accepted, was devised 
by the Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus (born 
Karl von Linné) in his monumental work, Sys-
tema Naturae, ﬁ rst published in 1735 (ﬁ g. 10.6). 
Convention dictates that the ﬁ rst letter of the 
generic name be capitalized and that the speciﬁ c 
name begin with a small letter. It is also customary 
to print the scientiﬁ c name of a species in italics, or 
in a type that is different from that of the accompa-
nying text. A modern reﬁ nement of the Linnaean 
system is the introduction of a third italicized name, 
opportunity for race C to pursue its own indepen-
dent evolutionary course. Two populations that 
are geographically separated, like B and C in our 
model, are said to be allopatric. (Technically speak-
ing, A and B are also allopatric since, for the most 
part, they occupy different geographical areas.)
After eons of time, the river may dry up and 
the hollow bed may eventually become ﬁ lled in 
with land. Now, if the members of populations B 
and C were to extend their ranges and meet again, 
one of two things might happen. The snails of the 
two populations might freely interbreed and estab-
lish once again a zone of intermediate individuals. 
Or, the two populations might no longer be able 
to interchange genes because they have become so 
different genetically that they cannot. If the two 
assemblages can exist side by side without inter-
breeding, then the two groups have reached the 
evolutionary status of separate species. A species 
is a breeding community that preserves its genetic 
identity by its failure to exchange genes with 
other such breeding communitites. In our pictorial 
model (ﬁ g. 10.5), race C has become transformed 
into a new species, C′. Two species (A-B and C′) 
have now arisen where formerly only one existed. 
It should be noted that races A and B are treated as 
members of a single species since no barriers to 
gene exchange exist between them.
NOMENCLATURE
The scientiﬁ c names that the taxonomist would 
apply to our populations of land snails deserve 
special comment. The technical name of a spe-
cies consists of two words, in Latin or in latinized 
form. An acceptable designation of the origi-
nal species of land snails depicted in ﬁ gure 10.5 
would be Helix typicus. The ﬁ rst word is the name 
of a comprehensive group, the genus, to which 
land snails belong; the second word is a name 
unique to the species. The taxonomist would be 
obliged to create a different latinized second name 
for the newly derived species of the land snail, 
the C′ population in ﬁ gure 10.5. This new species 
might well be called Helix varians. The name of 

 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
129
reproductively incompatible. Two populations that 
come to occupy the same territory are called sym-
patric. The agencies that prevent interbreeding 
between sympatric species are known as repro-
ductive isolating mechanisms.
Reproductive isolating mechanisms are of dif-
ferent types, and one or more of the types may be 
found separating two species. The various types 
may be grouped into two broad categories. One cat-
egory includes the prezygotic (or premating) mech-
anisms, which serve to prevent the formation of 
hybrid zygotes. The other category encompasses the 
postzygotic (or postmating) mechanisms, which act 
to reduce the viability or fertility of hybrid zygotes. 
The speciﬁ c types of isolating mechanisms under 
these two groupings can be listed in table 10.1.
Two related species may live in the same gen-
eral area but differ in their ecological requirements. 
The scarlet oak (Quercus coccinea) of eastern 
North America grows in moist or swampy soils, 
whereas the black oak (Quercus velutina) is adapted 
to drier soils (ﬁ g. 10.7). The two kinds of oak are 
thus effectively separated by different ecological 
or habitat preferences. Two sympatric species may 
also retain their distinctness by breeding at different 
times of the year (seasonal isolation). Evidently, 
which signiﬁ es the subspecies. Geographical races 
are recognized taxonomically as subspecies. Thus, 
it would be appropriate to designate races A and B 
(ﬁ g. 10.5) as Helix typicus elegans and Helix typi-
cus eminens, respectively. Such a species composed 
of two (or more) subspecies is said to be polytypic. 
A monotypic species is one that is not differentiated 
into two or more geographical races or subspecies. 
Helix varians would be a monotypic species.
REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATING 
MECHANISMS
We have seen that two populations (or  subspecies), 
while spatially separated from each other, may 
accumulate sufﬁ cient genetic differences in iso-
lation that they would no longer be able to inter-
change genes if they came into contact with one 
another. When the geographical barrier (or other 
barrier to gene ﬂ ow) persists, it is difﬁ cult to judge 
the extent to which the two allopatric popula-
tions have diverged genetically from each other. 
Only when the two populations come together 
again does it become apparent whether or not 
they have changed in ways that would make them 
I. Prezygotic (premating) mechanism:  Mechanisms that reduce the formation of hybrid zygotes.
1. Habitat (ecological) isolation: Ecological niche separates coexisting populations.
2. Seasonal (temporal) isolation: Species breeds at different times; mating is restricted by season.
3.  Sexual (ethological) isolation: Species engage in species-speciﬁ c courtship and/or mating rituals. Sexual attraction is 
species-speciﬁ c.
4. Mechanical Isolation: Prevention of copulation or transfer of pollen by physical means such as genitals not matching. 
5. Gametic isolation:  Incompatibility between male and female gametes.
II. Postzygotic (postmating) Isolating mechanisms: Mechanisms that reduce the viability or fertility of hybrid zygotes.
1. Hybrid inviability: Fertilized hybrid eggs (zygotes) have reduced or absent viability.
2.  Hybrid sterility: Hybrid progeny (of one sex or the other or both) are viable but cannot produce functional gametes 
(i.e., they are sterile).
3. Hybrid breakdown: Hybrids are fertile and viable, but less so in successive generations.
Based on Dobzhansky, Theodosius (1970). Genetics of the Evolutionary Process. Columbia University Press, New York. 
TABLE 10.1 
Reproductive Isolating Mechanisms

Inhabits dry, well-drained soils
Inhabits moist, poorly drained soils
Black Oak
Scarlet Oak
Figure 10.7 Ecological isolation is exempliﬁ ed by the different habitat requirements of two species of oak. 
Although both species occur in the eastern United States, the scarlet oak (Quercus coccinea) is adapted to the moist 
bottom lands, whereas the black oak (Quercus velutina) is adapted to the dry upland soils.
130 
Understanding Evolution
Cross-fertilization between two species may 
be successful, but the hybrid embryos may be 
abnormal or fail to reach sexual maturity (hybrid 
inviability). For example, two species of the chic-
ory plant, Crepis tectorum and Crepis capillaris, 
can be crossed, but the hybrid seedlings die in early 
development. Crosses between the bullfrog, Litho-
bates catesbeiana, and the green frog, Lithobates 
clamitans, result in inviable embryos. In certain 
hybrid crosses, such as between female Fowler’s 
toad (Bufo=Anaxyrus fowleri) and male Gulf Coast 
toad (Bufo=Incilius nebulifer— formerly valliceps), 
the hybrids may survive but are completely sterile 
(hybrid sterility). The familiar example of hybrid 
sterility is the mule, the offspring of a male ass and 
a female horse. In some situations, the F1 hybrids 
appear to be vigorous and fertile, but the viability 
of a subsequent generation is very reduced. Such 
a case of hybrid breakdown has been described in 
several species of cotton—Gossypium hirsutum 
(Upland cotton) and Gossypium barbadense (Pima 
cotton). These species produce normal fertile F1 
hybrids but the majority of the F2 hybrid cotton 
seedlings fail to germinate.
In essence, two populations can remain dis-
tinct, and be designated as species, when gene 
exchange between them is prevented or limited by 
 cross-fertilization is not feasible between two spe-
cies of frogs that release their gametes on differ-
ent months even in the same pond, or between two 
species of pine that shed their pollen in different 
periods. The breeding seasons of two species may 
overlap, but interbreeding may not occur because 
of the lack of mutual attraction between the sexes 
of the two species (sexual isolation). Among birds, 
for example, elaborate courtship rituals play impor-
tant roles in species recognition and the avoidance 
of interspeciﬁ c matings (chapter 6).
In many insects, interbreeding of species is 
hindered by differences in the structure of the repro-
ductive apparatus (mechanical isolation). Copu-
lation is not possible because the genitalia of one 
species is physically incompatible with the genitalia 
of the other species. In fact, several closely related 
species of insects can often be accurately classiﬁ ed 
by their distinctive genitalia. In some instances, the 
male of one species may inseminate the female of 
the other species, but the sperm cells may be invi-
able in the reproductive tract of the female. This 
form of gametic isolation is not unique to animals; 
in plants, such as the Jimson weed (Datura), the 
sperm- bearing pollen tube of one species encoun-
ters a hostile environment in the ﬂ ower tissue 
of the other  species and is unable to reach the egg.

 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
131
in San Luis Potosi), the hybrid embryos failed to 
develop normally. Thus, of this species, the mem-
bers geographically most distant from one another 
have diverged genetically to the extent that when 
cross-mated in the laboratory they are incapable of 
producing viable hybrids. 
It must be admitted that the possibility of a Ver-
mont frog crossing with a Mexican frog in nature 
is extremely remote. It took a biologist to bring 
these two frogs together. Yet, it is just this point 
that emphasizes that an isolating mechanism, such 
as hybrid inviability, does not develop for the effect 
itself; it is simply the natural consequence of sufﬁ -
cient genetic differences having accumulated in two 
populations during a long geographical separation. 
The late  Hermann J. Muller of Indiana University 
was among the ﬁ rst to suggest that isolating mecha-
nisms originate as a by-product of genetic diver-
gence of allopatric populations. The genetic changes 
that arise to adapt one population to particular envi-
ronmental conditions may also be instrumental in 
reproductively isolating that population from other 
populations that are themselves developing adaptive 
gene complexes. Indeed, the embryos of  Vermont 
leopard frogs differ considerably in their range 
of temperature tolerance from embryos of east-
ern  Mexican frogs. It might well be, then, that the 
embryonic defects in hybrids between these north-
ern and southern frogs are associated with the differ-
ent temperature adaptations of the parental eggs.
If the Vermont and Mexican leopard frogs were 
ever to meet in nature, any intercross between them 
would lead to the formation of inviable hybrids. This 
would represent a wastage of reproductive poten-
tial of the parental frogs. Theodosius Dobzhansky 
advanced the engaging hypothesis that under such 
conditions, natural selection would promote the 
establishment of isolating mechanisms that would 
guard against the production of abnormal hybrids. In 
frogs, a normal mating or a mismating in a mixed 
population depends principally on the discrimina-
tion of the female. The reproductive potential is 
obviously lower for an undiscriminating female than 
for a female who leaves normal offspring. If the ten-
dency to mismate is heritable, then the genes respon-
sible for this tendency will eventually be lost or 
sharply reduced in frequency by elimination of the 
one or more reproductive isolating mechanisms. 
More often than not, we are unable to obtain direct 
evidence for the presence or absence of interbreed-
ing in nature between two groups. The degree of 
reproductive isolation is then indirectly gauged by 
the extent to which the members of two populations 
differ in morphological, genetic, physiological, and 
behavioral characteristics. Two populations that 
are morphologically very dissimilar are likely to 
be distinct species. It should be understood, how-
ever, that the level of morphological differentiation 
cannot be used as a reliable criterion of a species. 
For example, two species of fruit ﬂ y, Drosophila 
pseudoobscura and Drosophila persimilis, are 
reproductively isolated but are almost indistin-
guishable on morphological grounds.
In recent years, biologists have increasingly 
relied on molecular genetic traits to distinguish 
one species from another. As a result of the appli-
cation of these newer techniques, many relation-
ships between species and other taxonomic units 
(e.g., genera) have been elucidated. As unbiased as 
molecular data may seem, it is not without its crit-
ics. This harkens back to our earlier deﬁ nition of a 
species as whatever the experts in the ﬁ eld says it is!  
After all, what we call a particular organism is sim-
ply meant to deﬁ ne our best current approximation 
of its evolutionary afﬁ nities. In this regard, biologi-
cal classiﬁ cation has become more ﬂ uid than it was 
in the past as the newer molecular genetic data is 
melded with the morphological, physiological, eco-
logical and behavioral attributes.
ORIGIN OF ISOLATING MECHANISMS
How do reproductive isolating mechanisms arise? 
In the 1940s, John A. Moore undertook a series 
of instructive evolutionary studies on the leopard 
frog, Lithobates pipiens. The leopard frog is widely 
distributed in North America, ranging from north-
ern Canada through the United States and Mexico 
into the lower reaches of Central America. Moore 
obtained leopard frogs from different geographi-
cal populations and crossed them in the laboratory. 
When frogs from the northeastern United States 
(Vermont) were crossed with their southerly dis-
tributed lowland relatives in eastern Mexico (Axtla 

132 
Understanding Evolution
Recent DNA studies demonstrate that there is 
much more variation within the so-called human 
racial groups than between them. This tells us that 
the superﬁ cial differences we see are trivial in 
terms of speciation and evolution. Today scientists 
agree that observed human genotypic and pheno-
typic variations are examples of clinal variation, 
which was discussed earlier and that race is a 
social construct that is not biologically meaningful 
for humans.
The term race is regrettably one of the most 
abused words on the English vocabulary. The biolo-
gist views a race as synonymous with a geographi-
cal subspecies; a race or subspecies is a genetically 
distinguishable subgrouping of a species. It is 
exceedingly important to recognize that a race is 
not a community based on language, literature, 
religion, nationality, or customs. There are Aryan 
languages, but there is no Aryan race. Aryans are 
people of diverse genetic makeups who speak 
a common language (Indo-European). Aryan is 
therefore nothing more than a linguistic designa-
tion. In like manner, there is a Jewish religion, but 
not a Jewish race. And there is an Italian nation, but 
not an Italian race. A race is a reproductive com-
munity of individuals occupying a deﬁ nite region, 
and in one and the same geographical region may 
be found Aryans, Jews, and Italians. Every human 
population today consists of a multitude of diverse 
genotypes. A pure population or race, in which all 
members are genetically alike, is nonexistent.
MICROEVOLUTION 
AND MACROEVOLUTION
Evolutionary changes in populations ordinarily 
are visualized as gradual, built upon many small 
genetic variations that arise and are passed on from 
generation to generation. The shifting gene fre-
quencies in local populations may be thought of 
as microevolution. The progressive replacement 
of light-colored moths by dark moths in industrial 
regions of England exempliﬁ es the microevolution-
ary processes. Most population geneticists subscribe 
to the view that the same microevolutionary pro-
cesses have been involved in the major transforma-
tions of organisms over long spans of geologic time 
indiscriminate females, an elimination effectively 
accomplished by the inviability of their offspring. 
Thus, the continual propagation of females that most 
resist the attentions of “foreign” males will lead 
eventually to a situation in which mismatings do not 
occur and abnormal hybrids are no longer produced.
Karl Koopman, an able student of Theodosius 
Dobzhansky, tested the thesis that natural selec-
tion tends to strengthen, or make complete, the 
 reproductive isolation between two species coex-
isting in the same territory. Koopman used for 
experimentation two species of fruit ﬂ y, Droso-
phila pseudoobscura and Drosophila persimilis. In 
nature, sexual selection (chapter 6) between these 
two sympatric species is strong, and interspeciﬁ c 
matings do not occur. However, in a mixed popu-
lation in the laboratory, particularly at low tem-
peratures, mismatings do take place. Koopman 
accordingly brought together members of both spe-
cies in an experimental cage and purposely kept the 
cage at a low temperature (16 °C). Hybrid ﬂ ies were 
produced and were viable, but Koopman in effect 
made them inviable by painstakingly removing 
them from the breeding cage when each new gener-
ation emerged. Over a period of several generations, 
the production of hybrid ﬂ ies dwindled markedly 
and mismatings in the population cage were sub-
stantially curtailed. This is a dramatic demonstration 
of the efﬁ cacy of selection in strengthening repro-
ductive isolation between two sympatric species.
HUMANS: A SINGLE VARIABLE SPECIES
There is only one present-day species of human, 
Homo sapiens. Different populations of humans 
can interbreed successfully and, in fact, do. The 
extensive commingling of populations renders it 
difﬁ cult, if not impossible, to establish discrete 
racial categories in humans. Races, as we have 
seen, are geographically deﬁ ned aggregates of local 
populations. The populations of humankind are no 
longer sharply separated geographically from one 
another. Multiple migrations of peoples and innu-
merable intermarriages have tended to blur the 
genetic contrasts between populations. The bound-
aries of human races, if they can be delimited at all, 
are at best fuzzy, ever shifting with time.

 
CHAPTER 10 Races and Species 
133
Time
Species A
Species C
Species B
Phyletic Gradualism
termed phyletic gradualism, and the transformation 
of a lineage over time has been termed anagenesis. 
As depicted in ﬁ gure 10.8, a new species (B) arises 
from the slow and steady transformation of a large 
antecedent population (A). If only transformation 
(i.e., anagenesis) occurred, then life would cease 
as single lineages became extinct. Hence, a new 
species (C in ﬁ g. 10.8) can also arise by the split-
ting or branching of a lineage. The splitting of one 
phyletic lineage into two or more lines is termed 
cladogenesis. But here again the splitting is con-
ceived of as proceeding slowly and gradually, with 
the two branching lineages progressively diverging, 
without signiﬁ cant reduction in population size. 
Thus, paleontologists tend to view lineage split-
ting in terms of gradual morphological divergence. 
(macroevolution). The traditional outlook is that 
small variations gradually accumulate in evolving 
lineages over periods of millions of years. If we 
were to recover a complete set of fossil specimens 
of a lineage, we would expect to ﬁ nd a graded series 
of forms changing continuously from the antecedent 
species to the descendant species. The temporally 
intermediate forms would be intermediate morpho-
logically. Under this perspective, our inability to 
ﬁ nd transitional fossil forms between the ancestral 
and descendant populations would represent merely 
the imperfect nature of the fossil record.
PUNCTUATED EQUILIBRIUM
The late Stephen Jay Gould of Harvard University 
and Niles Eldredge of the American Mus eum of 
Natural History have questioned the conven-
tional view that evolutionary changes in the 
distant past are principally the outcome of 
the gradual accumulation of slight inherited 
variations. They advocate that most evolu-
tionary changes have consisted of rapid 
bursts of speciation alternating with long 
periods in which the individual species 
remain virtually unmodiﬁ ed. Gould 
and Eldredge maintain that most 
 lineages display such limited morpho-
logical changes for long intervals of 
 geologic time as to remain in stasis, 
or “equilibrium.” Conspicuous or 
prominent evolutionary changes are 
concentrated in those brief periods 
(“punctuations”) when the lineages 
actually split or branch. This is the 
tenet of punctuated equilibria.
A single line of descent, 
or lineage, may persist for long 
reaches of geologic time. As small 
changes accumulate over periods 
of millions of years within one 
lineage, the descendant popula-
tions may eventually be recog-
nized as a species distinct from 
the antecedent populations. The 
persistent accumulation of small 
changes within a lineage has been 
Figure 10.8 According to phyletic gradualism, a lineage consists of a graded 
series of intermediate forms connecting ancestral and descendant organisms. Species 
A gradually transforms into species B and may split into a slowly evolving species C.
Redrawn by Phil Mattes, in Volpe, E. P., Biology and Human Concerns, 4th ed., 1993, Dubuque, 
IA:WCA. ﬁ g. 41.1, p. 443.

Time
Species A
Species A
Species B
Species B
Punctuated Equilibria
record may not be gaps at all. The notion of “gaps” 
presupposes the existence of “ﬁ ll.” In this case, the 
ﬁ ll would be intermediate forms. But none exist; 
hence neither do gaps. Before his death, Gould 
argued that there is no dichotomy between punctu-
ated equilibrium and phyletic gradualism because 
evolutionary time is measured on a geologic time 
scale and therefore what is fast (punctuated) may 
take thousands or even tens of thousands of years 
whereas what is slow (gradualism) may take hun-
dreds of thousand to millions of years to occur.
Viewed as a slow process, lineage splitting becomes 
reduced to a special case of the phyletic model.
Gould and Eldredge maintain that phyl-
etic gradualism is much too slow to produce the 
major events of evolution. In fact, the morphologi-
cal changes in successive populations of lineage 
usually are directionless and involve only minor 
temporal variations. The theory of punctuated 
equilibria advocates that the prominent episodes 
of evolution in the history of life are associated 
with the splitting of lineages, but it does not see 
the splitting as slow and steady. The new species 
arises through rapid evolution when a small local 
population becomes isolated at the margin of the 
geographic range of the parent species 
(ﬁ g. 10.9). Indeed, the successful branch-
ing of a small isolated population from the 
periphery of the parental range  virtually 
assures the rapid origin of a new spe-
cies. In geologic time, the branching is 
sudden—thousands of years or less, 
compared to the  millions of years 
of longevity of the species itself. 
The punctuational change does not 
entail any unconventional evolu-
tionary phenomenon. The expecta-
tion is that once the new species 
is established, little evolutionary 
change will occur in that species 
over  geologic time. 
Given the thesis of punctu-
ated equilibria, the fossil record 
is a faithful rendering of the evo-
lutionary processes. If a species 
remains essentially static during 
its long lineage, then one would 
not anticipate ﬁ nding a continu-
ous series of transitional fossils. 
Moreover, if a descendant species 
arises in small, peripheral popu-
lations, then it would be rare to 
ﬁ nd evidence of preservation of a 
small population evolving in a rel-
atively brief period of time. Thus, 
the so-called gaps in the fossil 
Figure 10.9 The theory of punctuated equilibria proposes that a small 
isolate from the parental population (species A) evolves rapidly into a new entity 
(species B), which undergoes a long period of stasis during which little or no 
 morphological change takes place. Species B does undergo minor structural modiﬁ ca-
tions with time, but these modiﬁ cations represent merely oscillations around the mean.
Redrawn by Phil Mettes, in Volpe, E. P., Biology and Human Concerns, 4th ed., 1993, Dubuque, 
IA: WCB. ﬁ g. 41.2, p. 443.
134 
Understanding Evolution

135
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
11
The process leading to the formation of a new 
species generally extends over a great reach of time. 
As we have seen, the origin of new species involves 
a long period of geographical isolation and the 
long-term inﬂ uences of natural selection. A sudden 
and rapid emergence of a new kind of organism 
is scarcely imaginable. Yet, a natural mechanism 
does exist whereby a new species can arise rather 
abruptly. The process is associated with the phe-
nomenon of polyploidy, or the multiplication of the 
chromosome complement of an organism. Many of 
our most valuable cultivated crop plants, such as 
wheat, oats, cotton, tobacco, and sugar cane, trace 
their origin to this instantaneous type of evolution.
POLYPLOIDY IN NATURE
Speciation is the “smoking gun” of evolution. Critics 
of evolution frequently demand proof that new spe-
cies arise by natural forces, and polyploidy provides 
the most straightforward examples. That said, some 
examples of polyploidy are far from straightforward 
and frequently belie our mammalian-based notion of 
speciation (table 11.1).
In nature, polyploid happens by two similar 
mechanisms, autopolyploidy and allopolyploidy. 
When a single species multiplies its own chromo-
some complement to form a new species, auto-
polyploidy has occurred.  Cultivated examples of 
autopolyploidy are potatoes (autotetraploid-4n) 
and bananas (autotriploids-3n). Autopolyploidy 
is a much less common mode of polyploidy than 
is allopolyploidy. Allopolyploidy involves two or 
more species hybridizing and contributing chro-
mosome complements to the new species. Bread 
wheat is an allohexaploid (6n), an organism hav-
ing six sets of chromosomes derived from plants 
whose haploid number was 7. Bread wheat has 
three doubled sets of chromosomes. (AABBCC). 
The A set of chromosomes came from Einkorn 
wheat (n7), the B was contributed by the wild 
grass Aegilops (n7) and the C set came from goat 
grass (n7) (see table 11.2 and ﬁ g. 11.1). Some 
polyploids have an even number (e.g., 4n, 6n, 8n) 
of chromosomes and some have an odd number of 
chromosomes (e.g. 3n, 5n, 7n). In general, organ-
isms with an odd number of sets of chromosomes 
are sterile and reproduce asexually. 
INSTANTANEOUS SPECIATION

136 
Understanding Evolution
Plant
Ancestral 
Haploid Number
Chromosome 
Number
Ploidy
Ploidy 
Name
Banana
11
22,33
2n,3n
Diploid, Triploid
Apple
17
34,51
2n,3n
Diploid, Triploid
Peanut
10
40
4n
Tetraploid
Tobacco
12
48
4n
Tetraploid
Potato
12
48
4n
Tetraploid
Cotton
13
52
4n
Tetraploid
Wheat
7
42
6n
Hexaploid
Strawberries
7
14,28,42,56,70
2n,4n,
6n,8n,10n
Diploid, Tetraploid
Hexaploid, Octaploid
Decaploid
Chysanthemums
9
18,36,54,70,90
2n,4n,6n,8n,10n
6n,8n,10n
Diploid, Tetraploid
Hexaploid, Octaploid
Decaploid
Sugar cane
10
80
8n
Octaploid
Animal
Mole 
Salamander
(Ambystoma)
14
28,42,56,70
2n,3n,4n,5n
Diploid, Triploid,
Tetraploid, Pentaploid 
Gray tree frog
12
24,48
4n
Haploid, Tetraploid
Whiptail
23
46–52
2n
Diploid
Lizard
69–71
3n
Triploid
92
4n
Tetraoids
Sturgeon
Varies
500+
8n
Octaploid
Viscacha rat
28
102
4n
Tetraploid
TABLE 11.1 
Polyploidy in Plants and Animals
TABLE 11.2      Species of Wheat (Triticum)
  
14 Chromosomes 
28 Chromosomes 
42 Chromosomes
 
T. aegilopoides 
T. dicoccoides 
T. aestivum
 
  (Wild Einkorn) 
  (Wild Emmer) 
  (Bread Wheat)
 
T. monococcum 
T. dicoccum 
T. sphaerococcum
 
  (Cultivated Einkorn)  
  (Cultivated Emmer) 
  (Shot Wheat)
 
 
T. durum 
T. compactum
 
 
  (Macaroni Wheat) 
  (Club Wheat)
 
 
T. persicum 
T. spelta
 
 
  (Persian Wheat) 
  (Spelt)
 
 
T. turgidum 
T. macha
 
 
  (Rivet Wheat) 
  (Macha Wheat)
 
 
T. polonicum
 
 
  (Polish Wheat)  

EINKORN WHEAT
14 chromosomes
(sets AA)
WILD GRASS
(Aegilops speltoides)
14 chromosomes
(sets BB)
EMMER WHEAT
28 chromosomes
(sets AABB)
GOAT GRASS
(Aegilops squarrosa)
14 chromosomes
(sets CC)
BREAD WHEAT
42 chromosomes
(sets AABBCC)
Figure 11.1 Evolution of wheat. Emmer wheat resulted from the hybridization of einkorn 
wheat with a wild grass, Aegilops speltoides. The common bread wheat is the product of hybrid-
ization of emmer wheat with a noxious species of goat grass, Aegilops squarrosa. The 
hybridizations were followed by chromosome doubling, a phenomenon discussed in the text.
 
CHAPTER 11 Instantaneous Speciation 
137
also common in agricultural plants, some of which 
developed naturally and some of which have been 
manipulated by humans. Brassica oleracea is paleo-
polyploid, which means that historically it was a 
Polyploidy is much more common in plants 
than in animals, accounting for up to 70 percent 
of all ﬂ owering plants (angiosperms) and up to 
85 to 95 percent of all fern species. Polyploidy is 

138 
Understanding Evolution
overlap in parts of Wisconsin and Michigan. The 
eastern gray tree frog (H. versicolor) is a tetraploid 
(4n) and the Cope’s gray tree frog (H. chrysosce-
lis) is a diploid (2n) species. Both tree frogs make 
a trill-like noise, but Cope’s gray tree frog has a 
shorter, faster call.
An especially interesting example of amphib-
ian polyploidy has evolved in the unisexual 
(all female) polyploid mole salamanders in the 
genus Ambystoma. Unisexual female may be dip-
loid (2n), triploid (3n), tetraploid (4n), and even 
 pentaploid (5n). In order for eggs of unisexual 
triploid females to develop, the females must make 
contact with the sperm of related diploid males, 
but in most instances the male genetic material is 
not incorporated into the offspring. Reproduction 
where another species sperm cells are required 
to activate the egg’s cell division, but where the 
resulting offspring carry no genetic material from 
those sperm cells is called gynogenesis.
The tetraploid (4n) mammal, the red vizcacha 
rat, Typanoctomy barrerae (Rodentia, Octodonti-
dae) with 102 chromosomes, is the ﬁ rst mamma-
lian polyploid to be discovered. This endemic of 
the Monte Desert of west-central Argentina is not 
a true rat, but rather a member of the chinchilla 
family. Polyploidy occasionally occurs in other 
mammals, including humans, but the embryos die 
in utero or shortly after birth. Triploid (3n69) and 
tetraploid (4n92) chromosome complements are 
not uncommon among human spontaneous abor-
tions (ﬁ g. 6.8).
WHEAT
The domestic wheats and their wild relatives 
have an intriguing evolutionary history. There are 
numerous species of wheat, all of which fall into 
three major categories on the basis of their chro-
mosome numbers. The most ancient type is the 
small-grain einkorn wheat, containing 14 chromo-
somes in its body (somatic) cells. There are two 
species of einkorn wheat, one wild and the other 
cultivated, and both of them may be found grow-
ing in the hilly regions of southeastern Europe and 
polyploidy that was “diplodized” (2n→4n→2n) by 
losing a set of duplicated chromosomes over evolu-
tionary times. Varieties of Brassica oleracea have 
been developed as familiar foods from a diverse 
assortment of plant parts, including roots (turnips 
and swedes), leaves (cabbage and brussel sprouts), 
seeds (mustard seed and oilseed rape), stems (kohl-
rabi), and ﬂ owers (cauliﬂ ower and broccoli). 
Speciation via polyploidy is less common in 
animals, but is known in some insects, amphibians, 
ﬁ sh, mollusks, crustaceans, and reptiles. Some liz-
ard species are all female sterile polyploids (usu-
ally triploids) that reproduce parthenogenetically. 
Parthenogenesis is the development of an egg 
without fertilization and is found in some mem-
bers of other animal groups, including insects, 
snails, sharks, crayﬁ sh (and other crustaceans), 
birds, and mammals.
Whiptail lizards in the genus Asphidoscelis 
(formerly Cnemidophorus) form all-female trip-
loid species that reproduce via parthenogenesis. 
Some parthenogenetic all-female triploid species 
of whiptail lizards are themselves hybrid species 
formed by the union of gametes from diploid par-
ent species. During the mating season, ﬂ uctuation 
in the hormones estrogen and progesterone cause 
some female whiptails to behave like males and 
mount the female that is about to lay eggs. Studies 
have indicated that this behavior may be important 
in maximizing reproductive success.
Many ﬁ sh species are polyploid, including 
salmon and sturgeons.  Sturgeons are evolution-
arily ancient ﬁ sh and are known to be diploid (2n), 
tetraploid (4n), and octoploid (8n), with as many 
as 500 chromosomes. Some artiﬁ cially produced 
salmon are the product of diploid (2n) and tetra-
ploid (4n) crosses that produce sterile triploids 
(3n), which need to continually be restocked. There 
are also naturally occurring polyploid salmon.
Polyploidy is also well known in amphib-
ians. The gray tree frogs Hyla versicolor and Hyla 
chrysoscelis of eastern North America are familiar 
voices of summer. Both gray tree frog species are 
phenotypically indistinguishable. Although their 
geographic ranges are largely distinct, they do 

 
CHAPTER 11 Instantaneous Speciation 
139
If the chromosome complement in the hybrid 
accidentally doubled, then the hybrid would con-
tain 28 instead of 14 chromosomes and pass on the 
doubled set of chromosomes to its offspring. Such 
an event, strange as it may seem, accounts for the 
emergence of the 28-chromosome emmer wheat. 
This new species is characterized as having the 
AABB genomes.
In turn, the 28-chromosome emmer wheat 
was the ancestor of the 42-chromosome bread 
wheat. In the early 1900s, the British botanist 
John Percival hazarded the opinion that the bread 
wheat group arose by hybridization of a species 
of wheat of the emmer group (28 chromosomes) 
and goat grass, Aegilops squarrosa, a weed com-
monly found growing in the wheat ﬁ elds in the 
Mediterranean area. Although this startling sug-
gestion was initially viewed with skepticism, it 
is currently conceded that Percival was correct. 
Aegilops squarrosa possesses 14 chromosomes, 
and thus would transmit 7 of its chromosomes 
(set C) to the hybrid. The hybrid would contain 
21 chromosomes (sets ABC), having received 14 
(sets AB) from its emmer wheat parent. The sub-
sequent duplication in the hybrid of each chromo-
some set provided by the parents would result in a 
42-chromosome wheat species (AABBCC).
The initial F1 hybrid between einkorn wheat 
and Aegilops speltoides (or between emmer wheat 
and Aegilops squarrosa) is sterile, but when the 
chromosome complement doubles, then a fully 
fertile species arises. Is it to be expected that the F1 
hybrid would be sterile? And what would account 
for the fertility of the hybrid when chromosome 
doubling occurred? This requires a deeper look 
into the phenomenon of polyploidy, to which we 
shall now turn.
MECHANISM OF SPECIATION 
BY POLYPLOIDY
Figure 11.2 illustrates the underlying basis of the 
fertility of a formerly sterile hybrid resulting from 
the doubling of its chromosome number. For ease 
southwestern Asia. Cultivated einkorn has slightly 
larger kernels than the wild form, but the yields of 
each are low and the grain is used principally for 
feeding cattle and horses.
Another assemblage of wheat, once widely 
grown, is the emmer series, of which there are 
at least six species. The chromosome number in 
the nuclei of somatic cells of emmer wheats is 28. 
These varieties, found in Europe and the United 
States, are used today principally as stock feed, 
although one of them, called durum wheat, is of 
commercial value in the production of macaroni 
and spaghetti.
The most recently evolved, and by far the most 
valuable agriculturally, are the bread wheats. The 
bread wheats have not been known to occur in 
the wild state; all are cultivated types. The bread 
wheats have 42 chromosomes. These wheats, high 
in protein content, comprise almost 90 percent of 
all the wheat harvested in the world today.
The various species of wheat thus fall into 
three major groups, with 14, 28, and 42 chromo-
somes, respectively. A list of the representatives of 
these three groups is given in table 11.2.
ORIGIN OF WHEAT SPECIES
Virtually all authorities are agreed on the sequence 
of evolutionary events depicted in ﬁ gure 11.1. 
Einkorn wheat, possessing a chromosome num-
ber of 14, was doubtless one of the ancestral par-
ents of the 28-chromosome emmer assemblage. 
A most remarkable, but generally accepted, the-
sis is that the other parent was not a wheat at all, 
but rather Aegilops speltoides, a wild grass with 
14 chromosomes. This wild grass parent occurs 
as a common weed in the wheat ﬁ elds of south-
western Asia. The cross of einkorn wheat and the 
wild grass would yield an F1 hybrid that possesses 
14  chromosomes, 7 from each parent. We may 
designate the 7 chromosomes from one parent spe-
cies as set (or genome) A, and the 7 from the other 
parent species as set (or genome) B. Accordingly, 
the F1 hybrids would have the AB genomes.

of presentation, the parental species are 
shown with a small number of chromo-
somes, 6 and 4, respectively. It should 
be noted that the chromosomes are pres-
ent in pairs. The members of each pair 
are alike or homologous, but each pair 
is distinguishable from the other. Thus, 
the 6-chromosome parent possesses three 
different pairs of chromosomes; the 4-
chromosome parent, two different pairs.
The gametes, egg cells and pollen 
cells (sperm), are derived by cell divi-
sions of a special kind, called meiosis 
(see chapter 3). One of the essential 
features of the process of meiosis is that 
the members of each pair are attracted 
to each other and come to lie side by 
side in the nucleus. The meiotic cell 
divisions are intricate, but the pertinent 
outcome is the separation of like, or 
homologous, chromosomes, such that 
each gamete comes to possess only one 
member of each pair of chromosomes. 
Each gamete is said to contain a haploid 
complement of chromosomes, or half 
the number found in a somatic cell. 
The latter, in turn, is described as being 
diploid in chromosome number.
The sterility of the ﬁ rst-generation 
hybrid is now comprehensible. There are 
simply no homologous chromosomes in 
the F1 hybrid. Each chromosome lacks a 
homologue to act as its pairing partner 
at meiosis. The process of meiosis in 
the hybrid is chaotic; the chromosomes 
move at random into the gametes. The 
eggs and pollen cells typically contain 
an odd assortment of chromosomes and 
are nonfunctional.
Occasionally, by sheer chance, a few 
gametes might be produced by the F1 
SPECIATION BY POLYPLOIDY
Normal Pairing at Meiosis
Chance Movement of All
Chromosomes to One Pole
Egg
Pollen
Egg
Pollen
6-CHROMOSOME
SPECIES
FERTILE
10-CHROMOSOME
SPECIES
STERILE F1 HYBRID
Abnormal Meiosis
Normal Pairing
at Meiosis
4-CHROMOSOME
SPECIES
Self-fertilizing
140 
Understanding Evolution
Figure 11.2 Sequence of events leading to a new, fertile species from two old species by hybridization and polyploidy. The 
F1 hybrid plant derived from a cross of the two paternal species is sterile. The F1 hybrid may occasionally produce viable gametes 
when all chromosomes fortuitously enter a gamete during the process of meiosis. The fusion of such gametes leads to a new form 
of plant, which contains two complete sets of chromosomes (one full set of each of the original parents).

 
CHAPTER 11 Instantaneous Speciation 
141
Experimental proof was lacking at the time 
John Percival proposed that the bread wheats 
originated from hybridization between the emmer 
wheat and goat grass, followed by chromosome 
doubling in the hybrid. Veriﬁ cation awaited an 
effective method of artiﬁ cially inducing diploid 
cells to become polyploid. The search for an efﬁ -
cient chemical inducing agent culminated in the 
discovery in the late 1930s of colchicine, a sub-
stance obtained from the roots of the autumn cro-
cus plant. Treatments of diploid plant cells with 
colchicine result in a high percentage of polyploid 
nuclei in the treated plant cells. Colchicine acts 
on the spindle apparatus of a dividing cell and 
prevents a cell from dividing into two daughter 
halves. The treated undivided cell contains two 
sets of daughter chromosomes, which ordinarily 
would have separated from each other had cell 
division not been impeded. The cell thus comes to 
possess twice the usual number of chromosomes.
The experimental production of polyploid 
cells through the application of colchicine paved 
the way for studies on wheat by E. S.  McFadden 
and E. Sears of the United States Department 
of Agriculture. These investigators successfully 
hybridized a tetraploid species of emmer wheat 
with the diploid goat grass, Aegilops squarrosa. 
The chromosome number in the hybrids was dou-
bled by treatment with colchicine. The synthetic 
hexaploid hybrids were similar in characteristics 
to natural hexaploid species of bread wheat, and 
they produced functional gametes. At almost the 
same time, Hitoshi Kihara of Japan obtained a 
comparable hexaploid wheat species, which spon-
taneously and naturally had become converted 
from a sterile hybrid to a fertile hybrid. Kihara’s 
work reinforced the notion that doubling of chro-
mosomes can occur accidentally.
To complete the proof, McFadden and Sears 
crossed their artiﬁ cially synthesized hexaploid 
wheat species with one of the naturally occurring 
bread wheat Triticum spelta. Fully fertile hybrids 
resulted, removing any doubt that goat grass, a 
noxious weed, is indeed a parental ancestor of the 
bread wheats.
hybrid that contain all the chromosomes (ﬁ g. 11.2). 
These gametes would be functional, and the fusion 
of such sex cells would give rise to a plant that con-
tains twice the number of chromosomes that the 
ﬁ rst-generation hybrid possessed. The plant actually 
would contain two complete sets of chromosomes; 
that is, the full diploid complement of chromosomes 
of each original parent. Such a double diploid is 
termed a polyploid—more speciﬁ cally, a tetraploid.
The tetraploid hybrid would resemble the ﬁ rst-
generation hybrid, but the plant as a whole would 
tend to be larger and somewhat more robust as a 
consequence of the increased number of chromo-
somes. More importantly, the tetraploid hybrid 
would be fully fertile. The meiotic divisions would 
be normal, since each chromosome now has a 
regular pairing partner during meiosis (ﬁ g. 11.2). 
The tetraploid hybrid is a true breeding type; it 
can perpetuate itself indeﬁ nitely. It is, however, 
reproductively incompatible with its original 
parental species. If the tetraploid hybrid were to 
cross with its original parental species, the off-
spring would be sterile. Hence, the tetraploid 
hybrid is truly a new distinct species, reproductive ly 
isolated from its parental species. In but a few gen-
erations, we have witnessed essentially the fus ion 
of two old species to form a single derived species.
EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION
To return to our wheat story, bread wheat (ﬁ g. 11.1) 
contains the chromosome sets of three diploid 
species—the AA of einkorn wheat, the BB of 
Aegilops speltoides, and the CC of Aegilops 
squarrosa. (The third set is typically referred to 
by botanists as the D genome. It is an accident 
of nomenclature that the third genome received 
the letter D, rather than C.) Technically, then, the 
bread wheat contains six sets of chromosomes; it 
is a hexaploid. The relationships of the three major 
groups of wheat can be shown as follows: 
Einkorn  14  AA  diploid
Emmer  28  AABB  tetraploid
Bread   42  AABBCC  hexaploid

142
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
The capacity of a population of organisms to 
increase its numbers is largely governed by the avail-
ability of resources—food, shelter, and space. The 
available supply of resources in a given environment 
is limited, whereas the organism’s innate ability to 
multiply is unlimited. A particular environment will 
soon prove to be inadequate for the number of indi-
viduals present. It might thus be expected that some 
individuals would explore new environments where 
competition for resources is low. The tendency of 
individuals to exploit new opportunities is a factor 
of major signiﬁ cance in the emergence of several 
new  species from an ancestral stock. The  successful 
 colonization of previously unoccupied habitats can 
lead to a rich multitude of diverse species, each 
 better ﬁ tted to survive and reproduce under the new 
conditions than in the ancestral habitat. The spread-
ing of populations into different environments 
accompanied by divergent adaptive changes of the 
emigrant populations is called adaptive radiation.
GALÁPAGOS ISLANDS
One of the biologically strangest, yet most fasci-
nating, areas of the world is an isolated cluster of 
islands of volcanic origin in the eastern Paciﬁ c, 
the Galápagos Islands. These islands, which 
Darwin visited for ﬁ ve weeks in 1835, lie on the 
equator 600 miles west of Ecuador (ﬁ g. 12.1). 
The islands are composed wholly of volcanic 
rock; they were never connected with the main-
land of South America. The rugged shoreline 
cliffs are of gray lava and the coastal lowlands are 
parched, covered with cacti and thorn brushes. In 
the humid uplands, tall trees ﬂ ourish in rich black 
soil.
Giant land-dwelling tortoises still inhabit 
these islands (see ﬁ gs. 2.4 and 12.6). After many 
years of being needlessly slain by pirates and 
whalers, these remarkable animals now live 
protected in a sanctuary created in 1959. Still 
prevalent on the islands are the world’s only 
marine iguana (ﬁ g. 12.2) and its inland variety, 
the land iguana (ﬁ g. 12.3). These two species of 
prehistoric- looking lizards are ancient arrivals 
from the  mainland. The marine forms occur in 
colonies on the lava shores and swim offshore to 
feed on seaweed. The land iguana lives on leaves 
and cactus plants. Cactus ﬁ lls most of the water 
needs of the land iguana. 
ADAPTIVE RADIATION
12

 
CHAPTER 12 Adaptive Radiation 
143
At least 85 different kinds of birds have 
been recorded on the islands. These include rare 
cormorants that cannot ﬂ y, 
found only on  Narborough 
Island, and ﬂ amingos, which 
breed on James Island. Of 
particular interest are the 
small dark ﬁ nches. These 
dusky birds exhibit remark-
able variations in the  structure 
of the beak and in feeding 
habits. The ﬁ nches afford 
an outstanding example of 
adaptive radiation. It was 
the marked diversity within 
this small group of birds that 
gave impetus to Darwin’s 
evolutionary views. Darwin 
had correctly surmised that 
the diverse ﬁ nches were 
modiﬁ ed descendants of the 
early, rather homogeneous, 
colonists of the Galápagos. 
The Galápagos ﬁ nches, 
now appropriately called 
“Darwin’s ﬁ nches,” have 
been studied since Dar-
win’s visit to the islands. In 
The Voyage of the Beagle, 
Darwin astutely drew atten-
tion to the variation in the 
beaks of the ﬁ nches that he 
(and Captain Fitzroy) had 
collected while visiting the 
islands. Darwin wrote:
These birds are the most singu-
lar of any in the archipelago…. 
It is very remarkable that a 
nearly perfect gradation of 
structure in this one group can 
be traced in the form of the 
beak, from one exceeding in 
dimensions that of the largest 
gros-beak, to another differing 
but little from that of a warbler.
Since Darwin, many  scientists have visited the 
Galápagos to study the unique assemblage creatures 
Culpepper
Wenman
Abingdon
Bindloe
Tower
James
Indefatigable
Chatham
Barrington
Jervis
Duncan
Charles
Albemarle
Narborough
Hood
Figure 12.1 Galápagos Islands (“Enchanted Isles”) in the Paciﬁ c Ocean, 
600 miles west of Ecuador. Darwin had explored this cluster of isolated islands and 
found a strange animal life, a “little world within itself.” The four stamps shown 
were issued by Ecuador to commemorate the centenary of Darwin’s visit in 1935.

144 
Understanding Evolution
endemic to these enchanted islands. Among ﬁ nch 
researchers, perhaps the foremost among them was 
Oxford’s David Lack, who started his work in 1938. 
More recently, the British-born Princeton Univer-
sity team of Rosemary and Peter Grant conducted 
an unprecedented long-term study of  Darwin’s 
ﬁ nches, which began in 1973. The Grants’ epic 
research studies were chronicled in the celebrated 
1995 Pulitzer Prize–winning book The Beak of 
the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time by 
 Jonathan Weiner.
DARWIN’S FINCHES 
The present-day assemblage of Darwin’s ﬁ nches 
descended from small sparrow-like birds that 
once inhabited the mainland of South America. 
The ancestors of  Darwin’s 
ﬁ nches were early migrants 
to the Galápagos Islands 
and probably the ﬁ rst land 
birds to reach the islands. 
These early colonists have 
given rise to 14 distinct spe-
cies, each well adapted to a 
speciﬁ c niche (ﬁ g. 12.4). 
Thirteen of these species 
occur in the Galápagos; one 
is found in the small iso-
lated Cocos Island, north-
east of the  Galápagos. Not 
all 13 species are found on 
each island.
The most striking dif-
ferences among the spe-
cies are in the sizes and 
shapes of the beak, which 
are correlated with marked 
differences in feeding hab-
its. Six of the species are 
ground ﬁ nches, with heavy 
beaks specialized for crush-
ing seeds. Some of the 
ground ﬁ nches live mainly 
on a diet of seeds found 
Figure 12.2 Marine iguana. Endemic to the Galápagos 
archipelago, the marine iguana is the only modern lizard 
capable of living in and eating from the sea. After eating 
marine algae, their primary food source, marine iguanas 
expel excess salt via uniquely adapted nasal glands.
Figure 12.3 Land iguana on one of the Galápagos Islands. Despite their horrendous 
appearance, these bizarre inland lizards are mild, torpid, and vegetarian. They feed on 
leaves and cactus plants. 
(Courtesy of American Museum of Natural History.)

 
CHAPTER 12 Adaptive Radiation 
145
probe out its insect prey from the 
excavated  crevice (ﬁ g. 12.5). Equally 
extraordinary is the warbler ﬁ nch, 
which resembles in form and habit 
the true warbler. Its slender, warbler-
like beak is adapted for picking small 
insects off bushes. Occasionally, like 
a warbler, it can capture an insect in 
ﬂ ight. 
FACTORS IN 
DIVERSIFICATION
No such great diversity of ﬁ nches 
can be found on the South American 
mainland. In the absence of vacant 
habitats on the continent, the occasion 
was lacking for the mainland birds 
to exploit new situations.  However, 
given the unoccupied habitats on the 
Galápagos Islands, the opportunity 
presented itself for the invading birds 
to evolve in new directions. In the 
absence of competition, the colonists 
occupied several ecological habitats, 
the dry lowlands as well as the humid 
uplands. The ﬁ nches adopted modes 
of life that ordinarily would not have 
been opened to them. If true warblers 
and true woodpeckers had already 
occupied the islands, it is doubtful 
that the ﬁ nches could have evolved 
into warbler-like and woodpecker-
like forms. Thus, a prime factor promoting adap-
tive radiation is the absence of competition. 
The emigration of the ancestral ﬁ nches from 
the South American mainland was assuredly not 
conscious or self-directed. The dispersal of birds 
from the original home was a chance event. Birds 
(along with other animals and plants) are thought 
to have been carried westward by the Humboldt 
Current aboard seaweed mats or driftwood rafts 
from the continent. The survivors of the ordeal of 
raft voyages initiated an evolution of their own on 
the Galápagos Islands. 
on the ground; others feed primarily on the ﬂ ow-
ers of prickly pear cacti. The cactus eaters possess 
decurved, ﬂ ower-probing beaks. Their beaks are 
thicker than those of typical ﬂ ower- eating birds.
All the other species are tree ﬁ nches, the 
 majority of which feed on insects in the moist 
 forests. One of the most remarkable of these tree 
dwellers is the woodpecker ﬁ nch. It possesses 
a stout, straight beak, but lacks the long tongue 
 characteristic of the true woodpecker. Like a 
 woodpecker, it bores into wood in search of insect 
larvae, but then it uses a cactus spine or twig to 
Warbler
finch
Small insectivorous
tree finch
Small ground finch
(seed-eater)
Medium ground finch
(seed-eater)
Large ground finch
(seed-eater)
Large cactus
ground finch
Large insectivorous
tree finch
Medium insectivorous
tree finch
Woodpecker
finch
Figure 12.4 Representatives of Darwin’s ﬁ nches. There are 
14 species of Darwin’s ﬁ nches, all conﬁ ned to the Galápagos with 
the exception of one species that inhabits Cocos Island. Closest to 
the ancestral stock are the six species of ground ﬁ nches, primarily 
seed-eaters. The others evolved into eight species of tree ﬁ nches, the 
majority of which feed on insects.

genetic differentiation of 
each new local population.
The Galápagos Islands 
are the tips of enormous 
volcanoes, most of which 
rise from 7,000 to 10,000 
feet above the ﬂ oor of the 
sea. It is of especial inter-
est that ﬁ ve distinct vari-
eties of tortoises occupy 
regions corresponding to 
the ﬁ ve principal volcanic 
tops of the large Island 
of  Albermarle (ﬁ g. 12.6). 
The ﬁ ve different forms 
of tortoises evolved inde-
pendently of each other at 
a time when Albermarle 
Island was so deeply sub-
merged that only its ﬁ ve 
major craters were above 
water. The subsequent low-
ering of the sea level in 
the geologic past had the 
effect of uniting the ﬁ ve 
volcanoes into a single 
land mass. Even to this 
day the ﬁ ve volcanoes are 
separated from each other 
by deep valleys. There is no intermingling of the 
ﬁ ve varieties of tortoises. This intriguing natural 
geologic circumstance serves to document the 
importance of long-term isolation for the genetic 
differentiation of the separated populations. 
Today, all species of Galápagos tortoise are 
threatened with extinction due to historic overcol-
lecting and, more recently, introduced predators 
such as feral pigs, dogs, and rats, which predate 
turtle eggs. In The Voyage of the Beagle, Darwin’s 
descriptions foreshadow what has become a dire 
conservation situation when he noted that “the old 
Bucaniers found this tortoise in greater numbers 
even than the present.” Tortoises, like all of their 
kin, are long-lived species with a low reproductive 
capacity. Efforts are ongoing to forestall further 
The original ﬂ ock of birds that fortuitously 
arrived at the islands was but a small sample of 
the parental population, containing at best a lim-
ited portion of the parental gene pool. It is likely 
that only a small amount of genetic variation was 
initially available for selection to work on. What 
evolutionary changes occurred at the outset were 
due mainly to random survival (genetic drift). 
However, the phenomenon of drift would become 
less important as the population increased in size. 
Selection unquestionably became the main evolu-
tionary agent, molding the individual populations 
into new shapes by the preservation of new favor-
able mutant or recombination types. More than 
one island was colonized, and the complete sepa-
ration of the islands from each other promoted the 
Figure 12.5 Tool-using woodpecker ﬁ nch (Camarhychus pallidus) 
prod ding for grub with a carefully chosen cactus spine of proper size and shape. 
(© W/Miguel  Castro/Photo Researchers, Inc.)
146 
Understanding Evolution

G.n. becki
G.n. microphyes
G.n. vandenburghi
G.n. vicina
G.n. guntheri
Figure 12.6 Distribution of the ﬁ ve subspecies of the giant land tortoise (Geochelone 
nigra) on Albemarle Island. Each of the ﬁ ve subspecies inhabits one of the ﬁ ve major 
volcanoes on Albemarle. Each subspecies evolved independently on the separate volcanic 
tops of the island. The Galápagos tortoises are currently in the midst of a taxonomic revi-
sion and each subspecies may soon  be recognized as a separate species.
 
CHAPTER 12 Adaptive Radiation 
147

148 
Understanding Evolution
gradually diminished until the population became 
eliminated. In enforced competition for the same 
limited food supply, P. aurelia was the more suc-
cessful species. 
Gause enunciated his principle primarily on 
the basis of observations of “bottle populations” 
in the laboratory. The competition experiments 
reveal that two species populations cannot exist 
together if they are competing for precisely the 
same limited resource. Alternatively, if two spe-
cies in nature were to occupy the same habitat, the 
expectation is that each would have different eco-
logical requirements, even though the degree of 
difference is slight. Ecologists have demonstrated 
the validity of this view. In virtually every natural 
situation carefully examined, two co-inhabiting 
species have been found to differ in some require-
ment. The heterogeneous resources of the environ-
ment in a given locality are typically partitioned 
among the co-inhabiting species to minimize 
direct competition and enable the two (or more) 
species to coexist.
Most of the Galápagos Islands are occupied by 
more than one species of ﬁ nch. On islands where 
several species of ﬁ nch exist together, we ﬁ nd that 
each species is adapted to a different ecological 
niche. The three common species of ground ﬁ nch—
small (Geospiza fuliginosa), medium ( Geospiza 
fortis), and large (Geospiza magnirostris)—occur 
together in the coastal lowlands of several islands. 
Each species, however, is specialized in feeding on 
a seed of a certain size. The small-beaked Geospiza 
fulginosa, for example, feeds on small grass seeds, 
whereas the large-beaked Geospiza magnirostris 
eats large, hard fruits. Different species, with dif-
ferent food requirements, can thus exist together 
in an environment with varied food resources. 
COEXISTENCE
Gause’s principle may be stated in the follow-
ing form: No two species with identical require-
ments can continue to exist together. However, it 
is exceedingly unlikely that two species in nature 
would have exactly the same requirements for 
depopulation and to attempt to otherwise conserve 
this unique assemblage of magniﬁ cent creatures.
Students of evolution had debated whether 
such unique life forms as the marine and land 
iguanas could have evolved in the relatively short 
period of geologic time represented by the present-
day Galápagos Islands, less than or equal to three 
million years old. The contentious question seems 
to have been resolved by the impressive ﬁ nding 
that the chain of Galápagos Islands once included 
older islands that are now below the ocean’s sur-
face. The long-vanished islands are geologically 
nine million years old and are 370 miles closer to 
the South American mainland than the present-day 
islands. Accordingly, some of the inimitable ani-
mals, such as the two varieties of iguanas, would 
have had a much greater interval of time to evolve 
from a common mainland ancestor than was previ-
ously thought. Presumably, many of the life forms 
on the older, submerged islands found their way to 
the newer, present-day islands in the chain. 
COMPETITIVE EXCLUSION
When two populations of different species are 
obliged (under experimental conditions) to use a 
common nutrient, the two will compete with each 
other for the common resource. Under competi-
tion because of identical needs, only one of the two 
species populations will survive; the other will be 
eliminated or excluded by competition. This is the 
principle of competitive exclusion. It is also known 
as Gause’s principle, after the Russian biologist 
G. F. Gause, who ﬁ rst demonstrated experimen-
tally that under controlled laboratory conditions, 
one of two competing species will perish.
In 1934, Gause studied the interactions 
under carefully controlled culture conditions of 
two protozoan species, Paramecium caudatum 
and Paramecium aurelia. When each species was 
grown separately in a standard medium in a test 
tube containing a ﬁ xed amount of bacterial food, 
each species ﬂ ourished independently. When the 
two species were placed together in the same cul-
ture vessel, however, the growth of P. caudatum 

 
CHAPTER 12 Adaptive Radiation 
149
food and habitat. The sum total of environmental 
requirements for a species to thrive and repro-
duce has been termed “the ecological niche” of 
that  species population. The term niche, as ecolo-
gists use it, is more than simply the physical space 
that the species population occupies. It is essen-
tially the way of life peculiar to a given species: 
its structural adaptations, physiological responses, 
and behavior within its habitat. Experience has 
shown that the likelihood of two species having 
identical niches is almost nil.
Direct evidence of the process of competi-
tion between species in nature is difﬁ cult to obtain. 
Observable competitive interaction is a relatively 
ﬂ eeting stage in the relation of two species popula-
tions. What the ecologist observes is the end result 
of competitive contact, when the actual or potential 
competitors have become differentially specialized 
to exploit different components of a local environ-
ment and accordingly live side by side. The out-
come, then, of incipient competitive interaction is 
the avoidance of competition through differential 
specialization, or in the terminology of ecologists, 
through niche diversiﬁ cation. 
Indirect arguments have been used to support 
the view that two closely related species popula-
tions come to exploit different ecological niches 
in the same locality after beginning a competitive 
interaction. We may envision a situation in which 
two closely related species, with almost similar 
ecological requirements, expand their geographic 
ranges and meet in a common habitat. It may be 
presumed that each of the two species populations 
has appreciable genetic variability and that the 
resources in the common habitat are varied. The 
two  species  populations would initially compete 
for suitable ecological niches in the new common 
habitat. However, we can expect that the members 
of the two species will ultimately become so differ-
ent in structure and behavior that each species will 
become specialized to use different components of 
the environment. In other words, if genetic differ-
ences in morphological and behavioral characteris-
tics tend at ﬁ rst to reduce competition between the 
two species, then subsequently natural selection 
will act to augment the differences between the two 
competing species. It is especially noteworthy that 
the differences between the two species become 
more pronounced as a consequence of selec-
tion reducing competition rather than intensifying 
competition.
A striking case of niche diversiﬁ cation has 
been described by David Lack for certain species 
of Geospiza in the Galápagos. Where two species 
occur together on an island, there is a conspicuous 
difference in the size of the beaks and food habits. 
Where either species exists alone on other islands, 
the beak is adapted to exploit more than one food 
resource. Thus, on Tower Island (ﬁ g. 12.7), the 
cactus-feeding Geospiza conirostris and the large 
seed-eating ground ﬁ nch Geospiza magnirostris 
live side by side. The former species occurs also 
on Hood Island, but the latter species is absent, pre-
sumably having failed to invade or reach the island. 
In the absence of competition, Geospiza conirostris 
on Hood Island has evolved a larger beak that is 
adapted to feeding on both cactus and seeds. The 
sharp separation in beak size of the two species on 
Tower Island is understandable if we assume that 
competition initially fostered the differentiation 
of the beaks to permit each of the two species to 
adapt to a limited or restricted range of the avail-
able food resources. Each species is now geneti-
cally specialized in food habits, and competition 
between the two is now avoided.
There are many examples to illustrate how 
two or more species avoid competition. Among 
warblers that inhabit the spruce forests of Maine, 
each species conﬁ nes its feeding to a particular 
region of the spruce tree. The myrtle warbler, for 
example, preys on insects at the base of the spruce 
tree, whereas the Blackburnian warbler prefers 
those insects on the exterior leaves of the top of 
the tree. They can exist together because they use 
different resources of the same tree.
We may conclude by stating, paradoxically, 
that competition between two species populations 
achieves the avoidance or reduction of further 
competition, and not an intensiﬁ cation. In natural 
populations, coexistence of two species, rather 

the number of habitats and 
species that are either already 
extinct or are threatened with 
extinction grows daily and 
at a rate not seen before in 
the history of our planet. In 
 chapter 16 we will continue 
this discussion of the history 
and evolutionary implications 
of humans impacts on the 
global environment.
CLASSIFICATION 
The original ancestral stock 
of ﬁ nches on the Galápagos 
diverged along several dif-
ferent paths. The pattern of 
divergence is reﬂ ected in the 
biologists’ scheme of clas-
siﬁ cation of organisms. All 
the ﬁ nches are related to one 
another, but the various spe-
cies of ground ﬁ nches obvi-
ously are more related by 
descent to one another than to 
the members of the tree-ﬁ nch 
assemblage. As a measure of evolutionary afﬁ ni-
ties, the ground ﬁ nches are grouped together in one 
genus (Geospiza) and the tree ﬁ nches are clustered 
in another genus (Camarhynchus). The different 
lineages of ﬁ nches are portrayed in ﬁ gure 12.8. It 
should be clear that our classiﬁ cation scheme is 
nothing more than an expression of evolutionary 
relationships between groups of organisms.
In chapter 13 we shall see how adaptive radia-
tion on a much larger scale than that which occurred 
in the ﬁ nches led to the origin of radically new 
assemblages of organisms, distinguishable by the 
taxonomist as Orders and Classes.
than competitive exclusion, is the general rule. The 
end result is that each species is part of a highly 
organized community in which each plays a con-
structive, or stabilizing, role. Nevertheless, there is 
one species—Homo sapiens—that seems unable to 
live in harmony with other species. Human over-
population is directly responsible for the wholesale 
destruction of natural habitats and species, global 
pollution, and other worldwide impacts that many 
experts believe pose the real danger of destroy-
ing our own species. When severe overpopulation 
occurs, organisms tend to exceed the available nat-
ural resources, or carrying capacity, which can lead 
to a population collapse. In all corners of the Earth, 
G. conirostris
G. magnirostris
CACTUS-FEEDING
GROUND FINCH
BOTH CACTUS-FEEDING
AND SEED EATING
SEED-EATING
GROUND FINCH
TOWER ISLAND
HOOD ISLAND
G. conirostris
Figure 12.7 Niche diversiﬁ cation. In the absence of competition, the 
ground ﬁ nch Geospiza conirostris on Hood Island has evolved a large beak 
that enables it to exploit a variety of food items (seed and cacti). On Tower 
Island, the same ground ﬁ nch Geospiza conirostris has evolved a specialized 
beak adapted solely for cactus feeding, thus reducing or avoiding competition 
for food resources with the seed-eating ground ﬁ nch Geospiza magnirostris. 
The latter species does not exist on Hood Island.
150 
Understanding Evolution

crassirostris
parvulus
pauper
psittacula
heliobates
pallidus
fortis
(medium)
magnirostris
(large)
fuliginosa
(small)
scandens
conirostris
difficilis
Cactus
eaters
Seed
eaters
Insect
eaters
Vegetarian
bud eaters
olivacea
inornata
Common ancestor from South American Mainland
Geospiza
Ground finches
Camarhynchus
Tree finches
Pinaroloxias
Cocos Finch
Certhidea
Warbler finch
Figure 12.8 Evolutionary tree of Darwin’s ﬁ nches, graphically expressing what is known or surmised as to the degree 
of relationship or kinship between the different species of ﬁ nches. Darwin’s ﬁ nches evolved from a common stock and are 
represented today by 14 species. The species are assembled in four genera, of which two (Certhidea and Pinaroloxias) contain 
only a single species each. The species associated together in a genus have signiﬁ cant common attributes, judged to denote 
 evolutionary afﬁ nities.
(Based on the ﬁ ndings of David Lack.)
 
CHAPTER 12 Adaptive Radiation 
151

152
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
The diversity of Darwin’s ﬁ nches had its 
beginning when migrants from the mainland suc-
cessfully invaded the variety of vacant habitats on 
the Galápagos Islands. Adaptive radiation, such as 
manifested by Darwin’s ﬁ nches, has been imitated 
repeatedly by different forms of life. Organisms 
throughout the ages have seized new opportuni-
ties open to them by the absence of competitors 
and have diverged in the new environments. The 
habitats available to Darwin’s ﬁ nches were cer-
tainly few in comparison with the enormous range 
of ecological habitats in the world. The larger the 
region and the more diverse the environmental 
conditions, the greater the variety of life.
Approximately 400 million years ago, during a 
period of history that geologists call the Devonian,
(see ﬁ g. 13.1 and table 16.1) the vast areas of land 
were monotonously barren of animal life. Save for 
rare creatures like scorpions and millipedes, ani-
mal life of those distant years was conﬁ ned to the 
water. The seas were crowded with invertebrate 
animals of varied kinds. The fresh and salt waters 
contained a highly diversiﬁ ed and abundant assem-
blage of cartilaginous and bony ﬁ shes. The vacant 
terrestrial regions were not to remain unoccupied 
for long. From one of the many groups of ﬁ shes 
inhabiting the pools and swamps in the Devonian 
period emerged the ﬁ rst land vertebrate. The ini-
tial modest step onto land started the vertebrates on 
their conquest of all available terrestrial habitats. 
The origin and diversiﬁ cation of the backboned 
land dwellers is one of the most striking examples 
of adaptive radiation on a large scale.
TRANSITION TO LAND
Prominent among the numerous Devonian aquatic 
forms were the lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ shes, the Crossop-
terygians, who possessed the ability to gulp air 
when they rose to the surface. These ancient 
air-breathing ﬁ shes represent the stock from 
which the ﬁ rst land vertebrates, the amphibians, 
are derived (ﬁ gs. 13.1 and 13.2). The transition of 
these ﬁ sh to land required a series of adaptations, 
including the ability to obtain oxygen from the air, 
the ability to support themselves on land with legs, 
and the ability to avoid desiccation.
Until recently, scientists believed that the air-
breathing lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ shes (Crossopterygians) 
inched out of dwindling Devonian puddles to larger 
MAJOR ADAPTIVE 
RADIATIONS
13

Quaternary
Crossopterygian
Labyrinthodont
Cotylosaur
Archaeopteryx
Stem
Mammal
Millions of years ago
430
400
350
310
275
225
185
135
85
2
Tertiary
Cretaceous
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Pennsylvanian
Mississippian
Devonian
Silurian
Periods
Eras
Cenozoic
Mesozoic
Paleozoic
Bony
fishes
Reptiles
Birds
Mammals
Amphibians
Figure 13.1 Evolution of land vertebrates in the geologic past. From air breathing, lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ shes 
(crossopterygians) emerged the ﬁ rst four-footed land inhabitants, the amphibians. Primitive amphibians 
(labyrinthodonts) gave rise to the reptiles, the ﬁ rst vertebrates to become ﬁ rmly established on land. The birds 
and mammals owe their origin to an early reptilian stock (cotylosaurs). An important biological principle 
reveals itself: each new vertebrate group did not arise from highly developed or advanced members of the 
ancestral group but rather from early primitive forms near the base of the ancestral stock. The thickness of the 
various branches provides a rough measure of the comparative abundance of the ﬁ ve vertebrate groups during 
geologic history. The Devonian period is often called the Age of Fishes; the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian 
periods (frequently lumped together as the Carboniferous period) are referred to as the Age of Amphibians; the 
Mesozoic era is the grand Age of Reptiles; and the Cenozoic era is the Age of Mammals.
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
153
water bodies to escape dehydration, thus forming 
the stock from which the ﬁ rst land vertebrates, 
the amphibians, were derived. In 2006, paleon-
tologists lead by Neil Shubin of the University of 
Chicago and  Ted Daeschler of the Philadelphia 
Academy of Natural Sciences made discoveries 
of new fossils that have modiﬁ ed those previous 
deductions. Tiktaakik (Inuit for “big freshwater 
ﬁ sh”) (ﬁ gs. 13.2 and 13.3) is a transitional fos-
sil between the lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh and the terres-
trial four-limbed tetrapods, such as amphibians, 
and the other land vertebrates, the reptiles, dino-
saurs, mammals, and birds. In the Late Devonian, 
roughly 380 million years ago, the land masses 
that are now the northern Canadian alpine tundra 
straddled the equator and were subtropical, akin to 

Figure 13.2 Fins to Limbs.  Lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh limb has the homologous limb bone structure to 
that found in the early tetrapod amphibian. 
Tibia
Tibia
Femur
Femur
Pelvis
Pelvis
Fibula
Fibula
Early amphibian
Humerus
Humerus
Shoulder
Shoulder
Radius
Radius
Ulna
Ulna
Lobe-finned fish
154 
Understanding Evolution
modern equatorial rainforests. The lush ecology 
of the tropical streams was ideally suited for Tik-
taakik to transition to terrestrial haunts.
Tiktaalik (ﬁ gs. 13.3. 13.4 and 13.6) and its 
kin possessed a mosaic of characteristics adapted 
for shallow water locomotion, which would 
prove to be important under the new conditions 
of life on land. Crocodilian-like, Tiktaalik’s 
transitional characteristics included a ﬂ at head 
with eyes at the top of the skull (making it look 
more crocodile-like than ﬁ shlike), a functional 
neck (a feature absent in ﬁ sh), ribs to support its 
body and aid in respiration, and limbs already 
equipped with wrist and elbow bones necessary 
to move and hold itself up. Figures 13.2 and 13.3 
shows the evolutionary transitions leading toward 
the development of a vertebrate limb capable of 
walking on land. The challenge of walking on the 
land went through a series of reﬁ nements from 
the lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh to the transitional Tiktaalik to 
the early amphibian.
Paradoxically, the ﬁ rst adaptations for move-
ments on land appear to have been associated 
with movement in shallow water rather than an 
attempt to abandon aquatic existence. Evolution-
ists speak of such potentially adaptive characters as 
preadaptations. It should be understood that such 
pre-adapted characters were not favorably selected 
with a view to their possible use in some future 
mode of life. There is no foresight or design in the 
selection process. A structure does not evolve in 
advance of impending events. Nor do mutational 
changes occur in anticipation of some new envi-
ronmental condition. A trait is selected for only 
when it imparts an advantage to the organism in its 
immediate environment. 
Accordingly, limb bones in Tiktaalik evo-
lved, not with conscious reference toward a 

Expanded ribs
Neck
Flat head,
eyes on top
Early 
amphibian
Tetrapods
Tiktaalik
roseae
Scales
Fins
360
377
370
380
Fish
Figure 13.3 Transition to land. During a 20-million-year 
span in the Late Devonian, vertebrate fossils exhibit increasing 
adaptations to land. Illustration depicts tetrapod ancestors, 
a Devonian ﬁ sh, the transitional fossil Tiktaalik and an early 
amphibian. Many scientists believe that Tiktaalik was capable 
of both crawling in shallow water and occasional terrestrial 
excursions onto land. Early amphibians were quite ﬁ shlike but 
possessed many more terrestrial adaptations.
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
155
possible future land life, but only because such 
structures were important, if not essential, to its 
survival in its shallow water habitat. In essence, 
the selection process does not foresee environ-
ments yet to come. The term pre-adaptation sim-
ply signiﬁ es that a structure evolves under one set 
of environmental circumstances and later becomes 
modiﬁ ed for a totally different function.
Like Archaeopteryx (ﬁ gs. 13.1, 13.12), which 
is intermediate between a reptile and a bird, 
Tiktaalik is a transitional form between ﬁ sh such as 
380 million year old Panderichthys and early tetra-
pods, such as Ichthyostega, known from 365 million 
years ago (ﬁ gs. 13.4, 13.15 and 13.6). As such, 
the discovery of Tiktaalik is what might best be 
termed a “missing link” (or transitional fossil) in 
the chain of events leading to the ﬁ rst terrestrial 
tetrapod. Tiktaalik, with its mixture of ﬁ sh and 
tetrapod characteristics, led one of its  discoverers 
to characterize it as a “ﬁ shapod.” Tiktaalik’s fea-
tures, adapted for movement in shallow waters, 
would prove necessary for life on land.
Before the close of the Devonian period, the 
transition from ﬁ sh to amphibian was complete. 
The early land-living amphibians were slim-
bodied with ﬁ shlike tails but possessed limbs 
capable of locomotion on land, such as the ﬁ sh-
like amphibians Ichthyostega (ﬁ g. 13.5). These 
four-footed amphibian-like creatures ﬂ ourished 
in the humid swamps of Mississippian and Penn-
sylvanian times but never did become completely 
adapted to existence on land.
The most ancient amphibian-like creatures 
were the labyinthodonts, such as Acanthostega 
and Ichthyostega (ﬁ g. 13.6), which spent most of 
their lives in water. These intermediates between 
ﬁ sh and more modern amphibians featured lung, 
limbs, and an amphibian-like build. Their mod-
ern descendants (salamanders, newts, frogs, and 
toads) must return to water to deposit their eggs. 
Amphibia, which means “double life,” refers to 
the fact that the amphibians have one foot on land 
and another still in the water. Thus, the amphib-
ians were the ﬁ rst vertebrates to colonize land but 
were, and still are, only partially adapted for ter-
restrial life.
CONQUEST OF LAND
From the amphibians emerged the reptiles, the 
true terrestrial forms. The appearance of a shell-
covered egg, which can be laid on land, freed the 

Last common ancestor
of all tetrapods
Panderichthys
Tiktaalik
Ichthyostega
Panderichthys
Tiktaalik
Ichthyostega
Amphibians
Lobe-finned fish
Ray-finned fish
All other modern tetrapods
(reptiles, birds, and mammals—
including humans)
Last common ancestor
of bony fish and tetrapods
Figure 13.4 The fossil sequence of Ichthyostega, Tiktaalik and Panderichythys may represent 
the evolutionary lineage that led to modern tetrapods.
Figure 13.5 Ichthyostega (from the Greek meaning 
ﬁ sh-roof) was a basal amphibian that retained many ﬁ shlike 
characteristics such as ﬁ n rays on its tail, which assisted its 
locomotion when in the water. Ichthyostega boasted effec-
tive limbs (with seven digits on its hind limbs) capable of 
walking on land, ears adapted for detecting airborne sounds, 
and an improved sense of smell on its elongated snout.
156 
Understanding Evolution
reptile from dependence on water. The elimina-
tion of a water-dwelling stage was a signiﬁ cant 
evolutionary advance. The ﬁ rst primitive reptile 
most likely arose during Carboniferous times. The 
ancestral reptile probably possessed the body pro-
portions and well-developed limbs of the more-
advanced terrestrial forms of amphibians, such as 
Seymouria (ﬁ g. 13.7). Seymouria is reptile-like, 
but its skeletal features suggest terrestrial habits. 
This advanced amphibian may have been a descen-
dant of an earlier amphibian group in the lower 
Carboniferous period, a group that was ancestral 
to the reptiles.
The terrestrial egg-laying habit evolved 
very early in reptilian evolution. A key feature 
of reptiles (and higher vertebrates) is the amni-
otic egg (ﬁ g. 13.8). The egg of the reptile (or 
bird) contains a large amount of nourishing 

365
385
380
375
370
Millions of years ago
Sea
Land
Rivers,
swamps
and
shallows
Tiktaalik
Ichthyostega
Acanthostega
Panderichthys
Eusthenopteron
Figure 13.6 Transition from Late Devonian lobe-  ned   sh to early tetrapod. The Late Devonian 
was a period of rapid transition. Open-ocean dwelling lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh, such as Eusthenopteron, had modiﬁ ed 
ﬁ ns that were pre-adaptations to the tetrapod limb. Panderichtys was a ﬁ sh with additional transitional fea-
tures. Transitional fossil Tikaaalik’s limblike ﬁ ns made it better able to venture onto land, and amphibian-like 
Ichthyostega had lungs and limbs. Acanthostega had eight webbed digit appendages but lacked wrists, mak-
ing it poorly adapted to movement on land.
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
157
yolk. Moreover, development of the embryo 
takes place entirely within a thick shell. These 
circumstances call for a special provision 
whereby food derived from the yolk and oxygen 
obtained from an external source can be made 
accessible to all parts of the developing embryo. 
The embryo itself constructs a complex system 
of membranes, known as extraembryonic mem-
branes, which serve for protection, nutrition, 
and respiration. These are the amnion, chorion, 
yolk sac, and allantois.
When fully developed, the amnion is a thin 
membrane loosely enclosing the embryo. It does 
not ﬁ t the embryo snugly. The space between the 
amnion and the embryo, the amniotic  cavity, is ﬁ lled 
with a watery ﬂ uid, the amniotic  ﬂ uid. The ﬂ uid is a 
cushion that protects the embryo from mechani-
cal impacts and, at the same time, allows it free-
dom of movement. The chemical composition 
of the amniotic ﬂ uid resembles the chemical 
makeup of blood. Thus, during its development 
the embryo is bathed by a ﬂ uid that is compatible 
in its chemical nature with the embryo’s blood. 
An interesting fact is that for the embryos of birds 
and reptiles, as well as for the human fetus, the 
amniotic ﬂ uid resembles seawater in chemical 
composition, in terms of elements (ions), such 
as sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium. 
After approximately 400 million years of evolu-
tion on land, vertebrates still carry essentially the 
chemical composition of seawater in their ﬂ uids—
amniotic ﬂ uid, blood, and other body ﬂ uids. This 
has been interpreted as indicating that life origi-
nated in the sea and that the balance of salts in 
various body ﬂ uids did not change very much 
in subsequent evolution. The amnion has been 
picturesquely characterized as a sort of private 
aquarium in which the embryos of land-living 

Figure 13.7 Seymouria, an advanced amphibian with 
reptilian body proportions (short trunk and well-developed 
limbs). Seymouria is known only from Permian rocks 
(275 million years ago), long after the reptiles had 
appeared. It may represent a relict of an earlier amphibian 
group that was ancestral to the reptiles. 
(Photo by L. Botin and R. Logan Department of Library Services, 
American Museum of Natural History.)
158 
Understanding Evolution
of the yolk sac carries dissolved yolk materials 
to all parts of the embryo, thus making the yolk 
available for chemical activities and growth in all 
regions. 
From the hind region of the embryonic body, 
a sac bulges out on the underside and pushes its 
way between the yolk sac and chorion. This sac 
is the allantois (ﬁ g. 13.8). Much of the allan-
toic blood vessels lies close to the inner sur-
face of the shell. The porous shell permits the 
ready exchange of respiratory gases between the 
external air and the internal blood. The allan-
toic sac also serves as a receptacle for urinary 
wastes. Waste ﬂ uids excreted by the embryonic 
kidneys pass into the cavity of the allantois. The 
allantois thus has both respiratory and excretory 
functions.
Finally, there is an outermost investing mem-
brane, the chorion, which is abundantly supplied 
with blood vessels. The embryo depends, in part, 
on this vascularized enveloping membrane for 
carrying on gaseous exchange with the outer air 
through the porous shell.
The amnion, chorion, allantois, and yolk sac 
in the human embryo are similar in essence to 
these extraembryonic membranes in the reptiles 
(and birds). Curiously, the yolk sac does develop 
in the human embryo in spite of the absence of 
any appreciable amount of yolk.  The human yolk 
sac, however, remains small and largely func-
tionless, providing early blood circulation to the 
developing mammalian embryo. There is also 
no elaborate development of the allantois in the 
human embryo; the allantoic sac never becomes 
more than a rudimentary tube of minute size that 
contributes to the formation of the umbilicus. 
Nevertheless, the very appearance of the yolk 
sac and allantois in the human embryo is one of 
the strongest pieces of evidence documenting 
the evolutionary relationships among the widely 
different kinds of vertebrates. To the student of 
evolution this means that the mammals, including 
human beings, are descended from animals that 
reproduced by means of externally laid eggs rich 
in yolk.
vertebrates recapitulate the water-living mode 
of existence of their remote ancestors. The pres-
ence of an amnion (amniotes) or absence of an 
amnion (anamniotes), is a major dividing line 
between vertebrates. Fish and amphibians, with 
their aquatic development, lack an amnion; the 
terrestrially developing birds, reptiles, and mam-
mals all possess this membrane.
As ﬁ gure 13.8 shows, the enormous mass 
of yolk has been enclosed by an internal circular 
membrane, the yolk sac. This membrane, which 
has formed by growing over the yolk, is attached 
to the embryonic body by a narrow stalk. The yolk 
sac is highly vascular, its many blood vessels com-
municating with the blood channels of the embryo 
proper. The blood circulating through the vessels 

Amnion
Chorion
Allantois
Yolk sac
Yolk
Amniotic
fluid
Figure 13.8 The amniotic egg. The developing embryo is enclosed by the membra-
nous amnion and cushioned by amniotic ﬂ uid. The large reserve supply of food (yolk) is 
contained within the yolk sac. The sacklike allantois serves as a receptacle for the embryo’s 
waste products. The outermost, vascularized enveloping membrane is the chorion.
(From a restoration by Charles R. Knight. Courtesy of American Museum of Natural History.)
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
159
characteristics (ﬁ g. 13.10): the Anapsiada, the 
Synapsida and the Diaspida. The Anapsida have 
solid skulls except for the eye orbit and include the 
extinct stem reptiles, the extinct aquatic freshwater 
reptiles, and perhaps the modern turtles. Exactly 
where exactly the turtles ﬁ t into the evolution-
ary scheme remains murky, with conﬂ icting data 
from DNA analysis and paleontological sources. 
The Synapsids diverged from the Anapsids and 
have a single hole in their skulls behind their 
eye sockets. Synapsids are the sail-backed pely-
cosaurs and the mammal-like therapsids, which 
eventually evolved into mammals. The Diaspsids 
are the largest group and also contain a pair of 
holes in their skull posterior to the eye and con-
sist of the archeosaurs, the dinosaurs (Saurischia 
and Ornithischia) (ﬁ gs. 13.9 and 13.11), the 
Mesozoic marine reptiles such as the plesiosaurs, 
the mollusk-eating placodonts, the ﬁ shlike ich-
thyosaurs, the ﬂ ying reptiles (pterosaurs), the 
ADAPTIVE RADIATION OF REPTILES 
With the evolution of the amniotic egg, the rep-
tiles exploited the wide expanses of land areas. 
The ancestral reptilian stock initiated one of the 
most spectacular adaptive radiations in the history 
of life on Earth. The reptiles endured as dominant 
land animals of the Earth for well over 100 million 
years. The Mesozoic era, during which the rep-
tiles thrived, is often referred to as the “Age of 
Reptiles.”
Figure 13.9 reveals the variety of reptiles that 
blossomed from the basal stock of amniota. As 
described in the previous section, the amniota are 
those vertebrates with an amnion as part of their 
extraembryonic membranes and include the birds, 
reptiles, and mammals. The anamniota are those 
vertebrates without an amnion and include the 
amphibians and ﬁ shes. The Class Reptilia is typi-
cally divided into three subclasses based on skull 

Anapsid Skull
Synapsid Skull
Diapsid Skull
Orbit
Orbit
Orbit
Lateral temporal 
opening
Lateral temporal 
opening
Dorsal temporal 
opening
Figure 13.10 Reptile skulls. The classiﬁ cation of reptiles is based on the number and type of holes on the side of their skulls 
behind the orbit of the eye. Anapsids have no holes, Synapsids have one hole and Diapsids have two holes. See text for details.
Figure 13.9 The ancestors of the stem amphibian consist of the modern land mammals, the turtles, crocodilians, lizard 
and birds as well as their extinct ancestors such as the dinosaurs which all went extinct around 65 million years ago. These verte-
brates diverged early in the fossil record and encompass the living anapsids, synapsids and diaspids shown below in ﬁ gure 13.10.
Paleozoic
Mesozoic
Cenozoic
Devonian Carboniferous Permian
Triassic
Jurassic
Cretaceous
Turtles Crocs
Squamates
Mammals
Reptiles
Mammals
Primitive
mammals
"Stem amphibian"
160 
Understanding Evolution

MARGINOCEPHALIA
COELUROSAURS
THYREOPHORA
CERAPODA
THEROPODS
SAUROPODS
Eoraptor
Figure 13.11 Simpliﬁ ed dinosaur family tree. The major dinosaur groups are classiﬁ ed based on hip structure. The bird-
hipped dinosaurs are the Ornithischians and the lizard-hipped dinosaurs Saurischians. The ﬂ ying pterosaurs do not ﬁ t either of 
these major classes.
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
161
sphenodonts, the lizards and snakes (Squamata), 
and the crocodilians. The remaining tetrapods are 
the amphibians.
The dinosaurs (ﬁ g. 13.11) were by far the most 
awe-inspiring and famous of the early reptiles. 
They reigned over the land until the close of 
the Mesozoic era, when they became extinct, 
roughly 65 million years ago, as part of a massive 
extinction pulse that most scientists believe was 
caused by a meteor or comet striking the Earth. 
The dinosaurs were remarkably diverse; they 
varied in size, bodily form, and habits. There 
are two Orders of dinosaurs, the lizard-hipped 
Saurischians and the bird-hipped Ornthischians. 
Some of the dinosaurs were carnivorous, such as 
the huge Tyrannosaurus, whereas others were 

Avian features:
1. Feathered
    wing and tail
Reptilian features:
1. Long bony tail
2. Claws on wing
3. Toothed beak
Figure 13.12 Transition reptile. Archaeopteryx 
(Greek for “ancient feather”) is now a series of transitional 
fossils that are intermediate between dinosaurs and birds. 
Its reptilian features include a long, bony tail, claws on its 
wings, and a toothed beak. Its avian or birdlike features are 
its feathered wings and tail. The ﬁ rst specimen was found in 
1861, just two years after Darwin published The Origin of 
Species, making it a key piece of evidence in the support of 
evolution.
162 
Understanding Evolution
forelimbs were about half as large as its legs, and 
there were ﬁ ve claws on each hand, which it pre-
sumably used to hold prey. Recent paleontological 
discoveries suggest that many of the ﬁ rst dinosaurs 
were also small predatory bipeds. The archosaurs 
also gave rise to the bizarre reptiles that took to 
the air, the pterosaurs (ﬁ g. 13.11). These “dragons 
of the air” possessed highly expansive wings and 
disproportionately short bodies. The winged ptero-
saurs succumbed before the end of the Cretaceous 
when the dinosaurs went extinct. 
Another independent branch of the archosaurs 
led to eminently more successful ﬂ yers, the birds.  
The link between the reptiles and the birds is seen 
in the celebrated transitional fossil Archaeopteryx, 
a Jurassic form that was essentially an airborne liz-
ard (ﬁ gs. 13.11 and 13.12). This feathered creature 
possessed a slender, lizard-like tail and a scaly head 
equipped with reptilian teeth. Nearly all authors 
agree that birds descended from reptiles, which 
were already warm-blooded (endothermic) rather 
than, as often assumed, cold-blooded (ectother-
mic). Under this view, the endothermic birds are 
merely aerial extensions of a terrestrial endother-
mic stock.
Certain reptiles returned to water. The stream-
lined, dolphin-like ichthyosaurs and the long-
necked, short-bodied plesiosaurs were marine, 
ﬁ sh-eating reptiles. The ichthyosaurs were proﬁ -
cient swimmers; their limbs were ﬁ nlike and their 
tails were forked.
The plesiosaurs were efﬁ cient predators, capa-
ble of swinging their heads 40 feet from side to side 
and seizing ﬁ sh in their long, sharp teeth. These 
aquatic reptiles breathed by means of lungs; they 
did not redevelop the gills of their very distant ﬁ sh 
ancestors. Indeed, it is axiomatic that a structure 
once lost in the long course of evolution cannot be 
regained. This is the doctrine of irreversibility of 
evolution, or Dollo’s law, after Louis Dollo, the emi-
nent Belgian paleontologist to whom the principle 
is ascribed. The reversal of the long evolutionary 
path from lungs to gills would demand the implau-
sible precise retrieval of an untold number of steps. 
Among the early reptiles present before Mesozoic 
vegetarians, such as the feeble-toothed but pon-
derous Apatosaurus. The prodigious body of 
Apatosaurus weighed 30 tons and measured 
nearly 70 feet in length. Not all dinosaurs were 
immense; some were no bigger than chickens. 
Some dinosaurs strode on two feet; others had 
reverted to four. The exceedingly long necks of 
certain dinosaurs were adaptations for feeding on 
the foliage of tall coniferous trees.
The dinosaurs descended from the archosaurs 
about 230 million years ago during the Middle to 
Late Triassic. Early dinosaur fossils of the genus 
Eoraptor (ﬁ g. 13.11) were meter-long bipedal pred-
ators that ran upright on their hind legs. Eoraptor’s 

two living species of living fossils, the tuataras, 
which are endemic to New Zealand (ﬁ g. 13.9).
EXTINCTION AND REPLACEMENT
The history of the reptiles attests to the fact that 
the ultimate fate of most groups of organism is 
extinction. The reptilian dynasty collapsed before 
the close of the Mesozoic era. Of the vast array 
of Mesozoic reptiles, relatively few survived to 
modern times; the ones that have include the liz-
ards, snakes, crocodiles, and turtles. The famed 
land dinosaurs, the great marine plesiosaurs and 
ichthyosaurs, and the ﬂ ying pterosaurs all became 
extinct. Some groups of reptiles, such as the ich-
thyosaurs, pterosaurs, and placodonts, went extinct 
before the two major groups of true dinosaurs 
(ﬁ gs. 13.9, 13.11). The cause of the decline and 
death of the true dinosaurs (Ornithischians and 
Saurischians) 65 million years ago has been linked 
to a large extraterrestrial impact 
(comet or meteor) in the vicin-
ity of the Yucatan Peninsula. 
Whatever radical environmen-
tal changes this impact created, 
dinosaurs and many other reptiles 
were unable to adapt to the altered 
environmental conditions.
As one group of organisms 
recedes and dies out completely, 
another group spreads and evolves 
(ﬁ g. 13.1). The decline of the 
reptiles 
provided 
evolutionary 
opportunities for the birds and the 
mammals. The vacancies in their 
habitats could then be occupied by 
warm-blooded vertebrates. Small 
and inconspicuous during the 
Mesozoic era, the mammals arose 
to unquestionable dominance in 
the years immediately following 
the extinction of the dinosaurs. The 
extent to which mammals contrib-
uted to the decline of the dinosaur 
Figure 13.13 Dimetrodon, one of the carnivorous pelycosaurs that ﬂ ourished 
during Permian times. The gaudy “sail” may have served as a heat-regulating device.
(From a restoration by Charles R. Knight, courtesy of American Museum of Natural History.)
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
163
days were the pelycosaurs, such as Dimetrodon, 
notable for their peculiar sail-like extensions of the 
back (ﬁ g. 13.13).  The function of the gaudy sail 
is unknown, but it should not be thought that this 
structural feature was merely ornamental or use-
less.  As we have emphasized, traits of organisms 
were selected for their adaptive utility. It may be 
that the pelycosauran sail was a functional device 
to achieve some degree of heat regulation. Be that 
as it may, the pelycosaurs gave rise to an important 
group of reptiles, the therapsids. These mammal-
like forms bridged the structural gap between the 
reptiles and the mammals.
The extant reptiles inhabit six of the seven 
continents and include four Orders. The Order 
Testudines includes the turtles, tortoises, and terra-
pins. The Squamata embraces the lizards, snakes, 
and wormlike amphisbaenids. The Crocodilia 
comprise the crocodiles, alligators, gavials, and 
caimans. Finally, the Sphenodontia consist of just 

and the ﬂ ying squirrel), and cursorial types well-
adapted for running (for example, the horse). The 
mammalian appendages are highly differentiated 
for the different modes of life. An important les-
son may be drawn from the variety of specialized 
appendages. Superﬁ cially, there is scant resem-
blance between the human arm, the ﬂ ipper of 
a whale, and the wing of a bat. And yet a close 
comparison of the skeletal elements (ﬁ g. 13.14) 
assemblage is unanswer able. Our knowledge of 
evolutionary history suggests that the ascendancy 
of the mammals was the result, rather than the 
cause, of the fall of the great reptiles. In this regard, 
the adaptive radiation of mammals that led to the 
diversiﬁ cation and expansion of the primates and 
to the eventual evolution of humans might not have 
occurred were it not for the extinction of the dino-
saurs 65 million years ago.
In mammals, a major evolutionary advance 
was the development of the pla-
centa, an intimate apposition of 
maternal and fetal tissues. The 
placenta provides optimum con-
ditions for the growth of the 
fetus—protection, a continuous 
supply of oxygen and food, an efﬁ -
cient system for removing waste 
products, and the transmission 
of antibodies. Of paramount sig-
niﬁ cance, mammals have added a 
higher order of parental care of the 
young. Many mammal newborns 
are relatively helpless and obtain 
nourishment in the form of milk 
through special mammary glands. 
The most primitive mammals are 
the monotremes (duckbill platy-
pus and spiny anteater), which lay 
reptile-like yolky eggs. The mono-
tremes nourish their young with 
milk secreted by modiﬁ ed sweat 
glands. The marsupials, which 
carry their developing early infants 
in a pouch, are also mammals and 
include the North American opos-
sum. The third major mammalian 
group is the placental mammals, 
which includes humans.
The mammals diversiﬁ ed into 
marine forms (for example, the 
whale, dolphin, seal, and walrus), 
fossorial forms living underground 
(such as the mole), ﬂ ying and 
gliding animals (such as the bat 
Humerus (upper arm)
Radius (forearm)
Ulna (forearm)
Carpals (wrist)
Primitive
pattern
Bat
Horse
Human
Frog
Whale
Lizard
Bird
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
5
Cat
1
2
3
4
5
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
5
Figure 13.14 Varied forelimbs of vertebrates, all of which are built on 
the same structural plan. The best explanation for the fundamentally similar frame-
work of bones is that humans and all other vertebrates share a common ancestry. 
Homologous bones are shaded appropriately. The number of phalanges in each 
digit is indicated by a numeral, beginning with the ﬁ rst digit (thumb).
164 
Understanding Evolution

shows that the structural designs, bone for bone, 
are basically the same. The differences are mainly 
in the relative lengths of the component bones. 
In the forelimb of the bat, for instance, the meta-
carpals and phalanges (except for the thumb) 
are greatly elongated. Although highly modi-
ﬁ ed, the bones of the bat’s wing are not funda-
mentally different from those of the forelimbs 
of other mammals. The conclusion is inescap-
able; the limb bones of the human, the bat, and 
the whale are modiﬁ cations of a common ances-
tral pattern. The facts admit no other logical 
interpretation. Indeed, as seen in ﬁ gure 13.14, 
the forelimbs of all tetrapod vertebrates exhibit a 
unity of anatomical pattern intelligible only on the 
basis of common inheritance. The corresponding 
limb bones of tetrapod vertebrates are said to be 
homologous because they are structurally identi-
cal with those in the common ancestor. Homology 
implies evolutionary divergence from a common 
ancestor (descent with modiﬁ cation). In contrast, 
the wing of a bird and the wing of a butterﬂ y are 
analogous; both are used for ﬂ ight, but they are 
built on an entirely different structural plan and 
are of independent origin (convergence). Many 
other examples of divergence from a common 
ancestor and adaptations to similar ecology lead-
ing to convergence can be found throughout the 
domains of life (ﬁ g 13.15).
Ancestral mammal
Ancestral reptile
Ancestral fish
Mammal
Porpoise/Dolphin
Reptile
Ichthyosaur
Tuna
Shark fish
Figure 13.15 Convergent evolution among fast-swimming predators. Body shapes adapted to fast movement 
in the water have evolved numerous times. Sharks and tuna are ﬁ sh, the ichthyosaur is an extinct reptile, and the dolphin is a 
marine mammal.
 
CHAPTER 13 Major Adaptive Radiations 
165

166
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
The polemics surrounding Darwin’s The 
Origin of Species was matched by another mon-
umental controversy of that day, a controversy 
regarding the unbelievable proposition that 
germs (bacteria) cause disease. The father of 
germ theory was Louis Pasteur, the chemist who 
was led into the study of germs through prob-
lems associated with the fermentation of wine. 
In the early nineteenth century, the notion of 
spontaneous generation was still ﬂ ourishing—
that is, most people believed that living things 
could originate from lifeless matter. In 1862 Pas-
teur provided proof that new life can come only 
from pre-existing life. Following years of bitter 
wrangling with skeptics, Pasteur ﬁ nally laid to 
rest the age-old belief that life could appear out 
of nowhere.
Since Pasteur’s time, countless generations of 
students have been taught not to believe in sponta-
neous generation. However, Pasteur’s experiments 
revealed only that life cannot arise spontaneously 
under conditions that exist on Earth today. Condi-
tions on the primeval Earth billions of years ago 
were assuredly different from present condi-
tions, and the ﬁ rst form of life, or self-duplicating 
particle, likely arose spontaneously from chemi-
cal, inanimate substances.
We are unable to witness the unique molecu-
lar events that led to the ﬁ rst form of life ages ago. 
The scientist’s reconstruction of life’s origin is 
largely circumstantial, but persuasive.
In an 1871 letter to botanist and friend Joseph 
Hooker, Darwin conjectured that life may have 
evolved in a “warm little pond”; as we shall see, 
he may not have been far off the mark. For some 
evolutionists, the question of the origin of life is 
unimportant, as it is clear that all life on Earth 
today shares a common ancestor. Therefore, the 
process of descent with modiﬁ cation is the critical 
issue for students of evolution, not how or when 
the ﬁ rst life came to be. Be that as it may, explor-
ing the question of the origin of life is a question 
that arouses intense curiosity and provides us with 
valuable insights into contemporary evolution as 
well as the history of planet Earth.
Astronomers agree that the Big Bang, the 
explosion that caused the formation of the uni-
verse, occurred about 13.7 billion years ago, that 
our solar system was formed about 4.6 billion 
years ago, and that our planet came into existence 
ORIGIN OF LIFE
14

3.6
Present
Billions of years ago
4.5
4.2
4.0
3.8
Life Diversities
First Life
RNA World
Pre-RNA World
Stable Atmosphere
Formation of Earth
Prebiotic World
Figure 14.1 Approximate timeline of events in the 
early history of life (in billions of years before the present).
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
167
at roughly 4.5 billion years ago. Scientists are able 
to date the oldest rocks to 3.8 billion years old 
(from Canada) and the ﬁ rst minerals date to nearly 
4.3 billion years ago (from Australia). Early Earth 
was so inhospitable to any form of life that even if 
life had evolved, it would have immediately been 
exterminated. The ﬁ rst evidence of life comes 
from fossils that are roughly 3.6 billion years old 
(ﬁ g. 14.1, table 16.1). Presupposing that life did 
evolve on Earth, the ﬁ rst questions are: what is 
life, when did it evolve, and how? 
WHAT IS LIFE
The line between the living and nonliving is some-
times blurred by organisms such as viruses, which 
rely on host organisms to exist. Nonetheless, the 
conventional view is that contemporary life is 
made up of:
 • organic matter (especially carbon) that is capa-
ble of reproduction (e.g., mitosis and/or meio-
sis), and
 • proteins that are made up of the 20 essential 
amino acids, and
 • genetic information that encodes proteins car-
ried in the form of a universal DNA-RNA 
genetic code. 
It is implied in these attributes that all liv-
ing organisms are capable of accumulating bio-
mass (growth and development), can obtain and 
use energy, can reproduce, and are likewise sub-
ject to mutation and selection (can respond to the 
environment). Reproduction and natural selection 
require the accumulation of biomass, energy (in 
the form of chemical reactions), and some way to 
store and transmit heritable variation. Life is also 
cellular (see Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and 
table 14.1). Presupposing that life did evolve on 
Earth, we can explore the question of what were 
the conditions on primitive Earth.
PRIMITIVE EARTH
The view that life emerged through a long and 
gradual process of chemical evolution was ﬁ rst 
convincingly set forth by the Russian biochem-
ist Alexander I. Oparin, in 1924, in an enthralling 
booklet entitled The Origin of Life. The trans-
formation of lifeless chemicals into living mat-
ter extended over some one billion years. Such a 
transformation, as Oparin points out, is no longer 
possible today. If by pure chance a living particle 
approaching that of the ﬁ rst form of life should 
now appear, it would be rapidly decomposed by 
oxygen of the air or quickly destroyed by the 
countless microorganisms presently populating 
the Earth.
Our Earth is reliably estimated to be 4.6 billion 
years old. It was formerly thought that the Earth 
originated as a ﬁ ery mass that was torn away from 
the sun. Astronomers now generally acknowl-
edge that the Earth (like other planets in the solar 
system) condensed out of a swirling cloud of gas 
surrounding the primitive sun. The atmosphere 
of the pristine Earth was quite unlike our pres-
ent atmosphere. Oxygen in the free gaseous state 

168 
Understanding Evolution
EXPERIMENTAL SYNTHESIS 
OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
In the early days of chemistry, it was believed that 
organic compounds could be produced only by 
living organisms. But in 1828, Friedrich Wöhler 
succeeded in manufacturing the organic com-
pound urea under artiﬁ cial conditions in the labo-
ratory. Since Wöhler’s discovery, a large variety of 
organic chemicals (amino acids, monosaccharides, 
purines, and vitamins) formerly produced only in 
organisms have been artiﬁ cially synthesized.
In 1953, Stanley Miller, then at the Univer-
sity of Chicago and a student of Nobel Laureate 
Harold Urey, synthesized organic compounds 
under conditions resembling the primitive atmo-
sphere of the Earth. He passed electrical sparks 
through a mixture of hydrogen, water, ammonia, 
and methane (ﬁ g. 14.2). The electrical discharges 
duplicated the effects of violent electrical storms 
on primitive Earth. In the laboratory, the four sim-
ple inorganic molecules interacted, after a mere 
week, to form several kinds of amino acids, among 
them alanine, glycine, aspartic acid, and glutamic 
acid. Hydrogen cyanide and cyanoacetylene were 
also identiﬁ ed among the products, and those com-
pounds can serve as intermediates in the formation 
of nitrogenous bases (purines and pyrimidines) of 
nucleic acids. Miller’s instructive experiment has 
been successfully repeated by a number of inves-
tigators; amino acids and nucleotides can also be 
generated by irradiating a similar mixture of gases 
with ultraviolet light.
It is very likely that proteins were randomly 
produced abiotically on the primitive Earth. How-
ever, life itself apparently did not begin with a self-
sustaining network of proteins. Polypeptide chains 
of amino acids are not self-complementary and, 
accordingly, cannot serve as templates for their 
own replication. On the other hand, nucleic acids 
are capable of self-replication. As discussed in the 
next section entitled “Life’s Beginnings”, ribonu-
cleic acid (RNA) probably was present before the 
emergence of protein synthesis. Moreover, RNA 
evidently preceded DNA in the evolution of life.
was virtually absent; it was bound in water and 
in metallic oxides on surface rocks and particles. 
Accordingly, any complex organic compound that 
arose during this early time would not be subject 
to degradation by free oxygen. Moreover, there 
was no layer of ozone to absorb the stark ultra-
violet rays from the sun, which would be lethal to 
modern animal life.
The early gas cloud was especially rich in 
hydrogen. The hydrogen (H2) of the primordial 
Earth chemically united with carbon to form 
methane (CH4), with nitrogen to form ammo-
nia (NH3), and with oxygen to form water vapor 
(H2O). Thus, the early atmosphere had a strongly 
reducing (nonoxygenic) character, containing 
primarily hydrogen, methane, ammonia, and 
water. The atmospheric water vapor condensed 
into drops and fell as rain; the rains eroded the 
rocks and washed minerals (such as chlorides 
and phosphates) into the seas. The stage was set 
for the combination of the varied chemical ele-
ments. Chemicals from the atmosphere mixed 
and reacted with those in the waters to form a 
wealth of hydrocarbons (that is, compounds of 
hydrogen and carbon). Water, hydrocarbons, and 
ammonia are the raw materials of amino acids, 
which, in turn, are the building blocks for the 
larger protein molecules. Thus, in the primitive 
seas, amino acids accumulated in considerable 
quantities and became linked together to form 
proteins.
Complex carbon compounds, such as pro-
teins, are termed organic because they are made 
by living organisms. Our present-day green plants 
use the energy of sunlight to synthesize organic 
compounds from simple molecules. What, then, 
was the energy source in the primitive Earth, and 
how was synthesis of organic compounds effected 
in the absence of living things? It is generally held 
that ultraviolet rays from the sun, electrical dis-
charges, such as lightning, and intense dry heat 
from volcanic activity furnished the energy to join 
the simple carbon compounds and nitrogenous 
substances into amino acids. Is there a valid basis 
for such a widely accepted view?

acid molecules capable of self-replication 
must also have developed.
The living cell is an orderly system of 
chemical reactions (directed by enzymes) 
that has the ability to reproduce. It seems 
reasonable that the machinery for self-
replication (that is, self-duplicating nucleic 
acids) evolved before the development 
of the metabolic (enzymatic) machinery 
of the cell. Whereas amino acids are the 
building blocks of proteins, nucleotides 
are the basic units of nucleic acids. The 
linear polynucleotides occur in nature in 
the form of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
or ribonucleic acid (RNA). Polynucle-
otides have the unique property of speci-
fying the sequence of nucleotides in a 
new molecule by acting as templates for 
the assembly of the nucleotides. Because 
preferential binding occurs between pairs 
of nucleotides (cytosine coupled with 
guanine and adenine coupled with ura-
cil), new daughter polynucleotide mol-
ecules can arise in which the nucleotide 
sequences are complementary to the par-
ent molecules. A second round of copy-
ing, in which the complementary strand 
serves as a template, restores the origi-
nal sequence. Thus, the original random 
sequence is multiplied many times.
It is reasonable to presume that self-
replicating polynucleotides slowly became estab-
lished in the primordial Earth 3.5 to 3.8 billion 
years ago. In the absence of proteinaceous enzymes 
in the prebiotic environment, less efﬁ cient cata-
lysts in the form of minerals or metal ions would 
be sufﬁ cient to promote the reactivity of the nucle-
otide precursors. More importantly, however, 
RNA itself can act as a catalyst. The linear RNA 
molecule can fold up to form complex surfaces 
that catalyze speciﬁ c reactions. Accordingly, RNA 
molecules have enzymatic properties in addition 
to their well-known properties as templates. It is 
highly probable that RNA guided the primordial 
synthesis of protein (ﬁ g. 14.3). The nucleotides 
LIFE’S BEGINNINGS
It is clear that organic compounds can be formed 
without the intervention of living organisms. Thus, 
it appears likely that somewhere in the primitive 
Earth’s sea a rich mixture of organic molecules 
spontaneously accumulated. In the absence of liv-
ing organisms, the organic compounds would have 
been stable and would have persisted for countless 
years. The sea became a sort of dilute organic soup 
in which the molecules collided and associated to 
form larger molecules (polymers) of increasing 
levels of complexity. Proteins capable of catalysis, 
or enzymatic activity, had to evolve, and nucleic 
Figure 14.2 Stanley Miller’s apparatus simulating 
conditions of the primordial Earth. The upper chamber contains a 
mixture of gases (methane, ammonia, and hydrogen gas plus water vapor). 
An electrical discharge (simulating lightning) is passed through the vapor-
ized mixture. The mixture is cooled by a water condenser, and any com-
plex molecules formed in the atmosphere chamber are dissolved in the 
water droplets. The organic molecules accumulate in the U-shaped trap, 
where samples are withdrawn for analysis.
Water
To
vacuum
pump
Water droplets containing
organic compounds including
amino acids in U-shaped trap
Cooling
condenser
Spark
+
–
CH4
NH3
H2O
H2
N2
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
169

Bases of
nucleic acid
Lipoprotein
cell membrane
Polynucleotides
(primordial RNA)
U
A
U
A
G
C
A
A
U
C
G
A
G
A
U
C
G
A
G
C
G
A
C
U
C
G
A
U
C
U
U
C
G
A
U
C
U
A
G
C
U
C
RNA
RNA
DNA
Protein
Protein
RNA
Polypeptide
(protein)
C. Protein synthesis
B. Self-replication of
polynucleotide
A. Spontaneous
polymerization
D. Cell-like compartment
E. Emergence of DNA
A
G
C
U
A
A
G
U
C
G
C
U
U
A
A
U
C
A
G
C
U
A
G
A
Amino
acids
Figure 14.3 Postulated stages in the origin of living cells. (A) Polynucleotides (primordial RNA) emerge from 
the spontaneous association of nitrogenous bases (adenine, cytosine, guanine, and uracil). (B) RNA has enzymatic 
properties and catalyzes its own replication. (C) Information encoded in the base sequences of RNA speciﬁ es the 
amino acid sequence in a polypeptide chain (protein). (D) A spontaneously associated lipoprotein serves as a cell 
membrane enclosing RNA and its protein product. (E) DNA replaces RNA as the repository of hereditary information.
170 
Understanding Evolution
of RNA (not DNA) were probably the ﬁ rst car-
riers of genetic information. RNA established a 
primitive genetic code for ordering amino acids 
into proteins. It warrants emphasis that the genetic 
code—the translation of nucleotide sequences into 
amino acid sequences—became established at a 
very early stage of organic evolution. The univer-
sality of the genetic code in present-day organisms 
attests to the early origin of the code.
We may presume that errors continually 
occurred in the copying process, and that the 
sequence of nucleotides in the original polynucle-
otide molecule became altered on numerous occa-
sions. Large numbers of polynucleotide variations 
were undoubtedly maladapted. Just as organisms 
today compete for available resources, molecules 
with different nucleotide sequences competed for 
the available nucleotide precursors in promoting 
copies of themselves. Any new mutant sequence 
with a replication rate higher than the antecedent 
sequence would be the “ﬁ ttest” and would prevail. 
Natural selection (differential reproduction) thus 
operates on populations of molecules as it does on 
populations of organisms. 
A selectively advantageous RNA molecule 
would be one that directs the synthesis of a pro-
tein that accelerates the replication of that par-
ticular RNA. However, a protein speciﬁ ed by 
a particular variant of RNA could not foster the 
reproduction of that kind of RNA unless it was 

 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
171
principally of phospholipids. It is not implausi-
ble that the ﬁ rst cell was formed when polarized 
ﬁ lms of phospholipids formed soaplike bubbles 
enclosing aggregations of other complex mac-
romolecules. Speciﬁ cally, a membranous struc-
ture (plasma membrane) might have arisen that 
encircled a self-replicating aggregation of RNA 
and protein molecules. Once bounded by a limit-
ing membrane, a given RNA molecule could be 
assured of propagating its own special protein 
molecule.
DNA is more chemically stable than RNA. In 
the hypothetical RNA World, at some later stage in 
the evolutionary process DNA took over the func-
tion of data storage, leaving RNA to continue to 
function in enzyme production and later to serve 
as a component of modern protein synthesis that 
utilizes all of the RNA polynucleotides. If RNA 
carried on the dual functions of storage and rep-
lication of genetic information and had the abil-
ity to serve as a molecular catalyst to accomplish 
primitive metabolism and the biochemical reac-
tions required, then it may have been pivotal in the 
establishment of the ﬁ rst life on Earth. Today RNA 
molecules serve essentially their primal function: 
directing protein synthesis. Thus, in modern cells, 
genetic information is stored in DNA, transcribed 
into RNA, and translated into protein.
The RNA World is not without its unanswered 
questions, but the concept remains an exciting line 
of contemporary research into both basic cell func-
tion and the origin of life on Earth. Ultimately, an 
endless permutation of nucleic acids (RNA and 
DNA) and proteins has fostered an enormous rich-
ness of life.
We may reasonably assume that the ﬁ rst living 
systems drew upon the wealth of organic materials 
in the sea. Organisms that are nutritionally depen-
dent on their environment for ready-made organic 
substances are called heterotrophs (Greek, hetero, 
“other,” and trophos, “one that feeds”). The primi-
tive one-celled heterotroph probably had little more 
than a few genes, a few proteins, and a limiting cell 
membrane. The heterotrophs multiplied rapidly in 
an environment with a copious supply of dissolved 
restrained in the immediate vicinity of the RNA. 
There may have been a time in Earth’s early his-
tory before proteins when information storage and 
enzyme activity (including self-replication) were 
accomplished exclusively by RNA. Such a prebi-
otic world—this hypothetical stage in the origin of 
life—is called “the RNA World.” The term RNA 
World was coined by Nobelist Walter Gilbert in 
1986 and expounded upon by another fellow 
Nobelist, Francis Crick. The basis of this concept 
arose from discoveries by Thomas Cech and Stuart 
Altman, who shared the Nobel Prize for Chemistry 
in 1989, that RNA could function as a biochemical 
catalyst, a property that previously was thought to 
be restricted to proteins. Cech and Altman named 
these RNA enzymes ribozymes. 
Since the RNA World was ﬁ rst conceived, the 
list of ribozyme abilities has grown, and that new 
information has propelled thought on the origin of 
earthly life. Today we know that RNA catalysis is 
much more fundamental to biology than Cech, Alt-
man, or Gilbert ﬁ rst conceived, including control-
ling the expression of genes. We also now know 
that RNA can also make DNA via a process called 
reverse transcription, which is common among 
the RNA viruses, such as the human immunode-
ﬁ ciency virus (HIV). In this instance, RNA serves 
as the template for making DNA, and an enzyme, 
reverse transcriptase, accomplishes the transfor-
mation of single-stranded RNA to double-stranded 
DNA (ﬁ g 4.10).
Under particular circumstances based on an 
RNA World scenario, RNA enzymes could cata-
lyze the synthesis of new RNA molecules. Muta-
tion and natural selection would exert constant 
selective pressure to harness favorable mutations 
that improved or enhanced the capabilities of 
RNA. This may have been particularly important 
in the self-replication of polynucleotides and in 
early protein synthesis (ﬁ g. 14.3).
The free diffusion of proteins could be fore-
stalled if some form of a compartment evolved to 
enclose or circumscribe the speciﬁ c protein made 
by a particular RNA (ﬁ g.14.3). All present-day cells 
have a limiting (plasma) membrane composed 

172 
Understanding Evolution
The ﬁ rst organisms to use water as the hydrogen 
source in photosynthesis were the blue-green algae. 
Since blue-green algae were active photosynthesiz-
ers, atmospheric oxygen accumulated in increasing 
amounts. Oxygen would be toxic to anaerobic bac-
teria. A massive extinction of anaerobic bacteria was 
likely coincidental with the evolution of photosyn-
thesis. Many primitive anaerobic bacteria, incapable 
of adapting to free oxygen, remained in portions of 
the environment that were anaerobic, such as sulfur 
springs and oxygen-free muds. However, new kinds 
of bacteria arose that were capable of utilizing the 
free oxygen. Today, there are bacterial types that are 
anaerobic as well as aerobic.
The Earth’s atmosphere gradually changed 
from a reducing, or hydrogen-rich, atmosphere to 
an oxidizing, or oxygen-rich, atmosphere. Geo-
logic evidence indicates that free oxygen began to 
accumulate in the atmosphere about 2 billion years 
ago. The rising levels of atmospheric oxygen set 
the stage for the appearance of one-celled eukary-
otic organisms, which arose at least 1 billion years 
ago (ﬁ g. 14.4). Then, within the comparatively 
short span of the last 600 million years, the one-
celled eukaryote evolved in various directions to 
give rise to a wealth of multicellular life forms 
inhabiting the Earth.
PROKARYOTIC AND 
EUKARYOTIC CELLS
Some of the simplest cells in nature include bac-
teria and cyanobacteria (“blue-green algae”), and 
archaea, which have been classiﬁ ed as prokary-
otes. The Greek expression for nucleus is karyon; 
hence, prokaryote means “before a nucleus.” 
Prokaryotic cells (table 14.1) have no nuclear 
membrane by which the hereditary materials 
(DNA) are set apart from the cytoplasm and they 
lack specialized cytoplasmic bodies (organelles), 
such as mitochondria and choloroplasts. In a bac-
terial cell, the DNA forms a simple loop that is 
attached to the inside of the cell’s membrane. In the 
absence of mitochondria, the enzymatic machinery 
in bacteria for converting energy into usable form 
organic substances. However, the ancient heterotro-
phs could survive only as long as the existing store of 
organic molecules lasted. Eventually living systems 
evolved the ability to synthesize their own organic 
requirements from simple inorganic substances. 
Over the course of time, autotrophs (auto, mean-
ing “self ”) arose, which were able to manufacture 
organic nutrients from simpler molecules. Under 
the deep-sea vent hypothesis for the origin of life 
discussed in a later section entitled “Deep Sea Vents”, 
the order would have been reversed, with chemoau-
totrophs evolving before ancient heterotrophs.
AUTOTROPHIC EXISTENCE
The ﬁ rst simple autotroph arose in an anaerobic 
world, one in which little, if any, free oxygen was 
available. The primitive autotrophs obtained their 
energy from the relatively inefﬁ cient process of fer-
mentation (the breakdown of organic compounds in 
the absence of oxygen). Thus, the early fermentative 
autotrophs were much like our present-day anaero-
bic bacteria and yeast. The metabolic processes of 
the anaerobic autotrophs resulted in the liberation 
of large amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmo-
sphere. Once this occurred, the way was paved for 
the evolution of organisms that could use carbon 
dioxide as the sole source of carbon in synthesiz-
ing organic compounds and could use sunlight as 
the sole source of energy. Such organisms would 
be the photosynthetic cells.
Early photosynthetic cells probably split 
hydrogen-containing compounds, such as hydro-
gen sulﬁ de. In other words, hydrogen sulﬁ de was 
cleaved into hydrogen and sulfur. (This is still 
done today by sulfur bacteria.) The hydrogen was 
used by the cell to synthesize organic compounds, 
and the sulfur was released as a waste product (as 
evidenced by the Earth’s great sulfur deposits). In 
time, the process of photosynthesis was reﬁ ned so 
that water served as the source of hydrogen. The 
result was the release of oxygen as a waste prod-
uct. At this stage, free oxygen became established 
for the ﬁ rst time in the atmosphere.

Precambrian
Paleozoic
Mesozoic
Cenozoic
Free
oxygen
Oxygen
accumulates
in
atmosphere
Oxygen from
photosynthesis
Oxygen-free
atmosphere
4.5
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.6
0
4.5
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
ORGANIC EVOLUTION
CHEMICAL EVOLUTION
FORMATION OF EARTH
Eukaryotic cells
Heterotrophs
Autotrophs
(photosynthesis)
Prokaryotic cells
Anaerobic
Billions of years
Multicellular
forms
Figure 14.4 Major events in the history of life. Chemical evolution preceded biological evolution. The ﬁ rst 
self-duplicating life forms were heterotrophs. Oxygen began to accumulate in the atmosphere with the appearance of 
photosynthetic autotrophs. Rising levels of atmospheric oxygen were associated with the emergence of eukaryotes. 
The last 600 million years have witnessed a great diversity of life in an oxygen-rich atmosphere.
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
173
In contrast to the prokaryotes, the cells of the 
morphologically more complex plants and ani-
mals, or eukaryotes (table 14.1), have a distinct 
nuclear membrane that encloses discrete DNA-
containing chromosomes. The eukaryotes include 
is found in the plasma membrane. The replication 
of a bacterial cell occurs rapidly by the simple divi-
sion of the cell into two. One bacterial cell can 
divide every 20 minutes and can leave 4 billion 
descendants within 11 hours.

174 
Understanding Evolution
University, enunciated the provocative hypothesis 
that mitochondria may have been derived from 
primitive aerobic bacteria that were engulfed by 
predatory organisms, probably fermentative bac-
teria, destined to become eukaryotic (ﬁ g.14.5). 
The predatory hosts became dependent on their 
enslaved mitochondria, and the later, in turn, 
became dependent on their hosts. Thus, the asso-
ciation was of mutual advantage to the predatory 
cell and the engulfed prey. Such a close associa-
tion, or partnership, is called symbiosis. In essence, 
the mitochondria (formerly oxygen-respiring 
bacteria) established permanent residence within 
the hosts. The predatory hosts became the ﬁ rst 
eukaryotic cells. 
Eukaryotic plant cells contain both mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts. Chloroplasts, like mito-
chondria, have their own unique DNA and the 
associated protein-synthesizing machinery. We 
can now speculate that those predatory cells that 
engulfed but did not digest the aerobic bacterial 
cells became the eukaryotic animal cells. Those 
predators that captured both the photosynthetic 
blue-green algae cells and the aerobic bacteria 
evolved into eukaryotic plant cells (ﬁ g. 14.5). 
not only multicellular animals and plants but also 
unicellular organisms, such as protozoa, fungi, 
and many algae. Eukaryotic cells also have an 
elaborate system of membrane-bound cytoplas-
mic organelles such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, 
Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum. 
The enzymes that are responsible for releasing 
large amounts of energy are packed inside the 
mitochondria. In the eukaryotic plant cell, a prom-
inent organelle is the chloroplast, the photosynthe-
sizing agent that converts light energy into chemical 
energy. One of the most intriguing speculations is 
that mitochondria arose not by a gradual evolution-
ary process but abruptly in an unusually striking 
manner. 
ORGANELLES AND EVOLUTION
Mitochondria have a number of interesting prop-
erties that suggest they were once free-living, or 
independent, bacteria-like organisms. Mitochon-
dria have small amounts of their own DNA distinct 
from nuclear DNA. Mitochondrial DNA exists as 
a loop-shaped molecule like the DNA of bacteria. 
In the early 1970s, Lynn Margulis, then at Boston 
Property
Prokaryotes
Eukaryotes
Cell size
Small (0.2–2.0 um)
Large (10–100 um)
Nucleus
No nuclear membrane
True nucleus present
Nucleoli
Absent
Present
Membrane-bound 
cytoplasmic organelles
Absent 
Present
Cell division
Fission
Mitosis
Chromosomes 
Small, circular, without 
histone proteins
Linear chromosomes complexed 
with histone proteins
Cell division
Binary ﬁ ssion
Mitosis
Sexual reproduction
No meiosis
Involves meiosis
Ribosomes
Small
Large and small
Mitochondria
Absent
Present
Flagella (when present)
Lack microtubules
Contain microtubules
TABLE 14.1 
Prokaryotes vs. Eukaryotes

Chloroplast
Nucleus
Nucleus
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Blue-green
alga
DNA
Aerobic
bacterium
Eukaryotic
animal cell
Eukaryotic
plant cell
Prokaryotic cell
(Anaerobic Bacterium)
Figure 14.5 Evolution of eukaryotes through symbiosis. The eukary-
otic animal cell may have arisen through a symbiotic relationship between 
a prokaryotic cell and an aerobic bacterium. The eukaryotic plant cell may 
have originated by a comparable symbiotic relationship betwen a blue-green 
alga and a eukaryotic animal cell.
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
175
chloroplasts were descendants of ancestral aero-
bic bacteria and blue-green algae, respectively, 
has gained widespread acceptance in the scientiﬁ c 
community through the years.
Accordingly, the engulfed prey became perma-
nent symbiotic residents—either as mitochondria 
or chloro plasts— within the predatory cell. The 
startling idea that present-day mitochondria and 

classiﬁ cation was developed by the Swedish natural-
ist Karl von Linné (1707–1778), whose name gen-
erally appears in latinized form, Carolus Linnaeus 
(chapter 10). Life was divided by Linnaeus into two 
grand kingdoms, Animals and Vegetables, broadly 
deﬁ ned as follows:
ANIMALS adorn the exterior parts of the Earth, 
respire, and generate eggs; are impelled to action 
by hunger, congeneric affections, and pain; and by 
preying on other animals and vegetables, restrain 
within proper proportion the numbers of both.
They are bodies organized, and have life, sen-
sation, and the power of locomotion.
VEGETABLES clothe the surface with ver-
dure, imbibe nourishment through bibulous roots, 
breathe by quivering leaves, celebrate their nup-
tials in a genial metamorphosis, and continue their 
kind by the dispersion of seed within prescribed 
limits.
They are bodies organized, and have life and 
not sensation.
Linnaeus was convinced that all species of 
animals and plants were ﬁ xed, unchanging enti-
ties, and that “there are just as many species as 
there were created in the beginning.” Modern tax-
onomists have departed completely 
from Linnaeus’ stand. Present-day 
taxonomy is based on the proposi-
tion of evolutionary change. The 
modern classiﬁ cation scheme is an 
expression of the evolutionary rela-
tionships among groups of organ-
isms. All systems of classiﬁ cation 
are imperfect to the extent that our 
knowledge is imperfect. The classi-
ﬁ cation scheme is continually being 
modiﬁ ed as new information on the 
evolutionary relations of organisms 
comes to light. 
Darwin used a tree metaphor 
for the organization and divergence 
of life from a common ancestor. 
The only ﬁ gure Darwin presented in 
The Origin of Species (our ﬁ g. 14.7) 
embodies his concept of descent with 
Although the relatively abrupt origin of mito-
chondria and choloroplasts in eukaryotes is now 
generally accepted, it is likely that the evolution 
of the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum pro-
ceeded through a series of gradual changes. Con-
tinual modiﬁ cation of the surface membrane of 
a prokaryotic cell may have been the means by 
which the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum of 
a eukaryotic cell originated. In other words, the 
nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum may have 
evolved by the invagination, or drawing inward, 
of the surface membrane of a primitive cell. Fig-
ure 14.6 shows the postulated mechanism for the 
origin of the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum 
from the cell surface membrane.
CLASSIFICATION OF ORGANISMS
Aristotle (384–322 B.C.), the great philosopher and 
naturalist, aptly declared that Nature is marvelous 
in each and all her ways. Although Aristotle did not 
view different kinds of organisms as being related by 
descent, he arranged all living things in an ascending 
ladder with humans at the top. A formal scheme of 
Polyribosomes
Endoplasmic
reticulum
DNA
Nuclear
pore
Nucleus
Figure 14.6 Hypothetical scheme of the origin of the nucleus and 
endoplasmic reticulum of a eukaryotic cell by the invagination, or 
drawing inward, of the surface membrane.
176 
Understanding Evolution

Figure 14.7 Tree diagram from The Origin of species, the only ﬁ gure in Darwin’s monumental monograph.
From Origin of Species by Charles Darwin
XIV
XIII
XII
XI
IX
VIII
VII
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
X
a10
a14
q14
p14
b14
f 14
o14
e14
m14
n14
r14
w14
y14
v14
z14
f 14
a9
a8
a7
a6
f 6
d 5
d 4
k 5
k 6
k 7
k 8
i 4
i 3
l 7
l 8
s 2
f 7
f 8
f 9
f 10
a5
a4
a3
a2
a1
m1
m2
m3
m4
m5
m6
m7
m8
u 8
u 7
u 6
u 5
w 7
w 8
w 9
w10
t 3
t 2
z 1
z 2
z 3
z 4
z 5
z 6
z 7
z 8
z 9
z10
m9
m10
F 10
E10
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
177
system. He grouped organisms into ﬁ ve separate 
kingdoms (ﬁ g. 14.8). Whittaker’s system takes into 
consideration the fundamental differences between 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic levels of organization 
and stresses the principal modes of nutrition—
photosynthetic, absorptive, and ingestive. The ﬁ ve 
kingdoms are the Monera (unicellular, prokary-
otic organisms), Prostista (unicellular, eukaryotic 
organisms), Plantae (multicellular higher algae 
and green plants), Fungi (multinucleate plant-
like organisms lacking photosynthetic pigments), 
and Animalia (multicellular animals). Whittak-
er’s scheme was favorably received and adopted 
by most taxonomists for many years. We have 
become accustomed to dividing all life forms 
into two major categories based on cell types, the 
prokaryotes (bacteria and blue-green algae) and 
the eukaryotes.
modiﬁ cation. Darwin introduces his tree concept 
as follows:
We may assume that the modiﬁ ed descendant of 
any one species will succeed so much the better as 
they become more diversiﬁ ed in structure and are 
thus enabled to encroach on places occupied by 
other beings. Now let us see how this principle of 
beneﬁ t derived from divergence of character, com-
bined with the principles of natural selection and 
of extinction, tend to act.
Today Darwin’s insight seems matter of 
fact because the branching tree concept is now a 
commonplace icon of evolution (e.g., ﬁ gs. 14.8 
and 14.9). However, in Darwin’s day the branch-
ing tree showing divergence and common descent 
was transformative and revolutionary.
In 1969, R. H. Whittaker suggested a radi-
cal departure from the traditional two-kingdom 

Figure 14.8 The ﬁ ve-kingdom classiﬁ cation.  Primitive unicellular prokaryotes (kingdom Monera) gave rise to 
more complex single-celled eukaryotes (kindom Protista). The divergence of the Protistans led to the three kingdoms 
of Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia. 
(Original design contributed by Stuart S. Bamforth, Tulane University.)
Prokaryotes
Blue-green
algae
Bacteria
MONERANS
PROTISTANS
Eukaryotes
Ciliates
Sarcodines
Red
algae
Green algae
Euglenoids
Yellow
algae
Sporozoans
Zooflagellates
Dinoflagellates
FUNGI
(absorption)
Sac fungi
Club
          fungi
Alga-like fungi
Slime molds
Mesozoa
Flatworms
Nematodes
Ribbon worms
Vertebrates
Arthropods
Annelids
ANIMALS
(ingestion)
Mollusks
Coelenterates
Sponges
Bryophytes
PLANTS
(photosynthesis)
Monocots
Dicots
Gymnosperms
Ferns
Lycopods
Horsetails Brown
algae
178 
Understanding Evolution
organisms (Eukarya) appear as a mere twig in a 
great microbial world!
Woese used the tools of molecular biology 
in reassigning life into three broad domains. He 
relied heavily on the nucleotide sequences found 
in ribosomal RNA, which are highly conserved in 
all organisms and would aptly serve to chronicle 
the past evolutionary history. Woese subsequently 
undertook the sequencing of the complete genome 
of one of the archaea, Methanococcus jannaschii. 
His work, reported in 1996, showed that M. janna-
schii has a host of genes unlike those of any organ-
ism known. Speciﬁ cally, nearly 56 percent of the 
gene sequences are completely different from any 
so far described from either bacteria or eukary-
otes. Of the 44 percent of the genome that does 
In 1997, Carl R. Woese at the University of Illi-
nois brought to light an unusual group of one-celled 
organisms so different from other forms of life, 
including bacteria, that he placed them in a sepa-
rate domain of life. These unusual microbes, which 
ﬂ ourish in harsh conditions, were initially called 
archaebacteria but are now referred to as archaea.
Woese proposed a novel universal phyloge-
netic tree (ﬁ g. 14.9). Instead of ﬁ ve major king-
doms, there are three broad domains: Bacteria, 
Archaea, and Eukarya. In Woese’s scheme, the 
Archaea and the Bacteria appear ﬁ rst and diverge 
from their common ancestor relatively soon in 
the history of life. Later, the Eukarya branches 
off from the Archaea. The one-celled organisms 
seem to dominate the tree of life. The multicellular 

Figure 14.9 The three broad domains of Carl Woese’s classiﬁ cation scheme: Bacteria, 
Archaea, and Eukarya. The predominant forms of life appear to be one-celled.
(Modiﬁ ed from Science Magazine, vol 276. No. 5313, 2 May 1997, p. 701.)
Microsporidia
Animals
Ciliates
Slime molds
Plants
Fungi
Euglena
Diplomonads
(Lamblia)
Eukarya
Bacteria
Archaea
Desulfuro-
coccus
Pyro-
dictium
Sulfolobus
Thermofilum
Thermoproteus
Thermococcus
Methanothermus
Methanobacterium
Archaeoglobus
Halococcus
Halobacterium
Methanoplanus
Methanospirillum
Methanosarcina
Methanococcus
species
Methano-
pyrus
Aquifex
Hydrogenobacter
Green sulfur
bacteria
Flavo-
bacteria
Cyano-
bacteria
Purple bacteria
Gram-positives
Green nonsulfur
bacteria (Chlorflexus)
Themotoga
Unknown common ancestor
Root
 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
179
a thermal gradient is created. At these thermal gra-
dients are a series of ecosystems unlike any other 
ecosystem on Earth. These communities do not 
rely on the Sun or photosynthesis for their source 
of energy but instead capture the energy of the heat 
of the Earth. Organisms capable of producing food 
via chemical synthesis are called chemoautotro-
phs. These organisms form the primary production 
component of the deep-sea hydrothermal vent food 
chain. Around deep-sea vents, various bivalves 
such as clams and mussel and assorted tube worms 
feed upon the food produced from the action of 
the chemoautotrophs, thus forming the consumer 
level of the deep-sea vent food chain. The discov-
ery of extremophile bacteria (Archaea) capable of 
living in the completely dark, extremely hot, high-
pressure hydrothermal vents has lead to conjecture 
that the ﬁ rst life on Earth may have evolved in or 
match other life forms, some are recognizable as 
bacteria-like while others, particularly those con-
trolling transcription and translation, resemble 
eukaryotic genes.
DEEP-SEA VENTS
One view of early Earth arose from our exploration 
of the deep oceans. In 1977 Alvin, a manned sub-
mersible vessel capable of surviving the extreme 
pressure of the deep sea, discovered a thriving and 
diverse ecosystem surrounding cracks in the Earth 
surface along mid-ocean ridges called hydro-
thermal vents. The water in these vents reaches 
temperatures exceeding 300 degrees Celsius and 
is enriched by hydrogen sulﬁ de (H2S) and metal 
ions. Where this unique water meets colder water, 

180 
Understanding Evolution
Panspermia, the theory that organisms were 
deliberately transmitted to the Earth by intelligent 
beings on another planet. We conclude that it is 
possible that life reached the Earth in this way, 
but that the scientiﬁ c evidence is inadequate at the 
present time to say anything about the probability. 
We draw attention to the kinds of evidence that 
might throw additional light on the topic.
The Murchison meteorite, which fell in 
 Australia in 1969, contains organic substances 
including dozens of earthly amino acids and 
some amino acids not known from Earth. Of the 
nearly 100 amino acids thus far identiﬁ ed from the 
Murchison meteorite, only about 20 are also found 
on Earth. The remainder have never before been 
found on our planet. In addition to amino acids, 
sugars, also necessary for life, have been recov-
ered from the Murchison meteorite. These discov-
eries have honed the debate and led scientists to 
consider the possibility that Earth’s life originated 
somewhere else in the universe and may have been 
transported to Earth via extraterrestrial comets or 
meteors.
Astronomers estimate that the universe con-
tains 100 billion galaxies; our galaxy—the Milky 
Way—has about 400 billion stars, putting an esti-
mate of the total number of stars in the universe at 
1 followed by 22 zeros. Many argue that it is incon-
ceivable that there is not life somewhere else.
Since the 1960s, the Search for Extraterres-
trial Intelligence (SETI) has kept a watchful ear to 
the universe, trying to detect any communication 
from beyond our planet. Radio SETI utilizes radio 
telescopes to try to detect narrow-bandwidth radio 
signals from space. These signals are not known to 
occur naturally, so detecting them would provide 
evidence of life beyond our planet. Since 1999, 
SETI@home, based at the University of California, 
Berkeley, has enlisted volunteers to add the power 
of their home computers to the search, thereby 
expanding the capabilities of SETI. Thousands of 
people in hundreds of countries have contributed 
to what is now the fastest supercomputer on Earth, 
scanning the heavens for possible transmissions 
from outer space.
around the gradient of temperatures between these 
deep sea vents and the colder ocean waters.
The Archaea are classiﬁ ed into several major 
types, depending on the conditions they live 
under. The thermophiles thrive at very hot deep 
sea vents and hot springs and around other geo-
thermal sources in excess of 100 degrees Centi-
grade. The halophiles ﬂ ourish in extremely saline 
environments, and the acidophiles tolerate acids. 
The methanogens (methane generators) prosper 
under anaerobic conditions, such as landﬁ ll sites 
and the rumens of cows, where they gain energy 
by oxidizing hydrogen. Methanogens are plenti-
ful wherever organic matter is present in anaero-
bic conditions. Even though today’s Archaea live 
under environmental conditions that resemble 
those that may have existed on early Earth, it is 
presumptuous to assume that the Archaea were the 
ﬁ rst microorganisms.
EXTRATERRESTRIAL ORIGINS
There is a minority perspective among competent 
scientists that life on Earth was seeded or infected 
from extraterrestrial sources. The theory of pans-
permia posits that meteors or comets carried the 
precursors of life, or life itself, to Earth. Untold 
numbers of meteorites and comets collided with 
early Earth, some of which may have carried the 
essentials of life. Other impacts of extraterrestrial 
origin were likely profoundly damaging and may 
have caused the sterilization of the Earth’s surface.
An elaboration on the panspermia concept, 
envisioned by DNA co-discoverer Francis Crick, 
is called directed panspermia. Directed pans-
permia speculates that life was seeded to Earth on 
purpose from other places in the universe. Accord-
ing to Crick:
It now seems unlikely that extraterrestrial living 
organisms could have reached the Earth either 
as spores driven by the radiation pressure from 
another star or as living organisms imbedded in 
a meteorite. As an alternative to these nineteenth-
century mechanisms, we have considered Directed 

 
CHAPTER 14 Origin of Life 
181
it does not address the fundamental question of the 
origin of life somewhere else! The search for the 
origins of life from outside the planet is a matter of 
conjecture and is not likely to result in any consen-
sus without some new information or discoveries.
The question of whether life originated on 
Earth or was transported to Earth from elsewhere 
remains an open question that may never be 
known with certainty. How the ﬁ rst life came to 
exist is an interesting theoretical question, but to a 
large degree, the origin of life is inconsequential to 
the study of evolution. Evolutionary biology is the 
study of what happened after life appeared on this 
planet and not about how that life came to be. The 
organic molecules that came to be assembled and 
associated with a cell membrane and a common 
genetic code have prospered. On Earth today, all 
life originates from pre-existing life and requires 
the dynamic interaction between nucleic acids 
(DNA and/or RNA) and proteins for its continued 
existence and perpetuation. However life arose, it 
came to exist on planet Earth and has ﬂ ourished 
over billions of years into many millions of spe-
cies both alive and extinct.
Life may well exist elsewhere within our own 
solar system. A fundamental goal of the scientiﬁ c 
search for life on other planets has been to identify 
extraterrestrial water. In 1995 the NASA space-
craft Galileo photographed Jupiter’s four moons, 
including Europa, which appeared to be covered 
in ice. The presence of icebergs suggests a liquid 
ocean beneath the frozen ice surface. Efforts to 
identify lunar ice have thus far been unsuccessful.
Mars has also been explored for signs of life. 
In 2000 NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor discovered 
evidence that within the last million years liquid 
had ﬂ owed on Mars, creating geologic formations 
such as gullies. Beginning in 2003, NASA’s search 
for Martian water continued with its Mars Explo-
ration Rover (MER) Mission, utilizing twin golf-
cart-size robotic rovers (Spirit and Opportunity) 
to explore the Martian surface and geology and 
search for liquid water that may contain life. 
To date, there is no hard evidence to support 
an extraterrestrial origin to life on Earth, but many 
reputable scientists continue to explore this line of 
inquiry. More importantly, although panspermia 
addresses the question of the origin of life on Earth, 

182
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
One of the dramatic breakthroughs in the 
1950s was an understanding of the interrelations 
of protein structure and the genetic information 
carried in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). There 
emerged the fundamental tenet that the gene 
(a linear array of nitrogenous bases in the DNA) 
codes for the precise sequence of amino acids that 
compose a protein. There was also the realization 
that gene mutation often involves no more than an 
alteration of a single base in the DNA sequence 
that speciﬁ es the amino acid. Such a single base 
alteration can result in the substitution in the pro-
tein molecule of one amino acid for another. This 
interferes with the activity of the protein. This is 
vividly exempliﬁ ed by the aberrant hemoglobin 
of sickle-cell anemia, in which a highly localized 
change in one of the bases of the DNA molecule 
leads to the substitution of only one amino acid 
residue in the hemoglobin molecule.
Over evolutionary time, DNA sequences 
diverge and proteins change in composition. The 
amino acid sequences of proteins have gradually 
been modiﬁ ed with time, yielding the arrays that 
are found today in extant species. Comparisons of 
the amino acid compositions in present-day organ-
isms enable us to infer the molecular events that 
occurred in the past. The more distant in the past 
that an ancestral stock diverged into two present-
day species, the more changes will be evident in 
the amino acid sequences of the proteins of the 
contemporary species. Viewed another way, the 
number of amino acid modiﬁ cations in the lines 
of descent can be used as a measure of time since 
the divergence of the two species from a common 
ancestor. In essence, protein molecules incorpo-
rate a record of their evolutionary history that can 
be just as informative as the fossil record.
NEUTRAL THEORY OF 
MOLECULAR EVOLUTION
Electrophoretic methods of detecting differences in 
the amino acid sequences of proteins in organisms 
have disclosed a wealth of amino acid substitu-
tions in the course of evolution. DNA sequencing 
and the analysis of protein structure have also been 
informative in our understanding of past evolu-
tionary afﬁ nities. Ardent advocates of  Darwinian 
MOLECULAR EVOLUTION
15

 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
183
selection, popularly called selectionists, maintain 
that a mutated form of a gene responsible for an 
altered amino acid must pass the stringent test of 
natural selection. Selectionists assert that a mutant 
allele is favored only when an amino acid substi-
tution confers an advantage to the organism. In 
the late 1960s, the Japanese population geneti-
cist Motto Kimura championed the view that the 
majority of amino acid substitutions are not likely 
to provide either an evolutionary advantage or dis-
advantage and are preserved by sheer chance. In 
essence, Kimura’s postulate is that most amino 
acid replacements are not fostered by natural selec-
tion but result from neutral mutations that are ﬁ xed 
by random drift. The frequency of a new neutral 
mutant allele ﬂ uctuates over time, increasing or 
decreasing fortuitously. Many of these alleles will 
be lost purely by chance in a few generations. But 
an occasional neutral mutant will spread through 
the population to reach ﬁ xation, or a frequency of 
100 percent.
Neutralists do not discount a role for natural 
selection at the molecular level. The role of selec-
tion is to protect a molecule from deleterious 
mutations. Indeed, most newly arising mutations 
are deleterious and are weeded out by natural 
selection. Natural selection also, in its positive 
role, permits the incorporation of beneﬁ cial mutant 
alleles. Beneﬁ cial mutant alleles are, of course, 
evolutionarily very important, but they are rare. 
Accordingly, the majority of variant alleles wit-
nessed today at the molecular level are likely to 
have been selectively neutral mutations that have 
been ﬁ xed by random drift.
In response to critics, Kimura and his col-
league, Tomoko Ohta, a gifted population genet-
icist in her own right, continually sharpened the 
neutral thesis of molecular evolution. Kimura 
and Ohta theorized that new neutral genes insinu-
ate themselves at a steady, or constant, rate in a 
given lineage. Over periods of millions of years, 
new forms of genes randomly establish them-
selves at a steady pace in the population and may 
themselves be gradually replaced. This turnover of 
alleles, governed purely by chance, is responsible 
for the coexistence of the multitude of amino acid 
 alternatives in a protein.
With this theoretical background, we shall 
turn to the experimental studies on varied proteins 
and examine the data that provide support for the 
rather unorthodox doctrine that molecular evolu-
tion is not primarily the result of the accumulation 
of advantageous mutations, but rather the steady 
accumulation of selectively neutral mutations that 
do not impair protein function.
CYTOCHROME c
Cytochrome c is an ancient, evolutionarily conser-
vative molecule that serves as an essential enzyme 
in respiration. It is a relatively small protein of a 
chain length slightly over 100 amino acid residues, 
which apparently exists in all eukaryotic organisms. 
No other protein has been so fully analyzed for so 
many different organisms. This ubiquitous protein 
has been extracted, puriﬁ ed, and analyzed in numer-
ous eukaryotic species. It has 104 amino acids in 
vertebrates and a few more in certain more primi-
tive species. Cytochrome c performs the same vital 
function in all organisms. 
Approximately a third of the amino acid resi-
dues of cytochrome c have not varied at all through-
out time. In particular, the same amino acids have 
been found in 35 positions in all organisms tested, 
from molds to humans. Evidently, certain amino 
acids at speciﬁ c positions are irreplaceable or invari-
ant. Any substitutions at these invariant sites are 
likely to interfere with the chemical integrity or fold-
ing properties of the protein molecule. Mutational 
changes at these sites are lethal and are rejected by 
natural selection. No such evolutionary constraints 
have been placed on the acceptance of chance alter-
ations at other sites. Amino acid substitutions are 
tolerated elsewhere since they preserve the essential 
chemical properties of the molecule. It is these toler-
able amino acid substitutions that are promulgated 
by Kimura’s selectively neutral mutations.
The number of amino acid replacements in 
cytochrome c of several species are compared in 
table 15.1. First, it is evident that the cytochromes 

molecule. The differences in amino acid sequences 
between two living species can be used to estimate 
the period of time that has elapsed since the two 
species diverged from a common ancestor. The 
number of allelic substitutions generated per time 
serves as a molecular clock. Figure 15.1 shows the 
constant rate at which the cytochrome c gene has 
evolved.
The molecular clock does not tick at the same 
rate for all protein molecules. Indeed, the rates of 
amino acid substitutions are appreciably differ-
ent in several protein molecules that have been 
extensively studied. Cytochrome c has evolved 
very slowly in comparison to the ﬁ brinopeptide A, 
in which the rate of amino acid substitution has 
been exceedingly rapid. It is likely that evolution-
ary change at the molecular level is slow where 
there are strong functional constraints and faster 
where changes are least likely to disrupt protein 
function.
Those who adhere to the neutralist position 
point with satisfaction to the analysis of the ﬁ brin-
opeptides. These are two 20-residue fragments 
(A and B) that are cleaved from the protein ﬁ brin-
ogen when it is activated to form ﬁ brin in a blood 
clot. Among several mammalian species, there 
is an extraordinarily high level of amino acid 
substitutions in ﬁ brinopeptide A. This peptide 
apparently functions equally well with numerous 
different amino acid sequences. Indeed, virtu-
ally any amino acid change appears to have been 
acceptable. It has been argued persuasively that 
the mutations responsible for the many different 
amino acids must be selectively neutral. Since the 
ﬁ brinopeptides have little known function except 
to permit the activation of ﬁ brinogen by being dis-
carded, they evidently can tolerate any amino acid 
change.
There are a few proteins in which nearly the 
entire amino acid sequence is critical for protein 
function. In such cases, it would be difﬁ cult to deny 
the strong role of natural selection. Certain his-
tones that bind to DNA in the nucleus have been 
highly conserved in their amino acid sequence. 
For example, histone IV from such divergent 
of closely related vertebrates differ in only a few 
residues, or not at all. There is no difference at 
all in the composition of the amino acid residues 
between humans and the chimpanzee. Cytochrome 
c of the rhesus monkey differs from the human only 
at position 66 of the molecule, where  threonine 
is present instead of isoleucine. Secondly, the 
greater the phylogenetic differences, the greater 
the likelihood that the cytochrome compositions 
differ.
MOLECULAR CLOCK
Amino acid substitutions accumulate at fairly ste-
ady rates over long periods of evolutionary time. 
The uniform rate is understandable because it is 
governed primarily by the rate of mutation with-
out the restraint of natural selection. The clocklike 
rate of molecular evolution was ﬁ rst detected by 
the Nobel laureate Linus Pauling and Emile Zuck-
erkandl at the California Institute of Technology, 
in their now classical analysis of the hemoglobin 
184 
Understanding Evolution
TABLE 15.1     Evolution of Cytochrome c*
 
Comparison with Human Cytochrome c
 
 
Number of Variant
 
Organisms 
Amino Acid Residues
 
Chimpanzee 
0
 
Rhesus monkey 
1
 
Rabbit 
9
 
Cow 
10
 
Kangaroo 
10
 
Duck 
11
 
Pigeon 
12
 
Rattlesnake 
14
 
Bullfrog 
18
 
Tuna 
20
 
Fruit ﬂ y 
24
 
Moth 
26
 
Wheat germ 
37
 
Mold (Neurospora) 
40
 
Baker’s yeast 
42 
*Compiled from studies by R. E. Dickerson.

modiﬁ ed our  understanding of taxonomic 
afﬁ nities and evolutionary time scales. In 
the mid-1960s, Vincent M. Sarich, working 
in the laboratory of Allan C. Wilson at the 
University of California at Berkeley, com-
pared the albumin molecules of humans and 
African apes. He calculated that the diver-
gence time between humans and African 
apes was only a scant ﬁ ve million years. 
At the time of Sarich’s pronouncement, 
the prevailing view among anthropologists 
was that humans and apes diverged at least 
15  million years ago. This view was based 
on a fossil ﬁ nding, Ramapithecus (now 
classiﬁ ed as  Sivapithecus) (see chapter 17), 
who was purported to be one of the earlier 
members of the human family. Ironically, 
the human status of Ramapithecus was 
undermined by new fossil ﬁ nds. Ramapith-
ecus has been dethroned as a forebear of 
hominids and is presently considered an 
ancestor of the orangutan. This paved the 
way for the acceptance of Sarich’s thesis 
that the road to humankind began 5 million 
years ago, or at least less than 10 million years 
ago. Equally important, as seen in ﬁ gure 15.2, 
we have come to the realization that the African 
apes (chimpanzee and gorilla) are more closely 
related to humans than they are to Asian apes 
(orangutan). 
GENE DUPLICATION
The process by which genes have evolved through 
duplication, followed by mutation and selection, 
is depicted in ﬁ gure 15.3. When a particular locus 
duplicates itself, two genes with identical base 
sequences coexist in the same individual. Inas-
much as only one locus is necessary to produce 
the polypeptide chain, an additional locus might 
be regarded as superﬂ uous. On the contrary, the 
duplicated locus might prove valuable in protect-
ing the individual against the hazards of mutational 
changes. Ordinarily a mutation that interferes 
MIllions of years ago
25
Human/
kangaroo
0
25
0
50
75
120
125
50
75
100
Human/
cow
Dog/
cow
Rabbit/
rodent
Llama/
cow
Sheep/
goat
Pig/
cow
Horse/
cow
Horse/
donkey
Goat/
cow
Nucleotide substitutions
Human/
rodent
Figure 15.1 The number of differences (“substitutions”) in 
nucleotide sequences in the cytochrome c genes of pairs of organisms 
is plotted against the time evolutionists estimate had elapsed since 
the pairs of organisms diverged. The resulting straight line signiﬁ es 
a constant rate of nucleotide substitutions, which is interpreted as 
indicating that cytochrome c is evolving at a steady, clocklike pace in 
all lineages.
 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
185
organisms as the pea plant and the calf differ in only 
2 of 102 amino acid residues. Nearly all amino acid 
substitutions would impair the activity of histone 
IV, and any substitutions, save a few, that may have 
appeared in the evolutionary past were most likely 
eliminated by natural selection. Since histone IV 
plays a vital role in the expression of the hereditary 
information encoded in DNA, it is hardly surpris-
ing that this protein would be closely speciﬁ ed and 
scrutinized. 
If proteins evolve at a constant rate, then the 
data on amino acid substitutions can be used to 
construct—or reconstruct—phylogenetic relation-
ships among organisms. As a generality, most 
molecular phylogenetic trees are in accord with 
the tempo of evolution based on fossil ﬁ ndings. 
There are a few notable exceptions. Indeed, in one 
instance, the molecular data have dramatically 

20
23
15
Miocene
Geologic time (Millions of years ago)
Pliocene
Pleistocene
10
5
0
Asian
apes
African
apes
Humans
• Premolecular
 evidence
Ramapithecus
20
23
15
Miocene
Geologic time (Millions of years ago)
Pliocene
Pleistocene
10
5
0
Asian
apes
African
apes
Humans
• Postmolecular
 evidence
Ramapithecus
Figure 15.2 On the basis of anatomical features and fossil ﬁ ndings (the premolecular evidence; left illustration), 
the three great apes (chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan) were judged to be more closely related to each other than 
to humans. Genetic analyses (postmolecular evidence; right illustration) indicate that the African apes (chimpan-
zee and gorilla) are more closely related to humans than to the Asian apes (orangutan). 
186 
Understanding Evolution
may eventually evolve from a common progeni-
tor. Indeed, it is generally accepted that the varied 
hemoglobin genes, alpha (a ), beta (b  ), gamma 
(g  ), and delta (d  ), arose by duplication from a 
single common ancestral gene. Each duplication 
was followed by the accumulation of mutations 
in the duplicated locus. The evolution of differ-
ent molecular species of a protein thus involved 
the interplay of gene duplication and mutation. 
Duplications that originated early in the evolution-
ary history were frequently separated into different 
chromosomes by translocations, whereas recently 
duplicated genes have remained linked on the same 
chromosome. The a and b genes of hemoglobin 
presently reside in separate chromosomes, whereas 
the more recently evolved d gene has remained 
closely adjacent to the b gene.
adversely with the functioning of a locus would 
be detrimental or lethal. However, an otherwise 
lethal mutation could be accepted if it occurred 
in the duplicated locus, since the original gene is 
unimpaired and would continue to synthesize the 
essential polypeptide. With the continual occur-
rence of mutations, the duplicated locus would 
produce a polypeptide whose sequence of amino 
acids is different from the original polypeptide. 
This new polypeptide, although still related to the 
original one, would be sufﬁ ciently altered to have 
a different activity and speciﬁ city. In this manner, 
two polypeptide chains, each with its own gene, 
would ultimately evolve from a single polypeptide 
and a single gene.
A particular gene may be duplicated more 
than once, and large families of related proteins 

Normal gene
Mutation only
Mutation
Abnormal protein
Selection against defective gene
Selective advantage of gene duplication
Mutation
Normal gene
Gene duplication and mutation
Additional mutations and selection
Normal protein
Abnormal protein
(inconsequential)
Two genes with different functions
Figure 15.3 Duplication of a gene followed by random mutations and natural selection can 
lead to two genes with different functions. In the absence of gene duplication, a mutation would 
be lethal if the mutant gene produces an aberrant protein (left). With a duplicated gene, the same 
mutation that would otherwise be lethal is not selectively disadvantageous, since the original gene 
continues to produce the normal protein (right). With time, several mutations can accumulate in 
the duplicated gene.
 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
187
have exceptionally high concentrations of myo-
globin in their muscles. Mammalian myoglobin 
is a single polypeptide chain of 153 amino acid 
residues.
In the distant past, it is likely that myoglobin 
in tissue cells and hemoglobin in blood cells 
were identical. Myoglobin evolved into a storage 
protein with a high oxygen afﬁ nity, and hemo-
globin became progressively adapted to fulﬁ ll 
its primary role of oxygen transport in different 
species. Based on the degree of similarity (or 
homology) of the amino acid residues between 
any two polypeptide chains, an evolutionary tree 
can be con structed (ﬁ g. 15.4). Each branching 
EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY 
OF HEMOGLOBIN
We have thus far suggested that the genes invol-
ved in the syntheses of the polypeptide chains of 
hemoglobin were derived through duplications of 
a common ancestral locus, followed by divergent 
mutations. The original hemoglobin molecule 
probably resembled the chemically related myo-
globin molecule. Myoglobin does not function 
as a respiratory protein; it is used mainly for the 
storage of oxygen in metabolically active tissues, 
espe cially within muscles. The storage of oxy-
gen is very important in diving animals, which 

During mammalian evolu-
tion, some 200 million years ago, 
the b  locus duplicated once again 
to give rise to the g (gamma) gene 
that codes for fetal hemoglo-
bin with its additional oxygen-
binding capacity. The most 
recent duplication resulting in 
the d (delta) gene occurred only 
40 million years ago. The delta 
chain has been found only in 
higher primates. The divergence 
of the d gene occurred prior 
to the separation of the phylo-
genetic lineage leading to the 
Old World monkey assemblage 
and the line represented by Old 
World monkeys, great apes, and 
humans. Curiously, present-day 
Old World monkeys do not syn-
thesize delta chains, at least in 
detectable amounts. Apparently, 
the d gene became silenced 
recently in Old World monkeys.
PSEUDOGENES
Genetic studies have established that the a gene and 
the b gene reside in different chromosomes. Indeed, 
a cluster of a-like genes has evolved from a single 
ancestral a gene by a series of duplications in one 
chromosome, and a comparable family of b genes 
has emerged in another chromosome. As shown 
in ﬁ gure 15.5, the linked group of a-like genes on 
human chromosome 16 contains two active embry-
onic zeta (z  ) and two active alpha (a) genes. The 
b-like cluster on human chromosome 11 comprises 
ﬁ ve active genes—namely, one epsilon (ε), two 
gamma (g  ), one delta (d  ), and one beta (b ).
Both families of hemoglobin genes contain 
loci called pseudogenes (depicted as psi, ψ) that 
cannot encode a functional polypeptide chain. 
Although each pseudogene shares many base 
sequences with its corresponding normal gene, the 
Myoglobin
Alpha
Zeta
Gamma
Epsilon
Beta
Delta
40 Million
200 Million
400 Million
600 Million years ago
1.0 Billion years ago
Ancestral Chain
Figure 15.4 Molecular evolution of hemoglobin chains. The small 
circles at the foci of branching indicate where the ancestral genes were 
duplicated to give rise to new globin chains.
188 
Understanding Evolution
point in the tree indicates where an ancestral 
locus was duplicated, giving rise each time to a 
new gene line.
Linus Pauling calculated that one amino acid 
substitution has occurred every 7 million years. The 
numerous differences in the amino acid sequences 
between myoglobin and hemoglobin indicate that 
the two molecules had a common origin at least 
600 million years ago, well before the ﬁ rst appear-
ance of the vertebrates. A one-chain hemoglobin 
still persists in primitive ﬁ sh, the cyclostomes. 
While the cyclostomes (lamprey and hagﬁ shes) 
have a single hemoglobin chain, the carp (bony 
ﬁ sh) has two chains. Accordingly, the differentia-
tion of the alpha and beta chains of hemoglobin 
occurred about 400 million years ago, when the 
ﬁ rst bony ﬁ shes appeared. At that time, the alpha 
and beta chains became aggregated to produce the 
efﬁ cient four-chain hemoglobin molecule charac-
teristic of most vertebrates.

in these clusters actually code 
for hemoglobin polypeptides. 
The function of the remaining 
90 percent of intergenic DNA 
between the genes is presently 
enigmatic. Some investigators 
have suggested that these exten-
sive intergenic regions might 
have no function and actually 
represent “junk” DNA. If such 
DNA is meaningless, then the 
base sequences could, during 
evolution, change rapidly with-
out consequences. In this vein, 
it is of interest that the arrange-
ments of the entire b cluster of 
genes are indistinguishable in 
the gorilla, baboon, and humans. 
This indicates that the arrange-
ment of the human cluster has 
been fully established 20 to 
40 million years ago and has 
been faithfully preserved since. This conservation 
of the arrangement suggests that the base sequences 
throughout the b region have been substantially con-
strained by selection, at least during recent primate 
evolution. Such conservative evolution is incompat-
ible with the notion that intergenic DNA is “junk.” 
One of the pioneers of molecular biology, Sidney 
Brenner, has cogently reminded us of a valuable dif-
ference between “junk” and “garbage”—garbage is 
thrown away whereas junk is stored (in the garage) 
for some unforeseen future use.
HOMEOTIC GENES
The name of Edward B. Lewis of the Califor-
nia Institute of Technology and 1995 Nobel Prize 
Winner immediately brings to mind his pioneering 
studies more than 60 years ago on genetic changes 
in the fruit ﬂ y, changes known as homeotic muta-
tions. These mutations are responsible for such dra-
matic developmental effects as the transformation 
of parts of the body into structures appropriate to 
Alpha cluster
(chromosome 16)
Beta cluster
(chromosome 11)
Human hemoglobin genes
60
50
ψβ2
ε
ψβ1
40
30
Kb
20
10
0
γG
γA
δ
β
ζ2
ζ1
ψα1 α2
α1
Figure 15.5 The two families of human hemoglobin genes form clusters 
on different chromosomes. The alpha cluster of linked genes occupies a 
length of about 30 Kilobases (30,000 base pairs). The beta cluster of genes is 
spread over a region of about 50 Kb (50,000 base pairs).
 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
189
presence of a so-called “frameshift” (see chapter 4) 
mutation has shifted the triplets of bases so that 
polypeptide synthesis is prematurely halted. Pseudo-
genes apparently are products of gene duplication 
that have accumulated debilitating base changes 
during sequence divergence. If the ψa1 gene were to 
become functional in the future, then the alpha chain 
would be coded by three operational a genes.
The occurrence of two immediately adjacent 
genes, both of which are expressed, is a common 
feature of gene clusters. Thus, two a genes (a 1 and 
a 2) are expressed in the production of alpha poly-
peptides. Such duplication of virtually identical 
genes has proved to be providential to some patients 
afﬂ icted with the blood disorder, thalassemia, char-
acterized by a reduced rate of alpha chain synthe-
sis as a consequence of a defective a gene. Some 
synthesis of alpha chains becomes possible if the 
impairment involves only one of the several a loci.
The genes in both hemoglobin linkage groups 
are separated by substantial tracts of intergenic DNA. 
In other words, only about 10 percent of the DNA 

Haltere
(rudimentary wing)
A
B
C
T1
T2 T3
A4
A5–A8
A3
A2
A1
Figure 15.6 (A) A drawing of a normal ﬂ y. The third 
thoracic segment (T3) has a rudimentary wing, known 
as a haltere. (B) A normal ﬂ y with a single set of 
wings. (C) Homeotic mutations transform segment T3 
into a structure similar to T2. A second, fully developed 
set of wings emerges from this transformed segment.
(Based on studies of E. B. Lewis, 1978, Nature 276:565.)
190 
Understanding Evolution
(ﬁ g. 15.6). Some evolutionists viewed such drastic 
morphological changes as major mutations, or mac-
romutations. In the 1940s, the prominent geneticist 
Richard Goldschmidt contended that homeotic 
mutants illustrate a possible mode of origin of novel 
types of body structure and hence could be respon-
sible for the rapid emergence of a new species in 
the distant past. Goldschmidt’s views are consid-
ered untenable today, but Lewis’s superb ﬁ ndings 
remain a landmark in develop mental genetics.
The inevitable question is: What is the normal 
role of a homeotic gene? The recent revolution 
in molecular biology has revealed that homeotic 
genes do have assignments that are the antithesis 
of the execution of bizarre disruptions of struc-
tures. Homeotic genes, in their normal state, are 
distinctly “master” genes that orchestrate the 
orderly unfolding of the genetic program for the 
development of the embryo. Perhaps unthink-
able, these master developmental genes are shared 
in animals ranging from the fruit ﬂ y to humans, 
which suggests that present-day life forms utilize 
in their development an ancient basic genetic net-
work. Stated another way, the complex genetic 
network for development apparently has arisen 
only once during evolution. 
In the early development of organisms as 
diverse as the fruit ﬂ y, mouse, and ourselves, one 
particular set of homeotic genes is responsible for 
determining the anterior to posterior (head-to-tail) 
axis of the embryo. In the embryo of the fruit ﬂ y, 
as seen in ﬁ gure 15.7, eight homeotic genes are 
arranged in a tandem fashion and are expressed in 
an anterior to posterior direction that mirrors their 
spatial order in the chromosome. If the most ante-
rior gene of the complex, the labial gene (abbrevi-
ated “lab” in ﬁ g. 15.7) were to mutate, then the 
development of head structures would be dra-
matically altered. Moreover, failure of expression 
of the labial gene by virtue of a mutation could 
lead to an overexpression of adjacent genes in the 
complex, resulting in strange imperfections in 
more posterior parts of the body. Certain homeotic 
genes normally act by suppressing the develop-
ment of structures. One of the homeotic genes 
other positions. Legs may form in a position nor-
mally bearing a wing, or a second set of wings may 
emerge in addition to the usual single pair of wings 

Cervical
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
lab
pb
int
Drosophila embryo
Dfd
Scr
Antp
Ubx
abd-A Abd-B
Mouse embryo
mx
A8
1a
T1 T2T3
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Spinal cord
Thoracic
Lumbar
Figure 15.7 Similar spatial organization of homeotic genes in the fruit   y and mouse 
embryos. Segmental expression of the cluster of Hox genes in the mouse embryo is most pronounced 
in the developing central nervous system (nerve cord) and developing bony spinal column.
(From John Gerhart and Marc Kirschner, Cells, Embryos, and Evolution, Blackwell Science, 1997, ﬁ g. 7.12.)
 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
191
by binding to speciﬁ c DNA sequences adjacent to 
the target gene it regulates. In essence, homeotic 
genes are master switches that bring into play, 
and coordinate the action of, other developmental 
genes. Each homeotic gene serves to engender a 
cascade of developmental effects.
Genes homologous to the homeotic genes of 
the fruit ﬂ y have been demonstrated in the mouse 
and humans. The normal homeotic genes of the 
fruit ﬂ y are collectively known as the homeotic 
complex, or HOM-C. The homologous genes in 
expressed in the posterior thorax inhibits the 
development of a posterior (second) wing. Conse-
quently, halteres (balancing organs resembling a 
reduced wing) are produced at that site rather than 
a second pair of wings.
The mechanism by which a homeotic gene 
exerts its effects has been actively pursued. It is 
now known that the protein product of a homeotic 
gene acts as a transcription factor. A transcription 
factor allows the cell to differentially turn on the 
expression of a particular target gene. It does so 

192 
Understanding Evolution
segment is known as the homeodomain, the part 
of the protein that binds strongly to recognition 
sites in other genes. Approximately 30  percent of 
the amino acids in the homeodomain are basic—
arginine and lysine. This is a hallmark of DNA-
binding regions of proteins. As seen in table 15.2, 
the homeodomains of various species are so 
highly conserved that they differ only in tolerable 
amino acid  substitutions—that is, the replacement 
of one amino acid by another of similar chemical 
properties.
OCULAR MALFORMATIONS 
AND EVOLUTION
Increasingly, evolutionary developmental biology 
(also called “evo-devo”) is providing insights into 
evolutionary questions. One example comes from 
another family of developmental control genes, 
called Pax genes that encode transcription factors. 
The vertebrate Pax genes are key regulators of the 
development of various organs of the body, notably 
the eye. One particular gene member of the family, 
vertebrates are said to be Hox genes. Irrespective 
of nomenclature, the important message is that all 
HOM-C and Hox genes share a common ancestry. 
There exists in nature sets of structurally similar 
genes, originally discovered in the fruit ﬂ y, that 
are the prime regulators of embryonic develop-
ment in life forms.
During the 1980s, homeotic genes were 
isolated and cloned in several species. A spe-
ciﬁ c nucleotide sequence, called the homeobox 
sequence, is common to the coding region of all 
HOM-C and Hox genes. This sequence, 180 nucle-
otides in length, can be used as a genetic probe. 
The homeobox probe cross-hybridizes with the 
genomic DNA of many organisms, including yeast 
and humans. The homeobox sequences of the fruit 
ﬂ y show 90 percent homology with the homeobox 
sequences discovered in human genes. The evo-
lutionarily conserved homeobox sequence appar-
ently is a general feature of many developmental 
regulatory genes. 
The homeobox sequence encodes a protein 
segment with 60 amino acid residues. The protein 
TABLE 15.2     Extensive Homology in Amino Acid Sequences of Five Homeodomains
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
Mouse (MO-010) 
Ser Lys Arg Gly Arg Thr Ala Tyr Thr Arg Pro Gln Leu Val Glu Leu Glu Lys Glu Phe
Frog (MM3) 
Arg Lys Arg Gly Arg Gln Thr Tyr Thr Arg Tyr Gln Thr Leu Glu Leu Glu Lys Glu Phe
Fruit ﬂ y (Antennapedia) Arg Lys Arg Gly Arg Gln Thr Tyr Thr Arg Tyr Gln Thr Leu Glu Leu Glu Lys Glu Phe
Fruit ﬂ y (Fushi tarazu) 
Ser Lys Arg Thr Arg Gln Thr Tyr Thr Arg Tyr Gln Thr Leu Glu Leu Glu Lys Glu Phe
Fruit ﬂ y (Ultrabithorax) Arg Arg Arg Gly Arg Gln Thr Tyr Thr Arg Tyr Gln Thr Leu Glu Leu Glu Lys Glu Phe
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
Mouse (MO-10) 
His Phe Asn Arg Tyr Leu Met Arg Pro Arg Arg Val Glu Met Ala Asn Leu Leu Asn Leu
Frog (MM3) 
His Phe Asn Arg Tyr Leu Thr Arg Arg Arg Arg Ile 
Glu Ile 
Ala His Val Leu Cys Leu
Fruit ﬂ y (Antennapedia) His Phe Asn Arg Tyr Leu Thr Arg Arg Arg Arg Ile 
Glu Ile 
Ala His Ala Leu Cys Leu
Fruit ﬂ y (Fushi tarazu) 
His Phe Asn Arg Tyr Ile 
Thr Arg Arg Arg Arg Ile 
Asp Ile 
Ala Asn Ala Leu Ser Leu
Fruit ﬂ y (Ultrabithorax) His Thr Asn His Tyr Leu Thr Arg Arg Arg Arg Ile 
Glu Met Ala Tyr Ala Leu Cys Leu
 
41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60
Mouse (MO-10) 
Thr Glu Arg Gln Ile 
Lys Ile Trp Phe Gln Asn Arg Arg Met Lys Tyr Lys Lys Asp Gln
Frog (MM3) 
Thr Glu Arg Gln Ile 
Lys Ile Trp Phe Gln Asn Arg Arg Met Lys Trp Lys Lys Glu Asn
Fruit ﬂ y (Antennapedia) Thr Glu Arg Gln Ile 
Lys Ile Trp Phe Gln Asn Arg Arg Met Lys Trp Lys Lys Glu Asn
Fruit ﬂ y (Fushi tarazu) 
Ser Glu Arg Gln Ile 
Lys Ile Trp Phe Gln Asn Arg Arg Met Lys Ser Lys Lys Asp Arg
Fruit ﬂ y (Ultrabithorax) Thr Glu Arg Gln Ile 
Lys Ile Trp Phe Gln Asn Arg Arg Met Lys Leu Lys Lys Glu Ile 
From W. J. Gehring. 1985. Sci. Am. 253/4:159.

 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
193
evolutionists but has been challenged by other 
prominent evolutionists who contend that photo-
receptive organs have evolved independently on 
innumerable occasions, perhaps 60 or more times. 
Not surprisingly, there are some who think that 
some components of the eye evolved via homology 
while other components are examples of conver-
gence. For example, it may be that the basic devel-
opmental pattern for eye development comes from 
Pax genes (homology) but that different groups of 
organisms have independently used this general-
ized genetic program to form vastly different types 
of eyes in dozens of different ways (convergence). 
Under this view, there are components eyes that 
evolved from shared common ancestry or homol-
ogy and other components of eyes that evolved via 
convergence. If true, this coalescence of apparently 
conﬂ icting ideas ranks as one of the more exquisite 
examples of the unity of knowledge arising from 
evolutionary theory.
MULTILEGGED FROGS REVISITED
We have seen that embryonic development is gov-
erned by a repertoire of transcription factors coded 
by master genes. To add an additional facet to the 
story, there are signals from the outside of devel-
oping cells that can modulate the activity of the 
transcription factors. These signals take the form of 
signaling macromolecules that enter cells and pro-
foundly inﬂ uence the differentiation of cells, tissues, 
and organs. For example, normal limb development 
in vertebrates depends upon a threshold concen-
tration of endogenous retinoic acid (an analog of 
vitamin A) reaching the developing limb bud at the 
precise time that Hox genes are being transcribed.
In 1993, Malcolm Maden of King’s College in 
London reported the striking homeotic transforma-
tion of tails into hindlimbs of frog tadpoles treated 
with retinoic acid. At a certain stage of develop-
ment, the tails of tadpoles of a European species 
of frogs (Rana temporaria) were amputated and 
the experimental animals were placed for several 
days in varied concentrations of retinoic acid. At a 
particular dose and treatment time, the tail actually 
Pax-6, has earned notoriety for causing malforma-
tions of the eye in mice and humans. Mutations in 
the Pax-6 gene are responsible in the mouse for 
diminutive eyes in the heterozygous state and the 
complete lack of eyes in the homozygous condi-
tion. The Pax-6 homologue in the human has been 
shown to be mutated in patients with congenital 
aniridia (lack of iris). 
The Pax-6 gene is characterized by a highly 
conserved homeobox-like sequence, a span of 
130 amino acids coded by 390 nucleotides. The 
homologue of Pax-6 has been isolated in the fruit 
ﬂ y, which shares a 94 percent identity with the 
amino acid sequences of mice and humans. Not 
unexpectedly, the Pax-6 homologue maps to the 
eyeless (eye) locus on the fourth chromosome of 
Drosophila.
Notwithstanding the great anatomical differ-
ences between the eyes of insects and vertebrates, 
the mouse Pax-6 gene induces ectopic eye devel-
opment when transplanted into fruit ﬂ y embryos. 
It would seem that the fundamental role of the 
Pax-6 gene in eye development has been conserved 
throughout the animal kingdom. After hundreds of 
millions of years of evolutionary independence of 
the fruit ﬂ y and mouse, the astounding similarity 
between the developmental genes of an insect and 
those of a mammal seems possible only if these 
major transcriptional genes arose only once in a 
distant common ancestor.
The time-honored view is that the compound 
eye of insects and the camera-like eye of verte-
brates evolved independently. Historically, evo-
lutionary biologists have interpreted the origin 
of eyes in well-known lineages—squid, insects, 
and  vertebrates—as illuminating examples of 
 converg ence (chapter 13), or the evolution of simi-
lar traits in genetically unrelated species, chieﬂ y 
as a result of similar environmental selective pres-
sures. At the University of Basel in  Switzerland, a 
team of developmental biologists led by  Walter J. 
Gehring proposed that the appearance of eyes in 
varied groups reﬂ ects shared ancestry ( homologies 
of developmental genetic networks) and not inde-
pendent evolution (convergence). This  revisionistic 
paradigm has been embraced by some  outstanding 

Amputate
Retinoic acid
Femur
Tibia
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 15.8 The tip is amputated from a tadpole’s 
tail and the stump is exposed to retinoic acid. The 
tail stump regenerates a hindlimb rather than a tail. 
The anatomy of the hindlimb is normal; the pictorial 
enlargement of the limb shows the normal ﬁ ve digits.
(Based on studies by M. Maden.)
194 
Understanding Evolution
cautioned to avoid taking retinoic acid in pill form. 
When absorbed in large quantities by a developing 
fetus, retinoic acid is highly teratogenic, causing 
both limb and cardiac malformations.
MITOCHONDRIAL EVE
In chapter 14 we stated that mitochondria probably 
began their existence as free-living, aerobic bacteria 
that had been engulfed by a primitive eukaryote. 
Mitochondria have a number of unique features in 
modern eukaryotic cells. For the present discus-
sion, we shall cite two prominent features. First, 
the mut ation rate of mitochondrial DNA is high, 
primarily because mitochondria have no effective 
DNA repair mechanism. The high mutation rate 
may also reﬂ ect the large concentration of muta-
gens (such as superoxide radicals) resulting from 
the intense metabolic functions performed by mito-
chondria. Second, mitochondrial DNA is inherited 
exclusively from the mother, and thus complica-
tions due to allelic segregation (as with nuclear 
genes) do not exist. The unfertilized egg contains 
some 200,000  maternal mitochondria, whereas a 
sperm cell contains a relatively small number of 
mitochondria, localized in the middle piece. The 
sperm’s middle piece disintegrates during the act 
of fertilization, so that the father cannot contrib-
ute to the ultimate mitochondrial genotype of the 
offspring.
Maternal inheritance coupled with the high 
mutation rate of mitochondrial DNA makes it 
possible to distinguish among closely related indi-
viduals and, in fact, to trace human origins. All 
present-day humans may have shared a common 
ancestral mother (our “mitochondrial Eve”) or 
more likely, a population of women from whom 
we all descended. One can attempt to reconstruct 
human female phylogeny by detecting and quanti-
fying nucleotide mutational changes by means of 
restriction enzymes. There are 37 genes, encom-
passing 16,569 pair bases, in each circle of mito-
chondrial DNA.
By analyzing mitochondrial DNA variations 
in women around the world, researchers have been 
regenerated a normal hindlimb (ﬁ g. 15.8). Control 
animals—with tails amputated but reared in the 
absence of retinoic acid—regenerated normal tails.
Retinoic acid may be viewed as a develop-
mental teratogen in the sense that elevated levels can 
alter, or redirect, the developmental pathways. In our 
introductory ﬁ rst chapter, we evoked the usual 
 env ironmental suspects—pesticides, for example—
to account for the multilegged anomaly in frogs 
collected in nature. Now we invite the reader to 
consider the possibility that the causative factor in 
nature may have been the sensitivity of Hox genes 
to inappropriate levels of retinoic acid (or some 
other Hox-sensitive substance). Parenthetically, it 
may be noted that retinoic acid is occasionally used 
as a medication to treat skin disorders in humans, 
disorders such as acne. Pregnant women have been 

accord with the thesis, subscribed to by many 
 evolutionists, that humans ﬁ rst emerged in Africa 
and then emigrated to other continents. The popu-
lation of females that represents mitochondrial 
Eve is presumed to have lived in Africa some time 
before 100,000 years ago (estimates range from 
290,000 to 140,000 B.C.E.). It is likely that there 
has been more than one migration out of Africa. 
This theme will be explored in chapter 17.
Data on mitochondrial DNA have enabled 
investigators to reconstruct the emigration to the 
Americas by northeast Asian migrants. Clearly, 
American aboriginal peoples did not evolve de 
novo on the American continents. The Americas 
were populated by migrant groups from Asia, and 
the ﬁ rst of these migrations probably occurred 
15,000 to 40,000 years ago. The most ancient 
migrants are represented today by descendants 
who speak “Amerind” languages, which includes 
most Native Americans. The Amerinds entered the 
Americas in a series of migratory waves 
20,000 to 40,000 years ago. The Navajo, 
Apache, and other members of a Native 
American group known collectively as the 
“Na-Dene” are latecomers. The ancestors 
of modern speakers of Na-Dene entered 
the continent in a later migration, a mere 
5,000 to 10,000 years ago. South America 
appears to have been colonized relatively 
quickly after the Americas were ﬁ rst occu-
pied, with estimates ranging from 12,000 to 
20,000 years before the present. Although 
it is intriguing to utilize these approximates 
dates as reference points, it is important to 
realize that they are just estimates based on 
what is a relatively new area of study.
Y-CHROMOSOME ADAM
The Y chromosome is the male counter-
part to mitochondrial DNA, and like mito-
chondrial DNA it has been used to trace 
the ancestry of the human species. The 
Y chromosome is unique to males, is inher-
ited exclusively from father to son, and 
Eve’s people
Eve’s people
Neanderthal
Neanderthal
H. erectus
H. erectus
Peking man
Peking man
Java man
Java man
Figure 15.9 The migration of Eve’s people, a group of modern 
humans who emerged in sub-Saharan Africa 150,000 years ago and then 
swept across Europe, India, Asia, and Australia. Presumably, the invad-
ing Eve’s people replaced previously existing human groups, such as the 
Neanderthals in Europe, Peking man in Asia, and Java man in Australia 
and Indonesia (see chapter 17).
(Illustration from James Shreeve, “Argument Over a Woman,” Discover [August 
1996]:52–59.)
 
CHAPTER 15 Molecular Evolution 
195
able to approximate where the most recent com-
mon female ancestor lived. The major result from 
these genetic analyses of women from around the 
world is that sub-Saharan African populations 
show the greatest genetic diversity, suggesting 
that they are the most recent common ancestor of 
human females. Populations other than those in 
Africa retain just a subset of this genetic diversity, 
as would be expected when a smaller group breaks 
away from a founding population, taking only a 
small sample of the full range of genetic variation.
The ancestral mitochondrial sequence appar-
ently arose in sub-Saharan Africa near the modern-
day countries of Kenya and Ethiopia (ﬁ g. 15.9). 
Stated another way, based on mitochondrial DNA 
types, the intercontinental migrations of women 
to their present-day geographic distribution is 
best explained by postulating that the source gene 
pool of all human mitochondrial genes is peoples 
who once lived in west-central Africa. This is in 

196 
Understanding Evolution
the proposition that all people living today share 
common ancestors who lived roughly between 
100,000 and 200,000 years ago in central or south-
ern Africa. Likewise, both lines of inquiry provide 
data on when and where these common ancestors 
subsequently migrated. Thus there is a consensus 
of archeological and genetic data independently 
supporting the same places and same relative time 
frames for the common ancestry and subsequent 
migration of all people alive today.
It is important to emphasize that there was 
almost certainly not a single male “Adam” or a 
single female “Eve.” Most likely, Mitochondrial 
Eve and Y chromosome Adam represent popula-
tions of our ancestors of perhaps 50 to 100 indi-
viduals; maybe even 1,000 individuals, but not 
two single human beings. Furthermore, although 
mitochondria and the Y chromosome allow for 
unique types of analyses, we must be mindful that 
DNA from mitochondria and the Y chromosome 
are only a small fraction of our genome, most of 
which is made up of the nuclear DNA contained 
in the X chromosome and the 22 pairs of auto-
somes. Contemporary molecular genetics research 
seeks to ﬁ nd better resolution to these complex 
questions of human origins. These themes will be 
explored again in chapter 17.
carries the genes that determine maleness. Like 
mitochondrial DNA, much of the Y chromosome 
does not recombine during meiosis. Furthermore,  
mutations to the Y chromosome tend to accumu-
late at a relatively constant rate. These character-
istics have made comparative studies of mutations 
on the Y chromosome an excellent tool for tracing 
the human male ancestry.
In the same way as we have used the biblical 
metaphor of a “mitochondrial Eve,” this imagery 
has been extended to the male’s Y chromosome, 
resulting in the term “Y chromosome Adam.” Put 
simply, the concept of a Y chromosome Adam is 
that there was a population of men whom we can 
identify as the most recent common ancestors of all 
modern human males. Like mitochondrial DNA, 
analysis of the mutations and diversity across 
modern-day human men’s Y chromosome point to 
an origin in a sub-Saharan region of Africa. 
Estimates project that all human males alive 
today are descended from a population of men 
who lived in Africa about 60,000 to 150,000 years 
ago. Although Y chromosome data reveal a 
slightly younger common ancestor than we ﬁ nd 
for our mitochondrial common ancestor, the 
apparent discrepancies are not very signiﬁ cant. 
Rather, these divergent lines of study both support 

197
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
16
HISTORY OF LIFE
Our interpretation of the ever-changing 
procession of life is based in great measure on 
the fossils of animals and plants entombed in the 
Earth’s rocks. An organism becomes preserved as 
a fossil when it is trapped in soft sediment that set-
tles at the bottom of a lake or ocean. The deposits 
of mud and sand harden into the sedimentary, or 
stratiﬁ ed, rocks of the Earth’s crust. Fossils, then, 
are the remains of past organisms preserved or 
imprinted in sedimentary rocks. Not all fossils are 
mere impressions of buried parts. Exceptionally, 
the whole organism may be preserved, as attested 
by the woolly mammoths embedded in the fro-
zen gravels of Siberia. In the case of petriﬁ ed tree 
trunks, the wood was inﬁ ltrated with mineral sub-
stances that crystallized and hardened. Incredibly, 
such mineral-impregnated wood can be sliced in 
very thin sections and studied microscopically for 
details of cellular structures.
The fossil remains of past life are incom-
plete and uneven. Innumerable organisms with 
soft tissue ( jellyﬁ shes and ﬂ atworms, for exam-
ple) are not good candidates for preservation. In 
contrast, the woody parts of plants, the shells of 
mollusks, and the bones and teeth of vertebrates 
are relatively common as fossils. Complete intact 
organisms can become trapped and preserved in 
amber, the fossilized remains of tree resins. Simi-
lar processes occur with organic peat and natu-
ral asphalt. Other substrates and mechanisms by 
which ancient organisms can be preserved include 
coal fossils, petroleum, fossil carbonization, and 
recrystallization. In many places of the Earth, the 
sedimentary rocks have been subjected to such 
pressure and heat that their fossil holdings have 
been irretrievably lost. The Earth’s rocks have also 
been exposed to the relentless forces of weather-
ing and erosion. Despite the destructive work of 
geologic processes, the available fossil assem-
blage contains an extraordinary amount of infor-
mation. The older strata of rock, those deposited 
ﬁ rst, bear only relatively simple kinds of life, 
whereas the newer, or younger, beds contain pro-
gressively more and more complex types of life. 
The increasing complexity of fossils in progres-
sively more recent rock strata is one of the more 
profound evidences for evolutionary changes in 
organisms with time. Each species of organisms 
now living on the Earth has emerged from an ear-
lier ancestral form.

198 
Understanding Evolution
GEOLOGIC AGES
The arrangement of geologic time is recorded in 
table 16.1. The largest division of time is the eon 
which is divided eras which embrace a number 
of subdivisions, or periods, and these periods are 
further reﬁ ned into epochs. Fossils appear in abun-
dance in the rocks of the Cambrian period, which 
dawned about 540 million years ago. The Cambrian 
strata bear numerous fossils of marine plants and 
animals; seaweeds, sponges, shellﬁ shes, starﬁ shes, 
and bizarre arthropods called trilobites. One of the 
more interesting Cambrian fossil sites is the Burgess 
Shale, located in British Columbia in  Canada. 
Dated about 530 million years ago, the Burgess 
Shale includes an impressive assemblage of hard-
bodied and soft-bodied creatures. The soft-bodied 
Burgess fossils owe their preservation to quick 
burial under anaerobic (non-oxygen) conditions.
The Cambrian was a period of great geologic 
upheaval of the Earth’s surface. Mountains were 
being formed as continents collided. Earthquakes 
and ice ages added to the ﬂ ux of environmental 
conditions. Oxygen levels in the oceans and the 
atmosphere were on the rise. Whether these earthly 
upheavals fostered the burst and diversiﬁ cation of 
life is unknown. Yet, it is likely that the Cambrian 
infusion of diversity was a function of the vast 
openness of ecological niches. The most explosive 
period of Cambrian life, estimated between 530 and 
520 million years ago, has been aptly described as 
the Cambrian explosion or “biology’s Big Bang.”
Cambrian life did not come into existence 
abruptly. The evolutionary epic began at a far more 
distant time. At least 3 billion years of slow organic 
evolution preceded the diversity of organisms 
of the Cambrian period. The Precambrian seas 
swarmed with a great variety of microscopic forms 
of life. Studies in recent years have dispelled the 
notion that Precambrian rocks are devoid of fossils. 
Precambrian life was dominated by prokaryotic 
bacteria and blue-green algae (cyanobacteria). The 
oldest microfossil life has been uncovered from 
 Warrawoona in Western Australia and dates back 3.6 
billion years ago. The bacteria-like  microfossils of 
Warrawoona are remarkedly similar to present-day 
blue-green algae. In  addition, the electron micro-
scope has been used to examine samples of deep 
sedimentary rock from South Africa (the so-called 
Fig Tree sediments). The microscopic analysis 
uncovered impressions of rod-shaped bacteria that 
existed 3.2 billion years ago. Further, minute traces 
of two chemical substances, phytane and pristane, 
have been found in the Fig Tree rocks. These chem-
icals are the relatively stable breakdown products 
of chlorophyll. Thus, photosynthesis by algae, in 
which oxygen is released, may have begun about 
3 billion years ago. Other ancient rocks—such as 
the 2-billion-year-old Gunﬂ int rock formation in 
Ontario, Canada—contain an assemblage of fossil 
microorganisms that appear to be blue-green algae, 
possibly red algae, and even some fungi. Eukaryotic 
organization is clearly in evidence in deposits that 
are approximately one billion years old. The Bitter 
Springs formation of Australia contains eukaryotic 
fossils that represent higher algae and fungi. The 
transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes appar-
ently occurred during the late Precambrian era.
We may visualize the vast span of time by 
compressing the history of life into 60 minutes. In 
the 60-minute clock depicted in ﬁ gure 16.1, each 
second represents one million years. The Precam-
brian era is conservatively viewed as originating at 
12 o’clock, or 3.6 billion years ago. Primitive bac-
teria have left imprints in the sediments 3.2  billion 
years ago, or about 7 minutes after the start of the 
clock. The Precambrian era stretches over 5/6 of 
the Earth’s entire history, during which time prim-
itive life was conﬁ ned to the sea.
Toward the close of the Precambrian 700  million 
years ago (or 11 minutes and 40  seconds before 
the hour), the fossil-bearing rocks show traces of 
soft-bodied invertebrates of simple organization. 
At the onset of the Paleozoic era 600 million years 
ago, the fossil record improves immeasurably. The 
Paleozoic era begins with only 10  minutes left in 
the hour and occupies a span of only 6 minutes and 
5 seconds (or 365 million years). Nevertheless, 
within this short interval, we witness the invasion of 
land by plants, the emergence of great swamp trees, 
and the dominance of ﬁ shes and amphibians. 

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
199
Eon
Era
Period
Epoch
Millions of 
Years Ago
Major Events and Characteristics
Phanerozoic
Cenozoic
(age of 
mammals)
Quaternary
Holocene 
(Recent)
0.01 to 
present
Dominance of modern humans
Much of Earth modiﬁ ed by humans
Pleistocene
1.8–0.01
Extinction of many large mammals
Most recent period of glaciation
Tertiary
Pliocene
5–1.8
Cool, dry period
Grasslands and grazers widespread
Origin of ancestors of humans
Miocene
23–5
Warm, moist period
Grasslands and grazers common, Radiation of apes
Oligocene
38–23
Cool period—tropics diminish
Woodlands and grasslands expand, Abundant grazing mammals
Eocene
54–38
All modern forms of ﬂ owering plants present
All major groups of mammals present
Paleocene
65–54
Warm period ﬁ rst placental mammals
Many new kinds of birds and mammals, 
Mesozoic
(age of 
reptiles)
Cretaceous
144–65
Meteorite impact causes mass extinction
Dinosaurs dominant
Many new kinds of ﬂ owering plants and insects
Jurassic
208–144
Giant continent begins to split up
Dinosaurs and other reptiles dominant 
First ﬂ owering plants and birds
Triassic
245–208
Giant continent—warm and dry
Explosion in reptile and cone-bearing plant diversity
First dinosaurs and ﬁ rst mammals
Paleozoic
Permian
286–245
90 % of species go extinct at end of Permian
New giant continent forms 
Gymnosperms, insects, amphibians, and reptiles dominant
Carboniferous
360–286
Gymnosperms and reptiles present by end
Vast swamps of primitive plants—formed coal
Amphibians and insects common
Devonian
408–360
Glaciation the probable cause of extinction of many warm-water 
marine organisms
Abundant ﬁ sh, insects, forests, coral reefs, ﬁ rst amphibian
Silurian
436–408
Melting of glaciers caused rise in sea level
Numerous coral reefs
First land animals (arthropods), jawed ﬁ sh, and vascular plants
Ordovician
505–436
Sea level drops causing major extinction of marine animals at end 
of Ordovician
Primitive plants present—jawless ﬁ sh common
Cambrian
540–505
Major extinction of organisms at end of Cambrian
All major phyla of animals present
Continent splits into several parts and drift apart
Proterozoic
Archaean
This period of time is also known as 
the Precambrian
2,500–540
First multicellular organisms about 1 billion years ago
First eukaryotes about 1.8 billion years ago
Increasing oxygen in atmosphere
Single large continent about 1.1 billion years ago
3,800–2,500
Continents form—oxygen in atmosphere
Fossil prokaryotes—about 3.5 billion years ago
Hadean
4,500–3,800
Crust of Earth in process of solidifying
Origin of the Earth
TABLE 16.1    Geologic Time Scale
This chart shows the various geologic time designations, their time periods, and the major events and characteristics of each time period.

200 
Understanding Evolution
The Mesozoic era, during which the reptiles 
reigned, commences with about 4 1/2 minutes left 
to the hour and lasts for 3 minutes (180 million 
years). Mammals and ﬂ owering plants dominate 
the landscape of the Cenozoic era during the last 
1 minute and 15 seconds of the clock hour. Not 
until the closing seconds of the evolutionary hour 
does the human species appear on the scene. The 
whole span of recorded human history covers the 
last 3 seconds!
FOSSIL RECORD OF PLANTS
The general character of plant life from the dawn 
of the Cambrian period to recent times is depicted 
in ﬁ gure 16.2. Only the broader aspects of past 
evolution are portrayed. It is evident that the ﬂ ora 
has changed in composition over geologic time. 
New types of plants have continually appeared. 
Some types thrived for a certain time and then 
disappeared. Others arose and ﬂ ourished. Still oth-
ers have survived until the present, only in much 
reduced numbers.
The Cambrian and Ordovician periods were 
characterized by a diverse group of algae in the 
warm oceans and inland seas. One of the most 
signiﬁ cant advances, which occurred during the 
Silurian period, was the transition from aquatic 
existence to life on land. The ﬁ rst plants that estab-
lished themselves on land were diminutive her-
baceous forms, the psilophytes, literally “naked 
plants,” in allusion to their bare, leaﬂ ess stems. 
The primitive woody stems sent up swollen aerial 
shoots to scatter their spores and thrust branches 
down into the Earth for water. The existence of psi-
lophytes made possible the subsequent emergence 
of an inﬁ nite variety of tree-sized plants that ﬂ our-
ished in the swamps of Carboniferous times. Two 
prominent trees that luxuriated in Carboniferous 
forests were the giant club moss, Lepidodendron, 
which soared to heights of 130 feet on slender 
trunks, and the coarse-leaved Cordaites, progeni-
tors of the modern conifers. The ﬁ rst seed-bearing 
plants, Pteridosperms, arose in the humid environ-
ment of the vast swamps. These ancient groups of 
tall trees dwindled toward the close of the Paleo-
zoic era and shortly became extinct. Their decom-
posed remains led to the formation of extensive 
coal beds throughout the world. Figure 16.3 shows 
the appearance of a Carboniferous swamp as 
reconstructed from fossils.
By far the greater number of Paleozoic spe-
cies of plants failed to survive. The Paleozoic ﬂ ora 
was largely replaced by the seed-forming gym-
nosperms, which became prominent in the early 
Mesozoic era. A diverse assemblage of cycads, 
ginkgoes (maidenhair trees), and conifers formed 
elaborate forests. During the closing years of the 
Mesozoic, the ﬂ owering plants (angiosperms), 
which began very modestly in the Jurassic period, 
underwent a phenomenal development and today 
constitute the dominant plants of the Earth. The 
Figure 16.1 Model of evolutionary time, where one 
second equals one million years. The Precambrian is repre-
sented as originating at 12 o’clock, or 3.6 billion years ago. 
The human species appeared about 3 million years ago, or 
a mere terminal three seconds of the evolutionary hour.
Precambrian
1 minute = 60 million years
Human species appears last
3 seconds of evolutionary hour
3
9
4
8
5
7
2
10
1
11
Cenozoic
Mesozoic
Paleozoic
12
6

Figure 16.2 Historical record of plant life. Plant life during the Cambrian and Ordovician, the ﬁ rst two periods of the 
Paleozoic era, was conﬁ ned to the water; seaweeds (algae) of immense size, often several hundred feet in length, dominated 
the seas. Land plants came into existence in Silurian time, in the form of strange little vascular plants, the psilophytes. In the 
Carboniferous period, imposing spore-bearing trees (Lepidodendrids and Calamites) and primitive naked-seeded plants 
(Pteridosperms and Cordaites) reached their peak of developement. The end of the Paleozoic era marked the extinction of the 
majority of the luxuriant trees of the Carboniferous coal swamps. The Mesozoic era was the Age of Gymnosperms, as evidenced 
by the abundance of cycads, ginkgoes, and conifers. Flowering plants (Angiosperms) rose to ascendancy toward the close of the 
Mesozoic era and established themselves as the dominant plant group on the Earth.
seed fern
Periods
Millions
of years
ago
Eras
Psilopsida
Algae
Lepidodendron
“giant club moss”
Selaginella
“small club moss”
Pteridosperm
“seed fern”
Moss
Psilophyte
Calamite
Fern
Horsetail
Bennettitale
Cycad
Ginkgo
Cordaite
Conifer
Flowering
plant
Fungi
Bryophyta
Lycopsida
Filicinae
Gymnospermae
Angiospermae
Sphenopsida
225
185
135
2
400
430
480
600
350
275
75
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Carboniferous
Cambrian
Permian
Quaternary
Triassic
Tertiary
Jurassic
Cretaceous
Paleozoic
Mesozoic
Cenozoic
 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
201
developments of the Cambrian period was the 
advent of hard parts in the form of protective 
shells and plates. The shelled invertebrates were 
already so well developed that their differentia-
tion must have taken place during the long period 
preceding the Cambrian. That this is actually the 
case has been attested by the discoveries of rich 
deposits of Precambrian fossils in rocks in the 
Ediacara Hills in southern Australia and on Vic-
toria Island in the Canadian Arctic. These fossil-
bearing rocks lie well below the oldest Cambrian 
strata and contain imprints of jellyﬁ shes, tracks of 
various kinds of worms, and traces of soft corals. 
Since the rocks on Victoria Island are 700  million 
years old, these discoveries extend the fossil 
record of invertebrates 100  million years beyond 
the Cambrian.
angiosperms have radiated into a variety of habi-
tats, from sea level to mountain summits and from 
the humid tropics to the dry deserts. Associated 
with this diversity of habitat is a great variety of 
general form and manner of growth. Many angio-
sperms have reverted to an aquatic existence. The 
familiar duckweed (Family Lemnaoideae), which 
covers the surface of a pond, is a striking example.
FOSSIL RECORD OF ANIMALS
In the animal kingdom, we witness a comparable 
picture of endless change, with waves of extinction 
and replacement (ﬁ g.16.4). The deep Cambrian 
rocks contain the remains of varied invertebrate 
animals—sponges, jellyﬁ shes, worms, shellﬁ shes, 
starﬁ shes, and crustaceans. One of the major 

202 
Understanding Evolution
Dominating the scene in early Paleozoic waters 
were the crablike trilobites and the large scorpion-
like eurypterids (ﬁ g.16.5). Most trilobites were not 
more than 3 inches long; the so-called giant trilo-
bite did not exceed 18 inches. The most powerful 
dynasts of the Silurian waters were the eurypterids 
(sea scorpions) which occasionally attained a 
length of 12 feet. Common in all Paleozoic periods 
were the nautiloids, related to the modern Nau-
tilus. The clamlike brachiopods, or lampshells, 
constitute nearly one-third of all Cambrian fossils, 
but are relatively inconspicuous today. The odd 
graptolites, colonial animals whose carbonaceous 
remains resemble pencil marks, attained the peak 
of their development in the Ordovician period and 
then faded away. No land animals are known from 
Cambrian and Ordovician times. Seascapes of the 
early Paleozoic are shown in ﬁ gure 16.5.
The bony ﬁ shes arose in the Devonian, the 
Age of Fishes. The lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ shes, or crossop-
terygians, had strong muscular ﬁ ns by which they 
crawled, in times of drought, from pool to pool 
along arid streambeds. The end of the Paleozoic 
era witnessed a decline in amphibians and the ini-
tiation of reptilian diversiﬁ cation.
Many of the prominent Paleozoic marine 
invertebrate groups became extinct or declined 
sharply in numbers before the Mesozoic era. Dur-
ing the Mesozoic, shelled ammonoids thrived in 
the seas and insects became prominent. Some of 
the ancient insects were enormous, like Megan-
euron, a form of dragonﬂ y with a wingspread of 
29 inches. Among vertebrates, the reptiles radi-
ated swiftly to dominate the land. At the close 
of the Mesozoic, the once successful marine 
ammonoids perished and the reptilian dynasty 
Figure 16.3 Luxuriant forests of giant trees with dense undergrowth ﬂ ourished in the Great Coal Age (Carboniferous 
period), between 350 million and 275 million years ago. The massive trunks at the left are the Lepidodendrids, an extinct group 
whose modern relatives include the small, undistinguished club mosses (Selaginella) and the ground pines (Lycopodium). The 
tall, slender tree with whorled leaves at the right is a Calamite, represented today by a less prominent descendant, the horsetail 
Equisetum. The fernlike plants bearing seeds (at the left) are seed ferns (Pteridosperms), which resembled ferns but were actu-
ally the ﬁ rst true seed-bearing plants (Gymnosperms).
(Courtesy of Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.)

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
203
collapsed, giving way to the birds and mammals. 
Insects have continued to thrive and have differ-
entiated into a staggering variety of species. Well 
over a million different species of insects have 
been described, and conservative estimates place 
the total number of living species today at 10 to 
14 million.
During the course of evolution, plant and ani-
mal groups interacted to each other’s advantage. 
There is little doubt, for example, that the rise 
and spread of ﬂ owering plants fostered the diver-
siﬁ cation and dispersal of insects. As ﬂ owering 
plants became less and less dependent on wind 
for pollination, a great variety of insects emerged 
as specialists in transporting pollen. The colors 
and fragrances of ﬂ owers evolved as adaptations 
to attract insects. Flowering plants also exerted 
a major inﬂ uence on the evolution of birds and 
mammals. Birds, which feed on seeds, fruits, and 
buds, evolved rapidly in intimate association with 
the ﬂ owering plants. During the Cenozoic era, the 
emergence of herbivorous mammals coincided 
with the widespread distribution of nutritious 
grasses over the plains. In turn, the herbivorous 
mammals furnished the setting for the evolution 
of carnivorous mammals. The interdependence 
between plants and animals continues to exist in 
nature today.
CONVERGENCE
The major pattern of the evolutionary panorama 
is divergence—the tendency of a population of 
organisms to become highly diversiﬁ ed when 
Periods
Millions
of years
ago
Eras
Porifera
Sponge
Lampshell
Coelenterate
Graptolite
Segmented
worm  
Ammonoid
Octopus
Straight-shelled
nautiloid
Gastropod
Insect
Crustacean
Trilobite
Eurypterid
Echinoderm
Vertebrate
Protozoa
Graptolithina
Coelenterata
Mollusca
Annelida
Arthropoda
Vertebrata
Echinodermata
Brachiopoda
225
185
135
2
400
430
480
600
350
275
75
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Carboniferous
Cambrian
Permian
Quaternary
Triassic
Tertiary
Jurassic
Cretaceous
Paleozoic
Mesozoic
Cenozoic
Figure 16.4 Historical record of animal life. Many of the invertebrate groups were already highly diversiﬁ ed and 
abundant in the Cambrian, the ﬁ rst period of the Paleozoic era, approximately 600 million years ago. The Paleozoic 
era is often called the Age of Invertebrates, with its multitude of nautiloids, eurypterids, and trilobites. Brachiopods 
with hinged valves were the commonest shellﬁ sh of the Paleozoic seas. In the Mesozic era, air-breathing insects and 
vertebrates, notably the widely distributed reptiles, held the center of the stage. The Mesozoic seas were populated 
with large, shelled ammonoids, now extinct. Warm-blooded vertebrates (birds and mammals) became prominent in 
the Cenozoic era, and the human species arrived on the scene in the closing stages of this era.

204 
Understanding Evolution
Figure 16.5 Highly diversi  ed assemblage of invertebrates of early Paleozoic seas. Top: Ordovician period. Large 
organism in foreground is a straight-shelled nautiloid. Other prominent forms are trilobites, massive corals, smaller nautiloids, and 
a snail. Bottom: Cambrian period. Conspicuous animals are the trilobite (center foreground), eurypterid (center background), 
and the jellyﬁ sh (left). Other animals include brachiopods, annelid worms, sea cucumber, and varied shelled forms. 
(Top, courtesy of Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago: bottom, courtesy of American Museum of Natural History, New York City.)

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
205
the population spreads over an area with varied 
habitats. The population can diverge into radi-
cally different lines, each modiﬁ ed for a speciﬁ c 
ecological role. Today, essentially similar habitats 
may be found in widely separate parts of the world. 
It would thus not be surprising to ﬁ nd that two 
groups of organisms, unrelated by descent but liv-
ing under similar environmental conditions in dif-
ferent geographic regions, can exhibit similarities 
in habits and general appearances. The tendency 
of one group of organisms to develop superﬁ -
cial resemblances to another group of different 
ancestry is called convergence (see chapter 13 
and 15). Stated another way, convergence is the 
result of similar selective forces causing com-
mon adaptive features of genetically independent 
origin. Contrarily, similarities of features in two 
groups due to a shared common genetic ancestry 
constitute homology.
Convergence is not an uncommon phenome-
non in nature (see ﬁ gs. 13.5, 16.6). Many unrelated, 
or remotely related, organisms have converged 
in appearance as a consequence of exploitation 
of habitats with similar ecological makeup. The 
relationship of convergence to adaptive radia-
tion should be evident; the former is the inevi-
table result of the countless series of adaptive 
radiations that have taken place in scattered parts 
of the globe. A striking example of convergence 
is afforded by the living marsupials of Australia 
(ﬁ g. 16.6).
The marsupials, or pouched mammals, are 
thought to have evolved in North America and 
expanded south, diverging from the placental 
mammals approximately 90 million years ago. In 
the late Cretaceous or early Tertiary periods (see 
table 16.1), marsupials began to migrate to Aus-
tralia and New Zealand from North America via 
Antarctica. Later, when Australia separated from 
Antarctica and moved northward, it became a 
completely isolated island, allowing for the inde-
pendent evolution of marsupials in Australia and 
New Zealand, free from competition from the more 
efﬁ cient placental mammals. In the absence of a 
land migration route between Asia and Australia, 
the latter land mass was inaccessible to practically 
all the placental mammals. On other continents the 
marsupials perished, save for the peculiar Ameri-
can opossum and their kin.
Imprisoned in Australia, the marsupials radi-
ated into a variety of habitats and open ecological 
niches. Several live in the open plains and grass-
lands; some are tree dwellers; others are burrow-
ers; and still others are gliders (ﬁ g. 16.6), Most 
kangaroos are terrestrial, but one variety, the 
 monkey-like kangaroo, is arboreal. The slow-mov-
ing nocturnal “teddy bear,” or koala, lives and feeds 
on Eucalyptus, the dominant tree in Australia. 
The bandicoot, with rabbit-like ears, has sturdy 
claws adapted for digging in the ground in search 
of insects. Marsupial moles live in desert burrows, 
and ﬂ ying phalangers have webs of loose skin 
stretched between the forelimbs and hind limbs. 
The ﬂ ying phalanger cannot actually ﬂ y but is 
adept at gliding. The impressive diversity of mar-
supials thus represents an admirable example of 
adaptive radiation.
The marsupials of Australia also vividly illus-
trate the phenomenon of convergence. They have 
ﬁ lled the ecological niches normally occupied by 
placental mammals in other parts of the world. The 
marsupial “mouse,” “mole,” “anteater,” “wolf,” ﬂ y-
ing phalanger, and groundhog-like wombat strik-
ingly resemble the true placental types—mouse, 
mole, anteater, wolf, ﬂ ying squirrel, and ground-
hog, respectively—in general appearance and in 
their ways of life (ﬁ g. 16.6).
It is interesting to note that a marsupial “bat” 
has not evolved in Australia. The opportunity was 
apparently denied by the invasion of placental 
bats from Asia, one of the few placental forms 
that managed, probably as a result of dispersal by 
ﬂ ight and winds, to reach Australia. With the com-
ing of humans, the secure existence of the mar-
supials has been threatened. Prehistoric humans 
introduced dogs, which ran wild (the dingoes); 
later human settlers brought a number of Euro-
pean placental mammals, such as the rabbit, hare, 
fox, cat, and  the Norway rat. Massive extinctions 
followed the arrival of these non-natives. One of 

206 
Understanding Evolution
Placentals
Marsupials
Wolf
(Canis)
Tasmanian wolf
(Thylacinus)
Ocelot
(Felis)
Flying squirrel
(Glaucomys)
Ground hog
(Marmota)
Wombat
(Phascolomys)
Anteater
(Myrmecophaga)
Anteater
(Myrmecobius)
Mole
(Talpa)
Mouse
(Mus)
Mouse
(Dasycercus)
Mole
(Notoryctes)
Flying phalanger
(Petaurus)
Native cat
(Dasyurus)
Figure 16.6 Phenotypic convergence is a common theme in evolution and is exempliﬁ ed by 
comparing the marsupial mammals of Australia to the placental mammals of the Americas.

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
207
the marsupials that succumbed to extinction in 
the twentieth-century is the marsupial “wolf,” the 
largest known carnivorous marsupial of the mod-
ern era.
THE PLAINS-DWELLING MAMMALS
When the great majority of land mammals ﬁ rst 
arose, South America was just as much an island 
continent as Australia. An impressively rich 
assemblage of mammals evolved in isolation in 
South America during the 70 million years that 
the continent remained separated from the rest 
of the world. Such bizarre placental mammals 
emerged as the giant ground sloth, the enormous 
toothless anteater, and the armored armadillo-like 
glyptodont. The predatory wolves that evolved in 
South America were not true carnivores; rather, 
they resembled the predaceous marsupials of 
Australia.
The spread of grasses across the ﬂ atlands of 
the Americas in the Tertiary period was asso-
ciated with the rapid expansion of herbivorous 
hoofed mammals (ungulates) in both continents. 
The crowd of grazing mammals that arose is 
so bewildering that it is difﬁ cult to call up a 
true picture of the immense variety of ungulate 
types. These archaic hoofed mammals are quite 
unfamiliar to most people; they have no vernac-
ular names and taxonomists have had to create 
special suborders for many of them. Selected 
examples of these curious hoofed mammals 
were shown earlier in  ﬁ gure 2.3 (chapter 2). 
These South American forms bear only super-
ﬁ cial resemblances to the hoofed mammals in 
other parts of the world. Toxodon superﬁ cially 
resembles a rhinoceros, Thoatherium has the 
appearance of a horse, Pyrotherium may be lik-
ened to an elephant, and Macrauchenia looks 
like a camel. The similarities in external appear-
ances signify convergence and not relationship 
by descent.
At the time the Isthmus of Panama rose from 
the depths, the land bridge across the Bering Straits 
lay completely dry. Large mammoths streamed in 
increasing numbers across the Bering Strait from 
Asia into North America during the Pleistocene. 
The mammoths, particularly the 10-foot high 
woolly mammoth, dominated the American plains. 
North America was also the recipient of some of the 
South American mammals. Among the immigrants 
from south of the border were Boreostracon, a giant 
glyptodont, encased in armor and an offshoot of the 
armadillo line, and Megatherium, a great ground 
sloth that weighed more than a modern elephant 
(ﬁ g. 16.7).
The South American hoofed mammals, 
evolving independently of mammalian types in 
North America, thrived for many  millions of 
years. Then the water gap between the Americas 
was closed. The Isthmus of Panama rose above 
the sea, establishing a land corridor linking 
the two continents. A horde of northern invad-
ers inﬁ ltrated through this land bridge. Preda-
tory carnivores, such as saber-toothed tigers 
and wolves, entered South America from the 
north, as did progressive herbivorous ungulates, 
among which were tapirs, peccaries, llamas, and 
deer. All of the native South American hoofed 
mammals, without exception, were driven into 
extinction. South America also became deprived 
of its indigenous variants of ground sloths and 
glyptodonts. It then later lost several of the 
immigrants, notably the mastodons and saber-
toothed tigers. 
EVOLUTIONARY STABILITY
Some types of organisms have not changed appre-
ciably in untold millions of years. The opossum 
has survived almost unchanged since late Creta-
ceous, some 75 or more million years ago. The 
horseshoe crab, Limulus, is not very different from 
fossils uncovered some 500 million years ago. 
The maidenhair, or ginkgo, tree of the  Chinese 
temple gardens differs little from its ancestors 
200 million years back. The treasured ginkgo has 
probably existed on Earth longer than any other 

208 
Understanding Evolution
investigators, it seems implausible that 
natural selection could be so conservative 
as to continue to favor the same pheno-
type for many millions of years.
MASS EXTINCTION 
The multitude of different kinds of present-
day organisms is impressive and by some 
estimates far exceeds 10 million species. 
Yet modern, the biological diversity is 
only a  fraction of the tremendous array 
of organisms of earlier periods. In the 
history of life, extinction has been the 
rule and not the exception, and it has 
punctuated Earth’s history since life ﬁ rst 
arose. A paradox of evolution is that 
even though more than 99 percent of 
all organisms that ever lived are extinct, 
there are today more different kinds of 
organisms than at any time in the his-
tory of the Earth (ﬁ g.16.8). This is due to 
repeated cycles of extinction and replace-
ment (see chapter 13). Some extinction 
events have been massive, while others 
have been smaller in scale. As we saw 
in  chapter 13, a sequence of massive 
adaptive radiations typically follows 
mass extinction events. In this way, ecological 
niches vacated due to extinction are reoccupied 
as survivors adapt and diversify. Historically, 
each undulation of mass extinction and adaptive 
radiation happened over a period of a million to 
several millions of years.
In most cases, the reason why an individ-
ual species went extinct is unknown and likely 
unknowable, and the intensity of species extinction 
is highly variable across time. Background extinc-
tions occurring at a relatively constant rate account 
for the majority of extinct species and occurred in 
the setting of natural selection and biological phe-
nomenon. Only those species that can continue to 
adapt to changing environmental conditions avoid 
extinction.
present tree. Darwin called the ginkgo “a living 
fossil.”
Long-standing stability of organization seems 
antithetical to the concept of evolution. Neverthe-
less, the notion that an established species may 
be rather stable is not completely at variance 
with conventional evolutionary thought. Long 
periods of relatively little change may be the out-
come of stabilizing selection (see chapter 6), in 
which the typical members of a population are 
selectively favored relative to the extremes. In 
other words, the “status quo” is maintained by 
selection after an ecological niche in a habitat 
has been successfully ﬁ lled. Admittedly, to some 
Woolly Mammoth
Saber-toothed Tiger
Glyptodont
Ground Sloth
Figure 16.7 Prominent land mammals that occupied the ﬂ at-
lands of the Americas in the Tertiary period.

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
209
periods had profound consequences. Although 
many things can result in the extinction of an indi-
vidual species, it takes a cataclysmic event such as 
global volcanism or an asteroid strike to alter the 
entire biosphere. In each instance, the consequences 
were greatest among species, followed by genera 
(groups of species), and then by families (groups of 
genera), and no phyla were completely eliminated. 
Some authors have argued that from the point of 
view of evolution, extinction may be a constructive 
phenomenon, eliminating organisms that are most 
susceptible to environmental stress.
HOLOCENE EXTINCTION
In addition to the above, a sixth, more controver-
sial mass extinction event is the Holocene extinc-
tion event—the ongoing mass extinction of species 
occurring on planet Earth. Estimates vary on the 
number of species that have become extinct in the 
By contrast, mass extinctions occur over a 
comparatively short length of geological time and 
are due to abrupt catastrophic events such as vol-
canic eruptions, climatic changes, and changes in 
sea levels. Unlike other extinction events, mass 
extinctions occur randomly, without regard to the 
adaptive values of traits or of organisms. In gen-
eral, less is known about background extinctions 
than is known about mass extinctions. As shown in 
ﬁ gure 16.8, the rate of speciation has been higher 
than the rate of background extinctions over most 
of the last half billion years.
After the rise of animal diversity dubbed the 
Cambrian explosion (roughly 530 million years 
ago), there followed a series of mass extinction 
events that punctuated Earth’s history. Especially 
signiﬁ cant is what are referred to as the ﬁ ve major 
mass extinction events, which occurred at or toward 
the end of the Ordovician, Devonian, Permian, Tri-
assic, and Cretaceous periods. (ﬁ g. 16.8, table 16.2). 
Each of these ﬁ ve massive extinction events or 
Figure 16.8 The diversity of life has increased over geological time despite the periodic 
declines caused by massive extinction events. Although an estimated 99 percent of all species have 
gone extinct, there is a higher level of biological diversity today than at any other time in the history 
of the Earth.
CAMBRIAN
ORDOVICIAN
SILURIAN
DEVONIAN
PERMIAN
TRIASSIC
JURASSIC
TERTIAKY
CRETACEOUS
CARBONIFEROUS
800
600
400
200
0
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Millions of Years Ago
Number of Families

210 
Understanding Evolution
Mass
When
Victims
Possible
Extinction
(million years 
Causalties
Cause(s)
Event
before present)
Holocene 
Recent
Megafauna,
all taxa
Likely impact of human invasion of non-African continents
Human population explosion and associates impacts—
habitat destruction, invasive species, etc.
Cretaceous-
Teritary
65 million
50 % of marine genera
76 % of marine species
18 % of land vertebrates inc. 100 % 
of dinosaurs.
Possible asteroid hitting Yucatan
Siberian volcanos
Global cooling
Late 
Triassic
199–214 
25 % of all families
75 % of all species
50 % of marine genera
76 % of marine species
End of mammal-like reptiles
Little known
Possible comet or asteroid impacts
Sea level decline; oceanic anoxia, (low dissolved oxygen) increased 
rainfall
Permian-
Triassic
251
53 % of marine families
84 % of marine genera
70 % of all land species
 (plants, insects and vertebrates)
96 % of all species
Possible asteroid
Global volcanism
Dropping sea levels
Oceanic anoxia (low dissolved oxygen)
Late 
Devonian
364
22 % of marine families
57 % of marine genera
83% of marine species
Unknown
Possible asteroid or comet impact
Oceanic anoxia (low dissolved oxygen)
Possible glaciation followed by deadly temperature declines
Ordovician-
Silurian
439
25 % of marine families
61 % of marine genera
 85 % of marine species
Glaciation leading to decline in ocean levels
Continental movements
TABLE 16.2 Six Major Mass Extinction Pulses Since the Cambrian Explosion

100
Africa
50
0
100
Australia
Percent
50
0
100
North America
50
0
100
Madagascar-New Zealand
50
0
100,000
10,000
Years ago
1,000
100
Figure 16.9 Pleistocene overkill. As humans migrated across the globe, the 
large mammals and ﬂ ightless birds were the ﬁ rst to go extinct. In Africa, where 
humans and animal life evolved side by side, the extinction impacts was diminished.
 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
211
(see ﬁ gs. 15.9 and 17.14). As humans spread out 
of Africa, wherever they landed they annihilated 
the large mammals and birds, who had no previ-
ous experience with our kind. Sometimes called 
the Pleistocene overkill, the megafauna, large 
mammals and ﬂ ightless birds, vanished within 
1,000 years of human colonization of each of the 
world’s continents (ﬁ g. 16.9).
past 40,000 years as humans spread out of Africa 
onto other continents (ﬁ g. 16.9). The causes of the 
most current pulse are many and complex, but all 
revolve around the exponential increase in the human 
population (ﬁ g. 16.10). The Holocene extinction is 
viewed as having three major waves or pulses.
The ﬁ rst wave is coupled with the spread of 
modern humans out of Africa and across the globe 

3
0
 
Y
e
a
rs
5
0
 
Y
e
a
r
s
8
0
 
Y
e
a
r
s
2
0
0
 
Y
e
a
r
s
1
,
6
4
9
 
Y
e
a
r
s
2.0
Billion
1.1
Billion
½
Billion
¼
Billion
4.5
Billion
7.2
Billion
1850
1650
1930
1980
2010
1 AD
Figure 16.10 The global human population has been increasing at an expo-
nential rate. According to population projections, the world population is likely to con-
tinue growing until at least 2050.
212 
Understanding Evolution
time habitat destruction quickened and the oceans, 
continents and islands all saw signiﬁ cant declines 
in species. In the oceans, the marine mammals 
and large ﬁ sh were impacted; on continents, the 
remaining megafauna and many freshwater taxa 
were affected; on islands the casualties included 
birds, mammals, and tortoises.
The third most recent wave of extinctions in 
the Holocene began in the mid-twentieth century 
and continues to the present and is most directly 
Animals not hunted to extinction were led to 
indirect extinction as a consequence of habitat and 
ecological disruptions. Similar scenarios played 
out on each continent as humans came to inhabit 
them. Because it was the homeland of our spe-
cies and humans and the large mammals evolved 
together on the African plains, Africa was least 
affected (ﬁ g. 16.9).
The second Holocene extinction pulse is 
linked to the spread of Europeans, during which 

 
CHAPTER 16 History of Life 
213
extinction is occurring at an accelerated rate 
(tens of thousands of years).The rate of extinc-
tions has been increasing, the closer to the pres-
ent one looks, and is higher today than at any 
time in the past.
linked to the exponential explosion of the human 
population (ﬁ g. 16.10) and associated widespread 
habitat loss and alteration. All taxa have been 
affected by this most recent mass extinction pulse.
Compared to other mass extinctions, which 
occurred over millions of years, the present mass 

214
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
The human species is the outcome of the 
same natural forces that have shaped all animal life. 
As relatively recent arrivals on the Earth, humans 
represent one of the latest adaptive advances in the 
animal kingdom. We are clearly part of the fabric 
of nature and have ancestral ties with other ani-
mals. There is almost universal unanimity that our 
closest relatives are the apes. The line leading ulti-
mately to humans diverged from the ape branch 
during Tertiary times. There are several candidates 
among Tertiary fossil apes that qualify as ances-
tors of the human species. One often hears stated, 
hesitatingly and perhaps in the form of an apology, 
that we are not really closely related to the apes but 
merely share a very distant ancestry with them. By 
indirection, the idea is conveyed that our remote 
generalized ancestor would not be at all apelike. 
This is sheer deception. There is simply no escap-
ing the fact that our very early predecessors had 
many features in common with the apes.
PRIMATE RADIATION
The Order Primates, to which humans belong, 
underwent adaptive radiation in Cenozoic times, 
approximately 85 million years ago. The primates 
are primarily tree dwellers; only humans are fully 
adapted for life on the ground. Many of the note-
worthy characteristics of the primates evolved as 
specializations for an arboreal mode of life. Depth 
perception is important to a tree-living animal; the 
majority of the primates are unique in possess-
ing binocular, or stereoscopic vision, wherein the 
visual ﬁ elds of the two eyes overlap. The hands 
evolved as prehensile organs for grasping objects, 
an adaptation later useful to humans for manipulat-
ing tools. The use of the hands to bring objects to 
the nose (for smelling) and to the mouth (for tast-
ing) was associated with a reduction of the snout, 
or muzzle, and a reduction of the olfactory area 
of the brain. Relative to other animals, primates 
generally have a poor sense of smell. Closely asso-
ciated with enhanced visual acuity and increased 
dexterity of the hands was the marked expansion 
of the brain, particularly the visual and memory 
areas. Progressive enlargement of the brain cul-
minated, in humans, in the development of higher 
mental faculties.
The primate stock arose and differentiated 
from small, chisel-toothed, insectivorous ancestors, 
EMERGENCE OF THE 
HUMAN SPECIES
17

 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
215
perhaps as long as 85 million years ago. The Asi-
atic tree shrew, Tupaia, an agile tree climber that 
feeds on insects and fruits in tropical forests, sur-
vives as a model for the ancestor of the primates. 
Most authorities place the tree shrew in the mam-
malian Order Insectivora, while a few hold the 
view that the tree shrew is a primitive, generalized 
member of the primates. The important consider-
ation is that the modern tree shrew bears likeness 
to the common ancestor of primates.
Primates are generally divided into two major 
groupings or suborders, the Prosimii (prosimians) 
and the Anthropoidea (anthropoids) (ﬁ g. 17.1). 
The prosimians are arboreal and largely nocturnal 
predators; they include such tropical forms as the 
lemurs, the lorises, and the tarsiers. As adaptations 
to an arboreal-nocturnal niche, these prosimians 
evolved large, forwardly placed eyes and strong, 
grasping hands and feet. The lemurs are largely 
conﬁ ned to the island of Madagascar, the lorises 
are found principally in eastern Asia, and the tarsi-
ers are limited to southeastern Asia. The tarsiers 
represent the most advanced group of prosimians 
and may be said to foreshadow the higher primate 
trends of the Anthropoidea.
The more advanced primates, the anthropoids, 
are composed of the New World monkeys, the Old 
World monkeys, the apes, and humans. All are able 
to sit in an upright position, and thus the hands are 
free to investigate and manipulate the environment. 
The monkeys are normally quadrupedal, running 
on all fours along branches of trees. Often referred 
to as the lesser apes, the gibbons and the siamangs 
habitually use their arms for hand-over-hand swing-
ing in a motion known as brachiation. The great 
apes (orangutan, chimpanzee, and gorilla) can 
maintain prolonged semi-erect postures. When on 
the ground, the chimpanzee and gorilla are “knuckle-
walkers,” the weight being placed on the knuckles 
of the hands rather than on the extended ﬁ ngers. 
The chimpanzee and the gorilla regularly travel 
quadrupedally on the ground. Humans alone are 
specialized for erect bipedal locomotion.
In 2009 a 47-million-year-old fossil, Dar-
winius maisillae, nicknamed Ida, was proclaimed 
as a transitional fossil link between the prosim-
ian and the anthropoid lineages and therefore 
could be ancestral to monkeys, apes, and humans 
(ﬁ g. 17.2). This controversial Eocene specimen 
was named to commemorate the 200th anniver-
sary of Charles Darwin’s birth and the ancestral 
Messel rain forest in Germany where the speci-
men was discovered. A juvenile specimen, Ida 
is a remarkably complete fossil with most of 
its skeleton, the outline of its soft body parts, 
and even the contents of the digestive track all 
intact. In the branching bush of the primate lin-
eage, Ida would be near the base, although her 
precise location on the primate tree is conten-
tious and awaits further study. Interestingly, Ida 
died at the fringe of a volcanic lake along with 
a host of other creatures that succumbed to the 
perils at the margins of a volcano. It is too early 
to tell whether Ida will join the ranks of Lucy 
(ﬁ gs. 17.7 and 17.8) as an enduring icon of pri-
mate evolution.
Biochemical and genetic studies reveal that the 
two species of chimpanzees (the common chim-
panzee, Pan troglodytes, and the bonobo—once 
called the pygmy—chimpanzee, Pan paniscus) 
and the two species of gorillas (western Gorilla 
gorilla and eastern Gorilla grauer) bear a special 
evolutionary relationship to humans. A wealth of 
molecular data (see chapter 15) reveals that the 
African great apes (chimpanzee and gorilla) are 
more closely related to humans than they are to 
Asian apes (the orangutans). Modern taxonomists 
ﬁ rmly maintain that the molecular ﬁ ndings should 
be reﬂ ected in our classiﬁ cation scheme by plac-
ing the African apes in the family of humans (fam-
ily Hominidae). 
Higher primate taxonomy is fiercely debat-
ed, always in a state of flux and never agreed 
to by all taxonomists. By one proposed revi-
sion (fig. 17.1), all of the hominoids (living 
and extinct members of the superfamily Homi-
noidea) are in the two families, the Hominidae 
and the Hylobatidae. The family Hominidae is 
then divided into two subfamilies, the Hom-
ininae, which includes three tribes, the tribe 

Old World
Monkeys
New World
Monkeys
Lemurs and
lorises
Tarsiers
Gibbons
Orangutans
Gorillas
Chimpanzees
Humans
Subfamily Ponginae
Tribe Gorillini
Subfamily
Homininae
Family
Hominidae
Family Hylobatidae
Millions of years ago
Tribe Hominini
Tribe Panini
Hominoids
Anthropoids
Prosimians
Arboreal insectivorous ancestor
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Figure 17.1 The adaptive radiation and classi  cation of the living primates from a 
basal stock of small insect-eating placental mammals. Although the common ancestor of the mod-
ern primate dates from around 85 million years ago, the major adaptive radiation of the primates 
and other mammals coincides with the disappearance of the dinosaurs roughly 65 million years ago.
216 
Understanding Evolution
Gorillini (the gorillas in the genus Gorilla), the 
tribe Panini (the chimps in the genus Pan), and 
the tribe Hominini (the humans in the genus 
Homo). The other subfamily is the Ponginae 
(the orangutans in the genus Pongo). Gibbons 
(in the genus Hylobates) and siamangs (in the 
genus Symphalangus) form the second homi-
noid family, the Hylobatidae. Whether this 
reflects the true state of affairs awaits the next 
revision.

Figure 17.2 At nearly 95 percent complete, Ida is one of 
the most complete fossil primates ever discovered. Private 
collectors unearthed Ida in 1983 and split the fossil, selling it 
in two separate parts. Twenty-ﬁ ve years later, it was restored 
and recognized as a transitional basal primate.
© Mike Segar/Reuters/Corbis
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
217
ADAPTIVE RADIATION OF HUMANS
The morphological differences between humans 
and apes relate mainly to locomotory habits and 
brain growth. Humans have a fully upright posture 
and gait and an enlarged brain. The cranial capac-
ity of a modern ape rarely exceeds 600 cubic cen-
timeters, while the average human cranial capacity 
is 1,350 cubic centimeters. The mastery of varied 
environments by humans has been largely the 
result of superior intelligence gradually acquired 
throughout evolution.
It may be difﬁ cult to envision humans other 
than as they exist today. Nevertheless, it should 
not be imagined that fossil specimens of the early 
Pleistocene epoch possessed the attributes of con-
temporary forms. Present-day humans are cer-
tainly different from their predecessors, in much 
the same manner that any modern form of life is 
different from its forerunner. It is important to 
recognize that there have been different kinds of 
human ancestors. The evolutionary process of 
adaptive radiation produced a family of human 
ancestors in much the same way that other groups 
of organisms became highly diversiﬁ ed.
Our present-day species—Homo sapiens—
is the sole surviving species of human. Until 
recently, we conceived of the human lineage as a 
tidy, straightforward succession of one species to 
the next, leading eventually to modern Homo sapi-
ens. We scarcely permitted ourselves to evoke the 
proposition that two or more species could have 
overlapped in place or time. The saga of human 
evolution increasingly suggests that there were 
coexisting species of human ancestors throughout 
most of our evolutionary past.
FORERUNNERS OF THE GREAT APES
One of the best known of the early Miocene Afri-
can hominoids is the fossils in the genus Procon-
sul (ﬁ g. 17.2). The name Proconsul, which literally 
means “ before (pro) Consul” comes from a famous 
chimpanzee at the London Zoo named “Consul.” 
Proconsul is believed to have been an arboreal 
quadruped, weighing 10 to 40 kg (roughly 20 to 
80 lb), and like the modern apes it lacked a tail. 
The specimen shown in ﬁ gure 17.3 is that of a 
small juvenile that weighed less than 20 kg (44 lb). 
Proconsul was a forest dweller, and it became 
extinct in the early Miocene.
The most famous of the late Miocene apes 
has been classiﬁ ed in the genus Dryopithecus, the 
oak-ape, so called because of the presence of oak 
leaves in the fossil beds. Known in more informal 
terms as the dryopithecines, these primitive oak-
apes were a relatively successful group of 30 or 
more species that ﬂ ourished for at least 10 million 
years, mostly in Europe. At that time, the Arabian 

Figure 17.3 Skeletal reconstruction of Proconsul, an early 
Miocene ape. Dark color indicates fossil remains.
218 
Understanding Evolution
peninsula joined Africa and Eurasia together, and 
the dryopithecines ranged widely throughout the 
two great land masses. Then, after their remarkable 
spread and divergence, nearly all of these early apes 
became extinct.
Dryopithecus may not be far removed from 
the common stock from which apes and humans 
arose. Although primarily a tree dweller, Dryo-
pithecus apparently wandered on the ground and 
proﬁ ted from the vegetable foods in the open grass-
lands (ﬁ g. 17.4). The transition from tree dwelling 
to ground living might well have ﬁ rst appeared at 
this time. The Miocene epoch was characterized by 
expanding populations of varied species of mon-
keys and apes in the European and African forests. 
Population pressure probably contributed to the 
departure of oak-apes from the forest fringes to the 
savanna grasslands. These pioneer ground-dwelling 
apes apparently were able to establish themselves 
in the open bushy plains by subsisting mainly on 
plant foods and largely avoiding confrontations 
with the savanna carnivores. But as the forests 
continued to recede and yield to the grasslands, 
the dryopithecines became extinct. Some spe-
cies of this ape may have evolved into the 
still-surviving orangutan, gorilla, and chim-
panzee. Other Miocene apes include Pliopith-
ecus, Sivapithecus, and Gigantopithecus.
Gigantopithecus was probably the larg-
est primate that ever lived. Although there is 
considerable disagreement on how large this 
creature was, males may have been nearly 
3 meters tall (over 9 feet) and may have 
weighed as much as 250 to 450 kg (roughly 550 
to 1000 lb). It is believed that Gigantopithecus 
was highly sexually dimorphic, with females 
being much smaller than males. Size is difﬁ -
cult to project, as this fossil ape is known only 
from several jaw fragments and over a thou-
sand teeth, which were discovered in China 
in the mid-twentieth century. Like the modern 
panda, it is believed that Gigantopithecus’s 
primary food source was bamboo. The ﬁ rst 
remains of this mammoth primate were found 
in a Hong Kong apothecary shop, where the fossil-
ized teeth and bone, known as “dragon teeth,” were 
ground into medicinal powder. Gigantopithecus 
survived until the Pleistocene, making them con-
temporaries of members of the genus Homo. For 
this reason and its immense size, myths and fables 
of Yeti (the Abominable Snowman), Sasquatch, and 
Big Foot, all of which have no basis in fact, typi-
cally reference Gigantopithecus.
The modern apes are intimately tied to the 
steadily shrinking forest habitats and are likely to 
face imminent extinction in the wild. The popula-
tion numbers of the great apes have dwindled, in 
part, because the apes have failed to adapt to niches 
beyond the humid tropical forests. Contrarily, many 
monkey species have thrived as they have success-
fully adapted to diverse habitats.
EARLY HOMINOIDS
The earliest common ancestor of the great apes 
and humans dates to about 8 million years ago. 

Figure 17.4 Reconstruction of Dryopithecus 
aﬁ canus, an apelike type that prowled East Africa 20 
to 25 million years ago. This pongid apparently led an 
agile life both on and off the ground. 
(Painting by Maurice Wilson; by permission of the Trustees of the 
British Museum—Natural History.)
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
219
matter of conjecture that awaits the discovery of 
other fossils from the same time period. Because 
Toumai dates to or before the time when the great 
apes and the line leading to humans diverged, it 
is not surprising that Toumai has a mixture of ape 
and human characteristics.
Another recent fossil ﬁ nd is Orrorin tugenen-
gis, sometimes referred to as Millennium Man, 
which was found in the Tugen Hills of Kenya 
in 2001. Orrorin is currently the second oldest 
relative of humans, and its fossils date to around 
6 million years ago. Known from roughly a dozen 
fossils from several individuals, the chimp-sized 
Orrorin was likely to have walked bipedally when 
it was not climbing trees. Whether Orrorin was an 
ape or a hominid remains uncertain, but regardless, 
it is an important fossil ﬁ nd that is helping extend 
our knowledge of human and ape evolution.
Ardipithecus (meaning “ground ape”) is the 
genus name of two species (ramidus and kadabba) 
of basal hominoids (living and extinct humans 
and apes) that lived in what is now Ethiopia 
between 4.4 and 5.8 million years ago. A. kadabba 
was found in the Awash region of Ethiopia, and 
A. ramidus comes from a nearby site named 
Aramis. Both are named as though they are 
at the base of the human lineage; kadabba is 
Afar for “basal family ancestor,” and ramidus 
is also Afar (and means “root”). Members of 
this genus are ancestral (ﬁ g. 17.5) to the aus-
tralopithecines (members of the genus Austral-
opithecus) described in the next section on the 
“Australopithecines”. Ardopithecus ramidus was 
discovered in 1994 by a team lead by Univer-
sity of California anthropologist Tim D. White. 
Ramidus dates from about 4.4 million years ago, 
and when ﬁ rst discovered it was thought to be 
a member of the australopithecines. Although 
its name (“ground ape root”) suggests that this 
species is at the base of the divergence between 
humans and the African apes, we now believe 
that this fossil is the oldest human ancestor. 
The older Ardopithecus species, A. kadabba, was 
ﬁ rst discovered in 1997 and lived around 5.8 to 
5.3 million years ago. Kadabba is notable for its 
Four recently discovered fossils shed light on 
the early ancestry and descent of the hominoids 
(ﬁ g. 17.5). 
Toumai (meaning “hope of life” in the local 
Tebou language) is more properly known by the 
scientiﬁ c name Sahelanthropus tchadensis and 
was discovered in 2001 in the Central  African 
country of Chad. Toumai is known from a skull 
that dates to approximately 6 to 7 million years 
ago and may be the oldest human ancestor. 
Because only the skull is available for study, 
there is an ongoing debate as to whether Toumai 
was bipedal. Whether Toumai is a direct descen-
dant of humans or an ape ancestor is also a 

Holocene
Miocene
(Toumai)
(Lucy)
Pliocene
Pleistocene
H. sapiens
P. robustus
P. boisei
Paranthropus aethiopicus
A. afarensis
A. africanus
H. ergaster
H. habilis
Homo rudolfensis
Kenyanthropus platyops
Australopithecus 
anamensis
Orrorin tugenensis
Ardipithecus kadabba
Sahelanthropus tchadensis
Ardipithecus 
ramidus
H. erectus
H. floresiensis
HOMINIDS
To Chimpanzees
Millions Years Ago
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
H. heidelbergensis
H. neanderthalensis
Figure 17.5 Human Ancestors: Evolutionary and historical relationship between fossil human ancestors. Throughout 
much of human fossil history, more than one hominid lived contemporaneously.
220 
Understanding Evolution

 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
221
1930s by the late Robert Broom, a Scottish pale-
ontologist. Adult skulls of Australopithecus were 
dug out from caves in Sterkfontein, Kromdraai, 
and Swartkrans in South Africa. The adult skulls 
conﬁ rmed the hominid anatomical pattern seen in 
the juvenile Taung cranium. The several new fos-
sil forms were originally given different names. 
However, in recent years it has become custom-
ary to refer to the South African fossils collec-
tively as the australopithecines. They were short, 
four to ﬁ ve feet in height, with a small ape-size 
brain (cranial capacity range of 450 to 600 cubic 
centimeters). Nonetheless, the australopithecines 
stood upright, walked bipedally, and dwelt in 
open country (ﬁ g. 17.6). These circumstances 
prominent canine teeth, a feature it shares with 
the older Sahelantropus and Orrorin fossils. Not-
withstanding its prominent shearing canine teeth, 
kadabba’s overall dental pattern is intermediate 
between humans and the African apes, although 
most of its dental features are more apelike than 
human-like.
In the fossil record that follows Ardipith-
ecus, Sahelanthropus and Orrorin are members of 
the genus Austalopithecus.
AUSTRALOPITHECINES: 
THE FIRST HOMINIDS
The australopithecine stage is a relatively long 
phase of adaptive evolution, in which several 
species of early hominids apparently coexisted 
(ﬁ gs. 17.5 and 17.9). The australopithecine era 
commenced 4 million years ago and ended about 
1 million years ago. At least six species are cur-
rently recognized falling into two main groups, 
the robust australopithecines (Paranthropus robus-
tus, P. boisei, and P. aethiopicus) and the gracile 
 australopithecines (Australopithecus anamensis, 
A. afarensis, and A. africanus).
In 1924 the Australian anatomist Raymond 
A. Dart announced the discovery of an unusual 
small skull from a Pleistocene limestone quarry 
near the village of Taung in the Transvaal region 
of South Africa. The fossilized skull was that of 
a child of about six years. The little Taung skull 
bears some resemblance to the skull of a young 
chimpanzee, but many of its components, notably 
the teeth, show pronounced afﬁ nities to humans. 
Certain striking features of the Taung skull suggest 
that the child had walked upright. The remarkable 
skull was designated by the formidable name of 
Australopithecus africanus (austral, for “south,” 
pithekos, for “ape,” and africanus, for “from 
Africa”). Dart was conﬁ dent that Australopithecus 
was related to the ancestral stock of humans rather 
than to the great apes.
Dart’s declaration, which several scientists 
initially derided, was fortiﬁ ed by ﬁ ndings in the 
Figure 17.6 Reconstruction of Australopithecus, 
a hominid of about 4 million years ago who stood 
upright, walked bipedally, and dwelt in open country. 
(Painting by Maurice Wilson; by permission of the Trustees of the 
British Museum—Natural History.)

222 
Understanding Evolution
dietary change to carnivorism was one of the more 
important steps in transforming a bipedal ape into 
a tool-making and tool-using human. Current 
thinking does not place A. africanus in the direct 
line of ancestry of humans (ﬁ gs. 17.5 and 17.9).
The South African ﬁ ndings have been supple-
mented and extended by fossil discoveries by the 
late Louis Leakey and his wife Mary at the 25-mile-
long Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Olduvai Gorge is 
situated in a volcanically active region in eastern 
Africa and has invaluable sediments of lava from 
prehistoric volcanic activity. Because lava con-
tains argon 40, the daughter isotope of potassium 
40, the rate of decomposition from potassium to 
argon permits an accurate dating of the Olduvai 
layers. Like a miniature Grand Canyon, the sides 
of Olduvai Gorge display different strata laid bare 
by the cutting of an ancient river.
In an exposed stratum of the gorge, the Leakeys 
in 1959 uncovered bony fragments of a robust aus-
tralopithecine, characterized by extremely massive 
jaws. This heavy-jawed fossil form with enormous 
teeth was called Zinjanthropus, or the Nutcracker 
Man. Fossil remains of Zinjanthropus were found 
in strata judged, by the potassium-argon dating 
method (instead of the conventional uranium-lead 
technique), to be about 1.8 million years old. Most 
scientists today agree that Zinjanthropus is essen-
tially an eastern African variety of Australopithe-
cus robustus. Zinjanthropus has more exaggerated, 
or coarser, features than A. robustus and warrants 
recognition as a separate species, Australopithecus 
boisei, and thus represents yet another species in 
the australopithecine complex.
One might suppose that an older, as yet 
undiscovered australopithecine (from Pliocene 
sediments) was at the base of the hominid lin-
eage. The candidate for such an ancestor was 
thought to be the fossil hominid recovered in 
1974 by a team led by the anthropologist Don-
ald C. Johanson, now at the Institute of Human 
Origins at Arizonia State University. The remains 
of this hominid were found at a formation in 
the Hadar region of Ethiopia, a formation that 
has been dated at 3.2 to 3.5 million years ago. 
nullify the popular view that humans were intel-
ligent animals when they ﬁ rst came down out of 
the trees. It seems clear that erect bipedal locomo-
tion on the ground preceded the development of a 
large complex brain. Moreover, the upright pos-
ture conﬂ icts with popular iconography that typi-
cally illustrates a hunched-over apelike ancestor 
that becomes progressively upright over a stretch 
of time.
The australopithecines are decidedly early 
representatives of the hominid lineage. However, 
it is not clear which of the australopithecines 
occupies a prominent place in the direct ances-
try of humans. The initial fossil ﬁ ndings fostered 
the notion that there were at least two distinct 
species of australopithecines—the light-jawed, 
slender (“gracile”) Australopithecus africanus 
and the heavy-jawed, robust Australopithecus 
robustus (now usually referred to as Paranthro-
pus robustus; paranthropos, meaning “parallel to 
man”, a name given to this fossil by Dart) with 
extremely large grinding molars. Africanus was 
not over four feet tall and weighed no more than 
60 pounds, whereas the robustus species was a 
foot taller and at least 30 pounds heavier. Ecolo-
gists have observed that when two contemporane-
ous species occupy the same habitat, the potential 
competitors become differentially specialized to 
exploit different components of the local environ-
ment. Thus, direct competition for food resources 
is minimized and the two species are able to coex-
ist. It is thought that Australopithecus africanus 
increasingly supplemented its diet with animal 
food. The dietary difference is supported by the 
ﬁ nding that A. africanus had smaller molars than 
A. robustus.
If, as appears likely, the two (or more) 
Australopithecus species did coexist at the same 
time in the same region, then only one of the two 
could have been the progenitor of a more modern 
species of hominid. Paleontologists had earlier 
suggested that the vegetarian A. robustus per-
ished without leaving any descendants, and that 
A. africanus was the forebear of a more advanced 
hominid. This was based on the assumption that a 

Figure 17.7 “Lucy,” a small adult female 
(less than 4 feet tall) who lived close to 3 million 
years ago. This famous skeleton was discovered 
by the paleoanthropologist Donald Johanson, 
and placed in a new species, Australopithecus 
afarensis.
© Dave Einsel/Stringer/Getty
Figure 17.8 Comparison of skeletal features of a modern 
human to a reconstruction of the famous Australopithecus afaren-
sis, “Lucy” (ﬁ g 17.7). The fossil components are shown in black. The 
reconstruction is based on mirror images of known parts of the 
skeleton and on other fossils.
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
223
weighed less than 66 pounds (30 Kg), and died 
when she was in her early twenties (ﬁ gs. 17.7, 
and 17.8). Other Hadar individuals are relatively 
large; the variation perhaps reﬂ ects differences 
due to sex. Parenthetically, it may be noted that an 
analysis of Lucy’s pelvis casts doubt on whether 
she was a female!
In 1978 Mary Leakey discovered a series of 
footprints made by human ancestors 3.6 million 
years ago at Laetoli in northern Tanzania. Appar-
ently the nearby volcano Sadiman experienced a 
mild eruption followed by a rainstorm just before 
The fossil beds at Hadar have yielded a remarkably 
rich paleontological collection. The constellation 
of fossils includes a social group of 13 individu-
als, a group that has come to be known as “the 
First Family.” The family members apparently 
died together at one spot. The most complete adult 
skeleton uncovered is the now-famous female 
hominid called “Lucy.” Her name was borrowed 
from the Beatles’ song “Lucy in the Sky with 
Diamonds.” She was only 3.5 to 4.0 feet tall, 

Paranthropus boisei
Paranthropus 
robustus
A. africanus
A. garhi
Homo 
habilis
H. erectus
H. ergaster
H. heidelbergensis
H. neanderthalensis
Homo
sapiens
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Millions of years ago (mya)
Time
4.0
5.0
Ardipithecine
ancestor
(bipedalism)
Australopithecus
anamensis
A. afarensis 
(“Lucy”)
Figure 17.9 Diversity in the human family. Several hominids lived contemporaneously with one another throughout 
much of human history, but only one species, modern Homo sapiens, survived to modern times.
224 
Understanding Evolution
individuals provide evidence for two distinct spe-
cies. If true, this would push the search for a com-
mon ancestor back even farther in time.
As paleontologists continue to search for 
fossils, new ﬁ nds continue to emerge and the re-
examination of older specimens calls for further 
revisions. Enter Australopithecus anamensis, the 
oldest of the australopithecines, dated to about 
4 million years ago. Although the ﬁ rst fossil was 
discovered in 1965, it was not appreciated for what 
it was until 1989 and was not assigned its current 
name until 1995. Anamensis was named for the 
Turkana name anam, which means “lake,” because 
many of the fossils were discovered near Lake 
Turkana in Kenya. Like A. afarensis, A. anamensis 
was a biped, a diagnostic character in separating 
the line of hominids from the African apes. As 
shown in ﬁ gure 17.5, A. anamensis may well be a 
direct ancestor of A. afarensis.
In essence, an enormous burst of diversity 
characterized the early stages of hominid evolution 
(ﬁ gs. 17.5 and 17.9). There were evidently multiple 
species of hominids, some of which appear to have 
coexisted. The next challenge is to trace the line of 
descent of our own genus, Homo, from the broad 
australopithecine family tree.
at least two hominids walked across this wet 
cementlike surface. When the volcano later cov-
ered the footprints with additional volcanic ash, 
the footprints were preserved. After the sediments 
eroded, the footprints were reexposed. The Laetoli 
footprints are remarkably similar to modern human 
feet. Evidently upright bipedalism was established 
as early as 3.6 million years ago. 
Johanson contends that the hominid remains 
from Hadar and Mary Leakey’s Laetoli fossils 
are so similar morphologically as to belong to a 
single human lineage. In 1978 Johanson and Tim 
D. White (an anthropologist from the University 
of California at Berkeley) assigned the Hadar and 
Laetoli specimens to the same species and delin-
eated them as a new species, Australopithecus 
afarenis. The new species derives its name from 
the Afar locality in Hadar, Ethiopia, which yielded 
the most numerous specimens. Australopithecus 
afarensis was then pronounced as the root stock 
from which all later hominids sprang. At pres-
ent, it is safe to say that the afarensis remains, 
dated between 3 and 4 million years ago, consti-
tute one of the earliest deﬁ nitive members of the 
family Hominidae (ﬁ g. 17.5). There are critics 
who contend that the bones and teeth of the Hadar 

 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
225
Homo rudolfensis is viewed as a distinct species 
that evolved earlier than Homo habilis (ﬁ g. 17.5).
GATHERING-HUNTING WAY OF LIFE
The lower Pleistocene hominids (Homo habilis) 
fabricated crude chopping tools by striking a few 
ﬂ akes from a cobble or large pebble. The stone 
tools enabled habilis to cut scavenged meat into 
chewable size pieces, as well as smash large bones 
to get at the fat-rich bone marrow. The open Afri-
can savanna offered the early plains-dwelling hom-
inids a wider selection of foods than were available 
in the tropical forests. Tools were used to gather 
a variety of plant materials (nuts, seeds, fruits, 
tubers, and roots) and small animals (lizards and 
rodents). It is unlikely, as popularly imagined, that 
tools were ﬁ rst contrived as efﬁ cient spears to hunt 
large game or that our early ancestors were vora-
cious meat-eating, predatory primates. The human 
species became accomplished hunters of the large 
animals only later in evolutionary history.
The early hominids on the savanna were most 
likely primarily gatherers of plants and small ani-
mal life, and both males and females were oppor-
tunistic in devising tools for digging, processing 
plant foods, and scavenging meat. The gathering 
of food was particularly critical to females with 
dependent young. There may have been some 
stalking and killing of game, but the uncertainty of 
success made hunting secondary or supplementary 
to the collection of plant food with its assurance of 
success. The exploitation of food sources by both 
males and females on the savanna fostered the col-
laborative interactions of individuals. Coopera-
tive behavior promoted the sharing of food for the 
ﬁ rst time. The sharing of food regularly is a social 
achievement unique to humans; only rarely do 
apes share food. The exchange of food is consid-
ered to be the earliest expression of human social 
reciprocity.
Homo habilis apparently had little propen-
sity to migrate beyond Africa. This early human 
thrived for nearly 500,000 years before it became 
HUMANS EMERGE: HOMO HABILIS
Members of our genus, Homo, evolved in Africa 
from australopithecine ancestors approximately 
1.8 million years ago. We are continually gaining 
new insight into how the genus Homo evolved and 
how its members came to live with, and eventually 
replace, the australopithecines. The increasingly 
diverse fossil record permits us to portray human 
evolution as a ﬂ ourishing bush containing various 
species. Although only a solitary human species 
(Homo sapiens) exists today, several species coex-
isted for much of our history. 
Early in the 1960s, Louis and Mary Leakey 
found remains of a light-jawed hominid that they 
claimed was more advanced and more human-
like than any known australopithecine. Estimates 
of the brain capacities of the skulls averaged 
637 cubic centimeters. This light-jawed type of 
Olduvai Gorge hominid was said to be the ﬁ rst 
civilized or humanized being, deserving of the 
rank of Homo, namely Homo habilis (ﬁ g. 17.5). 
The speciﬁ c name habilis means “handy,” from 
the inferred ability of this hominid to make stone 
tools. The recognition of Homo habilis indicates 
that this primitive human being was evolving 
alongside the less hominized australopithecines 
and lived side by side with them. The coexistence 
of Homo habilis and the australopithecines is gen-
erally accepted.
Spirited discourse surrounds son Richard 
Leakey’s 1972 discovery of an unusual skull from 
the desiccated fossil beds of Lake Turkana in Kenya. 
This nearly complete skull was initially placed at 
2.8 million years old but is currently acknowledged 
as being only 1.8 million years old. The specimen 
was cautiously designated only by its museum iden-
tiﬁ cation number—“1470.” The cranial capacity of 
the “1470” skull measures 780 cubic centimeters, 
which is signiﬁ cantly larger than any australo-
pithecine specimen. Skull “1470” clearly belongs 
to the genus Homo. Some anthropologists believe 
that “1470” is sufﬁ ciently different from Homo 
habilis to have earned its own species name, Homo 
rudolfensis. In the most current conﬁ guration, 

226 
Understanding Evolution
reserve the name of Homo erectus for the Eur-
asian pithecanthropine specimens and accord the 
name of Homo ergaster for African ﬁ nds. In this 
scheme, Homo erectus evolved from the  African 
Homo ergaster and migrated out of Africa about 
1 million years ago, if not earlier. In 1996, an 
interdisciplinary team of scientists re-examined 
two major fossil sites along the Solo River in 
Java and found surprisingly that Homo erec-
tus apparently persisted in southeast Asia until 
about 53,000 years ago. If proven correct, this 
would mean that Homo erectus survived some 
250,000 years after it had been surmised to have 
become extinct. This remnant population of Homo 
erectus would have existed at the same time that 
two other human species, Homo neanderthalensis 
and Homo sapiens roamed the Earth (ﬁ g. 17.10). 
Conﬁ rmation of the dates for the Java specimens 
would provide support for the new paradigm that 
more than one hominid species could have existed 
at any one time-level.
In the 1920s, Canadian anatomist Davidson 
Black’s elaborate excavation of caves in the lime-
stone hills near Peking, China, led to the discov-
ery of another primitive human, Sinanthropus 
pekinensis, or “Peking man” (ﬁ g. 17.11). The 
cranial capacity in the sinanthropines varied from 
900 to 1,200 cubic centimeters. They fashioned 
tools and weapons of stone and bones, and they 
kindled ﬁ re. A strong suspicion was once held 
that Sinanthropus was cannibalistic and savored 
human brains, for many of the fossil braincases 
show signs of having been cracked open from 
below. This view is now considered untenable; 
the damaged braincases are regarded as the work 
of scavengers or other natural events. Most of the 
original fossil specimens of Peking man were lost 
during World War II. Fortunately, photographs 
and measurements were made of the original fos-
sils. Plaster casts made of the original fossils still 
exist.
The Java and Peking hominids were originally 
each christened with a distinctive Latin name, Pith-
ecanthropus erectus and Sinanthropus pekinensis, 
respectively. There is, however, no justiﬁ cation for 
extinct. The hominid that followed had an even 
greater brain size and a proclivity to migrate.
HOMO ERECTUS: THE EXPLORER
The earliest and best-known representative of 
Homo erectus is the famous Java fossil, ﬁ rst 
described as Pithecanthropus erectus (“upright 
ape-man”). This primitive human being was dis-
covered at Trinil, Java, in 1894 by Eugene Dubois, 
a young Dutch army surgeon. Dubois had been 
profoundly inﬂ uenced by the writings of Charles 
Darwin and was taken with the idea that he could 
ﬁ nd the origins of humans. He surprised the world 
with the discovery of this early human. Curiously, 
Dubois in his later years inexplicably doubted 
his own ﬁ ndings and contended that Pithecan-
thropus erectus was merely a giant manlike ape. 
In the 1930s, additional fossil ﬁ nds of Pithecan-
thropus were unveiled in central Java by the Dutch 
geologist G. H. R. von Koenigswald. The fossil 
specimens date from between 1 million years and 
700,000 years ago. The newer ﬁ ndings conﬁ rmed 
the human status of the pithecanthropines. 
The pithecanthropines lived during mid-
dle Pleistocene times, between 1.3 million and 
300,000 years ago or less! They arose during a 
period of shifting climates that turned much of 
forested Africa into cooler and dryer open grass-
lands. These low-browed hominids were toolmak-
ers and hunters who had learned to control ﬁ re. 
They probably had some powers of speech. Their 
ability to exploit the environment is reﬂ ected in the 
expanded size of the brain. The cranial capacity 
of the pithecanthropines was in the range of 775 
to 1,000 cubic centimeters. Their advanced tool 
kit (termed Acheulean) included ﬁ nely worked, 
teardrop-shaped hand axes, various sharp cleavers, 
ﬁ nger-sized scrapers, and cutting ﬂ ake tools. The 
pithecanthropines were travelers and explorers that 
migrated successfully through the continents, from 
the tropical regions of Africa to Asia and Europe. 
Current evidence suggests that at least two 
species deserve recognition. Many writers now 

Died out
 30,000 years ago
Previously thought
 to have died out
500,000
years
ago
1.8 million
years
ago
300,000
400,000
100,000
150,000
Present
day
Neanderthal
Homo
sapiens
Fossils in Java;
 53,000 years old
200,000
150,000
Homo
erectus
Figure 17.10 Fossil skulls found in Java suggest that Homo erectus, thought to have perished hundreds of thousands of 
years ago, coexisted on Earth with the Neanderthals and modern Homo sapiens as recently as 30,000 years ago. 
(Source: New York Times, 12/13/96, front page, 3 Human Species Coexisted on Earth, New Data Suggest by John Noble Wilford.)
Figure 17.11 Peking humans left remains about 400,000 years ago in limestone caves in 
northern China, kindled ﬁ re, and fashioned tools of stone and bone.
(Painting by Maurice Wilson; by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum—Natural History.)
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
227

228 
Understanding Evolution
in the history of humans, or their direct ances-
tors, is there any evidence of a diminutive spe-
cies (ﬁ g. 17.12). Likewise, there are no previous 
human-like remains from this time period.
Estimated to be no bigger than an australo-
pithecine, Flores people stood only a meter in 
height, weighed around 25 kilograms, and had a 
380-cc brain (modern humans average 1400 cc, 
the australopithecines average ~ 500 cc). Remains 
date from roughly 13,000 to 94,000 years ago. 
However, the lore of the contemporary inhabitants 
of Flores, the Manggarai, speaks of diminutive 
people who survived in caves until the sixteenth-
century arrival of European traders. It appears 
that about 12,000 years ago, a volcanic eruption 
resulted in the extinction of the Flores people.
Notwithstanding their relatively young ances-
try, the Flores people’s bones resemble Homo erec-
tus more than modern Homo sapiens. However, the 
stone tools of the ancient Floresians are unlike any 
associated with Homo erectus and include such 
items as blades and other cutting and chopping 
tools as well as points that may have been used 
to hunt. There is also evidence that the Floresians 
hunted cooperatively and used ﬁ re.
On islands like Flores, evolutionary forces 
often select for either dwarﬁ sm or gigantism (or 
both). In the case of Flores, giant lizards and small 
elephants are thought to have once lived on this 
island. Although some critics have argued that the 
Flores people are small-headed microcephalics, 
a medical condition characterized by abnormally 
small heads, the evidence to date is compelling 
that very small human-like creatures once inhab-
ited this island. 
EVOLUTION OF HUMAN SOCIETY 
As Homo erectus wandered from place to place, 
the hunting of game most likely became intensi-
ﬁ ed. Vegetable foods continued to be important in 
subsistence, but the hunting habit was the way of 
life for nomadic Homo erectus. There is no evi-
dence that the female participated in the hunting 
recognizing more than the single genus of humans, 
Homo. Accordingly, modern taxonomists have 
properly assigned both the Java and Peking fossils 
to the genus Homo. Moreover, the morphological 
differences between these two fossil humans 
are readily within the range of variation that we 
observe in living populations today. These forms 
thus represent two closely related geographic 
races (subspecies) of the same species. Both Java 
and Peking hominids are usually placed together 
and classiﬁ ed as Homo erectus.
In 1984, an impressive complete skeleton of 
an adolescent boy dating from 1.6 million years 
ago was discovered from Kenya’s Turkana basin. 
Dubbed the “Turkana boy,” this young male fossil 
was 5 feet 3 inches tall and between 9 and 11 years 
of age. It is estimated that his adult height would 
have been 6 feet, much taller than previous hom-
inids. He possessed a surprisingly modern human 
body structure, suggestive of modern gait. He was 
tall, slender, and had long limbs, traits that would 
appear to be ideally suited for traveling long dis-
tances in harsh climactic conditions. This Kenyan 
specimen has several distinctive features that dis-
tinguish it from the Asian Homo erectus. Accord-
ingly, the Turkana boy and his kind in Africa have 
been set apart as a separate species, the afore-
mentioned Homo ergaster. This species has been 
proposed as a credible ancestor for all successive 
humans.
FLORES MAN
In 2003 the bones and artifacts of a miniature 
“hobbit”-size human-like being were found in 
caves on the island of Flores in Indonesia, roughly 
370 miles east of Bali. Discovered by paleoan-
thropologists Peter Brown, Michael Moorwood, 
and colleagues from the University of New Eng-
land in New South Wales, Australia, the Flores 
ﬁ nd has changed our perception of recent human 
evolution. Named Homo ﬂ oresiensis for its island 
place of origin, the discovery of the Flores people 
was both unexpected and controversial. Nowhere 

Figure 17.12 Flores man. Comparison of the skulls of miniature hominid, Homo ﬂ oresiensis (left) 
who inhabited the Indonesian Island of Flores 13,000 to 94,000 years ago with modern human, Homo 
sapiens.
© AFP/Getty Images
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
229
pairing increased the probability of leaving descen-
dants. The heterosexual pair-bonding relationship 
became fortiﬁ ed as the estrus cycle of the female, 
became modiﬁ ed into a condition of continuous 
sexual receptivity. The sustained sex interests 
of the partners made possible by the oblitera-
tion of estrus in the female increased the stability 
of the family unit and facilitated the develop-
ment of permanent family-sized shelters for rest, 
protection, and play. In essence, strong inter-
personal bonds between a male, a female, and 
their children became the basis of the uniquely 
human family organization. Critics of the pair 
bonding scenario assert the provocative notion 
that Homo erectus females were advantaged 
(though lower levels of male infanticide and 
greater food sharing) by having multiple male 
sexual partners.
of large game; the adult female was increasingly 
encumbered with a fetus or by the care of the 
young, or by both. The long period of dependency 
of the young strengthened mother-child bonds 
but also restricted the mobility and activity of the 
woman. It appears likely the female remained at 
the home base as a food gatherer while the male 
engaged in hunting. The immobility of the female 
and the prolonged immaturity of the young, cou-
pled with the limitations imposed on the male in 
the number of females he could possibly support, 
apparently transformed a basically polygamous 
society into a monogamous structure.
A primary human innovation was relatively 
permanent pair-bonding, or monogamy. Sustained 
pair-bonding proved to be advantageous in sev-
eral respects. It served to reduce sexual competi-
tion among the males. The prolonged male-female 

Figure 17.13 Neanderthal, a rugged cave-dweller who roamed Europe and 
the Middle East about 75,000 years ago.
(Painting by Maurice Wilson; by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum—Natural History.)
230 
Understanding Evolution
are one of the best known of fossil hominids, hav-
ing been found at numerous widely separate sites 
in Europe, particularly in France. The Neander-
thals were cave dwellers, short (about 5 feet) but 
powerfully built, with prominent brow ridges. 
They had large brains with an average capacity of 
1,450 cubic centimeters, as opposed to 1,350 cubic 
centimeters in modern humans. The Neanderthals 
occupied Europe, the Middle East, and western 
Asia from at least 230,000 years ago until about 
30,000 years ago. 
The Neanderthals were once popularly por-
trayed as brutish and dull-witted human crea-
tures. On the contrary, the Neanderthals made 
complex stone tools, were accomplished hunt-
ers of large game, compassionately cared for 
their sick and inﬁ rmed, and withstood the rigors 
of the bitter cold climate of the last glaciation. 
There is evidence that the Neanderthals buried 
their dead with various ritual objects. The tools 
of the Neanderthals are known as Mousterian 
and are characterized by ﬂ int scrapers and points. 
Human language was fostered as males and 
females recorded experiences with each other 
and transmitted information to their mates and 
children. Speech favored cooperation between 
local groups and the fusion of small groups into 
larger communities. Speech also fostered the suc-
cessful occupation of one geographical area after 
another. The exchange of ideas over wide areas 
permitted human cultures of great complexity to 
develop.
STATUS OF THE NEANDERTHALS
The classic Neanderthal was ﬁ rst unearthed in 
1856 in a limestone cave in the Neander ravine 
near Düsseldorf, Germany (ﬁ g. 17.13). This group 
of fossils derives its name from the picturesque 
Neander Valley or Neanderthal (“thal” means 
valley, but the silent “h” has been dropped in the 
modern German to “tal”). The Neanderthals or 
Neandertals (both spellings continue to be used) 

Equator
15,000
– 40,000
years ago
15,000
– 40,000
years ago
40,000
years ago
40,000
years ago
100,000
100,000
years ago
years ago
100,000
years ago
60,000(?)
years ago
60,000(?)
years ago
150–
200,000
years ago
150–
200,000
years ago
40,000 –
60,000(?)
years ago
40,000 –
60,000(?)
years ago
13–15,000
13–15,000
years ago
years ago
13–15,000
years ago
Figure 17.14 Modern humans (Homo sapiens) can be traced to sub-Saharan Africa from about 150,000–200,00 
years ago. They migrated to southern Africa by about 100,000 years ago and into Europe by about 40,000 years ago. 
Westward, humans reached India by about 60,000 years ago, the far East and Australia by 40,000–60,000 years ago, 
and across the Bering Strait to North America 15,000–40,000 years ago. South America was inhabited around 
13,000–15,000 years ago.
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
231
is also the opinion that modern humans and the 
Neanderthals interbred and assimilated their 
respective gene pools. This opinion apparently 
has been dispelled by mitochondrial DNA studies, 
which reveal that the Neanderthals became extinct 
without contributing mitochondrial genes to mod-
ern humans.
MODERN HUMANS: 
THE CRO-MAGNONS
The Cro-Magnons, a representative of our own 
species, Homo sapiens, can be traced back about 
40,000 to 10,000 years ago in Europe (ﬁ gs. 17.14, 
17.15 and 17.16). The Cro-Magnons were tall 
and slender: males reached 6 ft. (1.8 m) and 
weighed 155 lbs. (70 kg) while females reached 
5 ft. 6 in. (1.7 m) and weighed 120 lbs. (55 kg). 
The Cro-Magnons were culturally superior to the 
The Neanderthals roamed over Europe during the 
Upper Pleistocene until about 30,000 years ago 
and then dramatically disappeared. They were 
replaced by humans of a modern type, much like 
ourselves, which have been grouped under the 
common name of Cro-Magnon. The Cro-Magnons 
are decidedly representatives of our own species, 
Homo sapiens.
There is evidence that modern humans dis-
placed the Neanderthals in the Middle East by 
40,000 years ago. Modern humans spread into 
Europe about 40,000 years ago. From 40,000 
to 30,000 years ago, a span of 10,000 years, the 
Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons appear to have 
lived side by side in Europe. Some authors have 
suggested that the Cro-Magnons conquered and 
destroyed the Neanderthals. Others have endorsed 
the view that the anatomically modern human 
migrants brought new diseases to Europe for 
which the Neanderthals had no resistance. There 

Figure 17.15 Cro-Magnons, representatives of our own species, Homo sapiens, can be 
traced back about 40,000 years ago in Europe. 
(Painting by Maurice Wilson; by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum—Natural History.)
232 
Understanding Evolution
characteristics emerged in different geographical 
populations. This thesis is most often referred to 
as the Out-of-Africa theory, although a variety of 
notations have proliferated—the “single-origin 
model,” “monogenesis theory,” “Noah’s ark 
model,” and the “replacement theory.” 
Africa was apparently the center from which 
at least two waves of migrations occurred: one 
took place about 1 million years ago by Homo 
erectus and the other about 150,000 years ago 
by Homo sapiens. In the ﬁ rst wave, the Afri-
can Homo erectus spread over Europe and Asia. 
In the second wave, modern Homo sapiens 
expanded from its continent of birth (Africa) 
and replaced Homo erectus and its descendants 
across the world.
There is a school of thought, chieﬂ y identiﬁ ed 
with the paleoanthropologists Alan G. Thorne and 
Milford H. Wolpoff, that conceives of the modern 
human geographical populations as descending 
from different ancient hominid lineages evolving 
Neanderthals. Their reﬁ ned Aurignacian tool kit 
included improved hunting weapons (spears, nets, 
harpoons, and hooks), elaborate clothing from ani-
mal skins and furs, and sophisticated art and culture 
(ﬁ g. 17.15). Magniﬁ cently engraved bones, paint-
ings (ﬁ g. 17.16), and sculptures have been recov-
ered from caves in Spain and France. Modern-day 
artists view with awe the brilliant Cro-Magnon 
paintings and carved statues, often located deep 
within caves.
ORIGIN OF MODERN HUMANS
The weight of evidence favors the thesis that mod-
ern humans were cradled in Africa. Most investi-
gators would claim that modern humans with their 
distinctive features evolved in Africa between 
100,000 and 150,000 years ago and displaced their 
predecessors as they migrated to various regions 
of the globe. Subsequently, regional (“racial”) 

Figure 17.16 Lascaux Cave Paintings. Horses and giant extinct bulls called 
aurochs (in the background) were common themes of Cro Magnon cave paintings. In 
recent years, the 17,000 year old bestiary at the Lascaux cave in southwestern France 
have been plagued by fungus and mold that threatens destroy these Paleolithic relics.
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
233
independently of one another. Thus, as seen in 
ﬁ gure 17.17, the Indonesian Homo erectus (“Java 
man”) was the early progenitor of the present native 
inhabitants of Australia, the Chinese Homo erectus 
(“Peking man”) gave rise to modern Asians, the 
European Homo erectus gave rise to present-day 
Europeans, and the African Homo erectus (Homo 
ergaster) gave rise to present-day African popula-
tions. According to this view, gene ﬂ ow between 
the different geographical groups was sufﬁ cient 
to permit human populations to be maintained 
as one biological species. Simultaneously, the 
populations in different regions were sufﬁ ciently 
isolated to permit the development of distinct ana-
tomic identities. This state of affairs is known as 
the Multiregional hypothesis (also called “regional 
continuity hypothesis” or even the “candelabra 
hypothesis”). The Thorne-Wolpoff School would 
contend that geographic separation of the different 
early hominid branches did not lead to reproduc-
tive isolation, as might be expected of long-stand-
ing populations that are spatially separated and 
that differentiate along independent lines. It is, 
however, exceedingly difﬁ cult to imagine how sev-
eral hominid geographical assemblages, diverging 
in different parts of the world, could evolve inde-
pendently and yet repeatedly in the same direction 
leading only to one species, Homo sapiens. The 
parallel pattern of evolution associated with the 
absence of speciation is not hopelessly out of 
the question, but if it occurred, it must have been 
the very rare exception to the normal process.
There is scarcely any disagreement that the 
world of humans today is a single large neigh-
borhood. The once distinguishing features of 
geographical groups have become increasingly 
blurred by the interminglings and intermixings of 
peoples. Our present-day species lives in one great 
reproductive community.
GENOMES OF THE CHIMPANZEES 
AND HUMANS 
Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and humans (Homo 
sapiens) are two of the most thoroughly studied 

European
African
East
Asian
Australian
Multiregional hypothesis
Out-of-Africa theory
European
African
East
Asian
Australian
Differentiation of regional populations
Cro-Magnon
x
x
x
x = Extinct
Homo erectus
Peking
Java
Homo erectus
Cro-Magnon
Figure 17.17 Origin of modern humans. The multiregional hypothesis envisions a distant 
separation of the principal regional populations. Each regional population that stemmed from Homo 
erectus evolved independently and in parallel fashion over hundreds of thousands of years. Although 
each regional group evolved along its own distinctive direction, gene ﬂ ow (arrows represent gene 
exchange) between neighboring geographical groups was sufﬁ cient to permit human populations to be 
maintained as one biological species. According to the Out-of-Africa theory, regional differentiation 
occurred only after modern humans (Cro-Magnon) arose about 150,000 years ago in one place (Africa), 
and supplanted their predecessors as they migrated to various regions of the world.
Source: Modiﬁ ed from Biology and Human Concerns, Volpe, 4th ed., 1993:440.
234 
Understanding Evolution
human polypeptide chain from that of the chim-
panzee. Based on protein analyses, the sequences 
of human and chimpanzee polypeptides are, on 
average, more than 99 percent identical. Stated 
another way, the average human polypeptide is 
less than 1 percent different from its chimpanzee 
counterpart. The information on proteins has been 
reinforced by nucleic acid studies, which have 
revealed that our nuclear DNA is 98 to 99 per-
cent identical to that of the chimpanzee. It would 
seem that the exceedingly meager molecular dif-
ferences, at both the protein and DNA levels, are 
species, at both the organismal and molecular 
levels. In recent years, a variety of protein mol-
ecules of the two species have been analyzed by 
amino acid sequencing, immunology, and electro-
phoresis. All the molecular data agree in showing 
that the chimpanzees and humans are remarkably 
similar.
The two species have completely identical 
ﬁ brinopeptides, cytochrome c, and alpha, beta, 
and gamma chains of hemoglobin. With respect 
to myoglobin and the delta chain of hemoglo-
bin, only a single acid replacement separates the 

Chimp
chromosome 12
Historic
fusion
event
Chimp
chromosome 13
Telomere
Normal
chromosome
Centromere
Centromere
Normal telomere
Normal telomere
2 fused telomeres 
(inactive)
Active centromere from
chimp chromosome 12
Inactive centromere from
chimp chromosome 13
Human
chromosome 2
Telomere
(A)
(B)
(C)
Telomere
Figure 17.18 Origin of human chromosome 2. This diagram illustrates the historic 
fusion event between chimp chromosomes 12 and 13 to form modern human chromosome 2. 
(A) Normal chromosome with two terminal telomeres and one focal centromere. (B) Chimp 
chromosomes 12 and 13. (C) Human chromosome 2, composed of remnant molecular and 
cytological signatures of the historic fusion of chimp chromosomes 12 and 13, containing 
two normal telomeres, two fused inactive telomeres, one active centromere derived from 
chimp chromosome 12, and one inactive centromere derived from chimp chromosome 13.
Modiﬁ ed from Kenneth R. Miller, “Only a Theory” Viking Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-670-0188-6, 
pp. 106–107.
 
CHAPTER 17 Emergence of the Human Species  
235
prolongation of the growth period of the brain of 
the human fetus, thereby permitting additional 
time for the development of greater complexity of 
the brain.
Gross chromosomal rearrangements (inver-
sions and translocations) may play a prominent 
role in shifting a given regulatory gene from its 
normal position to a new location in another chro-
mosome. Despite appreciable homology of the 
two chromosomal sets, there is a profound differ-
ence in the number of sets of chromosomes found 
in chimps (and gorilla) and humans. Humans have 
23 (2n  46) pairs of chromosomes, and chimps 
(and gorilla) have 24 pair (2n  48).
On the tips of normal chromosomes are 
 telomeres, a region of repetitive DNA that protects 
the chromosomes from damage. In the middle of 
chromosomes is a region central constriction called 
the centromere. (ﬁ g. 17.18A). During cell division, 
much too small to account for the substantial ana-
tomical and behavioral differences between the 
two species.
It has been suggested that the major organis-
mal differences between the two species are largely 
based on changes in the regulatory sequences that 
control the expression of structural (protein-coding) 
genes rather than on changes in the structural genes 
themselves. In particular, the complex biological 
differences between humans and chimpanzees 
may stem primarily from mutational changes 
in regulatory units, such as promoters (a gene 
sequence that controls gene expression), enhanc-
ers (control elements that increase the rate gene 
transcription), and transcription factors (pro-
teins that control the transfer of DNA to RNA in 
protein synthesis). A subtle change in a regula-
tory sequence that codes for a particular tran-
scription factor might result, for example, in the 

236 
Understanding Evolution
the spindle ﬁ bers that orchestrate the movement of 
chromosomes attach to each chromosome via the 
centromere. Like the telomere, the centromere con-
tains unique repetitive sequences of DNA. These 
repetitive sequences, along with other character-
istics, provide these chromosomal elements with 
identiﬁ able molecular signatures. Telomeres and 
centromeres are essential parts of eukaryotic chro-
mosomes. Because of their unique molecular signa-
tures, it has been possible to solve the riddle of why 
humans have 23 (2n  46) pairs of chromosomes 
and chimps (and gorilla) have 24 pair (2n  48).
For decades, people have compared chimp 
and human chromosomes by every means avail-
able. During that time, chromosome 2 has aroused 
attention, but only recently have the hard data been 
available to prove the origin of chromosome 2. 
By using the molecular signatures of the chro-
mosomal structural elements of the telomere and 
the centromere, and sophisticated DNA sequenc-
ing, scientists have demonstrated that human 
chromosome number 2 is a fused chromosome of 
two chimp chromosomes, and thereby solved the 
puzzle of why these otherwise very closely related 
hominids have a different number of sets of chro-
mosomes (23 vs. 24).
As shown in ﬁ gure 17.18C, human chromo-
some 2 has the genetic signature of a fused chromo-
some. On close inspection, it is possible to identify 
two normal telomeres and two fused telomeres 
within the chromosome (ﬁ g. 17.18B,C). Likewise, 
it is also evident that chromosome 2 has both an 
active and an inactive centromere (ﬁ g. 17.18).
Somewhere during the course of evolution, 
in the line diverging from human and the African 
apes, the ape chromosomes 12 and 13 fused to form 
human chromosome 2 (ﬁ g. 17.18B,C). Because 
of the unique structure of the centromere and the 
telomere, it is now possible to show that this event 
took place. Based on the ability to sequence DNA 
and detect genes, it is possible to demonstrate 
that the genes on human chromosome 2 match 
the genes found on chimp chromosomes 12 and 
13. The match is so unambiguous that chimp spe-
cialists have renamed chimp chromosome 12 and 
13 as chromosomes 2A and 2B. The discovery of 
the chromosomal relationship between humans 
and the African apes is yet another line of evi-
dence supporting evolution. The implications are 
obvious: humans and the African apes, especially 
the chimpanzee, are extremely closely related by 
common descent.

237
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
18
In his provocative book entitled Sociobiology,
Edward O. Wilson of Harvard University delves 
imaginatively into the social interactions of all 
animals, including humans. The cardinal theme is 
that the social interplay of animals, no matter how 
complex, has evolved by natural selection. Accord-
ingly, sociobiologists attempt to place social 
behavior on sound Darwinian principles. The doc-
trine of natural selection is thought of as central 
to the biological understanding of sociality.
If the behavioral attributes of animals are the 
products of the same evolutionary forces that shape 
morphological and physiological traits, then social 
behavioral patterns should be adaptive. That is to 
say, behavioral dispositions should be optimally 
designed to confer reproductive success upon the 
individual. There are, however, behavioral acts 
that are detrimental to the individual performing 
the act but promote the reproductive advantage of 
other members of the population. A female worker 
bee, for example, completely forsakes procreation 
and labors ceaselessly to enhance the reproduc-
tive ﬁ tness of the queen. Is it possible to select for 
behaviors that are individually disadvantageous but 
beneﬁ cial to the species as a whole? This is one of 
the searching questions in sociobiology.
GROUP SELECTION
In 1932, the English geneticist J. B. S. Haldane 
speculated on the possibility that a trait may be 
selected that confers an advantage for the group 
but is costly to the individual. He used the term 
altruism for such a trait and deﬁ ned an altruistic 
act as one that decreases the personal ﬁ tness of the 
organism performing the act but is beneﬁ cial to 
the population as a whole. Thus, a prairie dog that 
emits a loud warning call (or alarm) when it spots 
a coyote improves the chances that his fellow con-
speciﬁ cs will survive. In protecting the group, the 
prairie dog (alarmer) attracts attention to itself 
and places itself in immediate danger of being 
captured by the predator. If the prairie dog were 
to remain silent, its presence to the coyote would 
not be betrayed. The warning act by the alarmer is 
essentially self-sacriﬁ cial; the term altruism may 
be equated with self-sacriﬁ cial or selﬂ ess. Haldane 
acknowledged the difﬁ culty in explaining, in a 
NATURAL SELECTION, 
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, AND 
CULTURAL EVOLUTION

238 
Understanding Evolution
mathematical model, the establishment of an altru-
istic trait that apparently diminishes one’s own 
chances of survival and reproduction.
The Scottish ecologist V. C. Wynne-Edwards 
evoked the concept of group selection to account for 
altruism as it relates to territorial behavior. Wynne-
Edwards views territoriality as a method of popu-
lation control. When a given population becomes 
excessive, many individuals cannot ﬁ nd territories 
and therefore cannot breed. Wynne-Edwards sug-
gests that the territorial system has evolved by natu-
ral selection as part of a mechanism to stabilize the 
population density at a level that can be supported 
by the available food resources of the area. Wynne-
Edwards’ thesis assumes that natural selection oper-
ates for the beneﬁ t of the group as a whole. The 
implication is that many individuals are genetically 
or internally programmed to refrain from reproduc-
ing so as to not endanger the welfare or survival of 
the stock. In other words, natural selection has fos-
tered both territorial “winners” and “losers” for the 
good of the species as a whole. Stated another way, 
a “loser” promotes the reproductive advantage of 
the “winner” at its own expense.
The curtailment of reproductive activity in 
“losers” is inconsistent with the notion of indi-
vidual selection. An abridgment of reproductive 
behavior certainly does not beneﬁ t the individual. 
Natural selection characteristically operates on 
individuals (not groups) to augment (not decrease) 
individual reproductive capability. Since selection 
presumably operates solely to maximize the repro-
ductive success of each individual, it is difﬁ cult to 
imagine how individuals can be selected to save 
the group at their own individual expense.
From a theoretical standpoint, can repro-
ductive curtailment or restraint on the part of an 
individual evolve in a population so as to con-
fer a reproductive advantage upon the group as 
a whole? Let us suppose that gene a1 promotes 
reproductive capability and its allele, a2, tends to 
curtail the reproductive capacity of an individ-
ual. Can the a2 allele persist, or even spread, in a 
population when its effect is to impair the repro-
ductive ﬁ tness of its possessor in the present and 
succeeding generations? The a2 allele is selected 
against since the possessors of the alternative 
allele, a1, obviously leave more offspring than 
the possessors of the a2 gene. Ultimately, the self-
sacriﬁ cial a2 allele will be replaced by the repro-
ductively advantageous a1 gene.
KIN SELECTION
Altruism apparently cannot evolve without vio-
lating the principle of individual selection, since 
the individuals displaying self-sacriﬁ cial behav-
ior are less biologically ﬁ t than their selﬁ sh 
colleagues. Yet altruistic behaviors are clearly 
evident, particularly among birds and mammals. 
A female bird behaves altruistically when she pro-
tects her brood against predation; a male baboon 
will emerge from the heart of a troop to attack a 
leopard that threatens the group; and a human will 
place his or her life in jeopardy to rescue a drown-
ing person. W. D. Hamilton proposed an alterna-
tive route for the evolution of altruism that is not 
founded on the indefensible premise of group 
selection.
Hamilton explained altruism as the outcome 
of a selective process called kin selection. The con-
cept is based on the fact that close relatives share 
a high proportion of the same genes. Altruistic 
behavior can be favorably selected if the prob-
ability is high that the beneﬁ ciaries of the altruistic 
act also have the same genes as the self-sacriﬁ cial 
altruist. Under this view, kin selection is a special 
manifestation of gene selection. It is the gene cod-
ing for a particular behavior that is optimized or 
favorably selected. A given allele a1 will spread 
if the behavior associated with this gene adds a 
greater number of a1 alleles to the next generation 
than in the preceding generation. This can happen 
only if the reproductively successful individuals 
are close relatives of the altruist, thereby increasing 
the probability that they carry the same a1 allele.
An instructive phenomenon is the special 
chirp, or warning call, in bird populations, by 
which one member alerts the ﬂ ock to the danger of 

Brother's offspring
Altruist
Brothers share 50% of their genes
Figure 18.1 Sibling altruism. The coefﬁ cient of relationships 
between two brothers is 1/2. Thus, the probability is 0.50 that a 
gene (or chromosome) present in one individual also occurs in his 
brother. For simplicity, only a pair of chromosomes is depicted. 
The individual’s altruism to his brother is selectively advantageous 
because the altruistic act enables his brother to transmit greater 
numbers of replicas of the shared chromosome to the next gen-
eration than the individual himself might have transmitted.
 
CHAPTER 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and Cultural Evolution  
239
a predator. We may assume that the warning note 
is governed by an a1 allele. A warning call origi-
nating as a signal from a parent to its offspring 
during the breeding season is selectively advanta-
geous because the degree of relatedness between 
the caller and recipient is high. Gene a1 will persist 
in the population, since the alarm call by the par-
ent (bearing gene a1) increases the ﬁ tness of suf-
ﬁ cient numbers of offspring also possessing a1. By 
protecting the offspring, the parent invests in its 
own genetic representation in subsequent genera-
tions. In an evolutionary sense, the offspring that 
are protected by the parent are, in part, genetically 
the parent itself.
The lifetime of an organism is to be viewed 
as a strategy for perpetuating the organism’s 
genes. An individual can transmit its genes 
directly through its own reproduction as well as 
by proxy through its close relatives who share 
genes by common descent. An individual is said to 
maximize an inclusive ﬁ tness—its own reproduc-
tive ﬁ tness plus the reproductive ﬁ tness of close 
relatives. The degree of genetic relatedness has a 
crucial bearing on the likelihood that two individu-
als will behave altruistically toward one another. 
The extent to which two individuals share genes by 
descent from a common ancestor is referred to as 
the degree of relatedness, or coefﬁ cient of relation-
ship (designated r). In diploid species, the degree of 
relatedness of an individual to his or her full siblings 
is 1/2; to half-siblings, 1/4; to children, 1/2; and to 
ﬁ rst cousins, 1/8. Stated another way, a given indi-
vidual shares 50 percent of his genes with a full 
brother or sister but only 12.5 percent of his genes 
with a ﬁ rst cousin. By this logic, grandparents and 
grandchildren are related by 1/4.
Kin selection molds a form of altruism that is 
channeled to genetic relatives. An altruistic gene 
will be perpetuated if the reproductive beneﬁ t 
gained by the recipient of the altruistic act exceeds 
the cost in reproductive ﬁ tness suffered by the altru-
ist. Figure 18.1 depicts kin selection with respect to 
two brothers. The altruist leaves no offspring, but 
his sacriﬁ cial act enables his brother to leave more 

240 
Understanding Evolution
(for maternal genes), or 1/4. The drone is notori-
ously lazy (“lazy as a drone”), since his inclina-
tion is to produce daughters (who share all of his 
genes) rather than help his sisters. In turn, sisters 
invest more energy in raising sisters than brothers 
and characteristically drive their brothers from the 
hive in the early summer. The selﬁ shness of the 
drones and the diligence of the female workers are 
predictable aspects of kin selection.
KIN SELECTION IN HUMANS
A variety of altruistic behavioral dispositions in the 
human species—the sharing of food, the sharing of 
implements, and the caring for the sick—probably 
evolved by kin selection in the early hominid hunt-
ing bands. These bands consisted largely of tightly 
knit groups of close relatives. In fact, in primitive 
cohesive societies, social behavior appears to have 
been dominated by kin selection.
A striking phenomenon in some human soci-
eties is the strong parental attitude exhibited by a 
brother to his sister’s children, far out of propor-
tion to his degree of relatedness to his nephews 
and nieces. However, as predicted by kin selection, 
a brother’s sense of responsibility to his sister’s 
children increases as conﬁ dence in paternity of 
his own children diminishes. A brother is always 
genetically related to his sister’s children, whereas 
he may be totally unrelated to his wife’s children if 
the probability of paternity is low. Apparently, the 
certainty of a genetic relationship between brother 
and nephew (or niece) outweighs the dubious or 
tenuous relationship between father and alleged 
son (or daughter). In essence, a high probability 
of paternity is a necessary antecedent for extended 
parental investment by the male.
It has been suggested that homosexual behav-
ior is a product of kin selection. Although the 
genetic factors for homosexuality lower repro-
ductive ﬁ tness, the production of offspring occurs 
by proxy through the homosexual’s immediate 
kin. In this vein, homosexuals may be compared 
to sterile worker bees who help raise their close 
offspring than he would have otherwise. The altru-
ist’s genes have been effectively removed from the 
population by his failure to reproduce, but the genes 
that he shares with his brother are more than restored 
by three of the offspring sired by his brother. The 
altruist has actually gained genetic representation in 
the next generation. Indeed, he has gained in inclu-
sive ﬁ tness, even though he has lost ﬁ tness in the 
classical sense.
Kin selection provides an explanation for the 
bafﬂ ing social behavior in ants, bees, and wasps. 
Curiously, whole castes of sterile females devote 
their entire existence to the welfare of the queen. 
Females are diploid individuals that develop from 
fertilized eggs with maternal and paternal sets of 
chromosomes. Males are the haploid products of 
unfertilized eggs and possess only the maternal set 
of chromosomes (ﬁ g. 18.2). The startling outcome 
is that the sibling daughters of a queen are more 
closely related to each other than they would be to 
any of their own daughters!
Speciﬁ cally, female workers share three-
fourths of their genes with their sisters (r  3/4). 
This is the case because sisters share the same set 
of paternal genes and share additionally, on the 
average, one-half of the maternal genes (ﬁ g. 18.2). 
Thus, sisters are related by the average of 1 (for 
paternal genes) and 1/2 (for maternal genes), or 
3/4. If a daughter were to produce her own off-
spring, that daughter would share only one-half of 
its genes with any of her offspring. Accordingly, 
a female worker actually contributes more to her 
Darwinian ﬁ tness by assisting her mother in rais-
ing offspring (3/4 relationship) than by rearing her 
own offspring (1/2 relationship). Natural selection 
has fostered an unusual form of cooperative behav-
ior among sisters.
The male bees, or drones, show a pronounced 
lack of concern over the welfare of their sisters. 
This is not surprising, since drones share only 1/4 
of their genes with their sisters. Since a drone pos-
sesses only maternal genes, a sister cannot share 
any paternal genes with her brother (ﬁ g. 18.2). The 
total genetic relationship of a sister to her brother 
is the average of zero (for paternal genes) and 1/2 

Haploid
Diploid
Diploid
Select sister A
Each daughter shares 50% of her genes
with her mother
Each son shares 100% of his genes
with his mother
Genetic similarity
100%
50%
75%
75%
A
A
B
C
E
F
G
H
D
A
A
B
C
D
50%
0%
25%
25%
E
F
G
H
Sister-sister relatedness
Mother-offspring relatedness
Select sister A
Average: 75%
Average: 25%
Genetic similarity
Sister-brother relatedness
Figure 18.2 Degree of genetic relationship of a female bee to her ofspring (top) 
and the genetic relatedness of sisters to sisters (lower left) and sisters to brothers 
(lower right). Females develop from fertilized eggs and have two sets of chromosomes 
(diploid state), whereas males develop from unfertilized eggs and have only one set 
of chromosomes (haploid state). For simplicity, the haploid set is represented by 
only two chromosomes. Sisters are more closely related to one another than they 
would be to their own offspring. The coefﬁ cient of relationship between mother and 
daughter is 1/2, but the coefﬁ cient of relationship between two sisters averages 3/4. 
Sisters have relatively few genes in common with their brothers, the coefﬁ cient of 
relationship averaging 1/4. 
 
CHAPTER 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and Cultural Evolution  
241

242 
Understanding Evolution
the hawk issues a warning call to its companions 
but does so only to curtail the noise of the ﬂ ock. 
Accordingly, the caller reduces the chance that the 
ﬂ ock will inadvertently summon the hawk into his 
own vicinity. In large measure, the caller is not act-
ing altruistically but rather selﬁ shly.
The same situation may be viewed in another 
selﬁ sh vein. Suppose the caller fails to signal, 
quietly taking ﬂ ight by itself without warning its 
unsuspecting conspeciﬁ cs. In this event, the hawk 
might be easily attracted to a single bird ﬂ ying off. 
The issuance of an alarm would be better than no 
alarm at all. An alarmer that issues a call curtails 
his risks by ﬂ ying up into the tree—and simul-
taneously arouses the other members to ﬂ y with 
him into the tree. In corralling the conspeciﬁ cs, 
the caller ensures protective cover for himself in 
ﬂ ight. The conspeciﬁ cs beneﬁ t from the caller’s 
act, but in increasing his own safety, the caller 
beneﬁ ts even more!
The portrait of a biological individual that 
emerges from these examples is one of self-
serving opportunism. It seems that an individual 
is programmed to care about itself. It may be, as 
several investigators contend, that acts of apparent 
altruism are actually selﬁ shness in disguise.
RECIPROCAL ALTRUISM
When a self-sacriﬁ cial parent saves his own child 
from some potentially tragic event, the parent 
acts to protect his share of genes invested in the 
child. If, however, an individual saves the life of 
an unrelated party or nonrelative, kin selection is 
ruled out. In this instance, the individual may have 
behaved altruistically with the expectation that the 
beneﬁ cent behavior will be reciprocated by the 
stranger at some future occasion. A person who 
saves another person from drowning, for example, 
hopes in turn for help when he or she is in dan-
ger. This is the concept of reciprocal altruism, ﬁ rst 
proposed in 1971 by Robert L. Trivers of Rutgers 
University. An altruist who places himself in 
danger for a biologically unrelated person incurs 
genetic relatives. The behavior of the homosexual 
increases the ﬁ tness of genetic relatives more than 
it decreases his or her own ﬁ tness. This view is 
consistent with kin selection, but there are as yet 
no supporting or conﬁ rmatory data.
Kin selection may have shaped the phenom-
enon of menopause in the female. The middle-aged 
woman enhances her ﬁ tness by caring for her chil-
dren’s children. As the menopausal woman loses 
her capacity to have her own children, she regains 
inclusive ﬁ tness by devoting her efforts to the rear-
ing of her grandchildren. It is interesting that the 
duration of fecundity is greater in women of eco-
nomically advanced countries. Menarche occurs 
earlier and menopause is deferred. With improved 
nutrition and better personal hygiene, the female 
increases the duration in which she can invest in her 
own children.
THE SELFISH GENE
The alarm calls of birds are often cited as an excel-
lent example of kin selection. It is generally the 
case that a close kin is sufﬁ ciently near the caller 
to beneﬁ t from the warning call. However, some 
authors contend that the habit of warning cries 
evolved by conventional individual selection rather 
than by kin selection. A warning call may not 
serve to draw the attention of the predator to the 
alarmer. The warning call may not expose the 
caller to greater danger. Rather, the call note is 
intended to mislead the predator as to the position 
of the prey.
Under this view, the alarmer utters a call that 
the predator cannot easily locate. Since the preda-
tor cannot readily detect the location of the call, it 
would appear that the alarmer issues the warning to 
protect itself and not its colleagues (conspeciﬁ cs). 
Suppose a ﬂ ock of birds is feeding in a meadow 
and a hawk ﬂ ies past in the distance. The hawk 
has not seen the ﬂ ock, but there is the danger that 
he will soon spot the ﬂ ock. The noisy rummaging 
activity of members of the ﬂ ock could attract the 
hawk’s attention. The alarmer who ﬁ rst detects 

 
CHAPTER 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and Cultural Evolution  
243
ﬁ nal effect for the stepmother is an increase in her 
own genetic material in succeeding generations. 
PARENTAL REPRODUCTIVE 
STRATEGIES
In the placental mammals, the young develop slowly 
and the prolonged period of caring for the young 
is almost exclusively restricted to the female. The 
males of most mammalian species do not establish 
even a semblance of a permanent relationship with 
the pregnant and nursing female. In its extreme 
form, such as in cats and bears, the female actually 
ejects the male from any contact with the young. 
It is as if the mammalian male were biologically 
superﬂ uous after insemination. Apart from insemi-
nation, most mammalian females have little use for 
the males—except possibly to protect them from 
other males. It is only exceptionally, as in wolves 
and humans, that the male plays an important role 
in the protection and care of the mother and child.
Each sex, without conscious intent, strives to 
attain maximal reproductive success. The repro-
ductive strategies of males and females are clearly 
different. Each sex may be viewed as an investor in 
which the capital invested is in terms of reproduc-
tive effort. The female undoubtedly invests more 
per offspring than the male. The overproduced, 
lightweight sperm are inexpensive compared with 
the thriftily produced, energy-rich eggs. The pro-
longed internal gestation and the protracted period 
of maternal care of the newborn place rigorous 
demands of energy and time on the female. Accord-
ingly, the female has a much greater stake in any 
one reproductive act. Since a reproductive mistake 
is much more severe for the female, she is more dis-
criminating than the male in the choice of a mate.
A male’s basic reproductive strategy is to 
achieve as many fertilizations as possible. Males 
are less selective in the choice of acceptable sexual 
partners and more aggressive in excluding other 
males from the opportunity to mate. Females 
are choosier and carefully evaluate their options. 
Males almost universally act competitively as 
a reduction in ﬁ tness because of the energy con-
sumed and the risks involved. However, a future 
reciprocal act by the recipient is likely to bring 
returns that are equal to, or greater than, the altru-
ist’s original expenditure.
There is deﬁ nite survival value to both donor 
and recipient when altruistic acts are mutually 
exchanged. Each participant beneﬁ ts by increasing 
his or her ﬁ tness. If, however, a recipient fails to 
reciprocate when the situation arises, that recipi-
ent would no longer have the beneﬁ ts of future 
altruistic gestures to him. The nonreciprocator 
would then be at a selective disadvantage since 
subsequent adverse effects on his life would not 
be overcome by altruistic acts that might be life-
saving. The ultimate effect of nonreciprocation 
would be the restriction of altruism to faithful fel-
low altruists, with the consequence that genes for 
reciprocal altruism would be perpetuated through 
the generations. In fact, the chances of selecting 
for altruistic genes are improved as more altru-
istic acts occur in the lifetime of the altruist. By 
the continual exchange of beneﬁ cent acts, altruists 
accrue more ﬁ tness in the long run than the non-
reciprocators. Overall, altruists gain ﬁ tness, rather 
than lose ﬁ tness, from selﬂ ess acts.
“Stepmothering” may be considered a form of 
reciprocal altruism. When the biological mother 
dies or leaves her children, the male may remarry, 
and the stepmother assumes the care of the off-
spring. The basis of the reciprocity is best seen 
in the behavior of western gulls off the coast of 
California. An unmated gull, by raising the off-
spring of a previous mate, establishes a pair-bond 
relationship with the male and guarantees herself 
both a mate and a breeding site for subsequent 
years. Thus, in a population of gulls where there is 
a surplus of breeding-age females, the acquisition 
of a breeding territory complete with a mate is a 
compelling incentive for a female gull to behave 
altruistically by rearing another female’s offspring 
on one occasion. By so doing, she increases her 
personal reproductive ﬁ tness for future years with 
only a relatively small initial investment. Such 
behavior is fostered by natural selection, since the 

244 
Understanding Evolution
way, we can expect enduring pair-bonding only 
where the male plays a substantial paternal role.
The tendency toward polygyny in human 
males apparently has been dampened by strong 
selective pressures. The human male engages in 
an elaborate courtship ritual, which is in itself a 
substantial investment for sustained pair-bonding. 
Robert Trivers has suggested that the prolonged 
male courtship serves as insurance for the male 
that he is not establishing a bond with an already 
inseminated female. The greater the male invest-
ment, the greater the importance of paternity 
knowledge. To assure accurate identiﬁ cation of his 
own offspring, the male jealously guards against 
“cuckoldry”—that is, against the possibility that 
he might invest in offspring that are not his own. 
Human males universally treat their mates as pos-
sessions and sequester them from the adulter-
ous interests of other males. It is only when the 
female remains faithful that the male can over-
come his ever-present uncertainty about paternity. 
Nevertheless, the other side of the male’s strategy 
is his inclination to cuckold other males. There 
have evolved, however, female counterstrategies 
to improve the female’s ability to hold her mate’s 
attention and care.
With the notable exception of humans, the 
female of mammalian species becomes sexually 
aroused only at certain seasons. At speciﬁ c times 
the female comes into heat, or estrus, and only dur-
ing these restricted periods is the female receptive 
to the male. The onset of heat is typically synchro-
nized with ovulation, or the release of the ripe egg. 
In simultaneously advertising sexual receptivity 
and ovulation, the mammalian female provokes 
intense competition among the dominant males 
and increases her likelihood of securing a male of 
exceptional genetic constitution. The females are 
monopolized by the males only at ovulation.
In the human female, there are generally 
no outward or conspicuous signs of ovulation. 
Human females may be sexually receptive during 
any part of the ovulatory cycle. Several authors 
have pointed out that the loss of the phenomenon 
of estrus in human evolution was an event of great 
“sexual advertisers,” and females act cautiously 
as “comparison shoppers.” The task of critical 
discrimination of a sexual partner and the avoid-
ance of an unproductive pregnancy resides almost 
wholly with the female.
The female selects that male as a sexual part-
ner whose appearance and behavior signify that 
he will transmit a superior set of genes to the off-
spring. Mammals are generally polygynous—that 
is, a single male mates with more than one female. 
As previously mentioned, most mammalian males 
do not establish any durable association with the 
female beyond the sexual act. If a reproductively 
ﬁ t mammalian male has little to offer except his 
superior genes, then it is to the female’s advantage 
to mate with that suitable male, no matter how 
often he may have already mated. In polygynous 
mammalian species, the ﬁ ttest males (at least those 
that are behaviorally the ﬁ ttest) have the great-
est reproductive success. For example, in breed-
ing colonies of elephant seals, the males clash for 
dominance status, which is associated with mating 
rights. Less than one-third of the males in resi-
dence during a season copulate, and as few as ﬁ ve 
dominant males account for 50 percent of the mat-
ing in a given season. Clearly, females who share 
an oft-mated male of unusual competitive ability 
are attracted to a “winner” with “proven” genetic 
qualities.
The situation is different with birds, in which 
monogamy is the general rule. One male and one 
female form a breeding pair and remain together, 
at least for the rearing of one brood. In some spe-
cies of birds, the same pair-bonding may persist for 
several successive broods (as in songbirds) or even 
for a lifetime (as in geese and swans). In these situ-
ations, the male’s contributions to the female and 
her offspring are much more than a mere comple-
ment of genes. The males of many species of birds 
defend a territory, provide protection against pred-
ators, assist in the building of nests, incubate the 
eggs, and furnish nourishment for the female and 
her young. Thus, where the male provides numer-
ous indispensable services, it is to the female’s 
advantage to maintain pair-bonding. Stated another 

 
CHAPTER 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and Cultural Evolution  
245
itself (r  1), and related by one-half to each of its 
sibling (r  1/2). Each offspring, then, would expect 
to receive twice as much parental care for itself as 
for each of its siblings. Thus, it is inevitable that 
conﬂ icts will arise between parent and offspring.
In particular, a mother will normally apportion 
her investment among her offspring to maximize 
the number that survive to reproductive maturity. 
She must necessarily limit the amount of care that 
she can give to any one child. On the other hand, 
if the child is to maximize its own chances, the 
child will attempt to extract more than its share of 
parental care. The parental investment in an off-
spring eventually reaches a point of diminishing 
returns. That point is reached when the mother’s 
investment in a given child costs her more than 
she gains and where it costs the child more than 
the child gains. Once the point of diminishing 
returns is met, the parent-offspring bond should be 
severed.
MEMES
Derived from the Greek mimema, meaning some-
thing imitated or mimicked, the term meme was 
coined by Richard Dawkins in his 1976 book The 
Selﬁ sh Gene. Memes include such things as ideas, 
rituals, gestures, beliefs such as religion, political 
theories, fads, songs, and technological innovations. 
Memes are transmitted from person to person and 
may spread vertically across generations or horizon-
tally within a single generation. According to Dawk-
ins, memes are “a unit of cultural transmission, or 
a unit of imitation” important to humans’ capacity 
for cultural evolution, and are the cultural equiva-
lent of genes. Unlike genes, memes can be relayed 
across time and space, can be transmitted between 
nonrelatives and even backward through generations, 
as when a child conveys an idea to a grandparent.
Meme proponents maintain that memes and 
memetics, the study of the transmission of memes 
within an evolutionary context, provides a theo-
retical basis for discussing cultural evolution in 
a manner analogous to our previous discussion 
importance. The concealment of ovulation by the 
female serves to maximize her mate’s conﬁ dence 
of paternity, in that potentially competing males 
are not ﬂ auntingly apprised of the ovulation event. 
Stated another way, if the human female were to 
glaringly advertise ovulation, it might cost her the 
protection and parental care of her mate by attract-
ing competing males who threaten her mate’s 
conﬁ dence of paternity. Moreover, her potentially 
philandering mate is restrained in seeking copula-
tion with other fertile females who, like her, con-
ceal the event of ovulation.
When the pair-bonding relationship fails or 
is dissolved, the female typically experiences dif-
ﬁ culty in ﬁ nding a substitute male to aid in the 
rearing of the offspring. We would expect strong 
selection pressure against “stepfathering,” since 
the substitute father is called upon to invest in 
some other male’s genes. The literature is replete 
with examples in varied mammals in which a 
male eliminates the offspring of a previous mating 
and replaces them with his own offspring. When 
the male lions of a new group depose the resident 
males of a pride, the new regime often kills the cubs 
of the displaced males. In another instance, a preg-
nant female mouse responds to the odor of a novel 
male by aborting her fetus and returning to estrus 
in preparation for propagating the genes of the new 
male. Among the Yanomama Indians of Venezuela, 
a man will order his newly acquired wife to kill her 
infants of a previous marriage. The biological urge 
to invest only in one’s own offspring is evidently 
powerful and pervasive.
PARENT-OFFSPRING CONFLICT
Robert Trivers deﬁ nes parental investment as the 
amount of care and assistance rendered by the par-
ent that increases an offspring’s chance of future 
reproductive success at the cost of limiting the par-
ent’s capacity to invest in other offspring. Each off-
spring is of equal value to a parent, since 50 percent 
of the parent’s genes are distributed in each off-
spring. But each offspring is completely related to 

246 
Understanding Evolution
supplies, to congregate into more stable communi-
ties, and to establish a distinctive civilization.
We have since modiﬁ ed our external sur-
roundings at an ever increasing rate. We have 
undergone an industrial revolution and are now 
witnessing a technological revolution. The rapid-
ity and efﬁ ciency with which we have dominated 
the environment reﬂ ects our capacity for learning 
and transmitting our accumulated knowledge. This 
capacity for cultural evolution has had a profound 
inﬂ uence on our way of life and on our destiny.
There are important differences between bio-
logical evolution and cultural evolution, one of the 
primary differences being the tempo of change 
(table 18.1). Unlike biological evolution, which 
is driven by mutation, natural selection, and the 
other factors and forces we have discussed thus 
far, cultural evolution is uniquely non- Darwinian. 
Likewise, while biological evolution can be gla-
cially slow, cultural evolution has the capacity to 
advance and progress at astonishing rates. Cultural 
transmission is rapid, limited only by the efﬁ ciency 
of communication methods and our inventive-
ness. The acquisition and transmission of learned 
ideas occurs through the generations from mind to 
mind rather than through the germ cells. A given 
cultural change can be passed on to large groups 
of unrelated individuals, whereas a given genetic 
modiﬁ cation can be transmitted only to direct 
descendants, who are generally few. Biological 
evolution is necessarily slow because it depends 
on accidental mutational changes in the DNA mol-
ecule, and it can take many generations before a 
of biological evolution via genes. Like reces-
sive genes, memes can stay unexpressed for long 
periods (generations) and then reappear. Using 
the genetics analogy, memes have the capacity 
to self-replicate and can be heritable and subject 
to mutation, variability, reproductive success, and 
extinction. Because memes spread like viruses and 
other contagious diseases, they are capable of quick 
diffusion across populations and cultures. Memes 
can infect cultures, religions, and even politics. 
Not surprisingly, the concept of memes has its 
critics and its supporters. One major criticism of 
the theory of memes is that unlike genes, memes 
cannot be empirically deﬁ ned or readily subjected 
to statistical analyses. Paul Ehrlich of Stanford 
University has argued that “memetics has not led 
to any real understanding of cultural evolution.” 
Alternatively the concept of memes may serve as 
a bridge integrating the social and natural sciences 
toward the study of evolution. 
CULTURAL EVOLUTION
Some 10,000 years ago, humans gave up the pre-
carious hunting and gathering way of life for a 
more settled and secure existence based on agri-
culture and the breeding of animals. This initial 
trial at cultivating the land ushered in the so-called 
Neolithic revolution. When we domesticated plants 
and animals, we took a major step in controlling 
nature rather than being at its mercy. We placed 
nature at our service with our ideas, discoveries, 
and inventions. We began to control our own food 
Biologic Evolution
Cultural Evolution
Agents
Genes
Ideas
Rate of change
Slow
Rapid 
Direction of change
Random mutations; subject to selection
Usually purposeful and directional
Nature of new variants
Often harmful
Often beneﬁ cial
Transmission
Parents to offspring
Wide dissemination by many means
Distribution in nature
All forms of life
Unique to humans
TABLE 18.1  Comparisons of Biologic and Cultural Evolution

 
CHAPTER 18 Natural Selection, Social Behavior, and Cultural Evolution  
247
the dramatic and ambitious pronouncement made 
by President John F. Kennedy’s on May 25, 1961, 
that the United States would put a man on the 
Moon before the end of the decade. In the years 
that followed, deliberate steps (Projects Mercury, 
Gemini, and Apollo), each designed to build 
on the previous, resulted in the realization of 
Kennedy’s goal when on July 20, 1969, Apollo 
11’s commander, Neil Armstrong, stepped off 
the lunar module’s ladder onto the Moon’s sur-
face. Biological evolution is not capable of this 
type of purposive, deliberate, vector-like change. 
Today, with the Internet and other forms of com-
munications and technology, cultural evolution 
has the capacity to adapt even faster than it did 
in the 1960s.
The human capacity for rapid cultural adap-
tation provides great hope for the future of our 
species and our planet. Our world is ﬁ lled with 
seemingly impossible dilemmas that threaten our 
very existence. Nevertheless, a directed commit-
ment by people could very quickly abate regional 
and global tribulations. Let us hope that when we 
are called to act, the arrow is still in the bow or at 
least that its trajectory can still be inﬂ uenced.
chance genetic change can become established in 
the population under the force of natural selection.
In chapter 1, we dismissed Lamarck’s concept 
of inheritance of acquired characteristics as an 
early concept of evolution that was specious and 
fanciful. However, cultural evolution is implicitly 
Lamarckian. As acquired characteristics or knowl-
edge is obtained, cultural evolution can result in 
a straight-line, purposeful change. In this way, 
cultural evolution sharply contrasts with biologi-
cal evolution and can be, and often is, directional, 
purposeful, and progressive.
In a 10-year period or less, what was innova-
tive becomes passé and often irrelevant. Medicine, 
computer technology, various branches of science, 
including genetics and molecular biology, are 
evolving at ever increasing rates. Through global 
interconnectivity via the Internet and other modal-
ities, ideas spread like viruses from one end of the 
Earth to another. Hence, cultural evolution has the 
capacity to build upon its immediate past, with-
out the aid of genes or DNA to transmit itself and 
build upon itself.
Exemplary of the directional, purposeful, and 
progressive capacities of cultural evolution were 

248
EPILOGUE
C harles Darwin’s (ﬁ g. E.1) explanation of 
evolution has been debated ever since the ﬁ rst 
appearance of his book, The Origin of Species. 
The entire ﬁ rst edition of 1,250 copies was sold out 
on the very day it ﬁ rst appeared, November 14, 1859. 
Some press reviews were favorable: others were 
scathing and satiric. The most favorable comments 
appeared in the London Times, authored by the dis-
tinguished scientist and Darwin advocate Thomas 
Henry Huxley. Huxley’s bold support of Darwin’s 
ideas earned him the reputation of being “Darwin’s 
bulldog,” and his candid reaction to The Origin of 
Species was to conjecture, “How extremely stupid 
of me not to have thought of that.”
Darwin’s theory appeared to many scientists 
to be refreshingly simple: some chance variations 
better adjust individuals to their environment, and 
such variant individuals tend to survive and trans-
mit their favorable characteristics to their descen-
dants. As we have discussed, this is the essence of 
natural selection, and it seemed harmless enough 
until Darwin hinted that humans may have evolved 
from “lower” forms of life. This notion was hereti-
cal because it contradicted the story of divine cre-
ation as told of in the Bible. The biblical rendition is 
that all organisms were created as separate species, 
all ruled over by humans, who were created them-
selves in the image of God. Religious opposition 
to Darwin’s oblique suggestion that humans were 
not the unique crown of divine creation came from 
evangelists in Victorian England, who believed 
staunchly in the inerrancy of the scriptures.
In Darwin’s day, the prevailing worldview 
was that all that was natural was the work of the 
Creator and the role of science was to explain the 
phenomenon produced by the Creator. Because of 
this perspective, Darwin ﬁ rst characterized his the-
ory to friend and botanist Joseph Hooker as “like 
confessing a murder.” Darwin knew that his work 
would challenge the established dogma of his day 
and revolutionize the way people thought about 
themselves and their position relative to the rest of 
life on Earth. 
Today the roots of opposition to Darwin-
ism spring largely from fundamentalist sects that 
insist on the literal interpretation of the Bible or 
other origin books. Mainstream ministers, rab-
bis, priests, and even Pope Paul II have accepted 
the validity of the theory of evolution, while also 
maintaining their religious beliefs. To preserve 
their absolutist concept of the Bible, some radical 
Protestant fundamentalists have woven Genesis 
into a spurious theory called “scientiﬁ c creation-
ism” and a newer form of the same ideology called 
“intelligent design” (ID). The intent of scientiﬁ c 
creationism and ID is to give the story of Genesis 
a veneer of scientiﬁ c respectability. The creation-
ists have pressed for the teaching of their super-
natural brand of evolution in the public schools. 
Broadly speaking, a devotee of creationism is one 
who rejects modern science in favor of a belief in 
a supernatural explanation for life. ID asserts that 
the universe was purposefully created by an intel-
ligent being.
THE CRUCIBLE OF EVOLUTION

 
Epilogue 
249
the book of Genesis. The fact that the Earth is over 
4 billion years old is not disputed by any serious 
scholar, be they religious scholar or scientist.
Furthermore, scientiﬁ c creationism is an 
inﬂ exible view not open to empirical testing. Sci-
ence necessarily rejects certainty and predicates 
acceptance of a concept on objective testing and 
the possibility of continual revision. The claims of 
creationists are unveriﬁ able (or unfalsiﬁ able) and, 
hence, inherently unscientiﬁ c. Creationism starts 
with a conclusion, accepts it as revealed truth not 
open to empirical testing, and then tries to “prove” 
the contention—not by abducting positive evi-
dence but by attempting to undermine evolution-
ary evidence.
The public has reacted to issues of scientiﬁ c 
creationism and ID with confusion. The average 
person on the street has been bewildered by the 
complex arguments of both sides. Creationists 
challenge the validity of data supporting evolu-
tionary change. Evolutionists acknowledge the 
uncertain nature of science and that the body of 
evolutionary knowledge is continually growing 
and increasing in accuracy. Unfortunately, most 
people are not conversant with the concepts of 
evolution and lack the conﬁ dence to weigh the 
issues. It is therefore not surprising that many citi-
zens perceive the controversy as a dispute between 
two groups of passionately committed individuals 
and supposes that one outlook is as good as the 
other. When creationists ask for equal time in the 
science classroom, the person on the street views 
the situation as a reasonable request for fair play. 
But the request is unreasonable because creation-
ism only masquerades as science, and the integ-
rity of science cannot be violated in the science 
classroom. Science does not resort to miraculous 
explanations. Likewise, there are many good rea-
sons to discuss theistic beliefs about creation in 
a school curriculum, but religious beliefs should 
be discussed in appropriate courses dealing with 
theology or contemporary religion. The biblical 
account of creation, however disguised, should not 
be taught as if it were science—which it decidedly 
is not.
Scientiﬁ c creationism and ID are a mockery 
of the objectivity of science and debase conven-
tional religion. There are many devoted theolo-
gians who accept evolution. Likewise, there are 
many esteemed scientists who are deeply commit-
ted to their religious faith. Religious faith and an 
acceptance of the tenets of Darwinian evolution 
are in no way incompatible. They are different 
realms that are non-overlapping. Religion is a mat-
ter of faith, and science is an objective portrayal of 
the world we live in. The bitter conﬂ icts that have 
arisen are unwarranted.
Scientiﬁ c creationism and ID are not scien-
tiﬁ c alternatives to Darwinian evolution. They 
demand absolute acceptance of views not subject 
to testing or revision. ID and scientiﬁ c creationism 
extend beyond the simple suggestion that a divine 
being could have created the universe. Fundamen-
talist creationists would assert, for example, that 
the Earth is less than 10,000 years old. This inde-
fensible view is not found in mainstream religions 
of any denomination. It is, however, a view that 
certain fundamentalist sects choose to read into 
Figure E.1 Charles Darwin (1809–1882) in 1880, two 
years before his death, at his house at Down House, Kent, 
England.

250 
Epilogue
descent with modiﬁ cation from a common ances-
tor deﬁ nes Darwinian thinking.
Prior to the time when Darwin lived, people 
viewed the Earth as young, as only thousands of 
years old. We now understand that the Earth and 
life on our planet are billions of years old. And 
while we know that evolution can occur at a rapid 
pace, the true age of the Earth provides sufﬁ cient 
time for many of the geologic changes modern sci-
ence ascribes to the natural world.
Before Darwin, adaptation and variation were 
viewed as the work of a divine Creator who deci-
ded on structure and function. A post-Darwinian 
view sees adaptation and the random interplay of 
environmental and genetic variation as the causes 
of variation and adaptation.
Though his own scientiﬁ c work, Darwin 
established the notion of a scientiﬁ c method of 
hypothesis testing. This way of thinking was at 
variance with the notion that observations simply 
substantiate the prevailing worldview. Modern sci-
ence is based on the use of the scientiﬁ c method 
(chapter 1).
Finally, Darwin argued that humanity evolved 
by the same forces as every other form of life. In 
the metaphor of the branching evolutionary tree, 
the human species is just another twig on the tree 
of life, no different, no better or worse, than any 
other branch. This proposition was most difﬁ cult 
for the general public to accept and forms the basis 
of much of the current debate regarding evolution.
SCIENTIFIC LITERACY
As scientiﬁ cally literate citizens, we are often 
called upon to articulate what we know and 
engage in thoughtful discussions with others. Yet 
when asked about evolution, many U.S. citizens 
do not have the knowledge and background to 
fully engage. As a society, we are unacquainted 
with the facts that form the basis of Darwinian 
evolution. The following statistics epitomize the 
societal level of Darwinian literacy in the United 
States.
CHANGING WORLDVIEWS
The reasons for the ongoing debate about evolu-
tion are complex, but in many respects they revolve 
around the ways in which Darwin’s ideas changed 
our worldview. This is why the evolution debate 
festers and refuses to go away. For many people, 
Darwinian thinking is an assault against their own 
worldview and is therefore stridently opposed. 
By any measure, it is not an exaggeration 
to call Darwin’s legacy revolutionary. Our post-
Darwinian framework for knowing and perceiv-
ing the natural world is fundamentally different 
from the pre-Darwinian framework. In many 
respects, the extent to which our worldview has 
changed since Darwin’s Victorian times is greatly 
underappreciated. Below are some of the ways 
in which Darwin’s ideas resulted in a profound 
paradigm shift. 
Darwin rejected the supernatural as the cause 
of our existence and instead established natural 
selection as the mechanism by which evolution 
occurs. This did not deny the existence of God or 
negate the belief in God, but proffered that natu-
ral selection explained the existence of the natural 
world.
Darwin argued that variation was fortuitous, 
due to chance and not ordained by any divine plan; 
that life was not stable and invariable, but instead 
was in constant ﬂ ux. Darwin described a world 
where species are forever changing and modify-
ing themselves, some evolving into new species 
and some going extinct. This was an entirely 
new way of thinking about biology and contra-
dicted the previous conception of an inﬂ exible 
and stable world. Under this new perspective, 
organisms and populations are viewed as unique 
and constantly changing, having both a history 
and a future.
Darwin dispelled the notion that evolution 
was linear and replaced this with the concept of 
branching, the tree metaphor (ﬁ g. 14.7), whereby 
branching implied common descent and a uniﬁ ed 
concept of all life being interrelated from a sin-
gle common ancestor. More than any other idea, 

(1308)
(n = 500)
(1013)
(1023)
(1021)
(2146)
(976)
(1024)
(1035)
(1507)
(1006)
(1005)
(1000)
(518)
(1008)
(1061)
(1006)
(1037)
(1000)
(1009)
(500)
(999)
(1241)
(999)
(1034)
(1000)
(1005)
(1000)
(1008)
(1003)
(1034)
(505)
(1484)
(1005)
United Kingdom
Iceland 
Denmark
Sweden
France
Japan
Norway
Belgium
Spain
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Hungary
Luxembourg
Ireland
Slovenia
Finland
Czech Republic
Estonia
Portugal
Malta
Switzerland
Slovak Republic
Poland
Austria
Croatia
Romania
Greece
Bulgaria
Lithuania
Latvia
Cyprus
United States
Turkey
0
20
40
Response
60
80
100
False
True
Not sure
Figure E.2 Public acceptance of evolution in 
34 countries. The United States ranked 33rd out of 34 in 
a recent (2005) survey of industrialized countries regarding 
their acceptance of the concept of evolution. Numbers in 
parenthesis are the number of individuals surveyed in each 
country. Respondents were asked to answer true, false, or 
not sure to the statement “Human beings, as we know them, 
developed from earlier species of animals.”
 
Epilogue 
251
are to have the tools needed to address the chal-
lenges ahead.
DARWIN IN THE COURTS
In the United States, there is a long history of 
the issue of teaching evolution in public schools 
Surveys reveal that one-third of U.S. adults 
believe that evolution is “absolutely false.” When 
asked if “the earliest humans lived at the same 
time as the dinosaurs,” only 50 percent of U.S. 
adult citizens answered “false.” Merely 45 per-
cent answered “true” to the statement that “human 
beings, as we know them today, developed from 
earlier species of animals.” In a 20-year (1985–
2005) national survey of U.S. adults, 55 percent 
were tentative in their acceptance of evolution. 
One recent poll found that an even greater per-
centage (70 percent) support the teaching of cre-
ationism in schools. Perhaps the most troubling 
statistic comes from the comparison of adults 
in 32 European countries, the U.S., and Japan 
regarding their acceptance of evolution. In that 
study (ﬁ g. E.2), U.S. adults ranked 33 out of 34. 
Only Turkish adults were less accepting of evolu-
tion. Over the 20-year study period, the percent-
age of U.S. adults who accept evolution declined 
from 45 percent to 39 percent. The percent 
that were “not sure” about evolution rose from 
7 percent to 21 percent. In Japan, 78 percent of 
adults accept evolution and in Denmark, Iceland, 
France, and Sweden, 80 percent or more accept 
evolution.
One of the reasons for the discrepancy 
between the United States and Europe and Japan 
is that the subject of evolution has been politici-
zed in the United States and deﬁ ned as a partisan 
issue. Unlike the United States, no major European 
or Japanese political party has embraced either 
creationism or evolution. Furthermore, surveys in 
both the United States and Europe ﬁ nd that there 
is a positive correlation between overall literacy in 
genetics and acceptance of evolution. Our society 
is no better versed in modern genetics than it is in 
evolution.
These statistics should disturb political lead-
ers, educators, and citizens alike. Science teachers 
from middle school through college recognize that 
present-day scientiﬁ c instruction of evolution is 
substandard and ineffective. Attitudes and beliefs 
regarding the instruction of evolution in the United 
States must change if twenty-ﬁ rst-century citizens 

252 
Epilogue
the U.S. Constitution (see below). The Tennessee 
court rejected all of these arguments and found 
the statute to be constitutional. Ironically, while 
the Butler Act was found to be constitutional, the 
conviction of John Scopes was set aside because 
of the legal technicality that the jury should have 
decided the ﬁ ne, not the judge. The Butler Act was 
not repealed until 1967. In the aftermath of these 
Tennessee court cases over a dozen states consid-
ered some form of anti-evolution statute. Most of 
these efforts were defeated, but Mississippi and 
Alabama did enact anti-evolution legislation. 
Over 40 years after the Scopes trial, in 
1968 (table E.1), the U.S. Supreme Court ﬁ nally 
declared laws forbidding the teaching of evolu-
tion unconstitutional. In Epperson v. Arkansas, the 
Court invalidated an Arkansas statue that prohib-
ited the teaching of evolution. In its decision, the 
Court held that the Establishment Clause of First 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution (see below) 
does not allow a state to require that learning be 
customized to any particular religious sect or 
doctrine.
In the 1982 case of McLean v. Arkansas 
Board of Education, a federal court declared that 
“creation science” is not a science. Furthermore, it 
held that a “balanced treatment” law violated the 
Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution (see 
below) and was therefore unconstitutional. More 
speciﬁ cally, Judge William Overturn made clear 
that “creation science” is religion. This ruling had 
a profound impact on the creationist movement 
in the United States, which did not challenge this 
decision until 1987.
In 1987 the U.S. Supreme Court held, in 
Edwards v. Aguillard, that the Louisiana “Cre-
ationism Act” was unconstitutional. That law pro-
hibited the teaching of evolution in public schools, 
except when it was taught in conjunction with 
“creation science.” In its ruling the Court found 
that the Louisiana law was deliberately designed 
to advance a particular religion. To assist the 
defense, over 70 Nobel laureates ﬁ led “friends of 
the court” briefs describing creation science as a 
religious doctrine. 
ending up in the courts. The reasons are both his-
torical and contemporary. In the past, most legal 
confrontations have been about the teaching of 
evolution. As that issue was resolved by the courts, 
the more recent clamor to the bench has come from 
religious fanatics who wish to disguise religious 
doctrine and pass it off as science. Compounding 
this are the dual issues discussed above: a citizenry 
that is poorly educated regarding evolution and the 
fact that evolution is at variance with a comfort-
ing anthropocentric worldview. These factors, in 
combination with an effective appeal by a vocal 
minority that both sides of the controversy should 
be taught in science classes, has kept the evolution 
wars on the front burners of our legal system.
The most famous court case regarding the 
teaching evolution in the public schools is the 
1925 case of John Scopes in Dayton, Tennessee. 
The Scopes case tested the Butler Act, which made 
it unlawful “to teach any theory that denies the 
story of Divine Creation of man as taught in the 
Bible, and to teach instead that man has descen ded 
from a lower order of animals.” Many historians 
consider this case a turning point in the U.S. 
creation-evolution debate. Scopes was a high school 
teacher of biology who intentionally violated the 
Butler Act by teaching about evolution. The law-
yer for the prosecution was Williams Jennings 
Bryant, a three-time presidential candidate, former 
secretary of state, and congressman. The defense 
was represented by Clarence Darrow, a nationally 
prominent defense attorney and trial lawyer. The 
goal of the defense was not to have John Scopes 
acquitted, but to have a higher court, such as the 
U.S. Supreme Court, declare that laws forbidding 
the teaching of evolution were unconstitutional. 
After an eight-day trial, the jury deliber-
ated for only nine minutes before ﬁ nding Scopes 
guilty. Scopes was ordered to pay a $100 ﬁ ne. 
The case was appealed to the Tennessee Supreme 
Court, where the plaintiffs challenged the rul-
ing on several grounds, including that the statute 
was vague, violated Scopes right to free speech, 
was in violation of the Tennessee State Constitu-
tion, and violated the Establishment Clause of 

 
Epilogue 
253
Case
Year
Judicial Venue
Major Finding(s)
Kitzmiller v. Dover, PA
2004
U.S. District Court
Ruled that intelligent design (ID) is another form of
Middle District 
creationism or “creation science” and 
Pennsylvania
therefore is a religious doctrine that violates the 
Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
Rodney LeVake v.
Independent School
District et al.
2000
Minnesota 
Supreme 
Court
Ruled that a high school biology teacher’s First
Amendment right to free speech did not entitle him to 
teach “evidence for and against the theory” of evolution.
Supreme Court refused to hear appeal.
Frieler v. Tangipahoa
1997
U.S. District Court
Rejected policy requiring teachers to read a disclaimer
Parish Board of 
Eastern District
when teaching about evolution. Seen by court as an
Education
of Louisiana
endorsement of religion. Recognized “intelligent
design” (ID) as “creation science.”
1999
Fifth Circuit Court
of Appeals
Afﬁ rmed decision
2000
U.S. Supreme
Declined to hear appeal, thus allowed lower court’s 
Court
ruling to stand.
Peloza v. Capistrano
1994
Ninth Circuit Court
Upheld lower court ruling that teacher’s First 
School District
of Appeals
Amendment rights to free exercise of religion is not
violated by school district’s requirement that teacher
be required to teach evolution in biology classes.
Webster v. New Lenox
1990
Seventh Circuit 
Afﬁ rmed district court ruling that “ teaching creation
School District
Court of Appeals
science for any reason was a form of religious
advocacy” and thus violated the Establishment
Clause of the First Amendment.
Edwards v. Aguillard
1987
U.S. Supreme 
Held that Louisiana’s “Creationism Act,” prohibiting 
Court
the teaching of evolution except when “creation
science” was also taught, was unconstitutional
(violated the Establishment Clause).
McLean v. Arkansas
1982
Federal Court
Declared that “creation science” is not science and
Board of Education
that the notion of a “balanced treatment” requiring
that both “evolution-science and “creation-science” be 
taught was a violation of the Establishment Clause.
Segraves v. State of 
1981
Sacramento
Court rejected parent’s contention that teaching about 
California
Superior Court
evolution violated their First Amendment rights to 
freely exercise their religion.
Epperson v. Arkansas
1968
U.S. Supreme
Invalidated an Arkansas law prohibiting teaching of
Court
evolution. Estabishment Clause violation. State cannot 
require teaching anything that fosters a speciﬁ c religion.
Compiled from: Brian Alters, “Teaching Biological Evolution in Higher Education” (2005), 
Barbara Forrest and Paul R. Gross, “Creationism’s Trojan Horse” (2004) and court proceedings.
TABLE E.1 Signi  cant Court Decisions Regarding the Teaching of Evolution, Creationism 
and Intelligent Design

254 
Epilogue
give preference to any one religion. As discussed 
below, the Establishment Clause is paired to a 
second clause, called the Free Exercise Clause, 
which prohibits restricting the free exercise of 
religion. As summarized in table E.1, this portion 
of the U.S. Constitution has formed the basis of 
many court rulings. What this makes clear is that 
the issue of teaching evolution in schools is not 
a question of fairness, but a matter of the highest 
possible legal principles. 
Some court cases have been brought because 
a party argued that there was a violation of the 
Free Exercise Clause, which is the second part of 
the Establishment Clause (“or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof ”). In the 1981 case Seagraves v. 
the State of California (table E.1), the parents of 
three schoolchildren sued the state, accusing them 
of violating the Free Exercise Clause of the First 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution by teaching 
about evolution. In this case, the California court 
judge ruled that California’s State Board of Edu-
cation’s policy provided adequate accommodation 
to the views of the Seagraves in contradiction to 
Mr. Seagraves’s contention that the class discus-
sion of evolution prohibited his and his children’s 
free exercise of religion.
Other important court cases are summarized 
in table E.1. In each instance, the courts were used 
as the ﬁ nal arbiter in the ongoing controversy 
between religious zealots and science education. 
Efforts to wedge religion into science classes 
or remove evolution from the curriculum have 
formed the basis of most cases. Every court ruling 
has supported the teaching of evolution in schools 
and against the teaching of religious doctrine in 
science classes. By whatever name (creationism, 
creation science, intelligent design), the courts 
have been unanimous in afﬁ rming that religion 
has no place in science class.
CLOSING COMMENTARY
Ultimately, the effective and widespread teaching 
of the principles of evolution is in the best interests 
In 2005 creationist proponents tried to change 
the words from “creation science” to “intelligent 
design.” However, Judge John E. Jones III, the pre-
siding judge in the trial of Kitzmiller et al. v. Dover 
Area School District et al., ruled that it is uncon-
stitutional to require that “intelligent design” be 
presented as an alternative to evolution. Tammy 
Kitzmiller was one of several parents who sued their 
school board when the teachers were asked to alter 
their teaching of evolution and to make students 
aware of the “gaps in the theory” and to teach intel-
ligent design as a reasonable “explanation for the 
origin of life.” Creation science had already been 
established to be a form of religion by the courts in 
McLean v. Arkansas Board of Education (table E.1). 
Judge Jones ruled that “intelligent design” is simply 
another form of “creationism” or “creation science” 
and is therefore a religious doctrine that violates the 
Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution. 
The Jones ruling, contained in a 139-page 
ﬁ nding of fact, is viewed by many as one of the 
most powerful and important decisions in the his-
tory of evolution court cases. Others believe that 
Jones’s decision is ﬂ awed and that the matter will 
soon resurface in another venue. Regardless of 
the merits of the Dover ruling, the leaders of the 
“wedge” movement are fervently determined to 
force their position on American education. 
The “wedge strategy” is a political manifesto 
aimed at reversing the teaching of evolution with 
religious doctrine. Authored by the conservative 
evangelical think tank called the “Discovery Insti-
tute,” the wedge strategy is a metaphor for the way 
in which a metal wedge is used to split logs. By 
advancing a small opening into the public debate 
about evolution, the wedge strategy hopes to cre-
ate an opportunity for promoting their political 
and social agenda.
The Establishment Clause refers to the ﬁ rst 
statements of the First Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution, which say that “Congress shall make 
no law respecting an establishment of religion 
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. . . .”. It is 
aimed at preventing the establishment of a state 
religion and thwarting the passage of laws that 

 
Epilogue 
255
of the greater society. Darwinian evolution is, as 
we have repeatedly discussed, the unifying prin-
ciple in biology and the other natural sciences. 
Many scholars have articulated the view that if 
our global society is to effectively address our pres-
ent and future environmental problems, coinciden-
tal with our exponential population expansion of 
the last millennium, the disciplines of ecology and 
evolution must be understood by citizens, scientists, 
and politicians alike. The Darwinian worldview, 
while disconcerting to some, deﬁ nes a path to a sus-
tainable future. In our increasingly rapidly changing 
world, what could be more important than an appre-
ciation for how and why change occurs? Our future 
existence may well depend on how well we come to 
appreciate the history of our species and our planet.

256
GLOSSARY
Aberrant: Not normal or usual.
Acidophile: Archaeabacteria in the domain 
Archaea, which are capable of living under 
conditions of extreme acidity.
Adaptation: A characteristic that promotes sur-
vival and reproduction in a particular environment.
Adaptive radiation: The diversiﬁ cation of 
species into new ecological niches.
Adenine (A): One of the two purine nitrogenous 
bases. Pairs with thymine in DNA and uracil 
in RNA.
Admixture: In population genetics, a measure of 
the mixing of genes from different populations.
Aerobic: Activity or function that requires air. 
Compare to anaerobic.
Albino: An organism lacking the pigment 
melanin. In humans, the condition of lacking any 
pigment coloration.
Algae: Diverse group of photosynthetic plants.
Allantois: The extra-embryonic membrane of 
vertebrate eggs that functions primarily in 
respiration and the storage of wastes.
Allele: One of two or more alternative forms of 
a gene.
Allelic frequency: A measure of the occurrence 
of an allele in a population expressed as a propor-
tion of the entire population.
Allopatric: Being geographically isolated. 
Compare to sympatric.
Allopatric speciation: The formation of new 
species when two groups physically separate. 
Also called geographic speciation.
Allopolyploid: An organism or species contain-
ing the sets of chromosomes from two different 
organisms.
Altruism: Behavior of self-sacriﬁ ce for the ben-
eﬁ t of others.
Amerind: The indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Amino acid: The twenty building blocks of pro-
teins coded for by the genetic code.
Amnion: The innermost ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled extra-
embryonic membrane of a vertebrate egg.
Amniotes: Living and extinct vertebrates 
(e.g., reptiles, birds, and mammals) possessing an 
amniotic sac.
Amniotic egg: The type of egg of a vertebrate 
that possesses an amnion, a chorion, yolk sac and 
an allantois as extraembryonic membranes.
The following is a non-exhaustive list of deﬁ nitions for terms found in this text. For those terms not 
found in this glossary, the reader should refer to a good scientiﬁ c dictionary.

 
Glossary 
257
production, via selective breeding, of individuals 
with desired characteristics.
Asexual reproduction: Reproduction in the 
absence of sex.
Aurignacian: An early Upper Paleolithic 
cultural phase (named after a cave in Aurignac, 
France) beginning in Europe about 40,000 years 
ago and lasting until about 22,000 years ago.
Australopithecines: Members of the genus 
Australopithecus, some of the earliest hominids.
Autopolyploid: A species or organism that 
contains duplicated chromosomes (polyploid) 
derived from the same species.
Autosome: The nonsex chromosomes. 
In humans, chromosomes 1–22.
Autotroph: An organism that has the ability to 
harness energy from the sun or from inorganic 
sources. Usually photosynthetic green plants.
Azoospermia: The absence of sperm.
Background extinction: The normal extinction 
rate found throughout the geological history of 
Earth. Compare to mass extinction.
Balanced polymorphism: Phenomenon by which 
two or more alleles are maintained in a population 
over the course of many generations through selec-
tion (heterozygote advantage) rather than mutation.
Base (nucleotide): The nitrogenous component 
of a nucleotide consisting of either a purine or a 
pyrimidine.
Base pair: Two complementary pairs of 
nucleotides in DNA (A–T; G–C) or RNA (A–U), 
connected by hydrogen bonds.
Binomial:  Literally, “two names.” The Linnaean 
two-name system of naming organisms where the 
genus name is followed by the species S name. 
E.g., Homo sapiens.
Biogeography: The study of the geographic dis-
tribution of living and extinct species.
Biological species concept: The concept of a spe-
cies as a reproductively isolated, freely interbreed-
ing population(s) that produces fertile offspring.
Amniotic sac: Fluid-ﬁ lled membrane surround-
ing a vertebrate embryo that provides protection 
and aids in respiration.
Amphibia: Member of the class Amphibia, 
which includes the frogs, toads, and salamanders.
Analogous: Serving the same function but not 
evolving from the same common ancestor. See 
convergence.
Anagenesis: The evolutionary process whereby 
one species evolves into another. Evolution within 
a single lineage.
Anaerobic: Conditions without the presence of 
oxygen. Compare to aerobic.
Anamniotes: Vertebrates without an amnion; 
includes the cyclostomes (hagﬁ sh and lamprey), 
ﬁ sh, and amphibians.
Angiogenesis: The growth of new blood vessels 
in the body.
Angiosperm: A ﬂ owering plant.
Anthropoid: Among the primates, the monkeys, 
apes, and humans. Apelike.
Antibody: A protein that is produced in response 
to a foreign substance (antigen).
Anticodon: The triplet sequence of nucleotides 
on transfer RNA that is complementary to a 
codon on messenger RNA.
Antigen: A foreign substance that stimulates the 
immune system. (See antibody).
Anthropoid: Primates that include living and 
extinct monkeys, apes, and humans. 
Aneuploid: Having one or more extra or missing 
chromosomes. See polyploidy.
Arboreal: Living in the tress.
Archaeobacteria: Members of the domain 
Archaea.
Archosaur: Diaspid amniotes that were the 
ancestors of the dinosaurs and include the modern 
crocodilians and birds.
Arti  cial selection: Selection through the 
intentional actions of humans encouraging the 

258 
Glossary
Class: A taxonomic category between a phyla 
and an order. A phylum contains classes that con-
tain orders.
Cline (clinal): A gradient of change (usually phys-
ical or physiological) in a phenotype or genotype 
in populations of related organisms, usually along a 
line of environmental or geographic transition.
Clonal: Cells that are descended from and genet-
ically identical to an original cell.
Co-dominant: Condition in which the heterozy-
gote produces both gene products. In sickle-cell 
anemia, for example, a heterozygote “carrier” 
with one sickle gene and one normal gene pro-
duces roughly half sickle-shape red blood cells 
and about half normal-shape red blood cells.
Coding strand: The strand of DNA that is 
used to make messenger RNA transcript during 
transcription.
Common descent: Having a common ancestor. 
A major principle of Darwinian evolution, which 
states that all organisms are related through com-
mon ancestry.
Competitive exclusion (Gause’s principle): 
Principle that under a particular set of environ-
mental conditions, competition between species 
seeking the same ecological niche results in one 
species surviving while the other perishes, result-
ing in each species occupying a distinct niche.
Congenital: Present at birth.
Conjugation: The temporary union of unicellular 
organisms, such as bacteria, during which genetic 
material is transferred from one cell to another.
Consanguinity: Close genetic relationships. 
For example, brother-sister, mother-son, father-
daughter, cousins. Usually used to indicate mat-
ing between close relatives.
Conspeci  c: Members of the same species.
Convergent evolution: The independent devel-
opment (evolution) of similar characters (struc-
tures or genes) in genetically unrelated organisms 
as a response to similar environments.
Creationism: The belief that organisms were 
independently created by a supernatural force.
Biosphere: The regions of the Earth’s surface 
and atmosphere where living organisms exist.
Bipedal: Walking on two hind limbs (legs) for 
locomotion.
Brachiation: An arboreal locomotion pattern 
used by gibbons and siamangs in which they swing 
from tree limb to tree limb using only their arms.
Cambrian explosion: Massive expansion and 
diversiﬁ cation of life that occurred roughly 
540 million years ago.
Carcinogen: A substance that causes cancer.
Carrier: An individual with one copy of a reces-
sive allele and one copy of a dominant allele who 
is unaffected by the recessive allele.
Carrying capacity: Based on the available 
resources, the maximum sustainable population of 
a particular environment.
Central dogma: A representation of the ﬂ ow of 
genetic information as DNA→RNA→protein.
Centromere: The central constriction of a chromo-
some; binds to spindle ﬁ bers during cell division.
Chemoautotroph: Organism capable of produc-
ing energy from chemicals (vs. the sun).
Chloroplast: Oval-shaped cellular organelle found 
in the cytoplasm of greens plants and green algae.
Chorion: The outermost of the extra-embryonic 
membranes in terrestrial vertebrates; contributes 
to the formation of the placenta in mammals.
Chromatid:  One of a pair of a duplicated chro-
mosome held together by a centromere.
Chromosomal aberration: Changes to the 
arrangement of parts of a chromosome such as an 
inversion, duplication, or translocation.
Chromosome: Structures in living organisms 
containing genes that are passed from one genera-
tion to the next. In humans and most eukaryotes, 
chromosomes are linear mixtures of DNA and 
proteins. In bacteria, chromosomes are circular.
Cladogenesis: Evolution that results in the split-
ting of a lineage; the splitting of one phyletic 
lineage into two.

 
Glossary 
259
Deleterious gene: A gene associated with a 
debilitating condition or disease.
Deleterious mutation: Harmful mutation. 
Mutation that is not adaptive.
Deletion: The loss of a portion of a chromosome.
De novo: Arising anew or from the beginning.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA): The set of 
nucleotides that serve as genetic information. 
Deoxyribose: Five-carbon sugar of DNA.
Devonian: Geological period in the Paleozoic 
which lasted from 417-354 million years ago that 
is known as the “Age of Fishes”.
Directional selection: Selection acting to reduce 
or eliminate one extreme form from a distribution 
of phenotypes.
Diapsid: Group of living and extinct amniotes 
with two temporal openings in their skull. 
Differential reproduction: Preferential repro-
duction of those individuals who are best adapted 
to a particular environment over those who are 
less well adapted to that environment.
Differential survival: Preferential survival of 
those individuals who are best adapted to a par-
ticular environment over those who are less well 
adapted to that environment.
Dihybrid cross: A cross between individuals 
that differ with respect to two different traits.
Dimorphism (as in sexual dimorphism): The 
presence or two morphologically distinct types.
Diploid: Having two sets of chromosomes.
Directed panspermia: The notion that life was 
purposefully seeded on Earth.
Directional selection: When selection favors one 
extreme of the distribution of traits, causing the 
distribution to shift in one direction.
Disruptive selection: When the extreme of a dis-
tribution of traits has the highest ﬁ tness, and the 
intermediate values are most disadvantageous.
Divergent evolution: Change leading to differ-
ences between lineages.
Creole: Used variously to describe the people 
and languages of the descendants of  various eth-
nic backgrounds who interbred with French set-
tlers to Louisiana.
Crossing over: The exchange of chromosome 
segments by nonsister chromatids during synapsis 
of meiosis I.
Crossopterygian: The lobbed-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh of 
the Devonian period that may have developed 
into the ﬁ rst tetrapods. Include the modern day 
coelacanth.
Cuckold: The male mate of an unfaithful female 
mate; from the cuckoo’s habit of laying eggs in 
the nest of other birds.
Cultural selection: Application of Darwinian 
concept of selection to culture.
Cussorial: Adapted for running.
Cyclostome: Primitive jawless ﬁ sh such as 
hagﬁ sh and lamprey.
Cytochrome c: A mitochondrial protein involved 
in energy transport.
Cytoplasm: Part of the cell enclosed by the 
plasma membrane that contains organelles.
Cytosine (C): One of the pyrimidines that pairs 
with guanine (G) in DNA and RNA.
Darwinism: Charles Darwin’s theory that bio-
logical evolution led to many different highly 
adapted species via the mechanism of natural 
selection.
Darwin’s   nches: The species of ﬁ nches native 
to the Galápagos Islands.
Decaploid: Having ten complete sets of 
chromosomes.
Descent with modi  cation: Darwin’s theory that 
existing life forms are the product of modiﬁ ca-
tions from pre-existing life forms.
Deduction: Deriving a conclusion inferred by 
logical reasoning.
Degenerate (redundant): A property of the 
genetic code in which more than one codon speci-
ﬁ es a particular amino acid. 

260 
Glossary
Endoplasmic reticulum: Cellular organelles 
made up of tubules, vesicles, and sacs that 
perform specialized functions in cells.
Endosymbiosis: Theory that eukaryotic cells 
evolved from a symbiosis between different 
prokaryotic species.
Endothermic: Organism that generates heat to 
maintain its body temperature, typically above the 
temperature of its surroundings. Sometimes erro-
neously called “warm-blooded.”
Enhancers: Genetic control elements that 
increase the rate of transcription.
Environmental modi  cation: Changing the 
environment.
Enzyme: Protein that catalyzes or speeds up an 
organic reaction.
Eon: A geologic unit that includes several eras, 
which is in turn composed of periods, which are 
composed of epochs.
Epoch: A unit of geological time that is a subdi-
vision of a period and is itself divided into ages.
Equilibrium: A balance between two or 
more forces.
Era: A category of geologic time between and 
eon and a period.
Erythroblastosis fetalis: Also known as Rh 
disease. A type of anemia in which the red blood 
cells (erythrocytes) of the fetus are destroyed by 
the maternal immune system.
Escherichia coli: A common form of bacteria, 
usually abbreviated as E. coli.
Establishment Clause: Part of the First Amend-
ment to the U.S. Constitution that says that 
“Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof”.
Estrus: Sometimes called “heat”; when the 
female is sexually receptive. Also describes the 
female ovulatory cycle.
Eugenic: The hereditary improvement of the 
human race.
DNA polymerase: Enzyme responsible for link-
ing nucleotides to form DNA strands. Primary 
enzyme of DNA replication.
Dollo’s law: Hypothesis that evolution is not 
reversible.
Double helix: Spiral pattern of DNA in which 
two complementary nucleotide strands coil 
around a common helical axis.
Domain: In scientiﬁ c classiﬁ cation schemes, the 
highest order of grouping.
Domain Archaea: In the three-domain system 
of taxonomy, the group that contains the diverse 
unicellular prokaryotes called Archaea.
Domain Bacteria: In the three-domain system of 
taxonomy, the vast group of unicellular organisms 
called Bacteria.
Domain Eukarya: In the three-domain system 
of taxonomy, the group that contains the eukary-
otic organisms, including the fungi, protists, 
plants, and animals.
Dominant Allele: Allele that exerts a phenotypic 
effect in the heterozygote.
Drosophila: Genus name for fruit ﬂ ies.
Duplication: A mutation that results in the dupli-
cation of a portion of a chromosome.
Dyad: Two chromatids found in late meiosis I 
and early meiosis II.
Ectothermic: An organism that has a body tem-
perature that varies with the environment. Some-
times erroneously called “cold-blooded.”
Electrophoresis: The movement of charged par-
ticles under the inﬂ uence of an electric ﬁ eld. Usu-
ally conducted in some medium, such as a gel.
Embryo: A stage in early development of a 
multicellular organism. In humans, embryo usu-
ally refers to the ﬁ rst nine weeks of gestation, 
after which the embryo is called a fetus.
Endemic: A species or population conﬁ ned to a 
speciﬁ c geographic locality.
Endogamous: Mating between a restricted group 
of individuals.

 
Glossary 
261
set of chromosomes. Male and female gametes 
fuse during fertilization to form a diploid (2n) 
zygote, also known as a fertilized egg.
Gemmules: Imaginary particles of inheritance 
that Darwin proposed for the theory of pangenesis 
that involves miniature body parts discharged into 
the blood that concentrates in the gametes.
Gene: A unit of heredity composed of a 
sequence of DNA that codes for a protein.
Gene clusters: A set of two or more genes that 
serve to encode for the same or similar products.
Gene   ow: Changes in the genetic composi-
tion of populations as a result of migration and 
immigration.
Gene pool: All of the genes in a population.
Genetic code: The sequence of messenger RNA 
triplets (codons) that speciﬁ es the sequence of 
amino acids in a polypeptide or protein. In gen-
eral, the genetic code is universal (identical in all 
organisms) and redundant (degenerate).
Genetic drift: Random ﬂ uctuation in gene fre-
quencies due to chance.
Genetic load: A measure of the impact of delete-
rious genes on a population compared to if it had 
the most favored genotype.
Genotype: Genetic constitution of an individual.
Genotypic frequency: A measure of the occur-
rence of a genotype in a population expressed as a 
proportion of the entire population.
Genome: The complete genetic constitution of a 
cell or organism.
Genomics: The comparative study of genomes.
Genus: Taxonomic unit above a species and 
below a family.
Germ cell: Cell involved in reproduction, such 
as an egg or a sperm.
Germinal: Relating to germ (sex) cells or sexual 
tissue (ovaries and testis)
Germinal mutation: Heritable mutations to ger-
minal tissue such as ovaries or testis.
Eukaryote: A cell or organism that possesses a 
clearly deﬁ ned nucleus. 
Evolution: Biological change over time.
Evolutionary developmental biology 
(evo-devo): The ﬁ eld of biology in which devel-
opmental processes are studied from an evolu-
tionary perspective.
Evolutionary divergence: Accumulation of dif-
ferences in populations or species, leading to the 
formation two or more new species.
Extinction: The end of the existence of a species 
or group of species.
Extremophile: An Archaean organism capable 
of living in very extreme environments. 
Family: A taxonomic unit of similar species 
above the level of a genus and below the level of 
an order.
Fecundity: The ability to reproduce.
Fertilization: Union of two gametes, such as an 
egg and sperm, to form a zygote.
Fitness: Darwinian ﬁ tness is reproductive suc-
cess; the number of offspring produced who sur-
vive to reproduce.
Flagella: Tail-like structure on certain single-
celled organisms.
Fossil: Geological remains from the past.
Fossorial: Adapted for living underground.
Founder effect: Related to genetic drift. When a 
small part of a larger population migrates and brings 
a nonrandom sample of founder population’s genes.
Frameshift mutation: Mutation involving the 
addition or deletion of a nitrogenous base.
Free Exercise Clause: Second part of the Estab-
lishment Clause of the First Amendment that says 
“or prohibiting the free exercise thereof”.
Galápagos: Islands off the coast of Ecuador where 
Charles Darwin landed in his voyage of the Beagle. 
Home of the Galápagos ﬁ nches and tortoises.
Gamete: Specialized haploid (n) reproductive 
cell such as an egg or a sperm with one complete 

262 
Glossary
Heterozygous: Possessing unlike alleles. 
E.g., “Aa.”
Heterozygote: Individual possessing unlike alleles.
Heterozygote advantage: Phenomenon in which 
the heterozygote has a higher Darwinian ﬁ tness 
than either homozygote.
Hexaploid: Having six complete sets of 
chromosomes.
Histone: A type of protein that complexes with 
DNA in eukaryotes.
Holocene: The geological epoch that began 
about 10,000 to 11,000 years ago, characterized 
by the development of human civilization.
Homeobox: A 180-base-pair DNA sequence that 
involves the regulation of a pattern of development.
Homeotic genes: Genes that determine which 
parts of the body form what body parts.
Homeodomain: A domain in a protein that is 
encoded by a homeobox.
Hominoid: The living and extinct members of 
the superfamily Hominoidea. Modern members 
include the apes (gibbons, chimpanzees, and 
gorillas) and the humans.
Hominid: Members of the family Hominidae. 
Modern members are gorillas, orangutans, 
chimps, and humans.
Hominin: Members of the subfamily Homininae. 
Modern members are gorillas, chimps, and humans.
Hominini: Members of the tribe Hominini. 
Modern members are chimps and humans.
(NOTE: The taxonomy of the terms hominoid, 
hominid, hominin, and hominini is not agreed 
upon universally. The above terminology follows 
ﬁ gure 17.1).
Homology: Similarity in biological features 
(genes, structures, behaviors) due to descent from 
a common ancestor.
Homologous structure: Structures that have 
similarities due to common ancestry and common 
descent.
Germ plasm: Cells that give rise to gametes 
(e.g., eggs or sperm).
Genus (pl. genera): A taxonomic grouping 
above a species and below a family (e.g., Homo).
Group selection: The concept that, under certain 
circumstances, genes will be selected for because 
they beneﬁ t the overall success of the group rather 
then the individual.
Guanine: One of the 5 nitrogenous bases found 
in nucleic acids (DNA and RNA). Binds with 
cytosine in DNA and RNA.
Gymnosperm: Meaning “naked seed”, this large 
group of seed bearing plants that includes the 
conifers and cycads.
Gynogenesis: A form of parthenogenesis found 
in some salamanders in which the embryo devel-
ops from maternal DNA only which was activated 
by contact with sperm from a male.
Halophile: An extremophile (archaebacteria) 
organism that thrives in environments with very 
high concentrations of salt.
Handicap principle: Principle proposed to 
explain how evolution may lead to honest or 
reliable signaling between animals that have the 
motivation to bluff or deceive one another.
Haploid: Having one set of chromosomes.
Haplotype: A group of alleles of different genes 
on a single chromosome that are closely linked 
and inherited as a unit.
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium: An equation 
and a concept that specify conditions under 
which it is possible to estimate gene frequencies 
from one generation to the next and describe 
how, when the speciﬁ c conditions are met, that 
gene frequencies do not change from one genera-
tion to the next. 
Hemoglobin: Component of red blood cells that 
carries oxygen.
Heterotroph: Organisms that cannot produce 
their own food and must obtain it from other 
organisms.

 
Glossary 
263
Inheritance of acquired characteristics: 
Lamarck’s hypothesis that the environment 
modiﬁ es traits that are then passed on to the next 
generation.
Insertion sequence: A short DNA sequence that 
acts as a transposable element.
Intelligent design: Assertion and belief that life 
and the universe were purposefully designed by 
an intelligent being. Also sometime referred to 
simply as ID.
Intergenic sequences: DNA sequences located 
between clusters of genes that contain few or 
no genes.
Intersexual selection: Sexual selection between 
members of the opposite sex.
Interspeci  c: Between species.
Intrasexual selection: Sexual selection between 
members of the same sex.
Intraspeci  c: Within species.
In utereo: Within the uterus.
Inversion: A 180-degree change in the direction 
of the genetic material in a single chromosome. 
Isolating mechanisms: Biological mechanisms 
that serve as barriers to gene ﬂ ow or interbreeding 
between populations.
Jumping genes or transposon: A mobile 
genetic element.
Karyotype: Picture of a complete set of chromo-
somes arranged in a standard format.
Kin selection: Evolutionary mechanism that 
selects for genes (or behaviors) that lowers an 
individual’s own ﬁ tness but enhances the repro-
ductive success of a relative. Selection that 
beneﬁ ts the individual’s relatives rather than the 
individual (e.g., an alarm call).
Kingdom: A taxonomic unit that contains phyla. 
Labyrinthodont: The main group of fossil 
amphibians that contains forms closely related to 
certain ﬁ sh.
Homozygote: Individual with two of the same 
alleles.
Homologous genes: Genes derived from the 
same ancestral gene.
Homologue or homologous chromosome: In 
a diploid (2n) organism, a pair of chromosomes, 
such as both chromosomes 1.
Hox gene: A class of genes involved with pattern 
formation in early embryos.
Hydrocarbon: A simple organic compounds 
containing hydrogen and carbon such as methane.
Hydrothermal vents: Openings in the ocean 
ﬂ oor at or near mid-ocean ridges that release hot, 
mineral-rich water that often supports rare and 
unusual forms of life that rely on chemoautotro-
phs for energy.
Hyperendemic: Term applied to malaria when 
transmission occurs, usually throughout the year 
at high intensity, and the disease burden is high in 
young children.
Hypothesis: A proposed explanation for a 
natural phenomenon based on previous obser-
vations or experiments. An unproven scientiﬁ c 
conclusion.
Hypothetico-deductive method: Scientiﬁ c 
method whereby science sets up testable hypoth-
eses and then tries to falsify them.
Ichthyosaur: The aquatic Mesozoic dinosaurs.
Inbreeding: Mating among genetically related 
individuals.
Inclusive   tness: The ﬁ tness of an allele or gen-
otype measured by its effects on related individu-
als that also possess it (see kin selection).
Independent assortment: Mendel’s principle 
that during gamete formation (meiosis) homolo-
gous chromosomes (or genes located on them) 
assort independently of each other.
Industrial melanism: The evolutionary process 
in which initially light-colored organisms become 
darker as a result of natural selection.

264 
Glossary
Meiosis: Cell division resulting in the formation 
of sex cell or gametes (e.g., sperm and eggs), each 
with half the genetic material of the parental cell.
Meiosis I : The ﬁ rst meiotic division, in which 
homologous chromosomes separate.
Meiosis II: The second meiotic division, in 
which duplicated chromosomes separate.
Meme: Cultural unit of evolution analogous 
to a gene.
Memetics: The study of the transmission 
of memes.
Mendelian: Having to do with the concepts 
described by Gregor Mendel.
Messenger RNA (mRNA): The RNA that is 
transcribed from complementary DNA and later 
translated into a protein at the ribosome.
Metacarpal: The tubular bones between the 
wrist and the base of the ﬁ ngers.
Metaphase: Stage of mitosis (or meiosis) fol-
lowing prophase.
Metastasis: Process by which cancer cells move 
from their point of origin to another place in the 
body.
Methanogen: Anaerobic archaebacteria that 
produces methane.
Microcephalic: An abnormally small head often 
associated the genetic condition called microcephaly.
Micromutation: A small mutation.
Microevolution: Evolution below the level of a 
species, such as the change of allele frequencies 
(i.e., due to selection, mutation, genetic drift, or 
migration) within a population.
Missense mutation: A base substitution mutation 
that results in the alteration of a single amino acid.
Mitochondria: Tubular-shaped organelle found 
in the cell cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells that is 
responsible for energy production in the cell.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA): DNA that is 
located in mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA is 
Lamarck: Jean Baptiste de Lamarck developed 
the theory of the inheritance of acquitted charac-
teristics. Although incorrect, it was one of the ﬁ rst 
cohesive concepts regarding natural causes for 
changes in organisms.
Lamarckian: Having to do with Lamarck, 
speciﬁ cally having to do with the notion of the 
inheritance of acquired characteristics.
Law: In science, something known with absolute 
certainty, such as the laws of thermodynamics. 
The term law is not applicable to biology.
Lethal gene: A gene that is incompatible with 
life. When dominant, it is lethal by itself. When 
recessive, it requires the presence of two alleles to 
be lethal.
Lethal selection: One hundred percent (100%) 
selection against a gene.
Linked genes: Genes on the same chromosome.
Linkage group: Genes on the same chromosome 
that tend to be transmitted together.
Locus: The physical location of a gene on a 
chromosome.
Macroevolution: The pattern of evolutionary 
change at or above the level of species.
Macromutation: A large-scale mutation that 
produces a characteristic.
Mammal: Vertebrate animals with hair and 
mammary glands.
Malignant: A medical term meaning “progress-
ing toward death.” Applied to cancers (neoplasm) 
to mean a rapidly growing aggressive growth.
Marsupial: Mammal with a marsupial pouch, 
such as the opossum.
Mass extinction: A relatively sudden sharp 
decline a large number of species over a short 
period of time, affecting major taxonomic 
groups.
Master genes: Genes that control the expression 
of many other genes.

 
Glossary 
265
Neutral mutation: A mutation has no effect on 
Darwinian ﬁ tness.
Niche: The habitat supplying the factors 
 necessary for the existence of an organism or 
 species or the ecological role of an organism 
has in a community regarding food and energy 
consumption.
Niche diversi  cation: Ecological principle that 
no two species occupy exactly the same niche.
Nitrogenous base: One of the building blocks 
of DNA and RNA: cytosine (C), guanine (G), 
adenine (A), thymine (T), and uracil (U).
Nonsense mutation: A single base substitution 
mutation that changes a coding sequence into a 
stop sequence, causing a protein to be truncated.
Nuclear genes: Genes on the chromosomes in 
the nucleus (as compared to mitochondrial DNA).
Nuclear envelope: Membrane that encloses the 
cell’s nucleus.
Nucleic acid: Organic molecule composed of 
nucleotides. DNA or RNA.
Nucleolus: Eukaryotic site of ribosomal RNA 
(rRNA) synthesis.
Nucleotide: Unit of nucleic acid composed of a 
phosphate, a ﬁ ve-carbon sugar, and a nitrogenous 
base (purine or pyrimidine).
Nucleus: The membranous organelle that con-
tains chromosomal DNA.
Octaploid: Having eight complete sets of 
chromosomes.
Order: A taxonomic level of classiﬁ cation above 
a family and below a class.
Ornithischian dinosaurs: Herbivorous dinosaurs 
with a hip structure similar to birds.
Organelle: A small subcellular structure that has 
a unique function.
Paleopolyploid: An ancient polyploid.
Paleontology: The study of extinct fossil 
organisms.
inherited maternally, from mothers to their off-
spring, and from their female offspring to subse-
quent generations.
Mitochondrial Eve: Concept of a population 
of women who are the matrilineal most-common 
ancestor of all currently living humans.
Mitosis: Cell division that forms two 
identical cells.
Molecular clock: The concept of using the num-
ber of differences in a DNA sequence or protein 
variation to measure relative time between species 
evolution. Application of this concept allows for 
the estimation of the dates or relative divergence 
between taxa.
Molecular signature: A feature of a cell or 
subcellular structure, such as a centromere, that 
makes it identiﬁ able.
Monohybrid cross: A cross between individuals 
that differ with respect to a single trait.
Monotreme: Egg-laying mammals, such as the 
duckbill platypus.
Monotypic: A single type. Compare to polytypic.
Morphology: The anatomical form and structure 
of an organism.
Mousterian: Flint tool style primarily associated 
with Neanderthals.
Mutagen: A substance or force that causes a 
mutation.
Mutation: A heritable change in DNA.
Natural sciences: The sciences that have to do 
with nature such as biology, zoology, botany, 
geology, biochemistry, physics, and so forth.
Natural selection: Process described by Charles 
Darwin by which individuals reproduce to a 
greater or lesser degree based on the presence of 
traits that are favorable or not to survival and/or 
reproduction.
Na-Dene: The Native Americans who are the 
descendants of the second major migratory wave 
into North America.

266 
Glossary
Pelycosaur: Primitive synapid reptiles of the late 
Paleozoic such as Dimetrodon.
Plesiosaur: Carnivorous aquatic reptile of the 
Jurassic through the Cretaceous. 
Point (or gene) mutation: A mutation involving 
a single nucleotide.
Polygyny: A mating system in which a male 
mates with multiple females.
Polymer: Two or more compounds formed by 
polymerization.
Polymerization: The process of changing a com-
pound so as to form a new compound.
Polymorphism: The presence of two or more 
genetic or phenotypic variants in a population. 
Polynucleotide: Sequence of nucleotides.
Polypeptide: Sequence of amino acids.
Polyploid: An organism with three or more sets 
of chromosomes.
Polytypic: Many types. Compare to monotypic.
Population: A group of organisms occupying a 
speciﬁ c area with a common gene pool.
Postzygotic isolating mechanism: Reproduc-
tive isolation in which a zygote is produced but is 
unable to develop into an adult.
Preadaptation: A characteristic that was adap-
tive under a previous set of conditions and later 
provides the initial stage for the evolution of a 
new adaptation under new conditions.
Prezygotic isolating mechanism: Reproductive 
isolation in which the formation of a zygote is 
prevented.
Principle of independent assortment: 
Mendelian concept that during meiosis, homolo-
gous chromosomes segregate independently of 
each other and of other homologous pairs of 
chromosomes.
Principle of segregation: Mendelian concept 
that during meiosis, homologous chromosomes 
segregate.
Pangenesis: Theory of inheritance proposed by 
Darwin that suggested that minute, body parts or 
gemmules were the agents of inheritance.
Panspermia: Hypothesis that life was initiated 
by material from outer space brought to Earth by 
a meteor or comet or cosmic dust.
Parthenogenesis: Egg development in the 
absence of fertilization.
Pathogenic: Capable of causing disease.
Pax-6 genes: Master control gene for the devel-
opment of eyes and sensory organs, and certain 
neural and epidermal tissues.
Period: The geologic unit of time that is a divi-
sion of an era.
Phalanges: Segmental bones of the ﬁ ngers 
and toes.
Phocomelia: Series of deformities caused by 
prenatal exposure to thalidomide.
Phyletic gradualism: Hypothesis that species 
change slowly over millions of years.
Phylogeny: The evolutionary history of an 
organism.
Phylum (pl phyla): A taxonomic rank below 
kingdom and above class.
Pithecanthropine: Resembling members of the 
extinct genus Pithecantropus, now Homo.
Placental mammal: The large group of mam-
mals with a placenta. Compare to monotremes 
and marsupials.
Plasmid: A small circular extra chromosomal 
ring of DNA that is not in a chromosome but is 
capable of autonomous replication.
Plasmodium falciparum: Protozoan parasite that 
is transmitted by female Anopheles mosquito to 
cause malaria in humans.
Pleistocene overkill: Hypothesis that humans 
were responsible for the extinction of the mega-
fauna and ﬂ ightless birds within a short time after 
they colonized different continents.

 
Glossary 
267
Race: A biological race is a group of organisms 
that differ in ecological, behavioral, geographic or 
physiological characteristics from other groups in 
that species. Same as subspecies.
Random drift: Fluctuations in the frequency of 
a trait due to chance.
Random mating (panmixia): Mating without 
respect to phenotype or genotype of the sexual 
partner.
Recessive allele: Allele that is only expressed 
when found in a double dose and whose expres-
sion is otherwise masked by the presence of a 
dominant gene.
Recessive trait: Traits that require two recessive 
alleles in order to be expressed.
Reciprocal altruism: Mutually beneﬁ cial 
exchanges of altruistic behaviors between 
individuals.
Recombinant DNA: DNA that has been 
altered by joining genetic material from two 
different sources, usually from two different 
species.
Recombination: Process by which chromo-
somes are broken and rearranged to form novel 
genetic combinations during meiosis. A result of 
meiotic cross-over.
Redundant (degenerate): Property of the 
genetic code whereby more than one codon 
speciﬁ es a speciﬁ c amino acid.
Repetitive DNA: DNA sequences that are 
repeated many times in the genome but that do 
not code for proteins.
Replica plating: A method of transferring bacte-
rial colonies from one plate to another.
Reproductive isolating mechanism: The vari-
ous mechanisms by which mating and/or hybrid-
ization between two species is prevented.
Restriction endonucleases: An enzyme that 
cleaves DNA at a particular base sequence.
Proofreading: The correction of an error in 
DNA replication.
Prophase: The ﬁ rst phase of mitosis.
Prophase I: The ﬁ rst phase of the ﬁ rst meiotic 
division, when chromatids are tetrads and 
crossing-over occurs.
Prophase II: The ﬁ rst phase of the second 
meiotic division.
Prokaryote: Any organism that lacks a distinct 
nucleus and other organelles due to the absence of 
internal membranes. Bacteria are among the 
best-known prokaryotic organisms.
Promoters: Gene sequences that control gene 
expression.
Prosimian: Suborder of primates that includes 
lemurs, lorises, and bush babies.
Protein synthesis: Process by which proteins 
are assembled at the ribosome according to the 
sequence speciﬁ ed by the genetic code. Transcrip-
tion and translation. DNA→RNA→protein.
Proteomics: The study and comparison of pro-
tein’s structure and function.
Pseudogenes: Defunct relatives of known genes 
that have lost their protein coding ability or are 
otherwise no longer expressed.
Psilophyte: Various extinct vascular rootless 
and often leaﬂ ess plants of the Devonian and 
Silurian periods.
Punnett square: Graphical representation of a 
mating or cross, named after British geneticist 
R. C. Punnett.
Punctuated equilibrium: The view that evolu-
tionary change goes through long periods of stasis 
and short intervals punctuated by rapid speciation.
Purine: One of two families of nucleotides with 
two chemical rings; eg., adenine and guanine.
Pyrimidine: One of two families of nucleotides 
with a single chemical ring; e.g., thymine, cyto-
sine, and uracil.
Quadrupedal: Walking on four limbs.

268 
Glossary
Segregation: Mendelian principle that during 
gamete formation (meiosis), homologous chro-
mosomes segregate from each other.
Selection coef  cient: A measure of the contribu-
tion of one genotype relative to the contributions 
of other genotypes.
Selectively neutral: A trait or gene that is not 
selected for or selected against.
Semi-lethal: Mutant allele that causes semi-
sterility.
Semi-sterile: When the recessive homozygote 
has half the reproductive capacity of the normal 
individual.
Sewall Wright effect: Same as genetic drift.
Sex chromosomes: Chromosomes controlling 
sex determination. In humans, the X and the 
Y chromosomes. 46XX  female; 46XY  male.
Sexual dimorphism: Gender differences in 
physical characteristics that mediate sexual 
responsiveness.
Sexual selection: A type of natural selection 
that acts on an organism’s ability and success in 
reproduction.
Sickle-cell anemia: Disease due to a mutation in 
the hemoglobin gene in which sickle-shaped red 
blood cells are produced, which causes a series of 
ailments.
Sickle-cell trait: Having one copy of the sickle-
cell gene. Being a carrier of the sickle-cell anemia 
allele.
Signaling macromolecule: A large molecule 
produced by a signaling cell that transmits infor-
mation from one cell to another.
Sister chromatids: Genetically identical 
duplicated chromosomes held together by a 
centromere.
Species: A reproductively isolated group of 
interbreeding organisms capable of producing 
fertile offspring.
Retinoblastoma: An inherited cancer of the 
retina or light-sensitive cells of the eye, most 
common in children.
Reverse transcription: Process by which single-
stranded RNA makes double-stranded DNA with 
the enzyme reverse transcriptase.
RhoGAM : Drug used to suppress the immune 
response of Rh-negative mothers who have an 
Rh-positive child soon after the delivery to pre-
vent Rh disease from occurring in the woman’s 
next Rh-positive child.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA): One of two forms 
of nucleic acids. There are three forms of RNA, 
messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), 
and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and each functions 
in protein synthesis.
Ribose: Five-carbon sugar of RNA.
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA): The RNA that 
makes ribosomes, which are the sites of protein 
synthesis.
Ribosome: Site of protein synthesis.
Ribozyme: RNA molecule that catalyzes a 
chemical reaction.
RNA polymerase: Enzyme that synthesizes 
RNA during transcription. Primary enzyme of 
transcription.
RNA World: A theoretical period of primitive 
Earth when enzymatic activity and informa-
tion needed for life was accomplished by RNA 
exclusively.
Same-sense mutation: An alteration in a 
single base that causes no change in the amino 
acid sequence due to the redundancy in the 
genetic code.
Saurischian dinosaurs: Carnivorous dinosaurs 
with lizard-like hips.
Secondary sex characteristics: Traits found in 
males and females that are associated with sexual 
maturation and sexual selection.

 
Glossary 
269
Sympatric speciation: Speciation that occurs 
when species diverge while inhabiting the same 
place.
Synapsis: During meiosis, the aligning of four 
chromatids to form a tetrad.
Synapsids: Early vertebrates with a pair of tem-
poral openings behind the eye socket; included 
the ancestors of mammals.
Taxa: Evolutionarily related groups of organ-
isms, such as a species or genus. 
Taxonomy: Field of biology concerned with 
classifying living and extinct organisms.
Telomere: Terminal section of a chromosome.
Template strand: The DNA strand that is used 
as a template for producing the messenger RNA 
used in transcription.
Teratogen: A substance that can cause a birth 
defect.
Terminator: Three sequences of the genetic 
code for the command to stop.
Tetrad: Four homologous chromatids bundled 
together early in meiosis I.
Tetrapod: A four-legged animal, including the 
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Tetraploid: Having four complete sets of chro-
mosomes (4n).
Thalassemia: Inherited disorder of the hemoglo-
bin molecule.
Thalidomide: A sedative that, when used dur-
ing pregnancy, causes a number of mostly limb-
related abnormalities known as phocomelia.
Theory: A well-tested, coherent explanation that 
holds true for a large number of facts and explains 
a wide range of observations about the natural 
world. Examples are the theory of gravity and the 
cell theory.
Therapsid: Extinct reptile of the order Therapsida; 
thought to be direct ancestor of the mammals.
Sphenodontia: Order of lizard-like reptiles 
that includes only one living genus, the tuatara 
(Sphenodon).
Speciation: The formation of a new species.
Spontaneous generation: Concept that life can 
spontaneously come about from nonlife.
Somatic: Relating to the body and not the 
gamete (germinal).
Somatic mutations: Mutations to somatic or 
body tissue.
Spontaneous generation: Theory that  living 
organisms can be produced from nonliving 
matter.
Spontaneous mutation: Mutation occurring in 
the absence of a mutagen.
Squamata: The largest recent order of reptiles, 
including lizards and snakes.
Stabilizing selection: When selection favors the 
mean of the distribution of phenotypes.
Start codon: The three-base sequence (usually 
AUG) that initiates translation.
Stop codon: One of three triplet base sequences 
(codons) (UAA, UAG, and UGA) of the genetic 
code that do not code for an amino acid, but sig-
nal the end of translation.
Subvital: A recessive gene that when homozygous, 
impairs reproductive ﬁ tness to less than 100 percent 
(but not less than 50 percent) of normal.
Subspecies: A taxonomic unit below the species 
often distinguished by specialized phenotypic 
characteristics and/or by geographic region. Same 
as race.
Symbiosis: A close ecological relationship 
between the individuals of two (or more) different 
species. 
Symbiotic: Relationship in which two or more 
organisms are in direct contact with each other.
Sympatric: Organisms living in the same loca-
tion. See allopatric.

270 
Glossary
Triplet: A group of three bases that function as 
a codon.
Triploid: Three sets of chromosomes (3n).
Trisomy: Having one extra chromosome 
(2n1), such as trisomy 21 or Down syndrome.
Ungulate: The hoofed mammals.
Uracil: Pyrimidine base of RNA that binds with 
adenine.
Urea: Organic chemical compound that is the 
waste produced when the body metabolizes protein.
Vector: An organism that causes disease.
Vertebrate: An organism with a backbone.
Vertebrates: Animals with a vertebral column. 
Form the taxonomic unit called Vertebrata.
Vestigial organ (structure): Structure or organ 
that has lost its original function but resembles 
a structure in a presumed common ancestor. An 
evolutionary relic.
Virus: A small infectious particle that consists of 
nucleic acid and a protein coat.
Wild type: In genetics, the phenotype or genotype 
that is most common in the natural population.
Y chromosome: Chromosome with the genes 
that determine maleness.
Y-chromosome Adam: Male population that is 
the patrilineal most recent common ancestor to 
existing human beings.
Yolk sac: The extra-embryonic membrane that is 
responsible for nutrition and circulation in verte-
brates. Is largely vestigial in mammals, but does 
provide some early blood before internal circula-
tion begins.
Zeitgeist: Intellectual and moral characteristics 
of an age. The spirit of the time or world view.
Zygote: A fertilized egg; capable of growth and 
development to form a complete organism; a 
diploid (2n) cell resulting from the fusion of male 
and female gametes.
Threshold: Minimum limit before which an 
effect is observed.
Thermophile: A type of extremophile (archae-
bacteria) that thrives at relatively high tempera-
tures, between 45 and 80 °C.
Thymine: Pyrimidine base that binds with 
adenine (A) in DNA and RNA and is replaced by 
uracil (U) in RNA.
Transcription: Assembly of messenger RNA 
from DNA. Together with translation, the process 
called protein synthesis.
Transcription factor: A protein that inﬂ uences 
the ability of RNA polymerase to transcribe 
genes.
Transfer RNA (tRNA): An RNA that carries 
amino acids used to translate mRNA into poly-
peptides (proteins).
Translation: Protein assembly at the ribosome. 
Together with transcription, the process called 
protein synthesis.
Translocation: A chromosomal mutation in 
which a portion of one chromosome breaks and 
becomes attached to another chromosome.
Transmutation: The term used  Jean Baptiste 
Lamarck and Charles Darwin to mean the chang-
ing of one species into another. In Darwin’s day, 
the word that meant evolution.
Transposable element: Mobile pieces of genetic 
material (also called transposon, jumping gene).
Transitional forms: Fossils or organisms are 
intermediate between an ancestral form and that 
of its descendants. Sometimes referred to as 
“missing links.”
Transposon: A mobile genetic element (also 
called Jumping genes).
Trihybrid cross: A cross between individuals 
that differ with respect to three traits.
Trimester: One third of the time of a pregnancy. 
In humans, approximately three months.

271
INDEX
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to 
ﬁ gures; page numbers followed by t 
refer to tables.
A
A blood type, 113, 114
AB blood type, 114
Aber, Werner, 89
Acanthostega, 155, 157
Achillea lanulosa, 122–123, 123
achondroplasia, 56–57
acidophiles, 180
adaptations
as evolutionary outcome, 21, 22
for land life, 152, 154–155, 154, 
155, 157
pre-adaptations, 155, 157
adaptive radiation
absence of competition and, 145
of amphibians, 152–156, 153, 154, 
155, 156
competitive exclusion and, 148
deﬁ ned, 142
of humans, 217, 231, 231, 232–233
of mammals, 163–164
of marsupials, 205, 206
mass extinction and, 163–164, 208
of primates, 214–216, 216
of reptiles, 159–163, 160, 161, 
162, 163
adenine, in DNA and RNA, 47, 47, 48
admixture of genes, 119–121, 120t
Aegilops species, crossed with wheat, 
135, 137, 139, 141
aerobic bacteria, 172, 174, 175–176, 175
Africa
admixture of European genes in, 
119–121, 120t
impact of extinctions, 211, 212
migration from, 231, 231, 232–233
most recent common ancestors from, 
194–195, 195, 196
sickle-cell anemia in, 98, 100–101, 101
African-Americans
admixture of European genes in, 
119–121, 120t
sickle-cell trait in, 102
age of parents, congenital defects 
and, 56
agriculture, sickle-cell trait and, 
100–101
Albemarle Island, 146, 147
albinism
in American Indians, 113–114
carrier frequency, 65
segregation principle and, 24–27, 25, 
26, 28t
albumin, 185
alkaptonuria, 70
allantois, 157, 158, 159
alleles
deﬁ ned, 7
dominant, 7–8
lethal, 69, 70, 71
meiosis and, 35, 35
population-speciﬁ c, 120–121, 120t
recessive, 7–8
segregation principle and, 24
selectively neutral, 109
Allison, Anthony, 100
allopatric populations, 128, 131
allopolyploidy, 135
Altman, Stuart, 171
altruism
group selection and, 237–238
in humans, 240, 242
kin selection and, 238–242, 239, 241
reciprocal, 242–243
Alvin (submersible), 179
Ambystoma species, 138
American Indians, 113–114, 195
Amerinds, 195
amino acids
artiﬁ cial synthesis of, 168
coding of, 54, 54, 55t
molecular evolution and, 182, 
183–185
overview, 50–51
Amish people
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome in, 8–9, 9, 
116–117
family names frequency, 116t
genetic drift and, 116–117
amnion, 157, 159
amniotes, 158, 159
amniotic cavities, 157
amniotic eggs, 157–159, 159
amniotic ﬂ uid, 157, 159
amphibians
emergence of, 152–156, 153, 154, 
155, 156
polyploidy in, 138
vulnerability of, 3
See also speciﬁ c types
anaerobic bacteria, 172
anagenesis, 133

272 
Index
analogous appendages, 165
anamniotes, 158, 159
anapsids, 159, 160
anemia, from Rh disease, 107–108
See also sickle-cell anemia
angiogenesis, 85
angiosperms, 200–201, 203
animals
cytochrome c composition, 184t
fossil record of, 201–203, 203
kingdom of, 176, 177
polyploidy in, 136t, 138
See also speciﬁ c types
Anopheles gambiae, 100
Anthropoidea, 215
antibiotic resistance, 85–89, 86, 87, 88, 
91–93
apes. See great apes
Apollo 11, 246
appendages, similarities among species, 
164–165, 164
archaea domain, 178, 179–180, 179
Archaeopteryx, 162, 162
archosaurs, 162
Ardipithecus species, 219, 221
Argentine pampas specimens, 14–15, 14
Armstrong, Neil, 246
artiﬁ cial selection, 16–17, 16, 17
Ashkenazi Jews, 102–103
Asphidoscelis species, 138
atmosphere, of primordial Earth, 
167–168, 172
australopithecines, 221–224, 221, 223, 224
autopolyploidy, 135
autosomes, 31
autotrophs, 172
azoospermia, 104
B
B blood type
in American Indians, 113
in Dunker sect, 114
European distribution of, 118–119, 118
babies. See infants
background extinction, 208, 209
bacteria
antibiotic resistance of, 85–89, 86, 87, 
88, 91–93
domain of, 178, 179
emergence of, 172–173
fossils of, 198
organelle evolution and, 174–176, 175
balanced polymorphism, 94–109
cystic ﬁ brosis and, 103–104, 105
heterozygote superiority and, 100–101
overview, 97, 98–100
relaxed selection and, 101–102, 102t
Rh disease and, 104–109, 106, 107
selection against heterozygotes and, 
104–108
selectively neutral alleles and, 109
sickle-cell anemia and, 94–98, 95, 96, 
97, 98, 102t
Tay-Sachs disease and, 102–103
types of, 99t
base pairs, 47, 48
base substitution mutations, 50, 51
Basque people, 119
bats, 206
Beagle, H.M.S., voyage of, 12–15, 13
beak adaptations, 143, 144–145
The Beak of the Finch: A Story of 
Evolution in Our Time (Weiner), 144
bees, 240, 241
begonias, 16
behavior. See social behavior
Big Bang, 166
bilirubin, 107
binomial nomenclature, 128–129
biological diversity. See diversity
biological evolution. See evolution
biological species concept, 126
birds
emergence of, 153, 162
fossil record of, 203
on Galápagos Islands, 143
reproductive strategies in, 244
warning calls of, 238–239, 242
See also speciﬁ c types
Biston betularia, 82–84, 83
Bitter Springs formation, 198
Black, Davidson, 226
black oak, 129, 130
Blackburnian warblers, 149
blood transfusions, for Rh disease, 107
blood types, 113, 114, 118–119, 118
blue-green algae, 172, 175–176, 175
body ﬂ uids, similarity to seawater, 157
bonobos, 215
Boreostracon, 207, 208
brachiopods, 202, 203
Brassica oleracea, 137–138
bread wheat, 135, 137, 139, 141
breeding experiments, importance of, 5
Brenner, Sidney, 189
Broom, Robert, 221
Brown, Peter, 228
Bufo species, 130
bullfrogs, multilegged, 2
environmental hypothesis, 5, 6, 7
genetic drift and, 110
genetic hypothesis, 7–8, 8, 9, 11
history of, 1
hybrid inviability in, 130
Mendelian inheritance of, 61–62, 62
Punnett square analysis of, 27–28, 29
selection and, 67–68, 68t
Burgess Shale, 198
C
Cajun people, 103
Calamites, 202
Camarhynchus species, 145, 150, 151
Cambrian period
animal life, 201, 203, 204
plant life, 200, 201
rise of diversity in, 198, 209
camouﬂ age, 82–84, 83
cancer cell heterogeneity, 84–85, 84
Carboniferous period, 153, 200, 
201, 202
carpenter bees, 123, 124
carriers
for albinism, 27, 65
bullfrog case hypothesis, 8
deﬁ ned, 8
See also heterozygotes
carrying capacity, 150
catastrophism theory, 15–16
Cech, Thomas, 171
cells
eukaryotic, 173–176, 174t
origin of, 169–172, 170
prokaryotic, 172–173, 174t, 175, 176
selection at level of, 84–85
Cenozoic era, 153, 200, 203
centromeres, 235–236, 235
Certhidea, 145, 151
chance genetic ﬂ uctuations. See genetic 
drift
character gradients. See clinal variation
checkerboard analysis. See Punnett 
square analysis
chemicals, as mutagen, 4
chemoautotrophs, 179
chicory plant, 130
children. See infants; parent-child 
behavior

 
Index 
273
Darwin’s ﬁ nches
adaptive radiation and, 143, 
144–146, 146
classiﬁ cation of, 150
coexistence of, 148–150
diversity of, 145
evolutionary tree of, 151
niche diversiﬁ cation of, 149, 150
overview, 15
daughter strands, 49
Dawkins, Richard, 247
de Vries, Hugo, 24
deductions, scientiﬁ c, 9
deep-sea vent hypothesis, 179–180
degeneracy of genetic code, 54
deleterious genes, 7–8
deletion mutations, 50, 51
deletion of chromosomes, 58
deoxyribose, in DNA, 48
The Descent of Man and Selection in 
Relation to Sex (Darwin), 78
descent with modiﬁ cation, 16, 165, 166
Devonian period
as Age of Fishes, 202
land adaptations during, 155
mass extinction during, 209, 209, 210t
overview, 152–155, 153
diapsids, 159, 160, 161
differential reproduction, 21
dihybrid inheritance, 36, 37, 38
Dimetrodon, 163, 163
dinosaurs, 161–162, 161, 163–164
diploid cells
deﬁ ned, 32
mitosis and, 31, 33
polyploidy and, 140
directed panspermia, 180
directional selection, 76, 76
disorders
balanced polymorphism and, 97, 99t
dominant, 73–75, 74t, 74, 95
mutation rates and, 55–57
recessive, 7–8, 8, 65, 110, 113, 117
See also speciﬁ c disorders
disruptive selection, 76, 77
distal hyperextensibility, 114, 115
diversity
Cambrian explosion of, 198, 209
of hominids, 224
mass extinction and, 208–209, 209
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
chemical structure of, 46–49, 47, 48
of chimpanzees vs. humans, 234–235
junk regions of, 189
Cook, L. M., 83
Cope’s gray tree frogs, 138
Cordaites, 200, 201
cormorants, 143
Correns, Carl, 24
cotton species, 130
cotylosaurs, 153
creationism, 12
Creole people, 121
Crepis species, 130
Cretaceous period, 209, 209, 210t
Crick, Francis H. C., 46, 47, 171, 180
Cro-Magnons, 231–232, 232, 233
Crocodilia, 163
crossing over, 41–42, 41
crossopterygians, 152–155, 153, 154, 
155, 202
cryptic female choice, 79
cultural evolution, 245–247, 246
cultural selection, 113–114
Cuna people, albinism in, 113
cursorial mammals, 164
Cuvier, Georges, 16
cyclostomes, 188
cystic ﬁ brosis, 70, 103–104, 105
cystic ﬁ brosis transmembrane conduc-
tance regulator (CFTR) gene, 104
cytochrome c, 183–184, 184t, 185
cytosine, 47, 47, 48
D
Daeschler, Ted, 153
Daphnia, 57
Dart, Raymond A., 221, 222
Darwin, Charles, 13
development of evolution theory, 
16–21
on ﬁ nches, 143
on giant tortoises, 146
on ginkgo tree, 213
on inherited variability, 43
on Lamarck, 7
natural selection principle, 12, 17–21, 19
on origin of life, 166
Punch’s Almanack cartoon, 20
sexual selection concept, 78–79
on species concept, 125–126
tree diagram, 176–177, 177
voyage on H.M.S. Beagle, 12–15, 13
Darwinian ﬁ tness. See reproductive 
effectiveness
Darwinius maisillae, 215, 217
chimpanzees
vs. humans, 233–236, 235
molecular evolution and, 185, 186, 215
China, Rh disease in, 119
chloride ion transport, 104
chloroplasts, 174–176, 175
cholera resistance, 104
chorions, 157, 158, 159
chromatids, 30, 32–33, 34
chromosomal aberrations, 58t, 58–60, 
59, 60
chromosomes
as basis for heredity, 28–31, 30, 
35–36
chimpanzees vs. humans, 235–236, 235
doubling of, 137, 139–140, 140, 141
homologous, 32, 34, 35, 35
independent assortment principle 
and, 41
odd number of, 135
second, in fruit ﬂ ies, 75
cladogenesis, 134
classiﬁ cation
binomial nomenclature for, 128–129
of Darwin’s ﬁ nches, 150
of organisms, 176–179
of primates, 215–216, 216
of reptiles, 159, 160
Clausen, Jens, 122
clinal variation, 122, 123, 132
clonal tumor cells, 84
Cocos ﬁ nches, 151
codons, 54, 55t
coexistence, 148–150
colchicine, 141
competition
adaptive radiation and, 145
natural selection and, 17
niche diversiﬁ cation and, 149–150
competitive exclusion, 148
complete selection, 67–70, 68t, 69t, 
69, 70
concealed variability, 75
congenital defects, 56–57
conjugation, 88
consanguinity
Amish people and, 8–9, 116
genetic drift and, 117–118
convergent evolution
deﬁ ned, 165
of eyes, 193
in fast-swimming predators, 165
in marsupials, 205, 206, 207 
overview, 203, 205

274 
Index
extinction(s)
adaptive radiation and, 163–164, 
208
background extinctions, 208, 209
of amphibians, 3
Holocene, 210t, 211–213, 211
human overpopulation and, 150
of marsupials, 205
mass, 163–164, 208–211, 209, 210t
of reptiles, 163–164
of South American hoofed 
mammals, 208
See also endangered species
extraembryonic membranes, 157, 158
extraterrestrial origin of life, 180–181
extremophiles, 178, 179–180, 179
eye malformations, 192–193
F
family names, among Amish, 116t
female choice, 79, 244
female vs. male reproductive strategies, 
243–245
fermentation, 172
fertility, 78, 78, 140
fertilization
cryptic female choice and, 79
as male reproductive strategy, 243–244
overview, 5
ﬁ brinopeptides, 184
Fig Tree sediments, 198
ﬁ nches. See Darwin’s ﬁ nches
ﬁ sh
fossil record of, 202
hemoglobin evolution in, 188
lobe-ﬁ nned, 152–155, 153, 154, 155
polyploidy in, 138
ﬁ tness. See reproductive effectiveness
Fitzroy, Robert, 13, 143
ﬁ ve-kingdom classiﬁ cation, 177, 178
ﬂ amingos, 143
Fleming, Alexander, 92–93
Flores humans, 228, 229
ﬂ owering plants, 200–201, 203
Ford, E. B., 82
fossils
Argentine pampas specimens, 14–15, 14
of hominids, 221, 222–224
of hominoids, 219, 220
of Homo species, 225, 226, 227
over geologic ages, 197, 198
of primates, 215, 217, 217, 218
environmental factors in, 3–7
homeotic genes and, 191, 192
Emmer wheat, 139, 141
endangered species
apes, 218
giant tortoises, 146, 148
human overpopulation and, 150
marsupials, 206
endogamous populations, 117
endoplasmic reticulum, 176, 176
environmental modiﬁ cations
beneﬁ cial vs. harmful, 57–58
bullfrog case study and, 3–4, 6
deﬁ ned, 4–5
Lamarckism and, 5–7
enzymes
in DNA replication, 50, 171
restriction endonucleases, 89–90, 
90t, 90
ribozymes, 171
Eoraptor, 162
epochs, geologic, 198, 199t
equilibrium, genetic. See genetic 
equilibrium
Equus, 14
eras, geologic, 198, 199t
See also speciﬁ c eras
erythroblastosis fetalis, 104–109, 
106, 107
Escherichia coli, 88, 89, 90t
An Essay on the Principle of Population 
(Malthus), 17
estrus, 244–245
eukarya domain, 178, 179
eukaryotic cells, 173–176, 174t
European genotypes, 118–121, 
118, 120t
eurypterids, 202, 203, 204
Eusthenopteron, 157
evolution
clock model of, 200
convergent, 165, 165, 193, 203, 205, 
206, 207
cultural, 245–247, 246
deﬁ ned, 21–22
descent with modiﬁ cation, 16, 
165, 166
doctrine of irreversibility, 162
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium 
and, 66
macroevolution, 132–133
microevolution, 132
See also molecular evolution
expert agreement on species, 126
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)—Cont.
recombinant, 89–91, 90t, 90, 91
repetitive, 89
replication of, 51, 49–50, 49, 56, 57
RNA world hypothesis and, 171
transcription of, 53–55, 54, 55t, 56, 57
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, xi, 75, 131
doctrine of irreversibility, 162
Dollo, Louis, 162
Dollo’s law, 162
domain system of classiﬁ cation, 178, 179
domestication of species, 16–17, 16, 17
dominant alleles
carriers and, 27
deﬁ ned, 7–8
selection against, 69, 70
dominant disorders
selection against, 73–75, 74t, 74
sickle-cell anemia as, 95
double helix DNA structure, 46–47, 47
doubling of chromosomes, 137, 
139–140, 140, 141
Drosophila species. See fruit ﬂ ies
drug-resistant organisms, 85–89, 86, 
87, 88
Dryopithecus, 217–218, 219
Dubois, Eugene, 226
Dunker sect, 114–116, 115
dyads, 33
E
ear lobe differences, 114, 115
Earth, formation of, 166–168, 173
eastern gray tree frogs, 138
ecological destruction. See habitat 
destruction
ecological isolation, 129, 130
ecological niches, 149
EcoRI and EcoRV, 89, 90t
eggs, 155, 158, 159
Ehrlich, Paul, 247
Einkorn wheat, 135, 137, 138–139, 141
Eldredge, Niles, 133, 134
electromagnetic spectrum, 45
electrophoretic patterns of 
hemoglobins, 97
Eleutherodactylus planirostris, 
110–112, 111
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, 8–9, 9, 
116–117
embryonic development
of amniote vertebrates, 157–159, 159

 
Index 
275
genetic recombination, 38, 39t, 
40, 40
genetic screening programs, 103, 104
genotypes
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and, 
64–66, 65
independent assortment principle 
and, 39t
vs. phenotypes, 27
genus, deﬁ ned, 128
Geochelone nigra. See giant tortoises
geographic speciation, 126–128, 127
geologic ages, 198–200, 199t, 200
Geospiza species. See ground ﬁ nches
germ cells, 5, 45, 46
germ-line vs. somatic mutations, 
45, 46
giant tortoises, 15, 15, 142, 
146–148, 147
Gigantopithecus, 218
Gilbert, Walter, 171
ginkgo tree, 213
giraffes, Lamarck on, 7
Glass, Bentley, 114
Glass, William, 118
glutamic acid coding, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 
96–97, 98
glyptodonts, 208, 208
goat grass, crossed with wheat, 135, 137, 
139, 141
Goin, Coleman, 110, 111, 112
Goldschmidt, Richard, 190
gorillas, 185, 186, 215
Gorman, John, 108
Gossypium species, 130
Gould, Stephen Jay, 133, 134
Grant, Peter, 144
Grant, Rosemary, 144
grass, crossed with wheat, 135, 137, 
139, 141
Gray, Asa, 79
gray tree frogs, 138
great apes, 185, 186, 217–218, 217
green frogs, 130
greenhouse frogs, 110–112, 111
ground ﬁ nches
competitive exclusion and, 148
diet of, 144–145
diversity of, 145
evolutionary tree of, 151
niche diversiﬁ cation of, 149, 150
ground sloths, 208, 208
group selection, 237–238
guanine, in DNA and RNA, 47, 47, 48
single alleles in, 25
trihybrid inheritance and, 39
gametic isolation, 130
Gamow, George, 51
gatherer-hunters, 225, 228–229
Gause, G. F., 148
Gause’s principle, 148
Gehring, Walter J., 193
gemmules, 17
gene ﬂ ow, 118–121, 118, 120t
gene frequencies, 64, 64
genes
as carried by chromosomes, 35
chemical nature of, 45–49, 47, 48
deﬁ ned, 53
deleterious, 7–8
dominant, 7–8
duplication of, 185–186, 187
homeotic, 189–192, 190, 191
Hox, 191, 192, 193–194
jumping, 89
lethal, 69, 70, 71
linkage of, 40–41, 41
overview, 5
Pax, 192–193
pseudogenes, 188–189, 189
segregation principle and, 24
semi-lethal, 71, 72, 73t, 73
subvital, 71–72, 73t, 73
See also alleles; DNA; mutations
genetic code
beginnings of, 170
ﬂ ow of information, 53–55, 54, 56, 57
overview, 50–51, 52, 55t
universality of, 190
genetic disorders. See disorders
genetic drift
Amish people and, 116–117, 116t
deﬁ ned, 110
Dunker sect case study, 114–116, 115
founder effect and, 113–114
greenhouse frogs case study, 
110–111, 111
molecular evolution and, 183
theory of, 112–113, 112t
genetic equilibrium
balanced polymorphism and, 
98–100, 99
of dominant disorders, 73–75, 74t, 74
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, 
64–66, 65
overview, 61–64, 62, 63t, 64
of sickle-cell anemia, 98–100, 99
genetic load, 75
punctuated equilibrium and, 134
as record of animals, 201–203, 203
as record of plants, 200–201, 200
See also missing links
fossorial mammals, 164
founder effect, 113–114
fowl, domesticated, 16, 16
Fox, Sidney M., 180
frameshift mutations, 51, 50
Franklin, Rosalind, 46
Freda, Vincent, 108
French Canadians, 103
frequency of recessive alleles, 68–70, 
69t, 69
frogs
gray tree, 138
green, 130
greenhouse, 110–112, 111
homeodomain amino acid 
sequences, 192t
leopard, 124–125, 125
mink, 1, 3, 11
retinoic acid effect on, 193–194, 194
See also bullfrogs, multilegged
fruit ﬂ ies
concealed variability and, 75
homeodomain amino acid 
sequences, 192t
homeotic genes in, 189–192, 190
homeotic mutations in, 191
independent assortment principle, 36, 
37, 38, 40
linkage principle experiments, 41
morphological differentiation in, 130
Pax genes and, 193
reproductive isolating mechanisms 
in, 132
fungi, kingdom of, 177
fused chromosomes, 236
G
G6PD (glucose-6-phosphatedehydroge-
nase) deﬁ ciency, 101
Galápagos Islands
giant tortoises on, 15, 15
map of, 143
overview, 142–144
See also Darwin’s ﬁ nches
Gallus gallus, 16
gametes
crossing over and, 41–42, 41
monohybrid inheritance and, 35–36, 35

276 
Index
Hox genes, 191, 192, 193–194
human growth hormone synthesis, 91
human species emergence, 214–236
australopithecine stage, 221–224, 
221, 223
coexisting species, 217
great apes forerunners, 217–218, 217
hominid forerunners, 218–221, 219
Homo erectus and, 226–230, 227, 
232–233, 234
Homo ﬂ oresiensis and, 228, 229
Homo habilis and, 225–226
molecular evolution and, 185, 186, 
233–236, 235
most recent common ancestors, 
194–196, 195
Neanderthals and, 230–231, 230
primate adaptive radiation and, 
214–216, 216
Ramapithecus and, 185, 186
timelines of, 220, 224
See also Homo sapiens
humans
adaptive radiation of, 217
vs. chimpanzees, 233–236, 235
chromosomal aberrations in, 58t, 
58–60, 59, 60
chromosome complement of, 30–31, 30
cytochrome c composition, 184t
embryonic development, 158–159
extinction and, 150, 211–213, 211, 212
genetic load in, 75
kin selection in, 240, 242
mitosis and meiosis in, 32, 33
mutation rates in, 55–57
ovulation in, 244–245
pair-bonding in, 244–245
polyploidy in, 138
secondary sex characteristics in, 80, 
81, 81t
as single variable species, 132
hunter-gatherers, 225, 228–229
hybrid breakdown, 130
hybrid inviability, 130, 131
hybrid sterility, 130
hybridization, polyploidy and, 140–141, 
140
hydrogen, in early atmosphere, 168, 172
hydrothermal vents, 179–180
Hyla species, 138
Hylobatidae, 215–216, 216
hypotheses, 9–11, 10
hypothetico-deductive reasoning, 
9–11, 10
Herrick, James B., 94
heterogeneity of cancer cells, 84–85, 84
heterotrophs, 171
heterozygotes
deﬁ ned, 25
frequency of, 65
recessive alleles in, 70, 71t
segregation principle and, 27
selection against, 104–109, 106, 107
selection for, 97–101, 99
Hiesey, William, 122
HindII and HindIII, 89
histone IV, 184–185
history of life, 197–200, 199t, 200
hitchhiker’s thumb, 114, 115
Holocene extinction, 210t, 211–213, 211
homeobox sequence, 192
homeodomains, 192, 192t
homeotic complex (HOM-C), 191–192
homeotic genes, 189–192, 190, 191
Hominidae, forerunners of, 218–221, 
219, 220
hominids
emergence of, 221–224, 221, 223, 224
molecular evolution and, 185, 186
Hominoidae, 215–216, 216
hominoids, 215–216, 216, 219–221, 220
Homo erectus, 226–230, 227, 
232–233, 234
Homo ergaster, 226, 228, 233
Homo ﬂ oresiensis, 228, 229
Homo habilis, 225–226
Homo neanderthalensis. See 
Neanderthals
Homo sapiens
coexistence with other species, 
226, 227
emergence of, 231–233, 232, 233, 234
as single variable species, 132
See also humans
homologous chromosomes, 32, 34, 
35, 35
homologous limbs, 164–165, 164
homology, 165
homosexual behavior, 240, 242
homozygotes
deﬁ ned, 25
vs. heterozygous carriers, 70, 71t
segregation principle and, 27
hoofed animals. See ungulates
Hooker, Joseph, 166
Hopi people, 113–114
Hoppe, David, 3
horses, 14, 14
gulls, 243
gymnosperms, 200, 201, 202
gynogenesis, 138
H
habitat destruction, 150, 212–213, 218
habitat isolation, 129, 130
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae, 89, 90t
Haldane, J. B. S., 237
halophiles, 180
halteres, 191
Hamilton, W. D., 238
handicap principle, 79–80
hands, six-digited, 9
haploid cells, 31, 32, 33, 34, 140
haplotypes, 121
Hardy, Godfrey H., 61, 64
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, 61, 
64–66, 65
Helix typicus, 126–128, 127, 129
hemoglobin
chimpanzees vs. humans, 234
DNA coding for, 51, 52, 53
electrophoretic patterns of, 97
molecular evolution of, 186–189, 188
sickle-cell, 54–55, 57, 95–97, 97
variants in, 56
Henslow, John, 12
heredity
chromosomal basis for, 28–31, 30, 
35–36, 35
dihybrid, 36, 37, 38
Lamarckism and, 5–7, 17, 246
Mendelian, 27–28, 29, 61–62, 62
mitochondrial DNA and, 194–195
monohybrid, 35–36, 35
trihybrid, 36, 38, 39
heritable variation
concealed, 75
genetic recombination signiﬁ cance in, 
38, 39t, 40, 40
independent assortment principle and, 
36–38, 37, 38, 39
linkage and crossing over effects, 
40–42, 41
mitosis and meiosis and, 31–35, 31, 
32, 33, 34
overview, 7–9
Punnett square analysis, 27–28, 29
segregation principle and, 24–27, 25, 
26, 28t
with three or more gene pairs, 36, 38, 39

 
Index 
277
life
deﬁ ned, 167
history of, 197–200, 199t, 200
See also origin of life
limbs, similarities among species, 
164–165, 164
limpets, 77
linkage of genes, 40–41, 41
Linnaeus, Carolus, 128, 128, 176
living fossils, 163, 213
lizards, 138, 142, 144
lobe-ﬁ nned ﬁ sh, 152–155, 153, 154, 
155, 202
locus of alleles, 35
lollipop transposon conﬁ guration, 88, 88
Lucy (fossil), 223, 223
Lyell, Charles, 12–13, 18
M
M blood type, 114
Macrauchenia, 14, 14, 208
macroevolution, 132
macromutations, 190
Maden, Malcolm, 193
Majerus, E. N., 84
malaria, 100–101, 101
male–male competition, 79, 244
male vs. female reproductive strategies, 
243–245
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 17, 18
mammals
adaptive radiation of, 163–164
emergence of, 153
fossil record of, 203
parental reproductive strategies, 
243–245
placental vs. marsupial, 205, 206
plains-dwelling, 207
See also speciﬁ c types
Margulis, Lynn, 174
marine iguanas, 142, 144
marine mammals, 164
Mars Exploration Rover (MER), 181
Mars Global Surveyor, 181
Mars, search for water on, 181
marsupials, 164, 205, 206, 207
mass extinction, 163–164, 208, 209, 
209, 210t
maternal mitochondria, 194–195
mating
Mendelian inheritance and, 61–62, 62
random, 62–64, 63t
jumping genes, 89
junk DNA, 189
Jupiter, search for water on, 181
K
karyotypes, 30–31, 30
Keck, David, 122
Kelsey, Frances O., 4
Kennedy, John F., 246
Kettlewell, H. B. D., 82, 83
Kihara, Hitoshi, 141
Kimura, Motto, 183
kin selection, 238–242, 
239, 241
King, Samuel, 117
kingdoms, 176, 177–179, 178
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 88
Klinefelter syndrome, 78
Koopman, Karl, 131–132
L
labial genes, 190
labyrinthodonts, 153, 155–156, 159
Lack, David, 144, 149
Laetoli footprints, 223–224
laissez-faire doctrine, 19–20
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste de, 6, 7
Lamarckism, 5–7, 17, 246
land iguanas, 142, 144
land life, transition to, 200
land snails, 126–128, 127, 129
land vertebrates, 152–156, 153, 154, 
155, 156
See also speciﬁ c types
Landauer, Walter, 4
language development, 230
laws, in natural sciences, 11
Leakey, Louis, 222, 225
Leakey, Mary, 222, 223, 225
Leakey, Richard, 225
Lederberg, Joshua, 85
left-handedness, 114, 115
leopard frogs, 124–125, 125, 
126, 131
Lepidodendron, 200, 201, 202
lethal alleles, 69, 70, 71
lethal selection, 67–70, 68t, 69t, 
69, 70
Levine, Philip, 105
Lewis, Edward B., 189, 190
I
Ichthyostega, 155, 156, 157
icthyosaurs, 162
Ida (fossil), 215, 217
iguanas, 142, 144
immunosuppressants, for 
Rh disease, 108
inclusive ﬁ tness, 239, 240
independent assortment principle, 36–38, 
37, 38, 39
independent evolution. See convergent 
evolution
individual vs. group selection, 238
induced mutations, 43, 44t
industrial melanism, 82–84, 83
infants
bonding with mothers, 229
chromosomal aberrations in, 77–78, 78
optimal birthweight in, 77, 77
Rh disease in, 104–109, 106, 107, 119
thalidomide-related malformations, 4, 4
inheritance. See heredity
insertion mutations, 51, 50
insertion sequences, 88
instantaneous speciation, 135–141, 136t, 
137, 140
insulin synthesis, 90
interbreeding, 122, 128
intersexual selection, 79
interspeciﬁ c selection, 79
intervals between pregnancies, 60
intrasexual selection, 79
intraspeciﬁ c selection, 79
invariant amino acids, 183
inversion of chromosomes, 58
invertebrates, fossil record of, 201, 
203, 204
See also speciﬁ c types
isolated populations
consanguinity and, 117–118
giant tortoises as, 146
religious isolates as, 8–9, 
114–116, 115
reproductive isolating mechanisms 
and, 129–132, 129t, 130
J
Jamaica, admixture of genes in, 121
Java man, 226, 228
Jewish people, 102–103
Johanson, Donald C., 222, 224

278 
Index
mutations
base substitution, 50
causes of, 43–45, 44t, 45
deﬁ ned, 43
in drug-resistant bacteria, 85–87, 86
evolutionary consequences, 57–58
homeotic, 189–190
induced, 43, 44t
interplay with selection, 70–71, 72
molecular evolution and, 182–183, 186
point, 51, 50
rates of, 55–57
spontaneous, 43, 44t, 50
myoglobin, 187–188, 188
Myrianthopoulos, Ntinos, 103
myrtle warblers, 149
N
N blood type, 114
Na-Dene people, 195
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration), 181
Nathans, Daniel, 89
Native Americans, 113–114, 195
natural selection, 67–78
concealed variability and, 75
Darwin and, 12, 17–21, 19
against dominant defects, 69, 70, 
73–75, 74
gene duplication and, 185–186, 188
group selection and, 237–238
industrial melanism and, 82–84, 83
kin selection and, 238–242, 239, 241
at molecular level, 170–171
mutation interplay with, 70–71, 72
partial, 71–73, 73t, 73
pregnancy loss and, 77–78, 78
against recessive defects, 67–70, 68t, 
69t, 69, 70
relaxed, 101–102, 102t
for resistance, 85–89, 86, 87, 88, 
91–93
selectively neutral alleles and, 109
vs. sexual selection, 79–80
types of, 76–77, 76, 77
nautiloids, 202, 203, 204
Neanderthals, 226, 227, 230–231, 230
Neel, James V., 95
neutral theory of molecular evolution, 
182–183
neutralists, 183
New Orleans, admixture of genes in, 120t
punctuated equilibrium and, 134
therapsids as, 163
Tiktaalik as, 155
Mississipian period, 153
mitochondria
DNA in, 194–195
origin of, 174–176, 175
mitochondrial Eve, 194–195
mitosis, 31–32, 31, 32, 33
mole salamanders, 138
molecular clock, 184–185, 185
molecular evolution
chimpanzees vs. humans, 
233–236, 235
of cytochrome c, 183–184, 184t, 185
gene duplication and, 185–186, 187
of hemoglobin, 186–189, 188, 189
homeotic genes and, 189–192, 
190, 191
molecular clock and, 184–185, 185
neutral theory of, 182–183
ocular malformations and, 192–193
molecular level of natural selection, 
170–171
molecular signatures, 236
Monera, 177
monkeys, 188, 215
monogamy. See pair-bonding
monohybrid inheritance, 35–36, 35
monoploid cells. See haploid cells
monotremes, 164
monotypic species, 129
moon exploration, as cultural 
evolution, 246
Moore, John A., 124, 131
Morgan, T. H., 41
morphological differentiation, 130, 
133–134
Morwood, Michael, 228
mosquitoes, 100
most recent common ancestors, 
194–196, 195
mother-child bonding, 229, 245
moths, melanic, 82–84, 83
mouse species, 191, 192–193, 192t
mRNA (messenger RNA), 53–55
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus), 92
Muller, Hermann J., 44, 131
multiple antibiotic resistance, 87–89, 
87, 88
multiregional hypothesis, 232–233, 234
Murchison meteorite, 180
mutagens, 44t, 45t, 45, 89
mating calls, 125, 126
Mayr, Ernst, 126
McClintock, Barbara, 89
McCormick, Robert, 13
McFadden, E. S., 141
McKusick, Victor A., 8, 116
mechanical isolation, 130
medical advances, effect of, 71, 72, 
104, 105
Megatherium, 207, 207
meiosis
crossing over and, 41–42, 41
with elimination of extra 
chromosomes, 78
in generalized life cycle, 32
in human sexual cycle, 33
overview, 32–35, 34, 35
polyploidy and, 140, 140
relationship with mitosis, 31
melanin, 24, 25
melanism, industrial, 82–84, 83
membranes
cellular, 171
extraembryonic, 157, 158
memes, 245
memetics, 245
Mendel, Gregor Johann, 24
independent assortment principle, 
36–38, 37, 38, 39, 40–41
pea plant experiments, 23–24, 24
segregation principle, 24–27, 25, 26, 28t
Mendelian inheritance
bullfrog case study, 61–62, 62
phenotypic ratios, 27–28, 29
Mendelian laws, 7, 11
menopause, 242
MER (Mars Exploration Rover), 181
Mesozoic era, 153, 200, 201, 202, 203
messenger RNA, 53–55
metastasis, 84, 85
Methanococcus jannaschii, 178–179
methanogens, 180
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA), 92
microevolution, 132
mid-digital hair, 114, 115
migration. See adaptive radiation
Miller, Stanley, 168, 169
mink frogs, 1, 3, 11
miscarriage. See pregnancy loss
missense mutations, 51, 50
missing links
Archaeopteryx as, 162, 162
for primates, 215, 217

 
Index 
279
phospholipid membranes, 171
photosynthesis, 172
phyletic gradualism, 133–134, 133
Pinaroloxias, 151
pithecanthropines, 226
placenta, 164
placental vs. marsupial mammals, 
205, 206
plains-dwelling mammals, 14, 14, 
205, 207
plains leopard frogs, 125, 126
plants
fossil record of, 200–201, 201
kingdom of, 176, 177
polyploidy in, 136t, 137–138
See also speciﬁ c types
plasma membranes, 171
plasmids
as carriers of DNA, 89–91, 90, 91
resistant organisms and, 87–88, 87
Plasmodium falciparum, 100–101
Pleistocene overkill, 211, 212
plesiosaurs, 162
point mutations, 51, 50
Pollack, William, 108
polygyny, 244
polynucleotides, 169
polypeptides
chimpanzees vs. humans, 234
genetic code and, 50–51
polyploidy
in animals, 136t, 138
deﬁ ned, 135
mechanism of, 135, 138–139, 140
in plants, 136t, 137–138
species with, 136t
in wheat, 136t, 137, 138–141, 140
polytypic species, 129
population size
consanguinity and, 117–118
extinctions and, 150, 211, 212, 213
frequency of recessive alleles and, 110, 
113, 117
religious isolates and, 8–9, 
114–116, 115
population-speciﬁ c alleles, 
120–121, 120t
populations
allopatric, 128, 131
endogamous, 117
evolution as property of, 21–22
mating systems and, 62–64, 63t
sympatric, 129, 132
See also genetic equilibrium
Out-of-Africa theory, 195, 195, 196, 
232–233, 234
Owen, Robert, 15
oxygen, 172
P
pair-bonding, 229, 244–245
paleopolyploidy, 137–138
Paleozoic era, 198, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204
Paley, William, 18
Pan species. See chimpanzees
Panderichthys, 155, 156, 157
pangenesis, 17
panspermia, 180
Paramecium species, 148
Paranthropus species, 221, 222
parent-child behavior
mother-child bonding, 229, 245
probability of paternity and, 240
stepfathering, 245
stepmothering, 243
parent-offspring conﬂ ict, 245
parental investment, 245
parental reproductive strategies, 243–245
parental strands, 49
parthenogenesis, 138
partial selection, 71–73, 73t, 73
Pasteur, Louis, 166
Pasturella pestus, 88
paternal ancestry, 195–196
Pauling, Linus, 95, 184, 188
Pax genes, 192–193
peacocks, 79–80
Peking humans, 226, 227, 228
pelycosaurs, 163
penicillin, 92–93
Pennsylvanian period, 153
peppered moths, 82–84, 83
Percival, John, 139, 141
periods, geologic, 198, 199t
See also speciﬁ c periods
Permian period, 209, 209, 210t
phenotypes
vs. genotypes, 27
independent assortment principle and, 
38, 39t, 40
sexual dimorphism and, 81
phenotypic ratios, 28, 36
Philosophie Zoologique (Lamarck), 7
phocomelia, 4
phosphate groups, 48
New World monkeys, 215
niche diversiﬁ cation, 149–150
niches, ecological, 149
nitrogenous bases, 47, 47, 48, 168
nomenclature, 128–129
nonsense mutations, 51, 50
northern leopard frogs, 124–125, 
125, 126
nucleic acids, 169
See also DNA; RNA
nucleotides, 88, 89, 169–170
nucleus, origin of, 176, 176
Nutcracker Man, 222
O
O blood type, 113, 114
oak species, 129, 130
ocular malformations, 192–193
Ohta, Tomoko, 183
Old World monkeys, 188, 215
Olduvai Gorge, 222, 225
On the Tendencies of Varieties to Depart 
Indeﬁ nitely from the Original Type 
(Wallace), 18
Oparin, Alexander I., 167
Opportunity (rover), 181
orangutans, 185, 186, 215
Ordovician period
animal life, 202, 204
mass extinction, 209, 209, 210t
plant life, 200, 201
organelles, 174–176, 176
organic compounds, 168, 169
origin of life
deep-sea vent hypothesis, 179–180
development of cells, 169–172, 170
extraterrestrial hypothesis, 180–181
formation of universe, 
166–167
heterotrophs vs. autotrophs, 
171–172
organelles and, 174–176, 176
prokaryotic vs. eukaryotic cells, 
172–176, 174t, 175
spontaneous generation and, 166
timeline of events, 167, 173
The Origin of Life (Oparin), 167
The Origin of Species (Darwin), 12, 18, 
43, 78, 176, 177
Ornithischia, 159, 163
Orrorin tugenengis, 219, 221
ostrich species, 15

280 
Index
parental strategies for, 243–245
by parthenogenesis, 138
reproductive effectiveness
vs. altruism, 237–238
bullfrog case study, 9, 21
deﬁ ned, 21
deleterious genes and, 71–72
of heterozygotes vs. homozygotes, 
100, 104, 109
inclusive ﬁ tness and, 239, 240
sexual selection and, 78–81, 80, 81t
reproductive isolating mechanisms, 
129–132, 129t, 130
reptiles
adaptive radiation of, 159–163, 160, 
161, 162, 163
classiﬁ cation of, 159, 160
emergence of, 153, 156–159, 158, 159
extinction of, 163–164
fossil record of, 202
See also speciﬁ c types
resistance, natural selection and, 85–89, 
86, 87, 88, 91–93
restriction endonucleases, 89–90, 90t, 90
retinoblastoma, 75
retinoic acid, 193–194
reverse transcriptase, 171
reverse transcription, 57, 171
Rh antigens, 114
Rh disease, 104–109, 106, 107, 119
Rhea species, 15
RhoGAM treatment, 108
ribose, in RNA, 48, 53
ribozymes, 171
Rio Grande leopard frogs, 125, 126
RNA enzymes, 171
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
chemical structure of, 48
codons of, 54, 55t
origin of life and, 168, 169–171, 170
transcribed from DNA, 53–55, 54, 55t, 
56, 57
translation of, 54, 56, 57
RNA world hypothesis, 171
Roberts, D. F., 118
S
saber-toothed tigers, 207, 208
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, 219, 221
salamanders, 138
salmon, 138
Salmonella typhosa, 88
Q
Quercus species, 129, 130
R
R plasmids, 87, 88
race
biological vs. cultural meaning, 132
deﬁ ned, 123–124
self-identiﬁ cation with, 119
speciation and, 126, 127, 128
radiation, as mutagen, 44–45, 45t, 45
Ramapithecus, 185
Lithobates berlandieri, 125, 126
Lithobates blairi, 125, 126
Lithobates catesbeiana. See bullfrogs, 
multilegged
Lithobates clamitans, 130
Lithobates pipiens, 124–125, 125, 126, 131
Lithobates septentrionalis, 1, 3, 11
Rana temporaria, 193–194, 194
Lithobates utricularia, 125, 126
random mating, 62–64, 63t
random union of eggs and sperm, 
64, 64
reasoning, hypothetico-deductive, 
9–11, 10
recessive alleles
complete selection against, 67–70, 68t, 
69t, 69, 70, 72, 73t, 73
deﬁ ned, 7–8
in heterozygotes, 27
partial selection against, 71–73, 73t, 73
replenishing of by mutations, 
70–71, 72
recessive disorders
bullfrog case hypothesis, 7–8, 8
heterozygote frequency and, 65
population size and, 110, 113, 117
See also speciﬁ c disorders
reciprocal altruism, 242–243
recombinant DNA, 89–91, 90t, 90, 91
red jungle fowl, 16
red vizcacha rats, 138
relatedness, degree of, 239, 240, 241
relaxed selection, 101–102, 102t
religious isolates, 8–9, 114–116, 115
repetitive DNA, 89
replica plating, 85, 86
reproduction
differential, 21
by gynogenesis, 138
postmolecular evidence, 186
postzygotic isolating mechanisms, 129t
pre-adaptations, 155, 157
Precambrian period, 198
predictions, scientiﬁ c method and, 10
pregnancy loss
from chromosomal aberrations, 58t, 
58–60, 59, 60
natural selection and, 77–78, 78
polyploidy and, 138
premolecular evidence, 186
prenatal screening, 103, 104
prezygotic isolating mechanisms, 125, 
126, 129t
primates
adaptive radiation of, 214–216, 216
fossils of, 215, 217, 217, 218
hemoglobin evolution in, 188
See also speciﬁ c types
Principles of Geology (Lyell), 12–13
probability
random mating and, 63
trihybrid inheritance and, 36, 38
Proconsul, 217, 218
prokaryotic cells, 172–173, 174t, 175, 176
Prosimii, 215
proteins
artiﬁ cial synthesis of, 168
origin of life and, 169–171, 170
overview, 50–51
translated from RNA, 54, 56, 57
See also amino acids
Protista, 177
pseudogenes, 188–189, 189
psilophytes, 200
Pteridosperms, 200, 201, 202
pterosaurs, 162
pulmonary tuberculosis, 103
Punch’s Almanack cartoon, 20
punctuated equilibrium, 133–134, 134
Punnett, R. C., 28, 61
Punnett square analysis
bullfrog case study, 27–28, 29
dihybrid inheritance, 36, 37
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and, 
64, 65
trihybrid inheritance, 36
purines
artiﬁ cial synthesis of, 168
in DNA and RNA, 47, 47, 48
pyrimidines
artiﬁ cial synthesis of, 168
in DNA and RNA, 47, 47, 48
Pyrotherium, 14, 14, 207

 
Index 
281
Stetson, B. E., 105
stop codons, 54, 55t
structural chromosomal aberrations, 58
sturgeons, 138
subclonal tumor cells, 84, 85
subspecies, deﬁ ned, 129
substitution mutations, 50, 51
subvital genes, 71–72, 73t, 73
survival of the ﬁ ttest, 19, 21
See also natural selection
survival until reproduction. See 
reproductive effectiveness
Sutton, Walter, 35
symbiosis, 174–176, 175
sympatric populations, 129, 132
synapsids, 159, 160
synapsis, 32
synthesis
of organic compounds, 168, 169
using recombinant DNA, 90–91, 91
Systema Naturae (Linnaeus), 128
T
tadpoles, retinoic acid effect on, 
193–194, 194
taxonomy. See classiﬁ cation
Tay-Sachs disease, 102–103
telomeres, 235–236, 235
teratogens, 4
terminating codons, 54, 55t
territorial behavior, 238
Testudines, 163
tetrads, 32–33, 34
tetraploidy, 138, 141
tetrapod vertebrates, 153–156, 155, 
156, 157
thalassemia, 101, 189
thalidomide-related malformations, 4, 4
theories, hypothetico-deductive 
reasoning and, 10, 11
therapsids, 163
thermophiles, 180
Thoatherium, 14, 14, 207
Thorne, Alan G., 232
Thorne-Wolpoff hypothesis, 232–233
threatened species. See endangered 
species
three-domain classiﬁ cation system, 
178, 179
thumb, hyperextensible, 114, 115
thymine, in DNA, 47, 47, 48
Tiktaalik, 153–155, 154, 156, 157
Sinanthropus pekinensis, 226
sister chromatids, 32, 34
Sivapithecus, 185
six-digited hands, 9
skull 1470, 225
slavery, admixture of genes and, 
119–120, 121
Smith, Hamilton D., 89
Smith, Theobald, 108
snails, 126–128, 127, 129
social behavior
group selection and, 237–238
of Homo erectus, 228–229
kin selection and, 238–242, 239, 241
parental reproductive strategies, 
243–245
reciprocal altruism and, 242–243
sharing of food, 225
Sociobiology (Wilson), 237
solar system, formation of, 166–167
somatic vs. germ-line mutations, 45, 46
southern leopard frogs, 125, 126
speciation
geographic, 126–128, 127
instantaneous, 135–141, 136t, 137, 140
punctuated equilibrium vs. phyletic 
gradualism, 133–134
species
concept of, 125–126
deﬁ ned, 128
humans as single variable, 132
polytypic vs. monotypic, 129
reproductive isolating mechanisms 
and, 129–132, 129t, 130
Spencer, Herbert, 19, 20
Sphenodontia, 163
Spirit (rover), 181
spontaneous abortions. See pregnancy 
loss
spontaneous generation, 166
spontaneous mutations, 43, 44t, 50
Squamata, 163
stabilizing selection, 76–77, 76, 77, 213
Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin-
resistant, 92
stepfathering, 245
stepmothering, 243
sterility
hybrid, 130
partial, 71, 78, 78
of polyploid hybrids, 140
sex chromosome aberrations and, 
78, 78
Stern, Curt, 73
Sarich, Vincent M., 185
Saurischia, 161, 163
scarlet oak, 129, 130
scientiﬁ c method, 9–11, 10
scientiﬁ c nomenclature, 128–129
screening programs, genetic, 103, 104
seal limbs condition, 4
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence 
(SETI), 180–181
Sears, E., 141
seasonal isolation, 129
seawater, and body ﬂ uid similarity, 158
second chromosomes, 75
secondary sex characteristics, 80, 81, 81t
segregation principle, 24–27, 25, 26, 28t
selection
artiﬁ cial, 16–17, 16, 17
cultural, 113–114
sexual, 78–81, 80, 81t
See also natural selection
selection coefﬁ cients, 72–73, 73t
selectionists, 182–183
selectively neutral alleles, 109
selﬁ sh gene, 242
The Selﬁ sh Gene (Dawkins), 247
semi-lethal genes, 71, 72, 73t, 73
semi-sterility, 71, 78, 78
sensitization to Rh antigen, 106, 107
SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial 
Intelligence), 180–181
Sewall Wright effect, 112
See also genetic drift
sex chromosomes, 30, 31
sexual cycle in humans, 32, 33
sexual dimorphism, 81
sexual isolation, 130
sexual selection, 78–81, 80, 81t
Seymouria, 156, 158
shared ancestry, 193
shelled invertebrates, 201
Shigella, 87, 88
Shriver, Mark D., 119, 121
Shubin, Neil, 153
sibling altruism, 239–240, 239, 241
sickle-cell anemia
balanced polymorphism and, 94–98, 
95, 96, 97, 98
as dominant vs. recessive, 95
hemoglobin structure in, 52, 53, 
54–55, 57, 95–97, 97
sickle-cell trait, 95, 97
signaling macromolecules, 193
silent mutations, 50
Silurian period, 200, 201

282 
Index
wheat, polyploidy of, 135, 136t, 137, 
138–139, 141
whiptail lizards, 138
White. Tim D., 219, 224
Whittaker, R. H., 177
wild grass, crossed with wheat, 135, 
137, 139, 141
Wilkins, Maurice H. F., 46
Wilson, Allan C., 185
Wilson, Edward O., 125, 237
Woese, Carl R., 178, 179, 180
Wöhler, Frederick, 168
Wolpoff, Milford H., 232
woodpecker ﬁ nches, 145, 146
Woolf, Charles M., 113, 114
woolly mammoths, 207, 208
Wright, Sewall, 112
Wynne-Edwards, V. C., 238
X
X chromosome, 30, 31, 78
x-rays, as mutagen, 44–45, 45t, 45
Xylocopa nobilis, 123, 124
Y
Y chromosome, 30, 31, 78
Y chromosome Adam, 195–196
yarrow plant, 122–123, 123
yolk sacs, 157, 158, 159
Z
Zahavi, Amotz, 79
Zinjanthropus, 222
Zuckerkandl, Emile, 184
Zuni people, 113
uracil, 48, 53
urea synthesis, 168
Urey, Harold, 168
Ussher, James, 12
V
valine coding, 52, 53, 55, 57, 
96–97, 98
variant alleles. See recessive alleles
variation, heritable. See heritable 
variation
Vecht, J. van der, 123
vegetable kingdom, 176
vertebrates
amniote vs. anamniote, 158, 159
fossil record of, 203
land, 152–156, 153, 154, 155, 156
limb similarities among, 164–165, 164
See also speciﬁ c types
Victoria Island rocks, 201
von Koenigswald, G. H. R., 226
The Voyage of the Beagle (Darwin), 13, 
143, 146
W
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 18
warbler ﬁ nches, 145, 151
warblers, 149
warning calls, 238–239, 242
water-dwellers, convergent evolution 
among, 165, 165
water ﬂ eas, 57
water, possible extraterrestrial, 181
Watson, James D., 46, 47
Weinberg, Wilhelm, 61, 64
Weiner, Jonathan, 144
western gulls, 243
Tinbergen, Niko, 83
toads, 130
tools, early use of, 225, 226, 228, 
230, 232
tortoises, giant. See giant tortoises
Toumai, 219, 221
Toxodon, 14, 14, 207
transcription factors, 191, 193
transitional fossils. See missing links
translocation of chromosomes, 58
transposons, 88–89, 88
tree concept of ancestry, 
176–177, 177
tree-dwelling primates, 214, 215
tree ﬁ nches, 145, 150, 151
tree shrew, 215
Triassic period, 209, 209, 210t
trihybrid inheritance, 36, 38, 39
trilobites, 202, 203, 204
triplets, in DNA coding, 50, 51, 
51, 53
triploidy, 58, 138
trisomy, 58
Tristan da Cunha (island), 117–118, 117
Triticum spelta, 141
Trivers, Robert L., 242, 244, 245
Tschermak, Erich von, 24
tuataras, 163
tuberculosis, 103
tumor cell heterogeneity, 84–85, 84
Tupaia, 215
Turkana boy, 228
Turner syndrome, 78
Typanoctomy barrerae, 138
U
uncertainty, in natural sciences, 11
ungulates, 14, 14, 207
universe, formation of, 166–167

