B O O K R E V I E W S
Julia Staffel, Unsettled Thoughts: A Theory of Degrees of Rationality.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019. 240 pp.
One of the major epistemological developments in recent decades is the ascent
of Bayesianism. Despite its popularity, Bayesianism faces a recurrent complaint:
the theory is overly demanding. For example, Bayesianism entails that we
should have credence 1 in every logical truth—a bar that not even the most
astute logicians meet.
A common response maintains that Bayesianism is a theory of ideal
rationality. Ordinary mortals count as rational insofar as they approximate this
ideal. But this response gives rise to two questions. First, what does it mean to
“approximate” the Bayesian ideal? Second, what’s the point of approximating
the Bayesian ideal—why toil toward a goal that we will never reach?
Surprisingly, neither question has received much attention. Luckily,
Julia Staffel’s Unsettled Thoughts (hereafter, US) is here to ﬁll this lacuna.
US is a tour de force, developing an ambitious research program that
will set the agenda for future discussion of these issues. Throughout, the book
combines boldness of vision with technical precision, and it is written in a
lucid and engaging style. Though it is only 217 pages, it is jam-packed with
enough exciting ideas and arguments to ﬁll up several volumes. Anyone inter-
ested in epistemology—or in the general relation between human and ideal
rationality—should read this book.
Since this book contains more material than any single review can hope
to cover, I will focus on two big-picture issues.
Explaining Our Intuitive Rationality Verdicts
As Staffel observes (chap. 3), there is by now a rich literature on how to mea-
sure the distance between two entities. Staffel’s general strategy is to use these
distance measures to explain what it is to approximate the Bayesian ideal. On
this approach, the degree of rationality of an agent’s credence function is given
by its distance from the closest coherent credence function.
This is a simple and elegant way of modeling degrees of rationality. But
it faces two challenges. One challenge is raised by Staffel (153), who introduces
two logic students, uncertain Una and certain Cera. Both Una and Cera enter-
tain a complicated conditional q that turns out to be a tautology, but neither
of them has discovered the proof. Una has credence .5 in q, whereas Cera has
credence 1. As Staffel notes, Una’s credence is intuitively rational, although it
violates Bayesian strictures; Cera’s credence is intuitively irrational, although it
accords with Bayesianism.
Staffel seeks to deal with this problem by saying that our judgments are
tracking doxastic rather than propositional rationality. However, this raises an
important question: how should we extend the framework in US to degrees
394
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/394/1654215/394beddor.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

B O O K R E V I E W S
of doxastic rationality? Even absent an answer to this question, trouble looms:
Staffel is committed to saying that Una’s credence in q is not propositionally
rational. So if Una’s credence in q is doxastically rational, then we are forced
to deny that doxastic rationality entails propositional rationality (a point Staffel
acknowledges [155]). But if we give up this entailment, it becomes even harder
to understand the relation between the two. It also becomes hard to explain
the incoherence of conjunctions such as “Sherlock’s belief that the butler did
it is rational, but it’s not rational for Sherlock to believe the butler did it.”
A second challenge comes from cases where an agent has misleading
evidence about the logical truths. Let’s introduce a third student, misled Missy.
Like Una and Cera, Missy has not found a proof of q. But her logic professor
conﬁdently asserts that q has been proven false. Question: Given her evidence,
what’s the rational credence for Missy to adopt? Intuitive Answer: Something
lower than 1.
Perhaps, some might say, here too our intuition is tracking doxastic
rather than propositional rationality. But in this case this response strikes me
as independently implausible. After all, the question I posed was not whether
Missy’s current credence in q is rational. (Given the setup, the latter question
cannot be answered; I haven’t even told you what Missy’s credence in q is.)
Rather, the question was, “Given her evidence, what credence would it be ratio-
nal for Missy to have?”—a question that is most naturally read as asking about
propositional rationality.
Having laid out these issues, let me suggest a possible path forward. As
Staffel acknowledges, one possible strategy is to reverse the traditional order
of explanation, and explain propositional rationality in terms of doxastic ratio-
nality. Staffel attributes this view to Sinan Dogramaci (2018) and John Turri
(2010), but it is worth noting it has earlier precedents in the reliabilist tradi-
tion (e.g., Goldman 1979). While reliabilists typically focus on outright beliefs
rather than credences, it’s easy to extend their basic framework to the latter.
To get a feel for how this might go, here’s a toy reliabilist model: an agent’s
credence c in some proposition p is doxastically rational iff c was produced by
a reliable credence-forming process, where a credence-forming process is reli-
able provided it usually generates credences with a sufﬁciently high degree of
accuracy (as measured by your favorite scoring rule). And it is propositionally
rational for an agent to adopt credence c toward p iff there is some reliable
credence-forming process available to the agent that, given their current states
as input, is disposed to produce a credence of c in p as output.
How would this framework handle our cases? Start with misled Missy.
The following credence-forming process is available to her: trusting the opinion
of experts on the topic, absent any evidence that the experts are unreliable. This process
is generally reliable, even though it will produce an inaccurate credence on
this particular occasion. So the reliabilist framework predicts that it is proposi-
tionally rational for Missy to adopt a low credence in q. Next up: certain Cera.
395
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/394/1654215/394beddor.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

B O O K R E V I E W S
Cera forms her credence through guesswork—a process that will often gener-
ate inaccurate credences. So the reliabilist theory underwrites the verdict that
Cera’s credence in q is not doxastically rational. Turn ﬁnally to uncertain Una.
On a natural way of ﬁlling out the case, she is employing a policy of distributing
one’s credence evenly over a set of exclusive and exhaustive propositions when
one cannot tell whether one’s evidence favors any one of these propositions
over any of the others. While this process will never produce highly accurate
credences about the members of this set, it is arguably the best policy available
for minimizing inaccuracy in such situations of evidential underdetermination.
Perhaps this makes her credence-forming process sufﬁciently reliable to confer
doxastic (and propositional) rationality on the credences it produces.
So this reliabilist view delivers the desired verdicts about the cases.
Should this view supplant the framework developed in US? I think not. For
starters, coherence is relevant to reliability: if a process sometimes generates
incoherent credences, it is not perfectly reliable. More importantly, it does
seem that coherence directly impacts our assessments of rationality in a way that
is not fully captured by the simple reliabilist picture sketched above. To illus-
trate, suppose A forms coherent credences using a moderately reliable process.
And suppose that B forms incoherent credences using a process that is gener-
ally highly reliable, but that produces incoherent credences on extremely rare
occasions. On some ways of ﬁlling out the case, A’s credence is intuitively more
rational than B’s, even though B’s credence-forming process might be more
reliable than A’s.
What this shows, I think, is that a fully comprehensive theory of ratio-
nality will need to have two dimensions. First, it will need take into account
the process responsible for the credence/belief (in the case of doxastic ratio-
nality), or the processes available to the agent (in the case of propositional
rationality). Second, it will need to take into account “internal” features of the
agent’s overall credence function/belief state—features such as the degree to
which the credence function encodes a coherent view of the world. And it is
here where US shines, providing an elegant and systematic framework for ana-
lyzing this second dimension. My point here is not to deny the importance of
the second dimension, but rather to emphasize that the ﬁrst dimension is also
crucial. By bringing the ﬁrst dimension into the picture, we can give a better
account of our intuitive rationality verdicts, and also shed light on the relation
between doxastic and propositional rationality.1 Exactly how these two dimen-
sions are balanced against each other in shaping our overall rationality verdicts
is a difﬁcult further question, and not one that I can hope to settle here.
1. In personal communication, Staffel indicates that she is currently working on
extending the framework in US to encompass other forms of rationality, including dox-
astic rationality. For some relevant discussion, see Staffel 2021.
396
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/394/1654215/394beddor.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

B O O K R E V I E W S
Belief, Decision-Making, and Certainty
In the last chapter of US, Staffel shifts focus from credences to outright beliefs,
tackling a version of the “Bayesian challenge.” The challenge is this: given that
we are already equipped with a notion of credence, what is the point of outright
beliefs?
According to Staffel, outright beliefs are a sui generis state, distinct from
credences. Their main function is to simplify reasoning by allowing us to ignore
improbable scenarios. According to this view, if A outright believes that the
train leaves from track 2, A is entitled to take this proposition as settled for the
purposes of practical deliberation. And this means that A is entitled to ignore
the small (but still positive) probability that the train will leave from some other
track.
While this account of the functional role of belief has much to recom-
mend it, one worry is that it stands in tension with our ordinary habits of belief
ascription.2 Consider an everyday case: we are about to give the ﬁnal exam
in the logic class we’ve been co-teaching. As we trudge from the department
toward the exam hall, you ask me, “You have the exams, right?” I pause: I deﬁ-
nitely seem to remember shoving the exams in my backpack. But the morning
is a bit of a blur, and I’m prone to absentmindedness. I reply, “I believe I have
the exams with me, but let me double-check.” I proceed to open my backpack
and conﬁrm that the exams are safely ensconced within. The key feature of this
scenario is that I self-ascribe a belief (that I have the exams with me), but I am
not entitled to ignore the possibility that this belief is false.3
How should we respond to this tension? Let me suggest one possibil-
ity. Perhaps the functional role that Staffel proposes for belief captures an
important psychological state, but that state is not belief. Rather, the state is
something that more closely corresponds to our folk notion of certainty. While
some philosophers will protest that certainty is rarely (if ever) attainable, ordi-
nary discourse suggests otherwise: in everyday conversation, we often claim to
be certain of many things—for example, “Scientists are now certain that global
warming has human causes.” And it does seem that if I am rationally certain that
I have the exams with me, I would be entitled to dismiss the possibility that I
left the exams back at the ofﬁce.
Going this route would allow us preserve much of Staffel’s account,
while also doing justice to our everyday belief ascriptions. However, if we go
this route, then the Bayesian challenge for belief remains unsolved. While we
will have found a functional role for certainty, we are still left with the task of
2. As Staffel notes, her conception of the functional role of belief resembles propos-
als made by a number of other philosophers (e.g., Clarke 2013; Greco 2015). The worry
I raise extends to these other views as well.
3. For complementary data suggesting that the ordinary conception of belief is a
relatively weak state, see Hawthorne, Rothschild, and Spectre 2016.
397
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/394/1654215/394beddor.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

B O O K R E V I E W S
ﬁnding a functional role for belief, and explaining how this role relates to cre-
dences. Still, we will not necessarily be back at square one. We might decide
that since certainty is what simpliﬁes practical reasoning, certainty is the more
interesting and important psychological state, in which case the idea that belief
reduces to sufﬁciently high credence may become more palatable.4
Summing up: US is a fantastic book, offering a compelling model for
how to use the tools of formal and traditional epistemology in order to advance
a genuinely important project. If you ever meet a disillusioned philosopher
bemoaning the state of contemporary epistemology, I recommend you hand
them a copy of US: if anything can convince them that epistemologists are still
doing groundbreaking work, this is likely to do the trick.
References
Beddor, Bob. 2020. “New Work for Certainty.” Philosophers’ Imprint 20, no. 8: 1–25.
Clarke, Roger. 2013. “Belief Is Credence One (In Context).” Philosophers’ Imprint 13,
no. 11: 1–18.
Dogramaci, Sinan. 2018. “Rational Credence through Reasoning.” Philosophers’ Imprint
18, no. 11: 1–25.
Goldman, Alvin. 1979. “What Is Justiﬁed Belief?” In Justiﬁcation and Knowledge, edited
by George S. Pappas, 1–25. Boston: Reidel.
Greco, Daniel. 2015. “How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Probability One.”
Philosophical Perspectives, 29, no. 1: 179–201.
Hawthorne, John, Daniel Rothschild, and Levi Spectre. 2016. “Belief Is Weak.” Philo-
sophical Studies 173, no. 5: 1393–404.
Staffel, Julia. 2021. “Pro Tem Rationality.” Philosophical Perspectives 35, no. 1: 383–403.
Turri, John. 2010. “On the Relationship between Propositional and Doxastic Justiﬁca-
tion.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 80, no. 2: 312–26.
Bob Beddor
National University of Singapore
Philosophical Review, Vol. 131, No. 3, 2022
DOI 10.1215/00318108-9743952
4. For related arguments that certainty is better suited to ﬁll many of the episte-
mological roles that have been traditionally assigned to belief or knowledge, see Beddor
2020.
398
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/394/1654215/394beddor.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

