E D I T E D  B Y  M A R Y  E M I N G  Y O U N G
T H E  W O R L D  B A N K
I N V E S T I N G  I N  O U R  C H I L D R E N ’ S  F U T U R E
FROM
Early
Child
DEVELOPMENT
DEVELOPMENT
TO
Human
FROM
Early
Child
DEVELOPMENT
DEVELOPMENT
TO
Human
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
blic Disclosure Authorized
23949


From Early Child Development 
to Human Development
Investing in Our Children’s Future
Editor
Mary Eming Young
Education Sector
Human Development Network
THE WORLD BANK
Washington, D.C.

Proceedings of a World Bank Conference 
on Investing in Our Children’s Future
Washington, D.C., April 10–11, 2000
© 2002 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
All rights reserved.
1  2  3  4  05 04  03 02 
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed here are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board 
of Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they 
represent.
The World Bank cannot guarantee the accuracy of the data included in
this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply on the part of the World
Bank any judgment of the legal status of any territory or the endorse-
ment or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is copyrighted. No part of this work may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or inclusion in any 
information storage and retrieval system, without the prior written per-
mission of the World Bank. The World Bank encourages dissemination 
of its work and will normally grant permission promptly.
For permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a request with 
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, 
fax 978-750-4470, www.copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to the Ofﬁce of the Publisher, World Bank, 1818 
H Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail 
pubrights@worldbank.org.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.

Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Chapter 1
Introduction and Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Mary Eming Young 
I.
The Beneﬁts of Investing in Young Children
Chapter 2
Early Child Development and 
the Brain—the Base for Health, Learning, 
and Behavior Throughout Life  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
J. Fraser Mustard 
Chapter 3
From Child Development to 
Human Development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Jacques van der Gaag  
II.
Measuring the Early Opportunity Gap
Chapter 4
Standards of Care: Investments 
to Improve Children’s Educational Outcomes 
in Latin America  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
J. Douglas Willms 
Chapter 5
Ensuring a Fair Start for All 
Children: The Case of Brazil  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Mary Eming Young 
III.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Early Childhood 
Programs
Chapter 6
Investing in Effective Childcare 
and Education: Lessons from Research  . . . . . . . 145
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and 
Alicia L. Meckstroth 
iii

iv
Chapter 7
Mapping and Documenting 
Effective Programming  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Judith L. Evans 
Chapter 8
Effective Early Childhood Programs: 
The U.S. Head Start Experience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
Louisa B. Tarullo 
Chapter 9
Elements of Quality in Home Visiting 
Programs: Three Jamaican Models  . . . . . . . . . . 233
Kerida Scott-McDonald 
IV.
The Private Sector’s Inﬂuence on the Public Sector
Chapter 10
Role of the Private Sector in Early 
Child Development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Robert G. Myers 
Chapter 11
Communities Can Make a Difference: 
Five Cases Across Continents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293
Simone Kirpal 
V.
Investing in the Future: Action and Policy
Chapter 12
Narrowing the Gap for 
Poor Children  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
Chapter 13
The Political Challenge: 
Commitment and Cooperation  . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and 
William H. Foege 
Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397

Foreword
A child’s early years are critically important, for they provide the
foundation for the rest of life, as an adolescent and as an adult.
Children who are well nurtured can live well and create better soci-
eties for all. Yes, children are our future and by investing in them 
at their earliest ages we invest in everyone’s human and economic
development.
In April 2000, the World Bank hosted a global conference which
addressed the beneﬁts and challenges of investing in early child de-
velopment (ECD). This landmark conference brought together the
world’s leading experts, academicians, practitioners, and policymak-
ers to focus on various aspects of ECD. They represented nongovern-
mental organizations and other private-sector groups, government
agencies, and multilateral and bilateral organizations. This volume
contains the proceedings of the conference. With its publication, the
World Bank hopes to encourage countries to adopt policies that tar-
get early child development, especially for children and families liv-
ing in poverty, and to spark other groups and organizations to invest
in ECD programs.
The reasons for focusing on children are more than traditional and
still pertinent humanitarian concerns for those least able to look after
themselves. New insights from neuroscience and the behavioral and
social sciences underscore the importance of giving children a better
chance in life. Nurturing them in their early years is vital for attack-
ing the worst effects of poverty and may be an effective way to break
the relentless, vicious cycle of poverty that, too often, crosses genera-
tions. Children who live in poverty cannot go to school, do not learn
to read, will have difﬁculty ﬁnding a job, and will have little hope for
their, and their children’s, future. Poverty diminishes people’s spiritu-
al resources, peace of mind, dignity, and freedom to live fully. And,
unfortunately, poverty is like a bad gene—it is inherited. 
v

Studies repeatedly show that children who are born in poverty, live
in unsanitary conditions, experience little mental stimulation or nur-
turing, and have poor nutrition in their ﬁrst years are far more likely
than richer children to grow up stunted in both body and mind. Sci-
ence tells us that early child development is critical and marks a child
for life. The development of a young child’s brain affects physical and
mental health, capacity to learn, and behavior throughout childhood
and adult life. The wiring and sculpting of billions of neurons in the
early years establish the base for developing competence and coping
skills later. For nations, the ﬁrst few years of a child’s life have a multi-
plier effect. Young children who are well nurtured tend to do better in
school and are more likely to develop the skills they will need to com-
pete in a global economy. Investing in young children is an essential
investment in human and economic development.
During the past generation, we have seen greater progress than at
any other time in history. Life expectancy has increased more during
the past 40 years than during the past 4,000 years. In today’s world,
the communications revolution holds out the promise of universal
access to knowledge. In this world, 5.7 billion people participate and
compete in a market economy, compared with 2.9 billion only 20
years ago. Yet, 100 million more people are living in poverty today
than 10 years ago, and many of these are children. 
• Most children born into poverty are malnourished and neglect-
ed and, hence, cannot attain their potential even before they
enter primary school. 
• 125 million primary-school aged children are not in school, and
most are girls.
• Another 150 million children start primary school but drop out
before they have completed 4 years of education.
• Almost one-half of the children in the least developed countries
of the world do not have access to primary education.
• Nearly 1 billion people, or one-sixth of the world’s population,
are illiterate, and most are women.
• In the next 25 years, the world’s population is expected to in-
crease by 2 billion people, and most of this increase will be in
developing countries where poor families are already struggling. 
vi
Foreword

These statistics are discouraging, but they also indicate many op-
portunities for taking action. Early child development is one way to
reverse the trends. ECD interventions and programs fundamentally
offer all children a fair chance to compete and succeed in life. They
help ensure that the competition is fair for all children by providing
the equipment and training they need to get ahead. Even by age 6,
children who are malnourished and have never had a book read to
them face a playing ﬁeld that is already unfair. 
Education is a great equalizer if all children have an equal opportu-
nity to take advantage of it. To reduce poverty and achieve universal
access to primary education, organizations must come together in
support of early child development. The World Bank has an impor-
tant role to play, but the total effort is much larger than the World
Bank’s investment alone. A strategy of cooperation, interaction, and
partnership among many organizations, governments, multination-
als, private-sector institutions, and civil groups offers the best possi-
bility for launching and sustaining broad action in early child devel-
opment. Simply acknowledging that early child development is
important or simply increasing resources for primary education are
not sufﬁcient. Speciﬁc goals, policies, and actions are needed to en-
sure that children can take full advantage of, and beneﬁt fully from,
the opportunities offered in primary school. 
The message communicated at this conference is the same as that
conveyed 4 years ago at the World Bank’s ﬁrst conference on early
child development: “It is never too early to become involved but it
can easily be too late.” This message is even more urgent today be-
cause of the growing number of poor children and the accumulation
of documented evidence showing that positive ECD interventions
can make a difference. Across the globe, children offer us the promise
of creating a better world, but we must act now to help them fulﬁll
that promise.
Mamphela Ramphele
Managing Director, 
The World Bank
Foreword
vii


Acknowledgments
This proceedings of the World Bank conference, “Investing in Our
Children’s Future,” was only feasible with the support and contribu-
tions of many individuals. Thanks are ﬁrst extended to the World
Bank’s senior management, starting with James D. Wolfensohn, Pres-
ident, and Eduardo A. Doryan, Vice President and Head, Human De-
velopment Network, for their support of children’s issues and the ear-
ly child development (ECD) program. Sincere thanks are given to
Elaine Wolfensohn for her personal commitment and guidance at
every stage in the planning of the conference and for her support of
the Bank’s ECD initiative. Special thanks are due to Ruth Kagia, Direc-
tor, Education Sector, Human Development Network, for her support
and guidance in planning and organizing the conference.
The conference brought together the world’s leading experts, aca-
demicians, and practitioners from nongovernmental organizations
and civil society, as well as policymakers from governments and mul-
tilateral and bilateral organizations. They focused on the beneﬁts, ef-
fectiveness, and support of early child development—some of the
same issues addressed at the World Bank’s ﬁrst conference on early
child development and at the “Children First Forum” organized by
the Task Force for Child Survival and Development, both of which
were held at The Carter Presidential Center, Atlanta, Georgia, in April
1996. The issues may be the same, but are even more urgent today.
The conference beneﬁted from the ongoing support of Bill Foege,
Mark Rosenberg, John Gates, Conrad Ferrara, and Pamela Wuichet of
the Collaborative Center for Child Wellbeing (formerly the Task Force
for Child Survival and Development). The conference also beneﬁted
immensely from being embedded into the broader framework of the
World Bank’s Children’s Week 2000, a week-long event organized 
in collaboration with the Child Labor and Street Children Teams of 
ix

x
Acknowledgments
the Bank, which include Bona Kim, Zaﬁris Tzannatos, Catalina Vil-
lamizar, and Kate Schecter and are coordinated by Stephen Com-
mins. In this framework, the conference participants had the oppor-
tunity to attend a series of events and workshops related to early
child development, child labor, and street children. We also thank Vi-
sion, Strength and Artistic (VSA) Expression and their afﬁliates, for
organizing and showcasing its programs and artists and for an exhibi-
tion of beautiful artwork created by disabled children from around
the world, and Jennifer Dickson of Counterpart Canada, for facilitat-
ing the participation of Rafﬁ, child advocate and singer, who pre-
miered his song “It Takes a Village to Raise a Child” and shared his vi-
sion at the conference. Thank you, Rafﬁ. 
Thanks are also extended to the Multilateral Development 
Department, Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway, and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Netherlands, for partially funding
preparation of the conference background papers. In addition,
many thanks are due to the team that helped organize the confer-
ence: Simone R. Kirpal, Amber Surrency, Claudine Cobra, and Julie
Wagshal in the Bank’s Education Sector, Human Development Net-
work, and Ruth Hubbell-McKey and Bethany Chirico of Ellsworth
Associates. A special note of appreciation goes to Francis James
Dobbs, Christopher M. Walsh, and Peter Knight for liaison with the
media and guidance on the design of media messages. Special
thanks also to Gaby Fujimoto-Gómez and Carolina Gomez, from
the Organization of American States (OAS), for coordinating the
participation of ECD practitioners from Latin America; to Helen 
Keith, Early Childhood Services Planning and Development, for 
coordinating with participants from the Caribbean and providing
guidance to develop the SERVOL case study; and to Marito Garcia
and Susan Opper in the World Bank’s African Region, Venita Kaul
and Ward Heneveld on the Bank’s India country team, and Antonio
Lim in the Bank’s Europe and Central Asia Region, for supporting
the participation of several delegates from the countries in their 
respective regions. 

Acknowledgments
xi
Thanks also to all 280 participants from forty-eight countries who
made the conference happen and, in particular, to Joan Lombardi of
the Bush Center in Child Development and Social Policy, Yale Uni-
versity, for guiding the planning of the conference and facilitating
the invitation to Secretary Donna E. Shalala of the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, and to Ricardo Morán of the Inter-
American Development Bank (IDB) for facilitating the invitation to
Enrique V. Iglesias, President, IDB, who were the conference keynote
speakers. Thanks also to Marjorie Newman-Williams and Waheed
Hassan of the United Nation’s Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for facili-
tating the participation of Kul C. Gautam, Deputy Executive Direc-
tor, UNICEF. Special thanks to Robert Myers, Maris O’Rourke, and
Heather Weiss, and to Margaret Marland, Minister for Children 
of Ontario, Canada, for their cooperation in chairing the confer-
ence sessions.
The conference featured presentations on the role of private 
initiatives in inﬂuencing public policy. The participants beneﬁted
from George Soros’ shared insights on his philanthropic activities
and support of ECD programs worldwide. In addition, ﬁeld practi-
tioners from the private sector and civil society shared their experi-
ences with their programs. Thanks in particular to Peter Hesse, who
described his 10-year program in Haiti; Sister Ruth Montrichard,
who spoke of her 25 years of dedication to the SERVOL program in
Trinidad; Elizabeth Lorant, who described her work with the Soros
Foundation beginning in the 1980s; and Kathy Bartlett, who 
described the Aga Khan Foundation’s Madrasa program in East
Africa. 
Special acknowledgments are due to key partners in the support of
early child development: UNICEF; the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); the World Health
Organization (WHO); the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO); the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID);
IDB; the Asian Development Bank; OAS; and nongovernmental 
organizations, including Bernard van Leer Foundation, Aga Khan

xii
Acknowledgments
Foundation, Save the Children USA, Christian Children’s Fund,
World Organization for Early Child Education, Academy of Educa-
tional Development (AED), World Vision, and the Consultative
Group on Early Child Care and Development. 
Many, many thanks to Linda M. Richardson for the text editing;
without her persistence, meticulous efforts, and superb skills, the
timely preparation of this proceedings would not have been possible. 

Chapter 1
Introduction and Overview
Mary Eming Young
Early child development (ECD) programs that comprehensively 
address children’s basic needs—health, nutrition, and emotional 
and intellectual development—foster development of capable 
and productive adults. And, early interventions can alter the lifetime
trajectories of children who are born poor or are deprived of the 
opportunities for growth and development available to those more
fortunate.
These facts are well known today and are founded on evidence
from the neurobiological, behavioral, and social sciences and the
evaluation of model interventions and large, publicly funded pro-
grams. The short- and long-term beneﬁts of ECD programs for chil-
dren are enormous. By providing basic health care, adequate nutri-
tion, and nurturing and stimulation in a caring environment, ECD
interventions help ensure children’s progress in primary school, con-
tinuation through secondary school, and successful entry into the
work force.
The economic returns to investing in young children are high.
But, there is an even more compelling reason for underscoring the
importance of the early years: Early interventions help children es-
cape poverty. Among the world’s 6 billion people, 2.8 billion live on
less than US$2 a day, and 1.2 billion live on less than $1 a day (World
Bank 2000). Within every country, there is a massive imbalance be-
tween rich and poor.
1

Disparities in children’s development mirror these economic 
disparities, and poverty is associated with poor social indicators, 
especially for poor children. Without the basic nutrition, health care,
and stimulation needed to promote healthy growth, many poor chil-
dren enter school not ready to learn. These children do poorly in
class, repeat grades, and drop out at high rates. They are at a disad-
vantage when they enter the workplace, earning the lowest wages,
and, as parents, pass their poverty on to their children. Giving chil-
dren a better chance is not only vital for attacking the worst effects of
poverty, but also may be an effective way of breaking the relentless,
vicious cycle of poverty transmitted across generations.
Core aspects of poverty are targeted in the goals for international
development recently set forth by the development community. The
goals are: reducing by half the proportion of people living in extreme
poverty by 2015; a two-thirds decline in infant and under-5 mortali-
ty, and a three-fourths decline in maternal mortality; universal pri-
mary education for all by 2015; gender equality in education by
2005; national strategies for sustainable development by 2005; and
ensuring that the current loss of environmental resources is reversed
globally and nationally by 2015.
The goals in poverty, health, and education are mutually reinforc-
ing. Higher school enrollment, especially for girls, reduces poverty.
Reductions in mortality, gained through better basic health care, in-
creases enrollment and performance in school, which reduces pover-
ty. As a great equalizer, education diminishes the differences between
rich and poor—but only if all children have an equal chance to take
advantage of education.
To meet the goal for universal primary education, poor children
must be given a fair chance to beneﬁt from school. In unequal soci-
eties that have high levels of poverty, a level playing ﬁeld even at age
6, or by the time a child enters school, may already be unfair for poor
children. By intervening early, ECD programs offer all children the
possibility to fully beneﬁt from school and to succeed in the market-
place. In this way, ECD interventions help reconcile countries’ goals
for equity and efﬁciency (Birdsall 1999).
2
Mary Eming Young

Early Child Development: Scientiﬁc Evidence
The importance of early child development has been noted by econo-
mists, behavioral scientists, educators, neuroscientists, and biologists.
Fogel, the 1993 Nobelist in economics, states that the quality of early
child development has a signiﬁcant effect on the quality of popula-
tions and inﬂuences health outcomes in adult life (Fogel 1999). In an
analysis of factors contributing to inequality in health, conducted for
the U.K. government, Acheson (1998) ﬁnds that, although remedia-
ble risk factors affecting health occur throughout life, childhood is a
critical and vulnerable state in which poor socioeconomic circum-
stances have lasting effects. He notes that, because adverse outcomes
(e.g., mental illness, short stature, obesity, delinquency, and unem-
ployment) result from early adverse environments, policies that re-
duce early adverse inﬂuences may have multiple beneﬁts for a child’s
entire life course and into the next generation.
During early childhood, patterns of behavior, competency, and
learning are initiated and established; socioenvironmental factors be-
gin to modify genetic inheritance; brain cells grow in abundance;
and biological pathways for handling stress arise. Increasing evidence
from various sources (Rutter, Giller, and Hagell 1998; Tremblay 1999)
documents that early-life conditions “have a long reach” for behav-
ior, particularly antisocial behavior, delinquency, and crime. Longitu-
dinal studies clearly show that most seriously antisocial adolescents
and adults exhibit behavioral problems during childhood and that
the origin of these problems traces back to fetal development and in-
fancy (Karr-Morse and Wiley 1997).
The early years also affect children’s learning, particularly their 
literacy and mathematics skills. Beginning at birth, most children 
are immersed in the language and literacy of their immediate family.
As infants respond to their parents and siblings, speech emerges natu-
rally and, by 12–18 months, toddlers usually begin to establish a 
recognizable vocabulary, which grows exponentially over the next
few years as language structures emerge and speech and language
continue to develop. These infant and toddler years are critical for 
Introduction and Overview
3

establishing the foundation for future literacy development (Willms
1999). In addition, recent research shows that children’s early mathe-
matical capabilities are considerably differentiated by social class dur-
ing these early years, when the neurological circuitry that underpins
these capabilities also develops the most rapidly (Case, Grifﬁn, and
Kelly 1999).
Commenting on gene–environment interactions, neuroscientists
claim that individuals’ “skills, abilities, dreams, and prejudices” result
from their genetic history and the particular physical and social envi-
ronmental stimuli to which they are exposed. They note that inade-
quate and inappropriate social and emotional experiences in the ear-
ly environment can compromise higher-level neural systems that
provide the information needed to bond, imitate, and generally re-
spond in socially appropriate ways (Cynader and Frost 1999). Re-
search shows that, during key developmental periods, the amount of
gray matter in some brain areas can nearly double within as little as a
year and that this process is followed by a drastic loss of tissue as un-
needed cells are purged and the brain continues to organize itself. By
the age of 3 years, the brains of children are 2.5 times more active
than the brains of adults, and they remain this way throughout the
ﬁrst decade of life (Shore 1997). Extensive rewiring continues
throughout childhood. Although growth spurts occur in the brain
even beyond early childhood, the rule for brain development appears
to be “use it or lose it” during the early critical periods (Giedd and
others 1999).
Stress also plays a role in early brain development. Studies of the
biological pathways involved in reactions to stress show that the
stresses to which individuals are exposed early in life may modify
their ability to moderate and control responses to stress later in life
(Cynader and Frost 1999); that the quality of sensory stimulation in
early life helps shape the brain’s endocrine and immune pathways;
and that adults who were poorly nurtured in early life tend to retain
sustained levels of stress hormones long after situations that cause
arousal. Studies also show that mothers’ handling of young animals
can “set the program” for responses of the hypothalamus-pituitary-
4
Mary Eming Young

adrenal pathway to stress throughout life and that the absence of ma-
ternal care produces abnormal stress reactions later in life (McCain
and Mustard 1999).
Implications for ECD
Brain development in the early years affects physical and mental
health, learning, and behavior throughout life. What, how, and how
much children learn later in school largely depends on the social and
emotional competence and cognitive skills they develop in the ﬁrst
few years of life. The development of a young child’s brain depends
on environmental stimulation, especially the quality of care and in-
teraction the child receives. The quality of care received, including
nutrition, health care, and stimulation, during the ﬁrst few years can
have a long-lasting effect on brain development. When these basic
needs are met, children can gain improved critical thinking skills,
self-conﬁdence, problem-solving abilities, and capacity to cooperate
with others. These skills will determine children’s overall school per-
formance and possibly alter their developmental trajectory (Ramey
and Ramey 1998).
Solutions to meet the intellectual and social development needs of
young children are available, but need to be adopted more broadly
and intensively. The knowledge base to support large-scale invest-
ments in ECD interventions is more than sufﬁcient. These invest-
ments will pave the way for improving individuals’ health, mental
and physical performance, and productivity and, in a major way,
help minimize or even prevent a host of related economic and social
problems, including juvenile delinquency, teenage pregnancy, and
social violence.
Do ECD Interventions Work?
ECD programs and interventions can improve children's chances in
the world. Young children who participate in early interventions that
include nutrition, health care, and nurturing have lower rates of
school dropout, higher school enrollment, and higher achievement
Introduction and Overview
5

from primary grades to adulthood. The examples of effective ECD in-
terventions across the world’s regions are many, and some have been
evaluated to measure their efﬁcacy. Some of the best known examples
include the Perry Preschool Project, the North Carolina Abecedarian
Project, the Infant Health and Development Program, and the Head
Start and Early Head Start programs in the United States; the Integrat-
ed Child Development Service (ICDS) in India; and the Initial Educa-
tion Project in Mexico. 
Studies of these interventions illuminate the particular beneﬁts of
ECD. For example, children who participated in ICDS scored higher
on intellectual aptitude tests and had superior school attendance,
academic performance, and general behavior than children who did
not participate (Chaturvedi and others 1987). ICDS is the largest ECD
program in the world, serving 32 million children. In Brazil, poor
children who attended 1 year of preschool stayed in primary school
0.4 years longer than children who did not attend preschool (Barros
and Mendonça 1999). For each year of preschool, children had a
7–12 percent increase in potential lifetime income, with the larger in-
creases gained by children from families whose parents had the least
amount of schooling (Barros and Mendonça 1999). The Abecedarian
Project showed that the likelihood of children being held back in the
same grade during primary school declined by almost 50 percent
when children attended ECD programs (Ramey and others 2000).
Studies also show that children from families with the least education
derive the greatest cognitive and social beneﬁts, and the effect of ear-
ly interventions appears to be long-lasting. Gains such as these are
real and veriﬁable, and they prove beyond a doubt that early inter-
ventions work.
The Next Step
Science clearly identiﬁes why and when ECD programs should be im-
plemented. And, ECD researchers and practitioners have determined,
in large part, what programs are effective and for which groups they
are most needed. These considerations can all be further broadened
6
Mary Eming Young

and reﬁned, but the critical questions now for the global community
are how to implement ECD interventions effectively and how to take
these programs to scale.
That is, how can governments utilize the knowledge gained from
science to deﬁne policies that will beneﬁt young children? How can
existing scientiﬁc knowledge about early child development be trans-
lated into interventions that beneﬁt large numbers of young children
deprived of their most basic needs from birth and, even, in utero?
Which public policies are needed (e.g., speciﬁcally for poor and oth-
erwise disadvantaged children)? What are the elements of program
effectiveness? How can programs be brought to scale? What are the
lessons learned in implementing these programs? And how can pub-
lic-private partnerships be encouraged?
The next step is to address these questions in global venues and to
solicit continued, sustained investments in early child development
for all nations. Continued efforts are needed to evaluate ECD 
programs and to promote, initiate, and implement effective ECD 
programs throughout the world and especially for impoverished 
children.
Investing in Our Children’s Future
To stimulate discussion of the questions posed above and invest-
ments in early child development, the World Bank hosted an interna-
tional conference, entitled “Investing in Our Children’s Future,” in
Washington, D.C., on April 10–11, 2000. The conference participants
reviewed the state of knowledge on the beneﬁts and effectiveness of
early interventions, addressed the role and inﬂuence of the private
sector, emphasized the importance of narrowing the gap for poor
children, and highlighted the potential political and economic gains
from investing in ECD. This volume contains the proceedings of the
conference. The chapters consist of papers developed for or subse-
quent to the conference.
The volume builds on and extends previous and similar efforts, in-
cluding an earlier conference hosted by the Bank, entitled “Early
Introduction and Overview
7

Child Development: Investing in the Future.” This conference was
held at The Carter Presidential Center, Atlanta, Georgia, in April
1996, and the proceedings were published (Young 1997). Both con-
ferences engaged representatives of governments, nongovernmental
organizations, foundations, academia, and multilateral and bilateral
agencies in interactive discussions and presentations on the impor-
tance of investing in young children.
The present volume is organized into ﬁve parts: The Beneﬁts of In-
vesting in Young Children, Measuring the Early Opportunity Gap,
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Early Childhood Programs, The Pri-
vate Sector’s Inﬂuence on the Public Sector, and Investing in the Fu-
ture: Action and Policy. Twelve chapters are included. The authors de-
scribe current understanding and suggest areas for future study and
action. The contributions reﬂect their extensive research and practi-
cal experience.
The Beneﬁts of Investing in Young Children
Two chapters in part I summarize the individual and societal beneﬁts
of investing in young children. In “Early Child Development and the
Brain: The Base for Health, Learning, and Behavior Throughout Life,”
J. Fraser Mustard conveys current research and research ﬁndings on
brain development. He notes historical evidence which suggests that
the relationship between economic growth and improved health
since the beginning of the industrial revolution is linked to improved
outcomes for children associated with increased prosperity. He then
reviews basic research on biological pathways; animal studies of de-
velopment and function, gene–environment interactions, and im-
mune effects; and population-based human studies of socioenviron-
mental effects and educational experiences—all of which substantiate
the importance of early childhood. Mustard describes the beneﬁts of
several intervention efforts and highlights the relevance of ECD pro-
grams for developed countries, such as Canada, as well as developing
countries. He emphasizes that good ECD programs should be avail-
able for all population sectors and can improve the quality of society
by reducing inequalities in health, competence, and coping skills.
8
Mary Eming Young

In “From Child Development to Human Development,” Jacques
van der Gaag deﬁnes the linkage between early child development
and human development. He provides a brief history of development
economics, commenting on the interests of Nobel laureates in eco-
nomics to illustrate the historical shift from developing planning
models to investing in people. Van der Gaag then describes four criti-
cal pathways—education, health, social capital, and equality—link-
ing early child development to human development, through eco-
nomic growth. He summarizes in chart form the immediate and
long-term beneﬁts of ECD programs for children, adults, and society
in each pathway, and he concludes that well-executed and well-tar-
geted ECD programs are initiators of human development and in-
vestments in the future of a nation.
Measuring the Early Opportunity Gap
Two chapters in part II address the need to measure inequalities in
early child development and to target ECD programs effectively. In
“Standards of Care: Investments to Improve Children’s Educational
Outcomes in Latin America,” J. Douglas Willms summarizes the
ﬁndings of the Primer Estudio Internacional Comparativo (PEIC),
the ﬁrst international study of school outcomes in Latin America
which utilized common tests and questionnaires across (13) coun-
tries. He describes the concept of socioeconomic gradients and re-
views results which show that the gradients, school outcomes, and
school achievement proﬁles vary widely among countries in the re-
gion and that the gradients are related to inequalities in society and
children’s developmental outcomes. Based on an analysis of the
data, Willms presents a framework to help policymakers evaluate
and monitor school outcomes. This framework includes a deﬁnition
of “vulnerable” children and standards of care for superior school-
ing; accounts for sector (private or public) and urbanicity; and incor-
porates key considerations for low-income countries. Willms sug-
gests that these countries could reduce the risk for children
associated with low parental education by one-half if they achieved
the standards set forth.
Introduction and Overview
9

In “Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil,” Mary
Eming Young offers a special analysis of Brazil as an example of the
potential implications of ECD policies to reduce inequality. She be-
gins by summarizing the improved outcomes for vulnerable children
in several ECD interventions in the United States as evidence to sup-
port investments in comprehensive programs, to reduce poverty,
build human capital, and strengthen overall development. Young
then summarizes the results of a recent World Bank study conducted
by the Institute of Applied Economic Research in Brazil. This study
reinforces ﬁndings presented by Willms concerning inequalities of
early education, and investments in this education, for children who
are poor or reside in rural areas. The evaluation of the effects of
preschool education in Brazil supports many other studies, which
show that attendance in preschool correlates with increased school-
ing overall, reduced grade repetition, and future earning capacity. Im-
portantly, the gains of preschool education for children of illiterate
parents appear to be higher than for children of educated parents.
Overall, the calculation for Brazil yields a 2:1 beneﬁt-cost ratio. Fur-
ther, 1 year of preschool attendance results in a 7–12 percent increase
in future earnings.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Early Childhood Programs
Four chapters in part III address the question: What constitutes quali-
ty? In “Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from
Research,” John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
review research on the ingredients of quality. They identify two im-
portant ingredients—classroom structure (e.g., child–staff ratio, sup-
portive services, staff characteristics) and classroom dynamics (e.g.,
positive teacher and child behaviors, effective teacher–child interac-
tions, stability and continuity). They also highlight eight supporting
factors, which include teacher education, in-service training, experi-
ence, continuity, and compensation; experienced and trained super-
visors and directors; community partnerships; and safe and appropri-
ate physical space. Studies of center- and family-based childcare,
which are summarized in a useful chart at the end of the chapter, 
10
Mary Eming Young

indicate important modifying factors associated with positive out-
comes. These factors include lower child–staff ratios, smaller group
sizes, appropriate caregiving, developmentally appropriate practices,
and caregiver responsiveness. Beneﬁts associated with higher-quality
childcare include improved language, enhanced social skills, reduced
behavior problems, and increased cooperation. Based on this infor-
mation, the authors highlight ﬁve types of investments as most im-
portant for enhancing children’s early development: well-trained,
motivated, and committed staff; safe, sanitary, and accessible facili-
ties; child–staff ratios and group sizes that foster appropriate
teacher–child interactions; consistent supervision; and staff develop-
ment to ensure continuing and improving quality. They conclude by
calling for additional quantitative studies of quality that utilize con-
temporaneous, longitudinal, and pre-post designs.
In “Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming,” Judith L.
Evans describes the Effectiveness Initiative (EI), a 5-year, qualitative
study of ten ECD programs. The aim is to better understand why pro-
grams are effective for diverse participants, communities, and cul-
tures. By examining the context of the ten programs in depth, the
participants are “mapping” the dimensions of effectiveness and iden-
tifying patterns of effectiveness across settings. Evans describes the
ten programs; the organization, assumptions, and status of EI; the
qualitative research tools that are being used (e.g., structured ques-
tions, analogies, storytelling, interviews); and the qualitative research
strategy adopted (i.e., embedded communications). She notes the ad-
vantages of qualitative research for discerning and describing differ-
ences, identifying patterns, gaining intuitive understanding, focusing
on process, and validating programming decisions. Evans urges that
qualitative reviews and evaluations be built into all ECD efforts to en-
sure that scarce resources are invested wisely in effective programs.
In the next chapter, Louisa B. Tarullo focuses on one U.S. program,
Head Start. In “Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head
Start Experience,” Tarullo describes the program’s initiative of pro-
gram performance measures, launched in 1995, and the Family and
Child Experiences Survey (FACES), a central part of the initiative.
Introduction and Overview
11

Data collected in the survey are being used to assess outcomes and re-
ﬁne the overall program. The conceptual framework for measuring
program performance links process and outcome measures for Head
Start children and families. Tarullo depicts the framework in pyramid
form. The ultimate outcome measure is “child’s social competence,”
and ﬁve objectives are identiﬁed to support this outcome. Multiple
performance measures are deﬁned for each objective. Tarullo also de-
picts the study design for FACES and reports key ﬁndings from the
1997–98 follow-up. The data show that Head Start can enhance chil-
dren’s growth and development; strengthen families as primary nur-
turers of children; provide high-quality educational, health, and nu-
tritional services to children; and improve children’s outcomes (e.g.,
higher vocabulary scores). These data have been used to document
and communicate Head Start’s effects to the legislature and public
and to improve the program further. Tarullo notes that the data 
are important evidence of the value of investments in early child 
development.
In “Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Ja-
maican Models,” Kerida Scott-McDonald notes the overwhelming
disadvantages of neglect, abuse, and inappropriate care experienced
by young children in poor Jamaican communities. She comments
that, for the one in three children under age 4 who live in poverty in
Jamaica, home-based early childhood programs offer perhaps the
greatest hope of breaking the cycle of poverty. Scott-McDonald com-
mends Jamaica for achieving 85 percent preschool coverage for all
4–5 year olds, but notes that day-care coverage for infants and chil-
dren from birth to age 3 is only about 14 percent. She identiﬁes and
describes twelve elements of quality in three home visiting programs
in Jamaica that are increasing poor families’ access to ECD interven-
tions and, ultimately, building social capital. Scott-McDonald also
comments on issues and concerns that still need to be addressed in
Jamaica. She concludes that the greatest overall challenge for the
home visiting programs is to ensure full institutionalization. Scott-
McDonald argues that formal programs are too expensive for poor
families and may be culturally irrelevant or insensitive to families’
12
Mary Eming Young

needs. She emphasizes that public-private partnerships are needed to
take the home-based programs to scale and to integrate them into the
nation’s delivery of social services.
The Private Sector’s Inﬂuence on the Public Sector
In part IV, two chapters consider the private sector’s involvement in
early child development. In “Role of the Private Sector in Early Child
Development,” Robert G. Myers illuminates the important and sig-
niﬁcant role that the private sector can have in improving children’s
development. He clariﬁes the terminology used to refer to early child
development, presents six arguments for societies to invest in ECD
programs and the implications for the private sector, and deﬁnes and
depicts the dimensions and components of the private sector as relat-
ed to early childcare and education. The broad view of the private
sector adopted by Myers includes small, medium, and large business
organizations; the variety of social organizations (e.g., community
groups, nongovernmental organizations and private voluntary orga-
nizations, churches, philanthropies), and private individuals. These
components can, and do, provide or support various ECD services,
training, and materials. Myers goes on to review the reasons given for
advocating private versus public care and education (e.g., availability
of resources, cost-effectiveness, accountability, quality, equity) and
suggests ways for increasing private-sector involvement in early
childhood activities. He notes that the opportunities for becoming
involved are many, and he encourages two components, business or-
ganizations and adults without children, to become much more in-
volved in early childcare and education.
In “Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Case Studies,” 
Simone Kirpal highlights the role of communities in early child de-
velopment. She presents ﬁve examples of ECD programs around the
world that give priority to extensive involvement of the local com-
munity, to create ownership and assure successful, cost-effective, and
sustainable programs. The cases exemplify how effective ECD pro-
grams can involve local communities to achieve sustainability and
how private-public partnerships can enhance the potential for taking
Introduction and Overview
13

the programs to scale. The ﬁve cases are the Montessori Preschool
Project in Haiti; the Mother-Child Day Care Center Services in 
Uganda; SERVOL in Trinidad and Tobago; the Aga Khan Founda-
tion’s efforts in Kenya, Uganda, and Zanzibar (the Madrasa Resource
Centers) and in Pakistan (Improving Pre- and Primary Education);
and the Step by Step program in Central and Eastern Europe, the
Former Soviet Union, Haiti, Mongolia, and South Africa. In her in-
troduction to the cases, Kirpal describes seven essential features of a
successful ECD program. These include a child-centered approach,
parental involvement and family support, community ownership,
cultural and ﬁnancial sustainability, training and capacity building,
integration within a broader development framework, and private-
public partnership. She notes that the goal of any community devel-
opment program should be to enable a process that will be main-
tained after outside funders leave. Involving communities from the
outset and adopting a partnership approach that emphasizes the full
participation of parents, families, and community members are nec-
essary to begin this process.
Investing in the Future: Action and Policy
The two chapters in part V move the discussion to another level,
from reviewing the data available to taking action and making policy.
In the ﬁrst chapter, Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala plead for
a focus on children who are most vulnerable—the poor and disad-
vantaged. Derived from their keynote addresses at the conference,
“Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children” relates how poverty is trans-
mitted between generations and the steps that can be taken to break
the cycle. Iglesias and Shalala urge communities and government to
work together and to combine their resources to intervene effectively.
The U.S. Head Start and Early Head Start programs are cited as an ex-
ample of programs that are providing important lessons about gov-
ernment-sponsored, community-based early child development. Igle-
sias and Shalala argue that even modest investments in programs
that involve parents, schools, and local health organizations can
have broad impact for society, by breaking the cycle of poverty and
14
Mary Eming Young

lessening related effects such as violence, criminal behavior, and
mental illness. They list six lessons from the Head Start experience:
The earlier intervention begins, the better; quality counts; quality
early childhood education begins with teacher training; parents must
be involved and accommodated; early childhood education must be
integrated with other needs; and government should make early
childhood education a national laboratory and catalyst for change.
Iglesias and Shalala conclude that the most important reason for in-
vesting in programs such as Head Start or quality childcare is to “even
up the odds” for poor children. They emphasize that the time has
come to narrow the gap between what can be done and what is being
done for poor children.
In the ﬁnal chapter, Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and
William H. Foege address “The Political Challenge: Commitment
and Cooperation.” Derived from their remarks on the political and
policy aspects of early child development, made at the conference,
this chapter considers the societal beneﬁts and constraints to invest-
ing in ECD programs and the political challenge for doing so. The
authors emphasize that society can be transformed through ECD ef-
forts that help realize the human potential, assure and protect hu-
man rights, foster democracy, and reduce poverty. They note that
political decisions favoring early child development may be thwart-
ed by the immediate costs of ECD programs (in contrast with the
long-term gains, well after politicians have left ofﬁce) and difﬁculties
in integrating ECD programs into other services provided by differ-
ent government agencies or sectors. The distance and time between a
decision and an effect are highlighted as two barriers to good deci-
sionmaking. Doryan, Gautam, and Foege emphasize that, despite
these constraints, government has an essential role to play in early
child development and that policymakers must consider the power,
position, and perception of all stakeholders when designing or im-
plementing ECD programs. They cite six steps for effective govern-
ment action and ﬁve “rules” for investing a nation’s resources in ear-
ly child development. They agree that the time to act is now, and
they urge the building of a global coalition to capture the enthusi-
Introduction and Overview
15

asm of communities, the commitment of political leaders, and the
passion of donors for early child development.
Conclusion
ECD programs are fundamentally about providing all children, who
are born unknowingly into the game of life, a fair chance to succeed.
Even by age 3 or 6, so many children are faced with so many obsta-
cles. The ﬁeld of play for them is not level and, for a lifetime, they
will struggle uphill. Despite malnutrition, disease, neglect, and abuse,
they strive to live and want to learn. Is this fair? Cannot the world of-
fer them more?
Most parents do their best to help their children have a fair chance
in school and at work. But many parents themselves need help, for
they are struggling too. Communities, governments, and societies
can band together to give all children and families a fair chance—to
provide the childcare and education programs needed for those with-
out them, to provide assistance for families to beneﬁt from them, and
to make sure that all programs are of high quality and effective. As
the world becomes more complex and the marketplace becomes even
more global, nations need to ensure their survivability by looking af-
ter their children so that both can participate and compete effectively
in the world economy.
How is equal opportunity created? In most countries, education is
the great equalizer, but only if all children have equal opportunities
to take advantage of education. Children who live in poverty in any
country do not have equal access. If educational facilities are avail-
able, they are of lesser quality than in more afﬂuent areas, and poor
children often have to forego education to work and bring income
into the family. Many poor children do not even have family support
and are on the streets earning their own way at very early ages.
Market reforms make physical and human capital assets more
valuable, which poor families all too often do not have. Govern-
ments must be called upon to supplement these conventional 
reforms with more aggressive policies and programs to augment the
16
Mary Eming Young

assets of the poor and to ensure that they too can exploit new market
opportunities. Placing a premium on policies and programs targeting
early childhood is an obvious ﬁrst choice because these efforts engen-
der a lifetime of improvement for the children and families beneﬁt-
ing from them. The poorer the families are, and the more unequal
the society is, the greater need there is for governments to channel
taxes and other public resources to ECD interventions that can stop
the intergenerational transmission of poverty, which undermines the
development of any nation (Birdsall 1999).
Each country in the world needs to invest in the future of its chil-
dren, and the private sector must participate in this investment. Pri-
vate businesses and organizations have important roles to play and
can inﬂuence government to take the right steps. Targeted invest-
ments in early child development by private-public partnerships will
help prepare all children to learn and succeed and to develop into
healthier, more productive adults.
Continued evaluation of the effectiveness of ECD programs will
provide the guidance needed for making good investments. The
monitoring and evaluation of programs for their efﬁcacy, efﬁciency,
and beneﬁt-cost furnishes critical information for making policy de-
cisions about which types of programs to support and which commu-
nities or populations to target. As with any investment, ﬁnancial
costs will be weighed against potential beneﬁts and feasibility of im-
plementation. The challenge ahead is to fund ECD programs that can
cost-effectively improve the lives of children and families at risk.
In his closing remarks at the conference, Foege speciﬁcally chal-
lenged the international community to deliberately plan a global
coalition to fund ECD initiatives that would promote, measure, and
improve children’s well-being. This coalition could be assembled 
similar to the new Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization
and would include, in each country, a focal responsibility for child
development.
By placing children at the center of the global agenda to reduce
poverty, we can “be the ﬁrst generation to think both as nationals of
our countries and as global citizens in an ever-shrinking and more
Introduction and Overview
17

connected planet”—an opportunity and a challenge for us recently
noted by James D. Wolfensohn (2001). As he eloquently states, “Our
children will inherit the world we create. The issues are urgent. The
future for our children will be shaped by the decisions we make and
the courage and leadership we show today.”
References
Acheson, D. 1998. Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health: 
Report. London: The Stationery Ofﬁce.
Barros, R.P. de, and R. Mendonça. 1999. Costs and Beneﬁts of 
Pre-school Education in Brazil. Background study commissioned 
to IPEA by the World Bank. Rio de Janeiro: Institute of Applied
Economic Research.
Birdsall, N. 1999. Investing in Children: The Role of the State in
Unequal Societies. Remarks presented at a seminar on Breaking
the Poverty Cycle: Investing in Early Childhood, Annual Meeting
of the Boards of Governors of the Inter-American Development
Bank and the Inter-American Investment Corporation, Paris,
France, March 14, 1999. [www.iadb.org/sds/soc]
Case, R., S. Grifﬁn, and W.M. Kelly. 1999. Socioeconomic Gradients
in Mathematical Ability and Their Responsiveness to Intervention
during Early Childhood. In D.P. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds.,
Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations. New York:
Guilford Press.
Chaturvedi, E., B.C. Srivastava, J.V. Singh, and M. Prasad. 1987.
Impact of Six Years Exposure to ICDS Scheme on Psycho-social
Development. Indian Pediatrics 24:153–60.
Cynader, M.S., and B.J. Frost. 1999. Mechanisms of Brain
Development: Neuronal Sculpting by the Physical and Social
Environment. In D.P. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds.,
Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations. New York:
Guilford Press.
Fogel, R.W. 1999. Catching Up With the Economy. American
Economic Review 89(1):1–21.
18
Mary Eming Young

Giedd, J.N., J. Blumenthal, N.D. Jeffries, F.X. Castellanos, H. Liu, and
A. Zijdenbos. 1999. Brain Development during Childhood and
Adolescence: A Longitudinal MRI Study. Nature Neuroscience
2(10):861–3.
Karr-Morse, R., and M.S. Wiley. 1997. Ghosts from the Nursery: Tracing
the Roots of Violence. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
McCain, M.N., and J.F. Mustard. 1999. Early Years Study: Reversing
the Real Brain Drain. Toronto: Publications Ontario.
Ramey, C.T., F.A. Campbell, M. Burchinal, M.L. Skinner, D.M.
Gardner, and S. L. Ramey. 2000. Persistent Effects of Early
Childhood Education on High-Risk Children and Their Mothers.
Applied Developmental Science 4(1):2–14.
Ramey, C.T., and S.L. Ramey. 1998. Prevention of Intellectual
Disabilities: Early Interventions to Improve Cognitive
Development. Preventive Medicine 27:224–32.
Rutter, M., H. Giller, and A. Hagell. 1998. Antisocial Behavior by Young
People. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shore, R. 1997. Rethinking the Brain — New Insights into Early
Development. Families and Work Institute. New York, N.Y.
Tremblay, R.E. 1999. When Children’s Social Development Fails. In
D.P. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the
Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Willms, D. 1999. Quality and Inequality in Children’s Literacy: The
Effects of Families, Schools, and Communities. In D. P. Keating
and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the Wealth of
Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Wolfensohn, J.D. 2001. The Challenges of Globalization. The Role of
the World Bank. Address to the Bundestag. Berlin, Germany, April
2, 2001.
World Bank. 2000. World Development Report 2000/2001, Attacking
Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.
Young, M.E., ed. 1997. Early Child Development: Investing in our
Children’s Future. International Congress Series 1137. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science B.V.
Introduction and Overview
19


Part I 
The Beneﬁts of Investing 
in Young Children


Chapter 2
Early Child Development 
and the Brain—the Base 
for Health, Learning, and 
Behavior Throughout Life
J. Fraser Mustard
For most mammals that have been studied in detail, the conditions
inﬂuencing physical development and behavior in the early stage of
life have a signiﬁcant effect on the later stages. Although the impor-
tance of the early years of life for the health and coping skills of
many mammals has been recognized, the importance for human de-
velopment and health is still controversial (Bruer 1999; Kagan 1998;
Keating and Hertzman 1999). The emerging understanding of the in-
ﬂuence of the social and physical environment (water quality, secure
physical environment, good nutrition, and excellent nurturing) in
the early years of human development on risks for physical and men-
tal health problems and competence and coping skills in adult life
has led to proposals that investments in mothers and children will re-
duce inequalities in development and health in adult life (Acheson
1998; Keating and Hertzman 1999; McCain and Mustard 1999).
This knowledge, coupled with the increasing evidence that the 
early period of child development affects cognition, learning, and 
behavior in the later stages of life (Keating and Hertzman 1999; 
McCain and Mustard 1999; Wickelgren 1999), is creating a broader
consensus about the fundamental importance of the early years of
23

24
J. Fraser Mustard
development. Much of this evidence comes from research in the nat-
ural and social sciences involving historical studies, neuroscience, ge-
netics, longitudinal studies of birth cohorts, population epidemiolo-
gy, cross-sectional studies, and randomized trials of the effects of
improved support for early child development on later stages of life.
One of the challenges is to combine the knowledge from the nat-
ural sciences and the social sciences. In his book Consilience: The Uni-
ty of Knowledge, Wilson (1998) sets out the difﬁculties of integrating
knowledge about humans from the natural and social sciences when
the interpretation involves the beliefs and values of a society and the
different frameworks, beliefs, and cultures of intellectual disciplines.
This chapter addresses early child development and health, compe-
tence, and coping skills in adult life from the perspective of various
disciplines in the natural and social sciences. The sections present
historical evidence, research ﬁndings from biological and animal
studies and from epidemiological and longitudinal studies in hu-
mans, and a case example of a new early child development (ECD)
initiative in Canada.
Historical Evidence
One of the striking changes in Western countries has been the effect
of the industrial revolution on the prosperity and health of popula-
tions in these countries. Fogel (1994), McKeown (1976), and others
(Steckel and Floud 1997) have tried to assess the cause of the remark-
able decline in mortality following the start of the industrial revolu-
tion.
In his study of Great Britain, McKeown (1976) estimates that direct
public health measures account for about 25 percent of the reduction
in mortality rate, and he concludes, by exclusion, that improved
health was largely related to improved nutrition resulting from the
gradual increase in prosperity and food production and distribution.
His conclusion is controversial (Szreter 2000). However, Fogel (2000),
in a broader and deeper assessment of a number of Western coun-
tries, also concludes that better nutrition, largely resulting from the

Early Child Development and the Brain
25
industrial revolution and improved prosperity, is the main factor
causing the fall in mortality rates.
In his analysis, Fogel (2000) ﬁnds that life expectancy improved as
the mean heights of populations increased. Because nutrition during
early childhood (including in utero) has a major effect on adult
height (Floud, Wachter, and Gregory 1990), Fogel concludes that the
increase in life expectancy is related to improved conditions for early
childhood. He speculates that conditions during early childhood af-
fected the risks for health problems in adult life. Obviously, other
changes besides improved nutrition, such as reduction in family size,
affected early child development during this period. Reduced family
size could have led to reduced risk of childhood infections and, possi-
bly, better nurturing of young children by parents (Reves 1985).
This historical evidence shows a relationship between economic
growth and improved health that is not due to health care and is
only partially explained by conventional public health measures. The
relationship, however, is linked to the improved outcomes for chil-
dren associated with more prosperous societies.
Being an economic historian, Fogel also considers the effect of a
healthier, more competent population on economic growth. He con-
cludes that much of the economic growth in developed countries in
association with the industrial revolution was a consequence of the
better quality of the population. He estimates that the improved
quality of the population may have accounted for as much as 50 per-
cent of the economic growth in the United Kingdom following the
start of the industrial revolution (Fogel 2000). This evidence indicates
a relationship between technological innovation, economic prosperi-
ty, changes in the social environment and the health and well-being
of populations and the effects of populations’ improved health and
well-being on economic growth. In his recent book, Fogel (2000) dis-
cusses the ways new knowledge and technological innovation are
producing major economic and social changes in societies today and
the potential effects of these changes on populations.
The historical evidence leaves two unresolved questions: How does
early life affect human development and the risk for physical and

26
J. Fraser Mustard
mental health problems in adult life? And, what biological pathways
are involved and how do the conditions of early child development
affect these pathways?
Research Findings
Human and animal studies provide substantial evidence of the effects
of nutrition and experience in the early years on brain development
and competence, coping skills, behavior, and health later in life
(Acheson 1998; Gunnar 1998; Hales 1997; Keating and Hertzman
1999; Lucas, Morley, and Cole 1998; McCain and Mustard 1999;
McEwen 1998; Meaney and others 1996; Selye 1936, 1976; Suomi
1997). New knowledge about the development of the brain in early
life and its effects on all aspects of body function, through pathways
involving the endocrine systems, the immune system, and mental
processes, is providing clues about other biological pathways (Francis
and others 1999; Gunnar 1998; Keating and Hertzman 1999;
McEwen 1998). The biological evidence supports the hypothesis that
brain development in early childhood is a factor inﬂuencing health,
learning, and behavior throughout the life cycle.
Biological Pathways
Biological studies provide intriguing evidence of the relationship be-
tween brain development and experiences in early childhood. Clues
about this relationship are found in pertinent studies of the
brain/hormone pathways, sensory pathways (e.g., the visual cortex),
and stages of brain development in humans.
Brain/Hormone Pathways
Understanding of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal gland (HPA)
system and the autonomic nervous system and stress has grown ex-
ponentially since the work of Selye (1936). The development of these
systems in early life and their effects on brain function and other im-
portant pathways in the endocrine and immune systems are now bet-
ter understood through studies of psychoneuroendocrinology and

Early Child Development and the Brain
27
psychoneuroimmunology. Basically, external or internal sensory
stimuli to the brain can, through the HPA system, lead to increased
production of corticosteroids (sterols) and activation of the autonom-
ic nervous system. Sterol levels and their duration in the blood affect
all body systems and organs, including the brain. The brain regulates
sterol levels in the blood through a feedback system involving the
hypothalamus. Regulation of the release of corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus not only affects the HPA
pathway, but also the hippocampus and other pathways involved in
the limbic system (McEwen and Seeman 1999). A critical question is:
How is the regulation of the CRH pathway set?
The hippocampus and hypothalamus have steroid receptors that
are important in a number of aspects of brain function inﬂuencing
behavior, loss of cognitive function, memory loss with aging, sub-
stance abuse, and suicide (Gunnar 1998; Francis and others 1999;
McEwen and Seeman 1999; Selye 1936). Studies in newborn rat pups
indicate that external and internal stimuli during early life can set
the sensitivity and regulation of the CRH-HPA system (Francis and
others 1999; Gunnar 1998; McEwen 1998; Meaney and others 1996).
Some of the regulation appears to be mediated by the effects of
stimuli, including sterols, in activating genetic components in the
neurons in the hippocampus and hypothalamus that are part of the
process for determining cell differentiation and function in early life.
Sterols regulate gene expression by several pathways involving activa-
tion of speciﬁc genes and via regulation of RNA transcription. Under-
standing of the inﬂuence and sustained effects of variations in envi-
ronmental conditions (experience) on the development of neural
systems, at both the level of gene expression and synaptic develop-
ment, is growing. Some investigators are exploring how changes at
sites that regulate the transcription of genes may serve as a mecha-
nism for long-term effects on neuron function.
Stimulation of the CRH-HPA pathway can occur through at least
three routes: by endogenous factors from the circulation such as
those associated with illness; by direct stimulation from visceral sens-
ing systems (e.g., pain and blood pressure); and by stimulation of the

28
J. Fraser Mustard
hypothalamus through the brain’s external sensing systems (e.g., vi-
sion, touch, sound, smell). The hippocampus is an important struc-
ture because of its involvement with the limbic hypothalmic pitu-
itary adrenal cortical (LHPA) system and the prefrontal cortex
(Dettling and others 2000; Francis and others 1999; McEwen and See-
man 1999). The hippocampus inﬂuences memory, learning, and be-
havior. Chronic high levels of sterols can cause loss of neurons in the
hippocampus, with effects on memory and behavior (McEwen 1999;
Sapolsky 1992, 1997). Animal studies impressively demonstrate that
early experiences (stimulation) inﬂuence the development of these
brain pathways and affect the response of these pathways to internal
or external stimulation later in life.
McEwen and Schmeck (1994) summarize this dynamic interaction,
the effects of early experiences, and the function of the CRH-HPA
pathway as follows:
“All this means that while the brain evokes hormones and their multi-
tude of effects, the tide of hormone affects the brain too. The implica-
tions are profound; individual differences in experience are translated
into differences in brain function, even brain structure; that is what
makes the situation so complex, so difﬁcult to resolve into such tidy
simplicities as nature versus nurture. Early life experiences and the
hormone exposures that are determined by the brain’s reactions to
those experiences provide cues that will change the way the brain re-
sponds to new experiences in the future” (McEwen and Schmeck
1994, p. 178).
Much of the evidence from both human and animal studies that
now relates early experience to physical and mental health problems
later in life points to the CRH-HPA pathway (Francis and others 1999;
McEwen 1998, 1999; McEwen and Schmeck 1994; McEwen and See-
man 1999; Sapolsky 1997). The exceptional work of Barker and col-
leagues (Barker 1992, 1997; Phillips and others 1998) in relating
birthweight and length of gestation to health in adult life shows the
“long reach” of conditions in utero and early life to adult conditions
such as coronary heart disease, high blood pressure, noninsulin-

Early Child Development and the Brain
29
dependent diabetes, reduced immune function in later stages of life,
and obesity. Experiments in a variety of animals conﬁrm the link be-
tween intrauterine growth retardation and hypertension and meta-
bolic disorders.
Recently, Barker’s group (Phillips and others 1998) found that plas-
ma sterol levels in 64-year-old men were inversely related to their
birthweight. The higher plasma sterol levels found in men with a low
birthweight in relation to gestational age were signiﬁcantly associat-
ed with higher blood pressure, plasma glucose levels, and insulin re-
sistance. Barker’s group concludes, as does Meaney’s group from stud-
ies with rats, that the CRH-HPA axis can be programmed in utero
(Phillips and others 1998; Smythe and others 1994).
Thus, the development and regulation of the CRH-HPA pathway
in early life, resulting from external and internal stimuli received in
utero and shortly after birth, inﬂuence the regulation and function of
this pathway throughout the life cycle. Because this pathway can af-
fect memory, cognition, behavior, metabolic pathways, the immune
system, and the cardiovascular system throughout life, the develop-
ment of brain function in early life is very important. In addition, ev-
idence indicates that the response of the autonomic nervous system,
which is more difﬁcult to study, is also inﬂuenced by conditions in
early life, probably related, in part, to the development of the limbic
HPA system (Francis and others 1999).
Sensory Pathways
Another set of brain pathways inﬂuenced by conditions in early life is
the wiring and sculpting of the regions of the cortex that connect to
the sensing systems (e.g., vision, touch, sound, smell). The neurons
in the different sensing parts of the brain cortex that differentiate in
response to signals received in early life inﬂuence how well individu-
als recognize the world around them and respond to inputs from the
sensing organs. Groundbreaking research on vision (Cynader and
Frost 2000; Hubel and Weisel 1962) shows a sensitive period during
the early stages of development when vision neurons in the occipital
cortex of the brain are most sensitive to the wiring and sculpting of

30
J. Fraser Mustard
neurons necessary for normal vision. As with the CRH-HPA system,
during a sensitive period in early development, stimuli from the reti-
na of the eye switch on the genetic machinery in the neurons in the
occipital cortex to enable them to differentiate for their function in
vision. In animal studies, if the sensitive period is missed, turning on
the genetic mechanism is difﬁcult.
Despite different interpretations of this work by nonspecialists,
one neuroscientist (Cynader 2000) in the vision ﬁeld recently clearly
stated the implications of this research:
“Studies of the plasticity of the visual cortex during the critical period
of postnatal development are particularly germane in light of recent
controversies about the importance of early childhood experience in
determining cortical competency in adults. These controversies—
which have profound implications for early childhood education, par-
enting, and childcare—have been characterized more by polemics
than by neuroscience research. The visual cortex represents the best
model that we have for understanding how sensory stimulation of the
early brain inﬂuences brain circuitry and function throughout life. Its
study should increase our knowledge of the ways in which early sen-
sory inputs determine the long-term capabilities of the brain” (Cynad-
er 2000, pp. 1943–44).
The evidence from animal and human studies is consistent with
the conclusion that the wiring and sculpting of the brain is most dy-
namic during the early years of life and is substantially affected by
the quality of nurturing or stimuli received during this period of de-
velopment. These effects are not “all or nothing,” however, at least as
indicated by the experimental results on vision. Still, the longer the
period before signals from the eye reach the visual cortex in a young
child, the poorer the individual’s visual acuity will be in adult life
(Cynader and Frost 2000). That is, this component of the brain will
not function as well as it could if normal signals from the eye had
passed to the visual cortex during the sensitive period for the wiring
and sculpting of neurons.

Early Child Development and the Brain
31
The same relationship holds for other sensory pathways such as
sound and touch (Cynader and Frost 2000; Hyman 1999). All of the
research demonstrates that substantially improving the relevant
wiring and sculpting for the sensing pathways is difﬁcult later if the
brain’s sensing system does not develop during the optimum period.
Evidence is increasing for the interconnection of sensing path-
ways, such as vision, with other key centers in the brain (Rauschecker
1999). Although relatively less is known about the development of
neural pathways to other parts of the brain that affect arousal, emo-
tions, behavior, language, and mathematical skills, some neuroscien-
tists speculate that the wiring and sculpting of these pathways devel-
op in a similar way to the sensory systems (Cynader and Frost 2000;
Hubel 1994; Le Doux 1999). Recent evidence about the “cross-modal
exchange” of different sensing systems with each other and other
parts of the brain provides a framework for understanding the lasting
effects of the development of these pathways in early life.
Stages of Development
Recent noninvasive studies of human brain development demon-
strate that some structures develop earlier than others and that brain
development is most active in the early years of life. By the second
decade, this activity declines to approximately the values in adult life
(Chugani, Phelps, and Mazziotta 1987; Huttenlocher 1994). Findings
suggest that some developments occur early (e.g., sensing pathways
such as vision, sound, touch; cross-modal connections; CRH-HPA
pathways), whereas other pathways develop later (e.g., literacy, math-
ematics) and are likely inﬂuenced by the earlier base (Case 1996; Cy-
nader and Frost 2000; Hyman 1999). Some complex developments,
such as behavior, emotion, and arousal, may be inﬂuenced at differ-
ent stages. Fortunately, the hippocampus, a key structure for memo-
ry, remains plastic throughout life and can generate new neurons
(Kandel 1999; Kempermann and Gage 1999). However, evidence
from studies of the effect of experiences in early life on the develop-
ment and regulation of the CRH-HPA pathway and cortisol levels in-

32
J. Fraser Mustard
dicates that a poor early environment can lead to poor regulation of
cortisol, which can negatively affect the development, function, and
regeneration of the hippocampus throughout life.
Researchers are currently pursuing strategies to inﬂuence gene ex-
pression at later stages of development to overcome, or at least par-
tially overcome, the failure to establish appropriate gene expression
in early stages of development (Cynader and Frost 2000; Smythe and
others 1994).
Animal Studies
Much of the understanding of human physiology and disease and
many of the technologies for diagnosis and treatment come from
animal studies. Currently, scientists are experimenting with the
transfer of animal tissue to humans to alleviate health problems, in-
cluding some brain disorders. Because of cultural, philosophical,
and other factors, many investigators resist attempts to apply
knowledge from animal experiments to an understanding of brain
function and development in humans. Some reservation about the
relevance of animal studies to humans is sensible, but to ignore the
core information is a mistake, partly because studies in animals can
reveal how various organs of the body, such as the brain, develop
and interact at cellular and organ levels throughout life. The perti-
nent research for early child development includes studies of devel-
opment and function, gene–environment interactions, and im-
mune effects.
Development and Function
In a number of studies with mice, rats, and monkeys (Black and oth-
ers 1998; Coe 1999; Greenough, Volkman, and Juraska 1973; Meaney
and others 1988), researchers have examined the effects of early life
events on brain development and brain characteristics and function
later in life. The evidence from these and other studies in animals
shows that the circumstances of early life inﬂuence brain develop-
ment and that this early development affects behavior, learning,
health, and memory in later life.

Early Child Development and the Brain
33
Data from rats show a number of interesting observations relating
developmental neurobiology to function. Rat pups given an enriched
animal cage (toys to play with) and involved with their mother show
clear beneﬁts. In contrast to pups that are not given enriched housing,
the animals, as adults, have more neurons and more neural connec-
tions (an outcome of brain wiring and sculpting) and perform better
on tests of rat competence. Greenough and colleagues note that adult
rats exposed to a similar, enriched environment also exhibit new neu-
rons and increased neural connections (Black and others 1998). How-
ever, the changes occur faster and are greater in young rats.
Other studies show that rat pups that are licked intensively by
their mothers in early life develop a regulatory control for their CRH-
HPA axis that provides a more balanced response to stimuli (i.e., low-
er sterol levels and a faster return to lower baseline values) (Francis
and others 1999; Meaney and others 1996, 1988). One of the striking
features shown in these studies is that well-licked rat pups have better
memories as they age. Also, the loss of hippocampus neurons was less
in these rats as they aged, which is compatible with the observation
that excess sterol levels can cause loss of neurons in the hippocampus
(Sapolsky 1992, 1997). In sum, rat pups with much touch (licking
from their mother) have a better regulated CRH-HPA pathway and re-
tain better memory and cognitive function as they age.
In one interesting study in rats, Francis and others (1999) crossed
foster pups from mothers that groomed and licked intensely with
pups from mothers that had low licking and grooming behavior. The
results showed that, regardless of the biological mother, pups placed
with “good” mothers developed CRH-HPA pathways similar to rats
from, and reared by, these mothers. The female pups from “poor”
mothers, reared by “good” mothers, had the same biological and
mothering characteristics as the mothers that reared them.
Gene–Environment Interactions
The early life and development of monkeys have been studied exten-
sively. In one set of experiments (Suomi 1997, 2000), rhesus monkeys
were grouped into genetically vulnerable and resistant strains. The

34
J. Fraser Mustard
genetically vulnerable strain was characterized as hyperreactors to
stress or challenge. If not raised by a nurturing mother, these mon-
keys have an overstimulated CRH-HPA system with exaggerated corti-
sol responses and poor return to resting levels. These vulnerable ani-
mals, poorly nurtured when young, show avoidance of novel stimuli
as well as anxious and depressive reactions to maternal separation. As
adults, they show increased anxiety and depressive behavior, exces-
sive alcohol consumption when given access to alcohol, impulse ag-
gression and violent behavior, and high circulating sterol levels. The
females tend to be poor mothers.
Researchers have studied in detail the biological pathways in these
animals, which show high sterol levels in response to mild stress,
high resting sterol levels, low brain serotonin levels, and a disrupted
circadian rhythm for sterols. When offspring from “poor” mothers in
the vulnerable strain are taken and reared by highly nurturing moth-
ers (Suomi 1997, 2000), the high-risk infants become secure and pre-
cocious in their exploratory patterns. As adults, they rise to the top of
the social hierarchy; have a robust immune response, a better regulat-
ed sterol pathway, and normal brain serotonin levels; and the females
become very nurturing mothers.
Researchers have found a genetic characteristic related to sero-
tonin metabolism in the vulnerable monkeys (Bennett and others
2000; Suomi 2000). If poorly nurtured, the animals with the short al-
lele have excess sterol responses to stimuli and low brain serotonin
levels; if well nurtured, the animals do not show these adverse re-
sponses (Suomi 2000). This ﬁnding exempliﬁes the effect of environ-
ment on gene expression.
Immune Effects
One of the important effects of the HPA system is on the immune
system. Excess activity of the CRH-HPA system with increased sterol
levels in early life can produce permanent and marked reductions 
in immune competence (Coe 1999; Suomi 2000). The effect of
sterols on the immune system is complex; for example, a strong
CRH-HPA response can be beneﬁcial in bringing an acute illness 

Early Child Development and the Brain
35
under control. Studies also show that infant monkeys reared in a 
deprived environment exhibit changes in antibody function that
can increase their risk of autoimmune disorders and conditions
such as asthma.
Human Studies
Epidemiological randomized social experiments, longitudinal stud-
ies, and observational studies in populations indicate how early life
experiences affect a child’s health, learning, and behavior. This expe-
rience-dependent early development is inﬂuenced by nutrition, par-
enting capability, and other factors that support early child develop-
ment. The studies clearly demonstrate the value and beneﬁt of good
ECD programs involving parents.
Environmental Effects
Population-based, epidemiological studies in developed countries
document the social partitioning of health, learning, and behavior.
The studies show a gradient relationship between measures of health,
cognition, and behavior and socioeconomic status (SES) (Bennett and
others 2000; Case, Grifﬁn, and Kelly 1999; Hertzman 1999; Macin-
tyre 1994; Marmot and others 1995; Power and Hertzman 1999;
Willms 1999). Individuals at the bottom of the SES index (levels IV
and V) have the lowest scores, and those at the top of the index have
the highest scores. Several points are of interest.
First, the gradients for health, learning, and behavior in developed
countries tend to be linear (i.e., there is no poverty threshold). Sec-
ond, the gradient cannot be explained solely by genetics; the social
environment clearly has an effect. Third, some countries have high
performance and fairly ﬂat gradients. Fourth, in developed countries,
the greatest number of children in difﬁculty are in the large middle
class. For example, Canadian data show that about 32 percent of chil-
dren in poor families and more than 20 percent of children in afﬂu-
ent families do not develop well in the early years (McCain and Mus-
tard 1999). The cause of these gradients, or social partitioning, of
populations is not just family income.

36
J. Fraser Mustard
Understanding the pathways for the social environment’s effect on
health, learning, and behavior is a challenge. The evidence from lon-
gitudinal studies supports brain development as being a contributing
factor, which involves the establishment of pathways that inﬂuence
learning, behavior, and physical and mental health throughout life.
Power and Hertzman (1999) refer to this process as “biological em-
bedding,” a concept that relates the environment of early life to the
switching on of genetic mechanisms responsible for differentiation of
the speciﬁc function of neurons in different regions of the brain.
Longitudinal studies of cohorts of children from birth to adult
life show similar effects of SES gradients for health, behavior, and
learning (Case, Griffin, and Kelly 1999; Power and Matthews 
1997; Power and Hertzman 1997, 1999; Power and others 1997;
Tremblay 1999; Wadsworth 1991). Figure 1 depicts the gradients
for academic achievement at age 23 in relation to social class at
birth for children from the 1958 British birth cohort. Percentages
Figure 1. Social Class at Birth and Percent With Education Qualiﬁcations 
(0 Level or Greater) at Age 23, 1958 British Birth Cohort
Reprinted with permission of The Lancet from Power and Matthews (1997).

Early Child Development and the Brain
37
with education qualifications improve with each step upward in
social class at birth.
The ﬁgure shows that the percentage of children with no educa-
tional qualiﬁcations (below 0 level in the British system) at age 23 is
highest for children born in the lowest social classes (IV and V) of
British society, compared with only 5 percent of children born in 
the highest social classes (I and II). The percentage with educational
qualiﬁcations increases at each higher level of social class at birth 
for both males and females. The gradient is obviously inﬂuenced by
individuals’ circumstances at birth and their life courses to age 23.
Figure 2 shows the gradients for health at age 33 among the
same cohort. In the figure, “psychological distress” (as assessed by
the twenty-four-item malaise inventory of psychological and so-
matic symptoms) relates to future mental health problems, and
“poor self-rated health” relates to chronic health problems in later
life. The figure shows a gradient for health in relation to social class
Figure 2. Social Class at Birth and Health at Age 33, 1958 British Birth Cohort
Reprinted with permission of The Lancet from Power and Matthews (1997).

38
J. Fraser Mustard
at birth. The gradient for future mental health problems at age 33
is most striking for females. Some aspects of both gradients (future
mental health and chronic health problems) may reflect the effect
of early life environment on the development of the CRH-HPA
pathway, as discussed earlier.
The data showing poor self-rated health in the early adult years as
a predictor of chronic health problems later in life are compatible
with Barker and colleagues’ ﬁndings that many chronic health prob-
lems of individuals in adult life can be related to conditions during
their mother’s pregnancy and the early years of life (Barker 1992,
1997; Phillips and others 1998). The data also agree with the conclu-
sion of Acheson’s report (1998) on inequalities in health in the Unit-
ed Kingdom—that early child development affects physical and men-
tal health problems in adult life.
The cohort data in ﬁgures 1 and 2 show that children in all social
classes are subject to environmental factors that affect health, behav-
ior, and learning in early life and that the proportion of children af-
fected is greater in the lower social classes. These data, of course, do
not take into account the effect of any events during life up to ages
23 and 33. Power, Hertzman, and colleagues have assessed such ef-
fects and concluded that a poor early start compounded by a poor life
course has the greatest effect on health, behavior, and learning (Pow-
er and Hertzman 1997; Power and others 1997).
Early Experience and Development
Data from other longitudinal studies in other countries show a clear
relationship between the early years and competence, coping skills,
and health in later years. A Swedish study (Andersson 1992) of a sam-
ple of children born in 1975 from low- and middle-income urban
households shows that children who attended good ECD centers,
which involved parents, before age 1, had the best social skills and
cognitive abilities at age 13. Male children entering the school system
in Sweden with poor verbal skills tended to be functionally illiterate
as teenagers, and a signiﬁcant number of them ended up in the jus-
tice system (Stattin 1993).

Early Child Development and the Brain
39
Studies of children in the French Ecoles Maternelle program
(Bergmann 1996) show that this program enhances performance in
the school system for children from all social classes and that the ear-
lier the children entered the preschool program, the better their out-
come. A study in the United Kingdom (Osburn and Milbank 1987)
shows that children in good half-day preschool programs had better
cognitive development and academic achievement than children
who were not in these programs and that children from disadvan-
taged backgrounds gained more than children from advantaged back-
grounds.
A striking observation from the longitudinal studies is that female
children who are reared in dysfunctional families without external
support in the early years are at increased risk for behavior and men-
tal health problems in later life (Maughan and McCarthy 1997;
Rodgers, Power, and Hope 1997; Rutter, Giller, and Hagell 1998).
Many male children reared in dysfunctional families show clear evi-
dence of antisocial behavior when they enter the school system, and
about one-third of them will be delinquent in their teens (Tremblay
1999). Females show an increased risk for mental health problems,
such as depression, in adult life (Maughan and McCarthy 1997;
Rodgers, Power, and Hope 1997). These ﬁndings hold true for chil-
dren in all social classes, and the proportion having difﬁculties in-
creases for those at lower SES levels.
Improving Early Child Development: The Effects
A number of studies in developed and developing countries have ad-
dressed the effects of programs for enhancing early child develop-
ment on learning, behavior, and health later in life. Randomized tri-
als of social interventions are far more difﬁcult to conduct than
randomized trials of medical drugs, and they tend to be small in size.
The results of these studies, however, can be tested for consistency
with the ﬁndings from biological and animal studies and from popu-
lation-based epidemiological and longitudinal studies.
A few studies demonstrate the effects of enhancing early child de-
velopment for poor populations. In Jamaica, Grantham-McGregor

40
J. Fraser Mustard
and others (1991, 1997) examined the effects of good nourishment
and nurturing on the development of children stunted at birth, in
comparison with a normal control group. The stunted children were
randomized into four groups, receiving no enhanced nutrition and
nurturing, improved nutrition, enhanced nurturing or stimulation,
or improved nutrition and nurturing. After 2 years, the group given
no support showed poor development; the groups given either im-
proved nutrition or stimulation improved about equally and
achieved about 50 percent of the development occurring in the con-
trol group; and the group given both nurturing and nutrition equaled
the development of the control group. This study highlights the val-
ue of both nutrition and nurturing on early child development for
infants who clearly were at a disadvantage at birth. The mothers of
the stunted children in this study did not have a healthy pregnancy,
and the children will carry some of the risks at birth identiﬁed by
Barker (1992, 1997). The results from this study are compatible with
those from animal and biological studies.
The Carolina, or Abecedarian, project demonstrates the effect of an
ECD initiative in a poor African-American population in the United
States (Campbell and Ramey 1994; Ramey 1990; Ramey and others
2000). The children, whose mothers had a low intelligence quotient
(IQ), were randomized into two groups. One group was placed in an
ECD program which involved parents and home visits throughout
the years beginning shortly after birth and continuing until the 
children entered school. The other group, the control, did not partic-
ipate. The program was an intensive ECD initiative having one quali-
ﬁed early childhood educator for every three infants and toddlers 
until age 3 and one for every six children over age 3.
The children participating in the ECD program showed gains in
cognition (including IQ), educational performance, and improved
behavior that were still evident at age 21, compared with the control
group. The program’s effect on IQ is of particular interest because of a
recent review (Wickelgren 1999) which concludes that circumstances
during the ﬁrst years of life appear to affect IQ. The children in the
Carolina program also showed signiﬁcant gains in mathematics 

Early Child Development and the Brain
41
performance during their school years. At age 21, more than four
times as many children who had been in the preschool program were
enrolled in 4-year degree programs, compared with children who had
been in the control group. Special programs for the control group
when they entered the school system did not have a signiﬁcant effect
on their development—further highlighting the importance of the
preschool program.
The well-known High/Scope Study (Berruta-Clement 1984; Schwein-
hart 1993) provides evidence from a randomized study of the effects
of an ECD initiative in the United States on children from families in
poor socioeconomic circumstances. The children entered the pro-
gram at age 3 and continued until they entered the school system at
age 6. This program began after the Abecedarian project and operated
only during the school year. It involved parents, one early childhood
educator for six children, and home visits. At ages 18 to 20, the chil-
dren who had attended the preschool program showed better school
performance and employment and fewer behavior problems, such as
teenage pregnancies and criminal activities. Their assessment at age
27 showed some striking effects. Compared with the control group,
fewer females in the intervention were in programs for “educable
mental impairment,” and the males in the intervention had far fewer
criminal arrests. The results are compatible with (a) increasing evi-
dence showing that females in poor early child development envi-
ronments are at increased risk for mental health problems in adult
life and (b) data showing that overcoming the disadvantages of poor
brain development in the very early years is difﬁcult later. The study
did not show a sustained effect on IQ, perhaps because it enrolled
children at age 3, after the very early years when IQ effects appear to
be realized (Wickelgren 1999).
Mathematical ability is an example of a development occurring in
the immediate preschool period. Programs designed to enhance basic
cognitive ability in mathematics at ages 4 to 5 years have an effect
(Case, Grifﬁn, and Kelly 1999; Grifﬁn, Case, and Siegler 1994). Case
and colleagues examined whether performance in mathematics in
school years could be improved through an initiative called Right

42
J. Fraser Mustard
Start in the United States. The strategy used, “the cognitive weight of
numbers,” draws on multiple sensing pathways and, probably, is in-
ﬂuenced by the cross-modal information exchange that the sensing
pathways develop in early life. In the study, children in a poor socio-
economic neighborhood were randomized into an intervention
group and a control group and compared with children in a middle-
class school. At age 9, the children participating in the special
preschool intervention program surpassed the children in the 
middle-class school, whereas the children in the control group 
performed less well than those in the middle-class school. Case spec-
ulates that individuals who miss this sensitive period of development
may have difﬁculty with complex mathematics later in life.
Case’s ﬁndings are compatible with the conclusions of Fuchs and
Reklis (1994), who studied the effects of early child development on
mathematics performance of students in various U.S. states. Fuchs
and Reklis found that a state’s mathematics performance in schools
was high when children entered the school system with good early
child development and low when early child development was low.
They conclude that strong preschool programs are required to im-
prove the mathematics performance of U.S. students overall. These
results are compatible with the ﬁndings from the Abecedarian project
and the concept that functions of the brain develop at different
stages in the early years.
Studies of ECD programs in other parts of the world are beginning
to show similar effects. A study in India (Kaul and others 1991) also
shows an effect of programs in the early years on subsequent ability
in mathematics. A World Bank study (World Bank 2001) summarizes
the results of ECD programs in Brazil as follows: increased comple-
tion of primary school by one-third, lower grade repetition, and low-
er drop-out rates. These results and others from Bolivia (Behrman,
Cheng, and Todd 2000) further document that good ECD programs
enhance outcomes in learning.
Observational Studies. Observational studies also show the beneﬁts
of good support in the early years of life. One of the most recent stud-
ies (Ames and others 1997) compares the outcome of children from

Early Child Development and the Brain
43
Romania adopted into Canadian British Columbia families shortly 
after birth with children adopted after spending many months or
years in Romanian orphanages. The description of these orphanages
indicates that they were poor environments for good early child de-
velopment. The children adopted shortly after birth exhibit similar
development as Canadian-born children in middle-class families, but
many of those adopted after spending many months or years in 
Romanian orphanages have signiﬁcant behavioral problems, poor 
attachment to caregivers, and lower IQs than those adopted early.
From a detailed analysis of Romanian orphanage studies, O’Connor
and others (2000) conclude that children who spent more time in the
orphanages before adoption showed persistently poor outcomes.
Gunnar and colleagues studied the CRH-HPA axis in Romanian
children adopted into British Columbia homes and found that those
adopted late have higher sterol levels (Donzella and others 2000;
Gunnar 1998; Gunnar and Donzella 1998). These sterol data agree
with the results of animal studies showing that a poor nurturing en-
vironment in early life can lead to an overactive and poorly regulated
CRH-HPA system and elevated sterol levels, with effects on cognition,
memory, and behavior. In reviewing the stress-sterol pathway and
early childhood, Gunnar concludes that caregivers and parents have
a very powerful effect on the development of this pathway in early
life through the quality of their nurturing. The data from both ani-
mal and human studies on the CRH-HPA axis and its development
and effects are remarkably congruent.
A study of orphans from Korea (Lien, Meyer, and Winick 1977)
adopted into American homes also shows an effect of the quality of
the early years on development and performance in later life. All the
children adopted into American families early after birth had higher
IQ scores than children who had spent considerable time in Korean
orphanages before adoption. Those who were well nourished when
adopted had the highest scores—again emphasizing the importance
of nutrition in the early years.
Despite the limitations of the orphanage studies and other possible
explanations, all the ﬁndings are compatible with the results of 

44
J. Fraser Mustard
animal studies. The human data indicate the importance of the early
years in establishing the base for competence and coping skills
throughout life.
Literacy
A major observation from many studies is the relationship between
verbal skills at about age 5 and literacy in later life. SES gradients in
literacy may, in part, reﬂect early child development. Willms (1999)
who has been involved in studies of literacy in developed countries,
conducted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment (OECD) and Statistics Canada, emphasizes the impor-
tance of early childhood, as well as school systems, for literacy.
Recent OECD studies of three measures of literacy in OECD coun-
tries show that, for all the countries, level of literacy is a gradient
when plotted against SES measures such as parents’ level of education
(OECD and Statistics Canada 2000; Willms 1999, in this volume).
Some countries have a high performance and fairly ﬂat gradient; oth-
er countries have a fairly steep gradient. Literacy in later life is related
to verbal skills or language development in early life (McKeough
1992; Stattin 1993; Willms in this volume).
In the United States, population measures of verbal skills in early
life show a fairly steep SES gradient (Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, and Brit-
to 1999) compatible with the fairly steep literacy gradient found in
the adult population (OECD and Statistics Canada 2000; Willms
1999). The greatest number of children not achieving their possible
level of performance is in the middle class, a ﬁnding that strongly 
refutes the claim that few families in the middle class with young
children do not have good early child development environments
(Bruer 1999). Those who make this claim do not know or believe the
ﬁndings from population-based, epidemiological studies.
The United States has a signiﬁcant problem because more than 45
percent of the population functions at low literacy (on the OECD
scale). Included at this low level are persons with very poor skills
who, for example, may not be able to determine from information
printed on a package the correct amount of medicine to give a child,

Early Child Development and the Brain
45
can only read simple and clearly presented material, and can only
perform tasks that are not too complex. Improving early child devel-
opment is a serious challenge for U.S. society if it wishes to reduce the
inequalities in literacy.
In developing countries, such as Chile, more than 85 percent of
the population functions at levels 1 and 2 (on the OECD scale). To
improve the socioeconomic circumstances of these countries, the
World Bank and others must support efforts to improve literacy in
written and cognitive performance and to encourage countries to 
invest in preschools [i.e., “tier 1,”] (McCain and Mustard 1999). 
Improving the literacy performance of populations will take at least
20 to 25 years if efforts are initiated now. Importantly, the tier 1
preschool initiatives must apply to all social classes (not only those in
poverty) because of the evidence showing a gradient relationship be-
tween literacy and SES. Interestingly, one country (Cuba) that has in-
vested for decades in mothers and children in the early years has a
high literacy performance for all of its population regardless of social
class (Willms in this volume).
A relevant observational study conducted for a number of U.S.
states by the Stanford economist Fuchs (Fuchs and Reklis 1994) 
addressed the relationship between an index of early child develop-
ment, readiness to learn at the time a child enters the school system,
and the performance of children on a mathematics test at grade
eight. The correlation was positive, with a correlation coefﬁcient
greater than +0.8. Math performance in the schools was clearly relat-
ed to the level of early child development at the time the children 
entered the school system. Fuchs and Reklis (1994) conclude that 
investment in preschools for all children is at least equally important
as investment in schools, to substantially improve mathematics out-
comes in the United States. In addition to Case’s research and the
data from population epidemiological studies and the OECD, this 
evidence refutes the naive assumption that only a small number of
children could beneﬁt from good ECD programs (Bruer 1999).
The assessments of literacy in developed countries (OECD 2000)
and Latin America yield some remarkable results (Willms in this 

46
J. Fraser Mustard
volume). Some countries show high performance in test areas and
fairly ﬂat gradients, and others show much poorer performance
across all social classes. The countries with high performance and
fairly ﬂat gradients tend to have high-quality preschool programs for
children which involve parents. Perhaps because literacy is a measure
of brain development and function and brain development affects
health, the correlation between estimates of a country’s literacy and
life expectancy is strong (OECD 2000). This subject is covered more
extensively in the chapter by Willms later in this volume.
Early Child Development in Developed Countries: The Case of Canada
Early child development is as important for developed countries as
for developing countries. Canada is one example.
Assessing the Needs
In 1998, the Honorable Margaret McCain and the author were asked
to chair a reference group and prepare a report on children’s early
years in the province of Ontario (McCain and Mustard 1999). The 
report was addressed to the Premier, the Minister for Children, and
the government of Ontario. In preparing the report, the reference
group received many anecdotal accounts of children in difﬁculty in
the wealthiest province in Canada and indications that the problem
was increasing, but the group could not conﬁrm this information 
because the government of Ontario did not have a relevant database.
Fortunately, the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth
(NLSCY) had generated key data on children and youth in Ontario
and Canada, from which the reference group could undertake a 
population assessment of the quality of early child development in
Ontario.
The survey included measures of verbal skills for children (an im-
portant predictor of future development) at ages 4 and 5 years for all
social classes. Figure 3 shows a clear gradient for this measure when
plotted against families’ SES. Although the children in the poorest
circumstances showed the poorest performance, 10 percent of the
children from afﬂuent families also did poorly. Also, the children in

Early Child Development and the Brain
47
Ontario did not perform as well on the literacy test, at every SES level,
as did children in the rest of Canada. The largest number of children
not doing well, in comparison with the rest of Canada, were in the
middle class.
Verbal skill at ages 4 and 5 also is a predictor of subsequent behav-
ioral and cognitive development. Not surprisingly, the literacy gradi-
ent for youth and young adults in Ontario was steeper than for Cana-
da’s three prairie provinces (Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba)
and Quebec.
Figure 4 shows the gradient in literacy performance for the popula-
tion in Canadian provinces by socioeconomic status (McCain and
Mustard 1999). The provinces fall into two groups—those with high
performance and shallow gradients (Quebec and the three prairie
provinces) and those with relatively steep gradients. The SES scale is
similar to that in ﬁgure 3.
Based on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. Socioeconomic status is a composite measure of family income and
mothers’ and fathers’ occupations and incomes; poor are on left, afﬂuent on right.
Figure 3. Socioeconomic Gradients of Children, Ages 4 and 5 Years, With Low-Receptive
Vocabulary, Ontario and Canada, National Longitudinal Study of Children and Youth, 
1994, Canada

48
J. Fraser Mustard
An assessment of mathematics performance among Ontario’s chil-
dren reveals a similar gradient (McCain and Mustard 1999). Impor-
tantly, all these data indicate that a signiﬁcant number of children
from afﬂuent families are not performing at desirable levels, while a
higher portion of the children at the low end of the SES scale are also
having difﬁculty.
Assessment of the development of Ontario’s children in relation to
family income shows that about 32 percent of the children in fami-
lies at the bottom quartile of income, and more than 20 percent of
the children in families at the top quartile of income, are not doing
well. Complete analysis of the data shows that the greatest number of
children in difﬁculty are in the middle class and that income is not
the determining factor. Rather, the quality of parenting and care-
giving is an important factor inﬂuencing the quality of a child’s early
development. Based on these ﬁndings, the study recommended to
Figure 4. Literacy and SES Gradients for Canadian Youth, by Province, 1994
SK, Saskatchewan; AB, Alberta; MN, Manitoba; QC, Quebec; ON, Ontario; NB, New Brunswick; NF, Newfoundland; PE,
Prince Edward Island; NS, Nova Scotia; BC, British Columbia.
Source: McCain and Mustard (1999).

Early Child Development and the Brain
49
the government of Ontario that good ECD and parenting programs
beginning early in life should be available for all families with young
children in Ontario, if the province is to have a more competent,
high-quality population in the future.
The ﬁndings are additionally signiﬁcant when related to the results
of the literacy studies conducted by OECD and Statistics Canada
(OECD 2000). The domains examined in these literacy studies are
prose literacy, document literacy, and quantitative literacy. In Canada,
more than 40 percent of the population functions at levels 1 and 2
(on the OECD scale) and about 22 percent at levels 4 and 5. In some
developed countries, less than 25 percent are at levels 1 and 2 and
more than 30 percent are at levels 4 and 5. To improve Canada’s per-
formance in the knowledge-based economy, Canada and Ontario
must invest in good ECD programs. The data show that developed
countries such as Canada, as well as developing countries, need to im-
prove their populations’ competence and coping skills for the future.
Recommendation: Early Child Development and Parenting Centers
The early-years study (McCain and Mustard 1999) recommended that
the government of Ontario, in partnership with communities and in-
volving the public and private sectors, establish early child develop-
ment and parenting centers, to begin at conception and be sensitive
to early child and brain development. Figure 5 depicts the framework
for these centers.
The study speciﬁcally proposes that the centers begin support for
families before a child is born, because of the importance of the in
utero period; include ﬁve essential components, or core functions, for
young children and their parents, from conception until entry into
school (at age 6); and measure their success in improving outcomes
for children. The early child development and parenting centers will
be guided by the following principles:
1. Available, accessible, affordable, and optional early child devel-
opment and parenting centers for all young children and fami-
lies in Ontario, from conception to entry into grade one in 

50
J. Fraser Mustard
the school system (parents may choose to bring their children
or not)
2. Centers that are both parent-oriented and child-oriented
3. ECD programs that are environments for children to engage in
play-based, problem-solving learning with other children and
adults
4. Responsive relationships between adults (early child develop-
ment staff and parents) and children that increase the potential
of play-based learning
5. Quality programs that teach family literacy and numeracy to
parents and other caregivers from diverse cultural, ethnic, and
linguistic backgrounds
6. Parenting programs that support parents and other caregivers
in all aspects of early child development
Figure 5. Proposed Framework for Early Child Development and Parenting Centers for the
Province of Ontario
Source: McCain and Mustard (1999).

Early Child Development and the Brain
51
7. Parent participation in ECD programs that enhance the
child’s early learning and optimal development in the home
environment
8. Appropriate supports and expertise that are available to allow
all children to participate fully, regardless of physical, develop-
mental, language, learning, or behavior difﬁculties
9. Ability to provide special efforts that may be necessary to en-
gage some families and children whose circumstances make it
difﬁcult for them to be involved in the centers
10. Centers, regardless of location, that are linked to the local pri-
mary school and with other institutions (e.g., libraries, recre-
ation) and cultural activities in their communities
11. Centers that provide a ﬂexible continuum of services to meet
the needs of children and parents at home, work, and school
12. Monitoring of the effectiveness of the centers using a develop-
mental readiness-to-learn measure of children when they enter
the school system.
A measure of early development (Early Development Index), simi-
lar to that used by Fuchs and Reklis (1994), has been developed by
the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIAR), Human Devel-
opment Program, the Founders’ Network of CIAR, and McMaster
University (Janus and Offord 2000). Use of this measure in assess-
ments of thousands of children as they enter the school system
shows that school performance is related directly to the quality of
early child development. This sensitive outcome measure can be used
to assess the effectiveness of community programs to improve early
child development.
Ontario’s government and the Minister for Children understand
the importance of programs such as these for the community, and
they appreciate the enormous importance of early child develop-
ment. The minister’s goal is to give the early years of human develop-
ment the same importance as the later years (primary, secondary, and
postsecondary education), and the government’s plans, which are be-
ing introduced in Ontario, are community-based and involve both

52
J. Fraser Mustard
the private and the public sectors. The minister is implementing the
recommendations of the early-years study (McCain and Mustard
1999).
Conclusion
All the studies noted herein demonstrate that good ECD programs
should be available for all population sectors and that these initia-
tives will improve the overall quality of the population and reduce
inequalities in health, competence, and coping skills. 
A key social
consideration is that children who have a poor start are at increased
risk of antisocial behavior, potentially resulting in increased crime
and violence for society. High levels of social disruption impede de-
velopment of competitive economies, whereas cohesive, stable soci-
eties with reasonable equity in competence and coping skills are best
able to adapt to economic and social changes associated with expo-
nential growth in knowledge and new technology.
The economic beneﬁts of investing in early child development for
society and individuals are very great. As economic historians have
pointed out, improved health, competence, and coping skills were a
signiﬁcant factor in the economic growth of Western countries after
the industrial revolution. Commenting on the value of early child 
development, van der Gaag concludes in the next chapter in this 
volume: “Well-executed and well-targeted ECD programs are initia-
tors of [human development]. They stimulate improvements in edu-
cation, health, social capital, and equality that have both immediate
and long-term beneﬁts for the children participating in the programs.
Investments in ECD programs are in many ways investments in the
future of a nation.”
For the world regions to cope with the profound socioeconomic
changes occurring, attention must be given to the competence and
coping skills of all populations. Ontario has taken a major step in this
direction with the establishment of early child development and par-
enting centers. The recommendations stimulating this action 
(McCain and Mustard 1999) were strongly inﬂuenced by the work of

Early Child Development and the Brain
53
the World Bank and the conclusion in its recent volume on early
child development (Young 1997):
“Because learning begins at birth, and even before, the starting point
for involving families in ECD programs must be as early as possible.…
Knowledge and understanding of ECD programs is no longer the con-
straint facing early child development. Rather, transforming this
knowledge into action is the major limiting factor in implementing
ECD programs and requires the combined support of governments,
nongovernmental organizations, the private sector, and the media.
The challenge to care for society’s youngest members is not just a
challenge for a single country or continent; it is a challenge for the en-
tire world community” (p. 330).
References
Acheson, D. 1998. Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health:
Report. London: The Stationery Ofﬁce.
Ames, E. 1997. The Development of Romanian Orphanage Children
Adopted to Canada. Final Report. Burnaby, B.C.: Simon Fraser
University.
Andersson, B.-E. 1992. Effects of Day-Care on Cognitive and
Socioemotional Competence of Thirteen-Year-Old Swedish School
Children. Child Development 63:20–36.
Barker, D.J.P., ed. 1992. Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease.
London: British Medical Journal.
———. 1997. Fetal Nutrition and Cardiovascular Disease in Later
Life. British Medical Bulletin 53(1):96–108.
Behrman, J.R., Y. Cheng, and P. Todd 2000. The Impact of the
Bolivian Integrated ‘PIDI’ Preschool Program. World Bank
Research Foundation Project on Evaluation of the Impact of
Investments in Early Childhood Development on Nutrition and
Cognitive Development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Bennett, A.J, K.P. Lesch, A. Heils, J. Long, J. Lorenz, S.E. Shoaf, M.
Champoux, S.J. Suomi, M.V. Linnoila, and J.D. Higley. 2000. Early

54
J. Fraser Mustard
Experience and Serotonin Transporter Gene Variation Interact to
Inﬂuence Primate CNS Function. Molecular Psychiatry.
Bergmann, B. 1996. Saving Our Children from Poverty: What the United
States Can Learn from France. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Berruta-Clement, J.R. 1984. Changed Lives: The Effects of the Perry
Preschool Program on Youths Through Age 19. Ypsilanti, Mich.:
High/Scope Press.
Black, J.E., T.A. Jones, C.A. Nelson, and W.T. Greenough. 1998.
Neuronal Plasticity and the Developing Brain. In N.E. Alessi, J.T.
Coyle, S.I. Harrison, and S. Eth, eds., Handbook of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 6: Basic Psychiatric Science and Treatment.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Brooks-Gunn, J., G.J. Duncan, and P.R. Britto. 1999. Are
Socioeconomic Gradients for Children Similar to Those for
Adults?: Achievement and Health of Children in the United
States. In D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health
and the Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Bruer, J.T. 1999. The Myth of the First Three Years: A New Understanding
of Early Brain Development and Lifelong Learning. New York: Free
Press.
Campbell, F.A., and C.T. Ramey. 1994. Effects of Early Intervention
on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-up Study of
Children from Low-Income Families. Child Development
65:684–98.
Case, R. 1996. Mathematics Education for the Information Age.
HDWP–29. Toronto: Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
Case, R.S., S. Grifﬁn, and W.M. Kelly. 1999. Socioeconomic Gradients
in Mathematical Ability and Their Responsiveness to Intervention
during Early Childhood. In D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds.,
Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations. New York:
Guilford Press.
Chugani, H.T., M.E. Phelps, and J.C. Mazziotta. 1987. Positron
Emission Tomography Study of Human Brain Functional
Development. Annals of Neurology 22(4):487–97.

Early Child Development and the Brain
55
Coe, C.L. 1999. Psychosocial Factors and Psychoneuroimmunology
Within a Lifespan Perspective. In D. Keating and C. Hertzman,
eds., Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations. New York:
Guilford Press.
Cynader, M.S. 2000. Perspectives: Neuroscience. Strengthening
Visual Connections. Science 287:1943–44.
Cynader, M.S., and B.J. Frost. 2000. Mechanisms of Brain
Development: Neuronal Sculpting by the Physical and Social
Environment. In D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental
Health and the Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Dettling, A.C., S.W. Parker, S. Lane, A. Sebanc, and M.R. Gunnar.
2000. Quality of Care and Temperament Determine Changes in
Cortisol Concentrations over the Day for Young Children in
Childcare. Psychoneuroendocrinology 25:819–36.
Donzella, B., M.R. Gunnar, W.K. Krueger, and J. Alevin. 2000.
Cortisol and Vagal Tone Responses to Competitive Challenge in
Preschoolers: Associations With Temperament. Developmental
Psychobiology 37:209–20.
Floud, R., K. Wachter, and A. Gregory. 1990. Height, Health and
History: Nutritional Status in the United Kingdom, 1750–1980.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fogel, R.W. 1994. Economic Growth, Population Theory and
Physiology: The Bearing of Long-term Processes on the Making of
Economic Policy. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. W4638. Cambridge, Mass.
———. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of
Egalitarianism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Francis, D.D., F.A. Champagne, D. Liu, and M.J. Meaney. 1999.
Maternal Care, Gene Expression, and the Development of
Individual Differences in Stress Reactivity. In Socioeconomic
Status and Health in Industrial Nations. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 896:66–84.
Fuchs, V., and D. Reklis. 1994. Mathematical Achievement in Eighth
Grade: Interstate and Racial Differences. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4784. Cambridge, Mass.

56
J. Fraser Mustard
Grantham-McGregor, S.M., C.A. Powell, S.P. Walker, and J.H. Himes.
1991. Nutritional Supplementation, Psychosocial Stimulation,
and Mental Development of Stunted Children. Lancet
338(8758):1–5.
Grantham-McGregor, S.M., S.P.C. Walker, S.M. Chang, and C.A.
Powell. 1997. Effects of Early Childhood Supplementation With
and Without Stimulation on Later Development in Stunted
Jamaican Children. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
66:247–53.
Greenough, W.T., F.R. Volkmar, and J.M. Juraska. 1973. Effects of
Rearing Complexity on Dendritic Branching in Frontolateral and
Temporal Cortex of the Rat. Experimental Neurology 41:371–78.
Grifﬁn, S., R. Case, and R. Siegler. 1994. Rightstart: Providing the
Central Conceptual Prerequisites for First Formal Learning of
Arithmetic to Students at Risk for School Failure. In K. McGilly,
ed., Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom
Practice. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Gunnar, M.R. 1998. Stress Physiology, Health and Behavioral
Development. In A. Thornton, ed., The Wellbeing of Children and
Families: Research and Data Needs. Institute for Social Research
Report. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan.
Gunnar, M.R., and B. Donzella. 1998. Social Regulation of the LHPA
Axis in Early Human Development. Institute of Child
Development. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Hales, C.N. 1997. Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus. British
Medical Bulletin 53(1):109–22.
Hertzman, C. 1999. Population Health and Human Development. In
D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the
Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Hubel, H.D. 1994. Nature vs Nurture vs Knowledge. In B.S. McEwen
and H. Schmeck, eds., The Hostage Brain. New York: Rockefeller
University Press.
Hubel, H.D., and T.N. Weisel. 1962. Receptive Fields, Binocular
Interaction and Functional Architecture in the Cat’s Visual
Cortex. Physiology 160:106–54.

Early Child Development and the Brain
57
Huttenlocher, P.R. 1994. Synaptogenesis in Human Cerebral Cortex.
In G. Dawson and K.W. Fischer, eds., Human Behavior and the
Developing Brain. New York: Guilford Press.
Hyman, S. 1999. Susceptibility and “Second Hits.” In R. Conlan, ed.,
States of Mind: New Discoveries About How Our Brains Make Us Who
We Are. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Janus, M., and D. Offord. 2000. Readiness to Learn at School. Isuma
1(2):71–75.
Kagan, J. 1998. Three Seductive Ideas. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
Kandel, E. 1999. Of Learning, Memory, and Genetic Switches. In R.
Conlan, ed., States of Mind: New Discoveries About How Our Brains
Make Us Who We Are. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kaul, V. 1991. Starting Children Too Early on Number Work: A
Mismatch of Developmental and Academic Priorities. Resources in
Education. Research Report 143. ERIC Data Base. Urbana
Champaigne: University of Illinois.
Keating, D.P., and C. Hertzman. 1999. Developmental Health and the
Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational Dynamics. New
York: Guilford Press.
Kempermann, G., and F.H. Gage. 1999. New Nerve Cells for the
Adult Brain. Scientiﬁc American 280:48–53.
Le Doux, J. 1999. The Power of Emotions. In R. Conlan, ed., States of
Mind: New Discoveries About How Our Brains Make Us Who We Are.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Lien, N.M., K.K. Meyer, and M. Winick. 1977. Early Malnutrition
and “Late” Adoption: A Study of Their Effects on the
Development of Korean Orphans Adopted into American
Families. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 30:1734–39.
Lucas, A., R. Morley, and T.J. Cole. 1998. Randomised Trial of Early
Diet in Preterm Babies and Later Intelligence Quotient. British
Medical Journal 317(7171):1481–87.
Macintyre, S. 1994. Understanding the Social Patterning of Health:
The Role of the Social Sciences. Journal of Public Health Medicine
16(1):53–59.

58
J. Fraser Mustard
Marmot, M., M. Bobak, and G.D. Smith. 1995. Explanations for
Social Inequalities in Health. In B.C. Amick, S. Levine, A.R. Tarlov,
and D.C. Walsh, eds., Society and Health. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Maughan, B., and G. McCarthy. 1997. Childhood Adversities and
Psychosocial Disorders. British Medical Journal 53(1):156–69.
McCain, M.N., and J.F. Mustard. 1999. Early Years Study: Reversing the
Real Brain Drain. Toronto: Publications Ontario.
McEwen, B. 1999. Corticosteroids, the Aging Brain and Cognition.
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 10(3):92–96.
McEwen, B.S. 1998. Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress
Mediators. New England Journal of Medicine 338(3):171–79.
McEwen, B.S., and H.M. Schmeck. 1994. The Hostage Brain. New
York: Rockefeller University Press.
McEwen, B., and T. Seeman. 1999. Protective and Damaging Effects
of Mediators of Stress. Elaborating and Testing the Concepts of
Allostasis and Allostatic Load. In Socioeconomic Status and
Health in Industrial Nations. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 896:30–47.
McKeough, A. 1992. Testing for the Presence of a Central Conceptual
Structure. In R. Case, ed., The Mind’s Staircase: Exploring the
Conceptual Underpinnings of Children’s Thought and Knowledge.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McKeown, T. 1976. The Modern Rise of Population. New York:
Academic Press.
Meaney, M.J., D.H. Aitken, C. van Berkel, S. Bhatnagar, and R.M.
Sapolsky. 1988. Effect of Neonatal Handling on Age-Related
Impairments Associated With the Hippocampus. Science
239:766–68.
Meaney, M.J., J. Diorio, D. Francis, J. Widdowson, P. LaPlante, 
C. Caldji, S. Sharma, J.R. Seckl, and P.M. Plotsky. 1996. Early
Environmental Regulation of Forebrain Glucocorticoid Receptor
Gene Expression: Implications for Adrenocortical Responses to
Stress. Developmental Neuroscience 18:49–72.

Early Child Development and the Brain
59
O’Connor, T.G., M. Rutter, C. Beckett, L. Keaveney, J.M. Kreppner,
and the English and Romanian Adoptees (ERA) Study Team. 2000.
The Effects of Global Severe Privation on Cognitive Competence:
Extension and Longitudinal Follow-up. Child Development 71:
376–90.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development),
and Statistics Canada. 2000. Literacy in the Information Age: Final
Report of the International Adult Literacy Survey. Paris: OECD.
Canada: Minister of Industry.
Osburn, A.F., and J.E. Milbank. 1987. The Effects of Early Education: A
Report from the Child Health and Education Study. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Phillips, D.I.W., D.J.P. Barker, C.H.D. Fall, J.R. Seckl, C.B. Whorwood,
P.J. Wood, and B.R. Walker. 1998. Elevated Plasma Cortisol
Concentrations: A Link Between Low Birth Weight and the
Insulin Resistance Syndrome? Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism 83(3):757–60.
Power, C., and C. Hertzman. 1997. Social and Biological Pathways
Linking Early Life and Adult Disease. British Medical Bulletin
53(1):210–21.
Power, C., and C. Hertzman. 1999. Health, Well-Being, and Coping
Skills. In D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health
and the Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Power, C., C. Hertzman, S. Matthews, and O. Manor. 1997. Social
Differences in Health: Life-Cycle Effects Between Ages 23 and 33
in the 1958 British Birth Cohort. American Journal of Public Health
87(9):1499–1503.
Power, C., and S. Matthews. 1997. Origins of Health Inequalities in a
National Population Sample. Lancet 350(9091):1584–89.
Ramey, C.T. 1990. Early Intervention for High-Risk Children: The
Carolina Early Intervention Program. Binghamton, N.Y.: The
Haworth Press.
Ramey, C.T., F.A. Campbell, M. Burchinal, M.L. Skinner, D.M.
Gardner, and S.L. Ramey. 2000. Persistent Effects of Early

60
J. Fraser Mustard
Intervention on High-Risk Children and Their Mothers. Applied
Developmental Science 4:2–14.
Rauschecker, J.P. 1999. Making Brain Circuits Listen. Science
285:1686–87.
Reves, R. 1985. Declining Fertility in England and Wales as a Major
Cause of the Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality. The Role of
Changing Family Size and Age Structure in Infectious Disease
Mortality in Infancy. American Journal of Epidemiology 122:112–26.
Rodgers, B., C. Power, and S. Hope. 1997. Parental Divorce and Adult
Psychological Distress: Evidence from a National Birth Cohort: A
Research Note. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 38(7):
867–72.
Rutter, M., H. Giller, and A. Hagell. 1998. Antisocial Behavior by Young
People. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sapolsky, R.M. 1992. Stress, the Aging Brain, and the Mechanisms of
Neuron Death. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
———. 1997. The Importance of a Well-Groomed Child. Science
277(5332):1620–21.
Schweinhart, L.J. 1993. Signiﬁcant Beneﬁts: The High/Scope Perry
Preschool Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, Mich.: High/Scope Press.
Selye, H. 1936. Nature 138:22.
———. 1976. The Stress of Life. rev. ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Smythe, J.W., C.M. McCormick, J. Rochford, and M.J. Meaney. 1994.
The Interaction Between Prenatal Stress and Neonatal Handling
on Nociceptive Response Latencies in Male and Female Rats.
Physiology and Behavior 55(5):971–74.
Stattin, H. 1993. Early Language and Intelligence Development and
Their Relationship to Future Criminal Behavior. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 102(3):369–78.
Steckel, R.H., and R. Floud. 1997. Health and Welfare during
Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Suomi, S.J. 1997. Early Determinants of Behaviour: Evidence from
Primate Studies. British Medical Bulletin 53(1):170–84.

Early Child Development and the Brain
61
———. 2000. A Biobehavioral Perspective on Developmental
Psychopathology. In A.J. Sameroff, M. Lewis, and S.M. Miller, eds.,
Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology. New York: Kluwer 
Academic.
Szreter, S. 2000. The McKeown Thesis. Journal of Health Services
Research Policy 5(2):119–20.
Tremblay, R.E. 1999. When Children’s Social Development Fails. In
D. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the
Wealth of Nations. New York: Guilford Press.
Wadsworth, M.E.J. 1991. The Imprint of Time. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Wickelgren, I. 1999. Nurture Helps Mold Able Minds. Science
283:1832–34.
Willms, J.D. 1999. Quality and Inequality in Children’s Literacy: The
Effects of Families, Schools, and Communities. In D. Keating and
C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations.
New York: Guilford Press.
Wilson, E.O. 1998. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
World Bank. 2001. Brazil, Early Child Development: A Focus on the
Impact of Preschools. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, Human
Development Network.
Young, M.E., ed. 1997. Early Child Development: Investing in our
Children’s Future. International Congress Series 1137. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science B.V.


63
Chapter 3
From Child Development 
to Human Development
Jacques van der Gaag 
Early child development (ECD) and human development (HD) are
closely linked. Early child development refers to the combination of
physical, mental, and social development in the early years of life—
those dimensions that are commonly addressed by integrated pro-
grams of ECD. These programs include interventions to improve the
nutrition, health, cognitive development, and social interaction of
children in the early years (Myers 1992; Young 1997).
Human development refers to similar dimensions—education,
health (including nutrition), social development, and growth—but at
the scale of a nation. The multidimensional framework for HD used
in this chapter is a variant of one ﬁrst proposed by the United Na-
tions Development Programme in 1990. (In)equality is included in
the discussion, but an even broader concept of HD would include ad-
ditional dimensions such as human rights (Sen 1999).
Human development, broadly deﬁned, is the overarching objec-
tive of most international and multinational development programs.
Because HD is so closely linked to ECD, investing in ECD is the natur-
al starting point for these programs and for the public policy that
frames these programs.
Four critical “pathways” link ECD to HD. The ﬁrst pathway runs
through education. Interventions during the early years of a child
have multiple beneﬁts for subsequent investments in the child’s 

64
Jacques van der Gaag
education, ranging from on-time enrollment in elementary school to
an increased probability of progressing to higher levels of education.
The second pathway is through health. Like education, investments
in health are an investment in human capital and have long-term
beneﬁts. The third pathway links the notion of improved social be-
havior (as a result of being enrolled in an ECD program) with the for-
mation of social capital. This linkage is more speculative, but is sug-
gested by some interesting research results. In the fourth pathway,
ECD is linked to HD by the potential of ECD programs to address in-
equality in society. And, ultimately, education, health, social capital,
and equality are linked to economic growth and, hence, to HD.
All these linkages are discussed in this chapter, which concludes
with suggestions for further research to close some of the gaps in
knowledge identiﬁed. To provide context, the chapter opens with a
brief history of development economics.
Development Economics: A Brief History
The history of development economics is well described in the Hand-
book of Development Economics, volume 1 (Chenery and Srinivasan
1989), which is recommended for serious readers. A key point to note
in this chapter is that early approaches to development, which were
characterized by mathematical planning models, have been replaced
gradually by development models which recognize that people are
both the means and the ultimate cause of development. These more
recent models underscore the importance of investing in (young)
people as a central means to foster development. 
The shift from planning models to people is illustrated by the salient
contributions of four Nobel laureates in economics, all of whom were re-
warded for their work on development. The ﬁrst Nobel laureate in eco-
nomics was Jan Tinbergen, who shared the prize in 1969 with Ragna
Frisch. Tinbergen’s inﬂuence on the ﬁeld can still be felt around the
world.
Tinbergen initially studied physics and, later, applied mathe-
matical planning models to the economies of developing countries,

From Child Development to Human Development
65
mainly to determine optimal levels of investments. The planning, at
least in concept, comprised three stages. First, at the macro level, a
desired level of economic growth was chosen. Since labor was
thought to be abundantly available, this desired growth rate deter-
mined the optimal level of overall investment. At the middle stage,
the optimal distribution of this investment by region and by industry
was determined, and, at the third stage, individual investments for
projects were evaluated and allocated. Apart from the abundance of
labor (to be recruited from rural areas), no people were included in
these planning models.
It would be unfair to Tinbergen (who entered or, rather, invented
the ﬁeld of development economics because of concern for the living
conditions of the world’s poor) to suggest that people were forgotten
in the development process. On the contrary, people were seen as an
important production factor. Consequently, education was an impor-
tant element in these models. Investments in education needed to be
planned, as were investments in roads or in machines. Indeed, skilled
labor (the result of such investments) could also be allocated by re-
gion or industry and, if needed, even imported.
Omitted from these early models, however, was the (economic) be-
havior of people. In 1979, the Nobel prize for economics was awarded
to T.W. Schultz (and W.A. Lewis). Schultz’s major contribution to the
ﬁeld was in showing that the behavior of people in developing coun-
tries is, like the people in developed countries, that of a rational homo
economicus, reacting to incentives and opportunities. He stressed the
importance of investing in human capital (skills and knowledge) to
increase productivity (especially in agriculture) and entrepreneurship.
A third Nobel laureate (in 1993), R.W. Fogel, emphasized the im-
portance of “people development” in yet another way. Taking a his-
torical view, Fogel underscores the importance of the contribution of
technological change to physiological improvements. He concludes
that the “technophysio” evolution (as termed by him) accounts for
about half of British economic growth over the past two centuries. He
states: “Much of this gain was due to the improvement in human
thermodynamic efﬁciency. The rate of converting human energy in-

66
Jacques van der Gaag
put into work output appears to have increased by about 50 percent
since 1790” (Fogel 2000, pp.78–79). Fogel is also one of the few econ-
omists who have recognized the importance of long-term health ef-
fects from deprivation during early childhood.
A. Sen, who received the Nobel prize in 1998, also recognized the
central role of investing in people. The resulting higher income,
from higher productivity, reduces poverty and increases economic
well-being. However, Sen also underscores better health, higher edu-
cation levels, and improved nutrition as separate goals which, in ad-
dition to higher income, represent nonmonetary aspects of the
quality of life (i.e., of “human development”) that are valuable in
and of themselves. In his latest book (Sen 1999), he extends this
concept, to emphasize that individual freedom is the ultimate goal
of economic life. In this treatise, Sen uses a very broad deﬁnition of
freedom, which includes freedom from hunger, disease, ignorance,
all forms of deprivation, poverty, as well as political and economic
freedom and civil rights.
Linking ECD to HD: Four Pathways
Education
The ﬁrst pathway, from ECD to HD, is through education. The impor-
tance of ECD for subsequent educational performance, and the role
of education in economic and human development, are well known
and supported by extensive scientiﬁc evidence accumulated from
neurophysics, pediatrics, the medical sciences, child development,
education, sociology, and economics. Ample evidence documents the
importance of the early months and years in life for a child’s physi-
cal, mental, and social development (Cynader and Frost 1999; Mc-
Cain and Mustard 1999; Myers 1992; Young 1997). The rapid devel-
opment of the brain during the early months and years is crucial, and
newborns who receive proper care and stimulation will be readier to
enter school on time and to learn.
Children participating in ECD programs receive psychosocial
stimulation, nutritional supplementation, and health care, and their

From Child Development to Human Development
67
parents receive training in effective childcare. Children who have
participated in these programs show higher intelligence quotients
and improvements in practical reasoning, eye and hand coordina-
tion, hearing and speech, and reading readiness (Myers 1992). Grade
repetition and dropout rates are lower, performance at school is
higher, and the probability that a child will progress to higher levels
of education increases (Barnett 1995; Barnett 1998; Grantham-
McGregor and others 1997; Karoly and others 1998; Schweinhart
and others 1993).
Over the long term, these children beneﬁt from earlier schooling,
better schooling, and more schooling, making them more productive
and more “successful”as adults. Being well educated is the best predic-
tor of “success” as an adult, regardless of how success is deﬁned. The
deﬁnition of success, as a better job and higher income in the market-
place or increased and improved production at home (e.g., childcare,
nutritional practices, family health), can differ from case to case, but
higher education is always associated with greater well-being, broadly
deﬁned (Haveman and Wolfe 1984; Psacharopoulos 1994).
The public beneﬁts of education are also well known. For society,
they include greater ability to adopt new technologies, better func-
tioning of democratic processes, lower fertility rates, and lower crime
rates (Carnoy 1992; Rutter, Giller, and Hagell 1998). As ﬁrmly estab-
lished in the economic literature on development, education is also
important for economic growth (Barro 1997).
The education pathway clearly demonstrates that the link between
ECD and HD is straightforward, as abundantly documented by scien-
tiﬁc evidence. Increased investments in ECD programs can be fully
justiﬁed, and usually are, based on this evidence alone (van der Gaag
and Tan 1998). Good education is a goal in itself and fosters econom-
ic prosperity. Yet, three additional pathways deserve at least the same
attention as education. 
Health
For many decades, the leading development agencies, including the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), and the World Bank, have emphasized the importance of

68
Jacques van der Gaag
providing good nutrition, immunization, and other basic health care
services for young children. The health beneﬁts of these services are
immediately evident (Bundy 1997; PAHO 1998; Stephenson and oth-
ers 1993), and the cost-effectiveness of interventions to improve
these services is well established (Horton 1999). Despite this knowl-
edge, and shamefully, millions of children in developing countries
still die before they have lived 1 year, and those who survive suffer
from a myriad of easily preventable diseases. 
ECD programs can make a dramatic difference. They are associated
with decreased morbidity and mortality among children, fewer cases
of malnutrition and stunting, improved personal hygiene and health
care, and fewer instances of child abuse.
Less well known are the strong links between trauma in the early
years of life (e.g., from malnutrition, even in utero, and infectious
diseases) and an individual’s health as an adult. Recent studies show
that the links between health and nutrition in the early years of life
and one’s health status as an adult are much more numerous and
stronger than previously known. The range of adult health outcomes
now known to be associated with growth in utero and early life de-
velopment, or lack of, includes blood pressure, respiratory function,
and schizophrenia. Childhood social and educational factors also are
strongly associated with physical and mental health outcomes in
adult life (Wadsworth and Kuh 1997).
Scientific evidence of these links is also available in relation 
to the crucial period of brain development in utero and shortly 
after birth (Barker 1998; Ravelli 1999). Infant malnutrition 
has been associated with diabetes and reduced stature as an adult.
Infection early in life has been related to the development of
chronic bronchitis, acute appendicitis, asthma, Parkinson’s disease,
and multiple sclerosis in adulthood. And, low birthweight has been
correlated with subsequent increased blood pressure, chronic 
pulmonary disease, cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease,
and stroke. Thus, although an investment in basic health and 
nutritional services for young children can be justified by immedi-
ate health and anthropometric outcomes for children, the linkage

From Child Development to Human Development
69
to their health status as adults heightens the importance of 
the interventions, which are standard components of integrated 
ECD programs.
The linkage to adults’ health status is also signiﬁcant for HD ef-
forts. Evidence indicates that the association between adults’ health
status and economic well-being is at least as strong as the association
between education and economic well-being (Hertzman 1999; Smith
1999). Adults with better health, higher life expectancy, and better
weight and height measures tend to have higher productivity, less ab-
senteeism from work, and higher incomes than their less fortunate
counterparts. 
However, the causality in the relationship between health status
and economic well-being remains in question. Does good health lead
to higher productivity (income) or does a higher income enable one
to buy better health? Both relationships—health as cause and as 
effect—have been proven true. When possible to establish that good
or poor health came ﬁrst, a subsequent economic effect could be 
determined (e.g., the reduced earning power of adults stunted by
malnutrition as a child) (Bundy 1997; Thomas and Strauss 1997). The
converse, higher income leading to better health, also is well docu-
mented (Acheson 1998). Clearly, better health results in higher 
income in many instances, but additional research is needed to 
further unravel the dual relationship.
To establish a deﬁnitive link between health and the HD of a na-
tion, the health-and-income nexus must be aggregated across indi-
viduals, for populations. Recent studies demonstrate this link. Like
education, the health status of a population is related to the econom-
ic growth of that population (Barro 1997; Pritchett and Summers
1996; WHO 1998). Key examples in Africa are the economic (growth-
reducing) effects of malaria and the epidemic of Acquired Immuno-
deﬁciency Syndrome (AIDS) (Bloom and Sachs 1998).
Surprisingly, most of the studies of health and economic growth
are recent, and additional research is needed to understand more ful-
ly the many ways in which the health of a population, which is a
good in itself, can inﬂuence the wealth of a nation. But, the fact that

70
Jacques van der Gaag
the link is very important is no longer debatable. Like education, the
health pathway from ECD to HD is clear. If increasing the wealth of a
nation is an overall objective, beginning with the health of a new-
born is a logical ﬁrst step. 
Social Capital
The “social” beneﬁts of ECD programs are less well deﬁned than the
health and education beneﬁts. Still, they do exist. Many studies of
the effects of ECD programs note the change in children’s behavior
(Kagitçibasi 1996; Karoly and others 1998). They are less aggressive
and more cooperative, they behave better in groups, and they accept
instructions (e.g., from parents) well. Overall the children have high-
er self-concepts and are more socially adjusted. 
A few long-term (tracer) studies point to similar outcomes for the
children’s adult life: improved self-esteem, social competence, motiva-
tion, and acceptance of the culture’s norms and values. In particular,
evidence suggests that participation in ECD programs leads to reduced
criminal behavior and less delinquency as an adult (Schweinhart and
others 1993; Yoshikawa 1995; Zigler, Taussig, and Black 1992). 
The link between improved social behavior and the formation and
maintenance of “social capital” has yet to be established. Social capi-
tal includes many distinct social phenomena. At the macro level, it
refers to informal institutional arrangements, trust, ethnic social net-
works, nonlegal market arrangements and other related phenomena
(Coleman 1990; Putnam 1993). At the individual level, the term
refers to a person’s ability to draw upon social networks to better pur-
sue his or her own interests, a phenomenon that usually involves 
reciprocal arrangements similar to the exchange of “IOU” slips when
obtaining ﬁnancial credit (Coleman 1988, 1990; Lin 1999).
Studies of the social beneﬁts of ECD programs suggest that the ben-
eﬁts will continue later in life. As the brain needs to be wired properly
for academic learning, so it needs to be prepared suitably for social
learning. If studies can truly establish the link between the social ben-
eﬁts of ECD programs and improved skills of adults in creating and
utilizing social capital, the link to HD can easily be made. 

From Child Development to Human Development
71
To do so only requires that the beneﬁts to social capital at the indi-
vidual level be aggregated to society as a whole. Although social capi-
tal is an ill-deﬁned concept that refers to many different social phe-
nomena, this linkage has already been established ﬁrmly in the
sociology and economic literature (Narayan 1997; Woolcock 1999).
Much empirical evidence has been acquired recently, and although it
does not directly make the link between children and adults as sug-
gested above, it is convincing and growing.
Interest in the link between culture, or values, and economic per-
formance also is increasing. Recent studies suggest that “values” is an
important concept for explaining differences in the growth of na-
tions (Fukuyama 1995). If researchers determine that ECD programs
can instill values that are reﬂected subsequently in adults’ behavior,
the link between ECD and HD through the pathway of social capital
may be even greater than suggested here. 
Equality
The fourth pathway, “equality,” refers to a “level playing ﬁeld.” It is
inextricably linked to the previous three pathways. Equality may re-
fer to a level playing ﬁeld in education, health, or social capital. And,
like education, health, and social capital, equality is a good in itself
and contributes to the economic performance of a nation. If ECD
programs can be shown to contribute to achieving a more equal soci-
ety, the link between ECD and HD, through the pathway of equality,
can be easily established. In fact, ECD programs can contribute great-
ly to a leveling of the playing ﬁeld if they are well targeted (Barros
and Mendonça 1999). With a relatively small investment, ECD pro-
grams can decrease the disadvantage of poor children, compared
with their more fortunate counterparts, in nutritional status, cogni-
tive and social development, and health. The beneﬁts of greater
equality begin right after birth. 
For adults, equality in education and health leads to equality of
opportunity; better education and health lead to higher income. Sig-
niﬁcantly, data show that countries with a more equitable distribu-
tion of income are also more healthy ( Deaton 1999; Hertzman 1999;

Wilkinson 1996). The evidence is undeniable, yet the reasons for the
relationship are being debated. Nevertheless, the link between more
equality of opportunity early in life and more equality in education,
income, and health later in life appears to be strong, as does the ag-
gregate link between greater equality in income and the health of so-
ciety. And, again, the beneﬁts begin with ECD.
Finally, numerous studies show that greater equality leads to high-
er sustainable growth (Aghion, Caroli, and García-Peñalosa 1999; Bar-
ro 1997). The link between ECD and HD, through the pathway of
equality, is complex, but strong. 
ECD: Beneﬁts and Research Needs
Table 1 summarizes the beneﬁts of ECD—better education, improved
health, increased social capital, and greater equality. All of these out-
comes are of value themselves, and the beneﬁts are immediately tangi-
ble at the time of intervention (i.e., in a child’s early years). ECD pro-
grams are most often justiﬁed by the immediate beneﬁts to a child’s
social and cognitive development and health and nutritional status.
Yet, as discussed above, these outcomes have positive, long-term con-
sequences for the children as they mature into adults and for their na-
tions as a whole. Except for the pathway of education, these long-term
beneﬁts are usually ignored by government ofﬁcials and policymakers. 
The link between ECD and HD through the pathway of education
is clearly established and abundantly documented. New develop-
ments in health research, particularly those addressing the relation-
ship between child health and adult health, also provide ample evi-
dence of a link between ECD and HD. As additional research ﬁndings
become available, the pathway of health is likely to become as signif-
icant to HD as is education. International organizations and govern-
ments may need to fundamentally rethink health care efforts world-
wide and to direct a much larger share of health care budgets to the
health care of children, especially in their early years. The aim will be
not only to address children’s immediate health problems, but also
to reduce their future health risks as adults.
72
Jacques van der Gaag

From Child Development to Human Development
73
Table 1.  ECD Beneﬁts for Children, Adults, and Society: Summary
Pathways linking ECD to HD
Beneﬁts of ECD
Education
Health
Social capital
Equality
For children 
Higher intelligence, improved practical 
Less morbidity, mortality, malnutrition, 
Higher self-concept;  more 
Reduced disadvantages of poverty; 
(immediate)
reasoning, eye and hand coordination, 
stunting, child abuse; better hygiene 
socially adjusted; less 
improved nutritional status,  
hearing and speech; reading readiness; 
and health care
aggressive; more cooperative; 
cognitive and social development, 
improved school performance; less 
better behavior in groups;  
and  health
grade repetition and dropout; 
increased acceptance of 
increased schooling
instructions
For adults 
Higher productivity;  increased 
Improved height and weight; 
Higher self-esteem; improved 
Equality of opportunity, education, 
(long-term)
success  (better jobs, higher 
enhanced cognitive development; 
social competence, motivation, 
health, and income
incomes); improved childcare 
less infections and chronic 
acceptance of norms and 
and family health; greater 
diseases
values; less delinquency and 
economic well-being
criminal behavior
For society
Greater social cohesion; less 
Higher productivity; less 
Improved utilization of social 
Reduced poverty and crime; better 
poverty and crime; lower fertility 
absenteeism; higher incomes
capital; enhanced social values
societal health; increased social 
rates; increased adoption of new 
justice; higher sustainable 
technologies; improved democratic 
economic growth
processes; higher economic growth
ECD, Early child development; HD, human development.

74
Jacques van der Gaag
The pathway of social capital is currently less clear, but suggestive.
The link between social behavior as a child and as an adult needs to
be conﬁrmed, and the link between social behavior and social capital
is still weak. The literature on social capital is relatively young, but
current evidence indicates that this pathway for ECD to HD will be-
come as ﬁrmly established as the pathways of education and health.
The pathway of equality from ECD to HD is undeniable and, as
noted, is linked to the other three pathways. The ﬁnding that income
equality is related to the health of society is a recent and surprising
one, which reinforces the importance of ECD and suggests far-reach-
ing policy implications.
Education, health, social capital, and equality are all important
contributors to economic growth. Together with economic growth,
they constitute the mutually reinforcing elements of a comprehen-
sive framework for HD, as depicted in ﬁgure 1. This framework could
be expanded easily, for example, to include gender issues or poverty
(as it relates to equality).
Well-executed and well-targeted ECD programs are initiators of
HD. They stimulate improvements in education, health, social capi-
tal, and equality that have both immediate and long-term beneﬁts
Figure 1. From Child Development to Human Development: A Comprehensive Framework

From Child Development to Human Development
75
for the children participating in the programs. Investments in ECD
programs are in many ways investments in the future of a nation.
Acknowledgment
The author thanks Wendy Janssens for excellent research assistance
during the preparation of this chapter.
References
Acheson, D. 1998. Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health:
Report. London: The Stationery Ofﬁce.
Aghion, P., E. Caroli, and C. García-Peñalosa. 1999. “Inequality and
Economic Growth: The Perspective of the New Growth Theories.”
Journal of Economic Literature 37 (December):1615–60.
Barker, D.J.P. 1998. Mothers, Babies and Health in Later Life.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Barnett, W.S. 1995. Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs
on Cognitive and School Outcomes. The Future of Children
5(3):25–50.
———. 1998. Long-Term Cognitive and Academic Effects of Early
Childhood Education on Children in Poverty. Preventive Medicine
27:204–07.
Barro, R.J. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
Empirical Study. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Barros, R.P. de, and R. Mendonça. 1999. Costs and Beneﬁts of Pre-
School Education in Brazil. Rio de Janeiro: Institute of Applied
Economic Research.
Bloom, D.E., and J.D. Sachs. 1998. Geography, Demography, and
Economic Growth in Africa, Harvard Institute for International
Development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Bundy, D.A.P. 1997. Health and Early Child Development. In M.E.
Young, ed., Early Child Development: Investing in our Children’s
Future. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.

76
Jacques van der Gaag
Carnoy, M. 1992. The Case for Investing in Basic Education. New York:
United Nations Children’s Fund.
Chenery, H., and T.N. Srinivasan. 1989. Handbook of Development
Economics, volume 1. New York: North Holland.
Coleman, J. 1988. Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital.
American Journal of Sociology 94:S95–S120.
———. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
Cynader, M.S., and B.J. Frost. 1999. Mechanisms of Brain
Development: Neuronal Sculpting by the Physical and Social
Environment. In D.P. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds.,
Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological,
and Educational Dynamics. New York: The Guilford Press.
Deaton, A. 1999. Inequalities in Income and Inequalities in Health.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
W7141. New York.
Fogel, R.W. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of
Prosperity. New York: Free Press.
Grantham-McGregor, S.M., S.P. Walker, S.M. Chang, and C.A.
Powell. 1997. Effects of Early Childhood Supplementation With
and Without Stimulation on Later Development in Stunted
Jamaican Children. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
66:247–53.
Haveman, R.H., and B.L. Wolfe. 1984. Schooling and Economic
Well-being: The Role of Nonmarket Effects. Journal of Human
Resources 19(3):377–407.
Hertzman, C. 1999. Population Health and Human Development. In
D.P. Keating and C. Hertzman, eds., Developmental Health and the
Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational Dynamics. New
York: The Guilford Press.
Horton, S. 1999. Economics of Nutritional Investments (draft). In
R.D. Semba and M.W. Bloem, eds., Nutrition and Health in
Developing Countries. Totowa, N.J.: Humana Press.

From Child Development to Human Development
77
Kagitçibasi, Ç. 1996. Family and Human Development Across Cultures:
A View from the Other Side. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Karoly, L.A., P.W. Greenwood, S.S. Everingham, J. Hoube, M.R.
Kilburu, C.P. Rydell, M. Sanders, and J. Chiesa. 1998. Investing in
Our Children: What We Know and Don’t Know about the Costs and
Beneﬁts of Early Childhood Interventions. Washington, D.C.:RAND.
Lin, N. 1999. Inequality in Social Capital: Evidence from Urban China.
Creation and Returns of Social Capital in Education and Labor Markets.
Center for Research in Experimental Economics and Political Decision
Making/University of Amsterdam, Institute of Information and
Computing Sciences (ICS)/University of Groningen and ICS/Utrecht
University.
McCain, M.N., and J.F. Mustard. 1999. Reversing the Real Brain Drain:
Early Years Study, Final Report. Toronto: Publications Ontario.
Myers, R.G. 1992. The Twelve Who Survive. London: Routledge.
Narayan, D. 1997. Voices of the Poor: Poverty and Social Capital in
Tanzania. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
PAHO (Pan American Health Organization), ed. 1998. Nutrition,
Health and Child Development: Research Advances and Policy
Recommendations. Scientiﬁc Publication No. 566. Washington, D.C.
Pritchett, L., and L.H. Summers. 1996. Wealthier Is Healthier. Journal
of Human Resources 31(4):841–68.
Psacharopoulos, G. 1994. Returns to Investment in Education: A
Global Update. World Development 22(9):1325–43.
Putnam, R. 1993. The Prosperous Community – Social Capital and
Economic Growth. The American Prospect 356(spring):4–9.
Ravelli, A.C.J. 1999. Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Famine and
Glucose Tolerance and Obesity at Age 50. Thela Thesis.
Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Rutter, M., H. Giller, and A. Hagell. 1998. Antisocial Behavior by Young
People. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schweinhart, L.J., H.V. Barnes, and D.P. Weikart (with W.S. Barnett
and A.S. Epstein). 1993. Signiﬁcant Beneﬁts: The High/Scope Perry
Preschool Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, Mich.: High/Scope Press.

Sen, A. 1999. Development as Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Smith, J.P. 1999. Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual
Relation Between Health and Economic Status. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13(2):145–66.
Stephenson, L.S., M.C. Latham, E.J. Adams, S.N. Kinoti, and A.
Pertet. 1993. Physical Fitness, Growth and Appetite of Kenyan
Schoolboys With Hookworm, Trichuris trichiura and Ascaris
lumbricoides. Infections Are Improved Four Months After a Single
Dose of Albendazole. Journal of Nutrition 123:1036–46.
Thomas, D., and J. Strauss. 1997. Health and Wages: Evidence on
Men and Women in Urban Brazil. Journal of Econometrics
77:159–85.
Van der Gaag, J., and J.-P. Tan. 1998. The Beneﬁts of Early Child
Development Programs: An Economic Analysis. Washington, D.C:
World Bank, Human Development Network.
Wadsworth, M.E., and D. Kuh. 1997. Childhood Inﬂuences on Adult
Health. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 11:2–20.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1998. Health, Health Policy, and
Economic Outcomes. Health and Development Satellite, WHO
Director-General, Transition Team. Geneva.
Wilkinson, R.G. 1996. Unhealthy Societies: The Afﬂictions of Inequality.
London: Routledge.
Woolcock, M. 1999. Managing Risk, Shocks, and Opportunity in
Developing Economies: The Role of Social Capital. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank, Development Research Group.
Yoshikawa, H. 1995. Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs
on Social Outcomes and Delinquency. The Future of Children
5(3):51–75.
Young, M.E., ed. 1997. Early Child Development: Investing in our Children’s
Future. International Congress Series No. 1137. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science B.V.
Zigler, E., C. Taussig, and K. Black. 1992. Early Childhood
Intervention: A Promising Preventative for Juvenile Delinquency.
American Psychologist 47(8):997–1006.
78
Jacques van der Gaag

Part II 
Measuring the Early 
Opportunity Gap


Chapter 4
Standards of Care: 
Investments to Improve 
Children’s Educational 
Outcomes in Latin America
J. Douglas Willms
At the 1990 World Conference on Education for All, held in Jomtien,
Thailand, educators and policymakers recommended increased em-
phasis on care and stimulation during early childhood, improve-
ments in the quality of education provided, and universal access to
completion of primary education by the end of the millennium. Dur-
ing the 1980s, researchers showed that children in low-income coun-
tries have lower levels of literacy than children in high-income coun-
tries who receive similar amounts of schooling. Two plausible
explanations for this ﬁnding are that children in poorer countries be-
gin primary school without the developmental base to enable them
to achieve their full potential and that the quality of schooling in
low-income countries is lower than in high-income countries.
During the 1980s, research conducted in several countries provid-
ed compelling evidence that schools differ considerably in their out-
comes, even after accounting for children’s family backgrounds
(Bryk, Lee, and Smith 1990; Gray 1989; Raudenbush and Willms
1991; Willms 1992). The results of large-scale studies of schooling in
low-income countries demonstrated the importance of human and
81

material resources (e.g., school infrastructure, class size, teachers’
experience and qualiﬁcations, availability of instructional materials)
for achieving better school outcomes (Fuller and Clarke 1994). Re-
search by the World Bank showed that such factors have an even
stronger relationship to academic achievement in low-income
countries than to that in high-income countries (Heyneman and
Loxley 1983).
In 1996, a consortium of thirteen Latin American countries con-
ducted the Primer Estudio Internacional Comparativo (PEIC), the
ﬁrst international study of school outcomes in Latin America to uti-
lize common tests and questionnaires across several countries. The
PEIC study entailed (a) testing more than 50,000 pupils in grades 3
and 4 for language and mathematics skills and (b) administering
questionnaires to pupils, parents, teachers, and school administra-
tors. The data included considerable information on early childhood
outcomes, including parents’ home practices and whether the child
attended day care. This comparative study is one of the ﬁrst to assess
the importance of these factors. The multinational study was funded
by the Inter-American Development Bank; Convenio Andrés Bello;
Ford Foundation; United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO); and the following participating
countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile,
Cuba, Dominican Republic, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, and
Républica Bolivariana de Venezuela.
Two substantive reports of the study have been published. The ﬁrst
report (UNESCO 1998) provides technical information on PEIC and
descriptive analyses by country. The second report, entitled Schooling
Outcomes in Latin America, was coauthored by Willms and Somers
(2000) and prepared in consultation with the Laboratorio Latino-
americano de Evaluación de la Calidad de la Educación, which coor-
dinated the study. The second report presents, for each country, 
detailed descriptions of the relationships between achievement out-
comes and family socioeconomic status (SES), school sector (public,
private), extent of urbanization (rural, urban, mega-city), material re-
sources (e.g., class size, school infrastructure, teachers’ qualiﬁcations),
82
J. Douglas Willms

and school “culture” (e.g., parental involvement, teachers’ attitudes,
principals’ autonomy, learning climate).
The present chapter summarizes some ﬁndings of the Willms and
Somers (2000) report and extends the analysis to assess the relative
importance of family and school factors. Four aims are to: (a) portray
the relationship between school outcomes and SES, giving attention
to urbanicity and sector; (b) estimate the magnitude of effects associ-
ated with risk factors relevant to childhood vulnerability in Latin
America and discern the extent of these effects in mediating the rela-
tionship between school outcomes and SES; (c) suggest a framework
for using ﬁndings from international studies to prescribe “standards
of care” based on the most important predictors of early childhood
outcomes; and (d) suggest ways to improve the capability for moni-
toring progress in early child development.
The chapter demonstrates how the suggested framework could be
applied across the relevant countries using PEIC ﬁndings and indi-
cates the achievement of standards within each country. Drawing
from the Willms and Somers (2000) report, the chapter presents
data on twelve countries, referred to herein as the “Region” (data for
the thirteenth country, Costa Rica, were not available because of a
speciﬁc coding problem, and data for Peru are included only for 
Regional estimates because country-speciﬁc results for this country
are embargoed).
The chapter comprises ﬁve main sections, as follows: The Impor-
tance of Understanding Socioeconomic Gradients; School Outcomes
in Latin America: Gradients and School Proﬁles; Standards of Care: A
Suggested Framework; Childhood Vulnerability: Analysis and Find-
ings; and Next Steps: Strengthening the Basis for Monitoring and Re-
form. A concluding section presents additional perspectives.
Several caveats should be noted. Any analysis of this sort and any
attempt to set standards can be easily criticized. A framework that
links processes to outcomes is necessarily limited by the data avail-
able and the difﬁculty of generalizing empirical ﬁndings which re-
ﬂect local social, political, and economic realities. Collaborations
with school districts and governments grappling with the use of
Standards of Care
83

data for monitoring have demonstrated that the main value of mon-
itoring is to stimulate dialogue on desired outcomes of schooling
and critical examination of current policies and practices. Accord-
ingly, the overarching goal of the chapter is to generate dialogue
about standards of care.
The Importance of Understanding 
Socioeconomic Gradients
Perhaps the most pervasive ﬁnding of research on human develop-
ment is that children’s developmental outcomes are related to the
SES of their families. There is a “gradient”: Children whose parents
have lower levels of education and income and are working in less
prestigious jobs are less likely to succeed academically, more prone to
behavioral disorders, and more vulnerable to poor health than are
children living in afﬂuent families. Virtually every important social
outcome seems to be related to SES. This relationship has become so
ﬁrmly entrenched in understanding human development that the
terms “children with delayed development,” “children at risk,” and
“children living in poverty” are used synonymously. Because this re-
lationship has become accepted as nearly universal, one may ques-
tion whether further study of socioeconomic gradients is worthwhile.
Understanding socioeconomic gradients is essential for under-
standing factors that contribute to the success of society. A “socioeco-
nomic gradient” describes the relationship between some develop-
mental outcome and SES. Researchers of early child development are
typically interested in outcomes describing children’s cognitive, so-
cial, and behavioral development. These outcomes, such as achieve-
ment test scores, are usually measured on a continuous scale, but also
can be measured dichotomously with indicators such as whether a
child has a speciﬁc disease or behavior disorder or is particularly vul-
nerable.
SES refers to the relative position of a family or individual within a
hierarchical social structure based on access to, or control over,
wealth, prestige, and power (Dutton and Levine 1989; Mueller and
84
J. Douglas Willms

Parcel 1981). SES is usually operationalized as a composite measure
comprising income, level of education, and occupational prestige.
Gradients can be depicted as a line on a graph, with the developmen-
tal outcome on the vertical axis and an SES measure on the horizon-
tal axis (see ﬁgure 1).
Implications of Socioeconomic Gradients
Gradients can be used to indicate the translation of investments in
material, social, and cultural resources into skills and competencies
over time (e.g., between decades). For a society, they depict overall
outcomes (e.g., levels of literacy) as well as inequalities among social
classes. These inequalities have several implications for society—for
its social cohesion, health and well-being, and social policy.
Social Cohesion. Achieving equality of outcomes (i.e., “shallow gra-
dients”) is essential for achieving social cohesion. Ritzen’s deﬁnition
of social cohesion as “an inclusive civil society and responsive politi-
cal institutions” (Ritzen 2000) is central to the World Bank’s ap-
proach to policy and projects. Mounting evidence demonstrates that
the economic success of societies depends on relationships among
people within and among institutions, communities, and countries.
Standards of Care
85
Figure 1. Socioeconomic Gradients, Deﬁned
Childhood Outcome
Socioeconomic Status
Socioeconomic
gradient

Researchers have used the term social capital to characterize the
nature of relationships among people and the relationships’ facilita-
tion of collective action, social networks, and community norms and
values (Coleman 1988). Research at the micro level has shown that
the productivity of institutions and organizations depends on team-
work, communication, sharing of knowledge and ideas, and workers’
embracing of organizations’ aims. Research at the macro level has
been focused on the nature of social support and collective action
and their effect on people’s trust and trustworthiness and sense of se-
curity and well-being. Currently, the concept of social capital is being
incorporated into the new growth models of economic development.
Health and Well-Being. Inequalities in social outcomes appear to be a
strong determinant of health and well-being. A number of studies
show that health outcomes vary among neighborhoods, communi-
ties, health authorities, states and provinces, and countries, even af-
ter accounting for people’s socioeconomic backgrounds. Two ﬁndings
are especially relevant to socioeconomic gradients. First, gradients for
mortality and health status are nonlinear: They are steep at low levels
of income and become shallower at higher levels of income (Epel-
baum 1999; House and others 1990; Mirowsky and Hu 1996; Wolfson
and others 1999; Wolfson, Rowe, Gentleman, and Tomiak 1993). Af-
ter people meet their basic needs for food, clothing, and housing, fur-
ther increases in income seem to contribute only marginally to their
health. Second, health is not only related to overall levels of income
and wealth, but also to levels of income inequality in a society
(Wilkinson 1992, 1996; Kaplan and others 1996; Wolfson and others
1999). The predominating explanations relate to people feeling rela-
tively deprived or excluded.
Social Policy. Gradients can provide a focus for social policy, which is
concerned mainly with achieving particular outcomes for society as a
whole and, especially, for vulnerable groups. During the past few
decades, governments have focused mainly on economic policies.
Consequently, social policies have not changed at the same pace. Dis-
cussions about social policy have mainly concerned the functions 
of state governments, particularly provision of services (e.g., public
86
J. Douglas Willms

education, health care, protective services) and redistribution of in-
come by income transfers to targeted groups (Fellegi and Wolfson
1999). The roles of corporations, communities, and families in shap-
ing social policy have received relatively little attention. Gradients
are useful as a simple, straightforward device for shifting attention to-
ward desired social outcomes and inequalities in outcomes. A simple
display of gradients for a set of outcomes always begs the question,
“Can we alter the gradients?”
Socioeconomic Gradients for Childhood Vulnerability
Socioeconomic gradients are pertinent to early childhood develop-
ment and the vulnerability of children to society’s inequalities. In
PEIC and other studies, researchers have demonstrated the complex
relationships and interactions between these gradients and children’s
vulnerability. Ten key questions for research have been elucidated by
the Canadian Research Institute for Social Policy (Willms, forthcom-
ing) and are summarized below.
1. At what age do socioeconomic gradients for children’s outcomes become
evident? Do gradients become stronger as children become old-
er? For example, are gradients evident for the prevalence of
children with low birthweight or for children’s early develop-
mental outcomes? Do gradients become stronger after children
enter the formal school system?
2. Are gradients stronger for some outcomes than for others? For exam-
ple, are gradients stronger for cognitive outcomes than for be-
havioral outcomes?
3. Which SES components are related most strongly to children’s social and
cognitive outcomes? Most recent research emphasizes the effects
of poverty on children’s outcome, but other factors (e.g., par-
ents’, and especially mothers’, level of education) have a signif-
icant role. The relative importance of various SES components
at different ages needs to be better understood.
4. Are gradients linear or curvilinear? A particular concern is whether
gradients for children’s developmental outcomes weaken above
Standards of Care
87

a certain SES threshold and, if so, whether this threshold varies
among communities. For example, the income threshold for
health outcomes appears to be about $20,000: Below $20,000,
the relationship between income and health is strong, and
above $20,000, the relationship is weak (Epelbaum 1990;
House and others 1990; Mirowsky and Hu 1996). Income gradi-
ents may be curvilinear as well as linear. In Canada, the income
gradient for health outcomes is curvilinear, but the change in
slope is more gradual, making it difﬁcult to identify a threshold
accurately (Boyle and Willms 1998; Wolfson and others 1993,
1999). Determining whether gradients are linear or curvilinear
is particularly relevant to the development of policies for in-
vesting in early childhood by targeting resources to low-in-
come families.
5. What factors mediate the relationships between childhood outcomes
and SES? The term “mediating factors” describes the underlying
processes for one variable inﬂuencing another (Baron and Ken-
ny 1986) (e.g., income and achievement). For example, do 
parents in low-income families pursue a different approach to
parenting which leads to poor developmental outcomes? If so,
parenting styles could be a mediator of the socioeconomic 
gradient.
6. Are there groups within society whose children are particularly vulnera-
ble? Special concerns are the outcomes for children in minority
groups, single-parent families, and families with parents who
were teenagers when they had their ﬁrst child.
7. Do children’s outcomes vary by community? In relation to children’s
development, “community” is deﬁned as a group of citizens
collectively concerned about the health and well-being of their
children. Communities can be multiple and overlapping (e.g.,
neighborhoods, churches, municipalities, classrooms, schools,
school districts). A concern is whether children’s outcomes vary
among communities regardless of family background.
8. Do socioeconomic gradients vary among communities? For example,
are some communities particularly successful in abating 
88
J. Douglas Willms

inequalities in children’s outcomes? In many contexts, gradi-
ents vary among communities, and communities that have
particularly steep or shallow gradients can be identiﬁed. For
school outcomes, gradients tend to converge for children at
higher SES levels (Willms 2000). This convergence has impor-
tant implications for social policy for it suggests that children
from relatively afﬂuent family backgrounds tend to do well in
any community, whereas children from less afﬂuent back-
grounds can have substantially different outcomes in different
communities. Successful communities are able to bolster the
social outcomes of their least-advantaged citizens.
9. What are the effects of segregating children from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds by, for example, residential segregation, private schooling,
selective schooling, tracking or streaming, and ability grouping within
classrooms or by other mechanisms that differentiate groups according
to socioeconomic background? This question is especially relevant
to low-income countries because their school systems are high-
ly segregated owing to disparities in income between rural and
urban families and to private schooling. This “hypothesis of
double jeopardy” implies that a child in a poor family is even
more vulnerable when educated in a poor setting.
10. If communities’ gradients vary, what factors are associated with high
outcome levels and shallow gradients? If gradients for children’s 
developmental outcomes vary among communities, can a
community’s achievement of superior or more equitably dis-
tributed outcomes be explained by community factors?
School Outcomes in Latin America: Gradients 
and School Proﬁles
The target population for PEIC was all children attending grades 3
and 4 in the thirteen participating countries. For each country, the
sample included approximately 100 schools, with twenty grade 3
pupils and twenty grade 4 pupils in each school, for a total of
3,000–4,000 pupils. The data collected included achievement test
Standards of Care
89

scores in language (Spanish) and mathematics and questionnaires ad-
ministered to each pupil, one of the pupil’s parents, the teacher, prin-
cipal, and school administrator. [See UNESCO (1998) and Willms and
Somers (2000) for further details.] The ﬁndings for gradients and
school proﬁles are depicted and summarized below.
Gradients
Figures 2–4 display the socioeconomic gradients, by country, for
school outcomes (language scores, mathematics scores, and no grade
repetition) in relation to parents’ education. Parents’ education (years
of schooling) is averaged for a child’s two parents (the full regression
models included a variable for single- or two-parent families). The
gradients are calculated based on ordinary least-squares relationships,
and, because most countries had a signiﬁcant nonlinear component,
the square of parental education is included. The test scores for lan-
guage and mathematics are scaled using the Rasch method to obtain
a mean score of 250 for the Region, with a standard deviation of 50.
No grade repetition is included as a measure of whether a child has
repeated at least one grade before completing grade three.
In most analyses of schools’ effectiveness, grade repetition is treat-
ed as a variable of school policy and is used in regression analyses as
an independent variable to explain variation in academic test scores.
In PEIC, grade repetition is treated as a dependent variable for three
reasons: (a) progressing through school with one’s same-age peers is
an important school outcome strongly related to self-esteem, sense of
belonging, and general well-being (Shepard 1989; Shepard and Smith
1989); (b) grade failure early is one of the best predictors of complet-
ing secondary school (Audas and Willms 2000; Rumberger 1995); and
(c) reducing the rates of grade repetition is central to the long-term
success of schooling in Latin America and is an outcome that can be
improved easily through national and local policies. During the
1980s, a typical child in Latin America took 1.7 years to be promoted
to the next grade (UNESCO-OREALC 1992).
To simplify the discussion and be consistent with the “standard”
of a “no-fail” policy, a dichotomous variable is used in this chapter to
90
J. Douglas Willms

indicate whether a child has repeated at least one grade. Willms and
Somers (2000) used a “time to completion” measure to account for a
child’s grade repetition. However, neither measure accounts for chil-
dren who leave school before completing a grade and then reenter
the same grade the following year. A more detailed analysis of this 
Standards of Care
91
Figure 2. Socioeconomic Gradients for Language Scores, by Country

issue is under way for a few countries, beginning with Brazil, by re-
constructing each child’s educational history and applying a multi-
level variant of event-history analysis.
92
J. Douglas Willms
Figure 3. Socioeconomic Gradients for Mathematics Scores, by Country

Standards of Care
93
Figure 4. Socioeconomic Gradients for No Grade Repetition, by Country

The problem of grade repetition is acute in several Latin American
countries. Some children report failing more than ﬁve times by the
time they are in grade 3. However, the data for number of repetitions
and children’s age are inconsistent. It seems that, in many schools,
pupils leave school during the academic year and return the follow-
ing year in the same grade, a situation that many parents would not
usually consider grade repetition.
Findings
Several important ﬁndings are evident from the analyses. (1) Coun-
tries vary dramatically in school outcomes and socioeconomic gradi-
ents. (2) The hypothesis of converging gradients does not hold; that
is, the results for children of parents with high levels of education
vary as much as those for children of parents with low levels of edu-
cation. (3) The gradients in some countries are nonlinear, but levels
of achievement increase at higher SES levels.
Previously, it seemed that “the success of a society, as gauged by
these types of indicators, depends on the extent to which it is suc-
cessful in reducing inequalities” (Willms 1999). The author’s current
working hypothesis is that (a) societies progress from relatively ﬂat
gradients with low levels of social outcomes to steep gradients with
average levels of outcomes and, ﬁnally, to shallow gradients with
high levels of social outcomes, and (b) this progression depends on
how social and human capital are invested (Willms 2000).
Perhaps the most important point, however, is that the PEIC 
results for Cuba, similar to the results of the International Adult Lit-
eracy Study (IALS) for Sweden, demonstrate that high levels of social
outcomes and equality of social outcomes can be achieved among
low- and high-status groups. The nonlinear relationship, which is
most evident among the lowest-scoring countries, suggests that a
“premium” is associated with completing secondary school, a ﬁnd-
ing that is not inconsistent with the current working hypothesis.
The elite of a country may attain a higher standard of achievement
ﬁrst, and lower socioeconomic groups may then slowly rise to meet
these levels.
94
J. Douglas Willms

Moreover, the results for Cuba and Chile, which, by Latin Ameri-
can standards, have relatively low levels of grade repetition, demon-
strate that high levels of achievement are possible without failing
pupils. Brazil, which has a large percentage of children repeating
grades, has achievement levels for language similar to those of Chile,
and for mathematics, slightly higher. However, these results are based
on grade cohorts, not age cohorts. The results for Brazil would be
somewhat lower if, for example, the average scores of pupils ages 7 to
9 could be assessed in each country. This assessment will be one of
the strengths of the Program of Indicators of Student Achievement
(PISA) study, which targets all 15-year-olds in each country. If coun-
tries adopt a no-repetition policy or take measures to dramatically re-
duce repetition rates, many teachers will have to change their atti-
tudes toward grade repetition and will need to be equipped with the
necessary skills to teach in heterogeneous classrooms.
School Proﬁles
The analysis of school proﬁles offers additional detail on the varia-
tion in school outcomes within each country and for the Region. Fig-
ures 5–7 present these proﬁles for the Region. Hierarchical linear
analysis yielded estimates of the average test scores for each school,
with adjustment for measurement and sampling errors. The ﬁgures
denote each school’s sector (public or private), urbanicity (rural, ur-
ban, mega-city), and relative size. Similar plots for each country are
given in the Willms and Somers (2000) report.
Findings
The school proﬁles show that schools in the Region vary widely in
academic achievement even after accounting for parents’ education.
In the full report (Willms and Somers 2000), the variation among
schools within each country was examined in relation to certain fam-
ily background variables, which included parents’ education, amount
of time the parent was at home during work days, number of books
in the home, and single- or two-parent family. Even with control for
these variables, the schools’ academic achievement levels varied 
Standards of Care
95

96
J. Douglas Willms
Figure 5. School Achievement Proﬁle for Language, by Type of School, in the Region

Standards of Care
97
Figure 6. School Achievement Proﬁle for Mathematics, by Type of School, in the Region

98
J. Douglas Willms
Figure 7. School Achievement Proﬁle for No Grade Repetition, by Type of School, 
in the Region

substantially. At any SES level, the difference between the worst- and
best-performing schools was about 1.5 standard deviations, which,
for grades 3 and 4, amounts to about 1.5 years of schooling.
The PEIC data also included several factors pertaining to a child’s
early childhood experience (e.g., regular reading by parents to their
child during preschool years, parental involvement in the child’s
schooling). As expected, these factors were related positively to
school outcomes, a ﬁnding that has been substantiated by many oth-
er studies.
The data also included an item for child’s attendance at day care,
and the analysis showed small, but signiﬁcant, effects associated with
this variable. However, information was not collected on the nature
or quality of day care or the period when the child attended day care.
More detailed analyses of this variable within countries would likely
indicate larger effects.
A principal aim of the study was to discern which schooling 
factors contributed to high educational achievement. Analysis re-
vealed that a number of factors were positively associated with high
test scores and the time pupils took to complete the ﬁrst three
grades of primary school. Signiﬁcantly, the important factors in-
cluded variables pertaining to school resources and to school policy
and practice.
Standards of Care: A Suggested Framework
The above data can be analyzed further to yield suggested standards
of care for evaluating and monitoring school outcomes currently and
over time. Establishing standards for reform is not easy, however, and
the data and analyses to substantiate standards and reforms must be
scrutinized carefully. For policymakers, a main concern is the com-
plexity of interpreting statistical data from analyses of regression co-
efﬁcients and relative and attributable risks.
In the PEIC study, the multilevel regression results are complex
and not easily translated into policies for reform. Generally, the inter-
pretation of regression coefﬁcients is fairly straightforward—they 
Standards of Care
99

represent the effect on the outcome of a one-unit increase in the co-
variate when all other variables are held constant. For example,
Willms and Somers (2000) estimate that the effect on language scores
of teachers working another job is –11.2. That is, the language scores
of children in schools where all teachers worked another job were
11.2 points less than those of children in schools where no teachers
worked another job. However, the situation for PEIC and for similar
studies is much more complex. Only about one-half of all pupils in
the Region attended schools where no teachers worked another job,
and less than 10 percent attended schools where all teachers worked
another job; the remaining students (about 40 percent) attended
schools where some teachers worked another job.
A related problem is that the effect may be important in relative
terms, but not in absolute terms. For example, within a country, a mi-
nority group may have very low test scores, but the group comprises
only 1 percent of the population. In regression analysis, the gap in
test scores between minorities and nonminorities would be estimated
as an unstandardized regression coefﬁcient, and the difference would
be expressed in the units of the test. The importance of the differ-
ence, in this instance, would be judged in “relative” terms.
However, the marginal contribution to R-squared (i.e., the propor-
tion of the variance explained) would be quite small because the mi-
nority group comprises only 1 percent of the population. Even if the
scores of all minority pupils could be immediately boosted up to the
Regional mean, this overall mean would not change dramatically.
The importance of the difference, in this instance, would be judged
in “absolute” terms. This distinction is important for policymakers as
they choose between targeted interventions to improve scores and
outcomes of particular groups (e.g., pupils in rural schools in low-
socioeconomic areas) and universal interventions to improve scores
and outcomes of all pupils (see Offord and others 1997).
Relative risk and attributable risk are also commonly used by epi-
demiologists. In this case, “relative risk” denotes the ratio of the pro-
portion of vulnerable individuals among those exposed to a risk fac-
tor to the proportion of vulnerable individuals among those not
100
J. Douglas Willms

exposed to the risk factor. As a multiplier, relative risk indicates the
potential increased likelihood of a child being vulnerable if the child
changes from not being exposed to being exposed. “Attributable risk”
expresses in percent the total occurrence of vulnerability that could
be attributed to a particular risk factor.
To calculate these risks, the outcome variable must be dichoto-
mous (i.e., vulnerable versus not vulnerable). For PEIC, the outcome
variable is having low test scores versus not having low test scores, or
repeating a grade versus not repeating a grade. The risk factors also
must be dichotomous. For example, the PEIC risk factors include at-
tending a school that has a poor library versus attending a school
that has a good library, or attending a school that has low parental
involvement versus attending a school that has high parental in-
volvement.
The technique of assigning relative and attributable risk is used in
the analysis summarized below to elucidate possible standards for re-
form. This technique is not as powerful as regression techniques, but
the distinction between relative and absolute risk is more transparent.
An Outcome Standard for Children
The PEIC study deﬁned a child as “vulnerable” if he or she had:
• A language test score below 221 in grade 3 or below 240 in grade
4 (these cutoff scores correspond approximately to the lowest
one-third of scores), or
• A mathematics test score below 225 in grade 3 or below 239 in
grade 4, or
• Repeated a grade during the ﬁrst 3 years of elementary school.
This deﬁnition was based on several considerations. First, decid-
ing on an outcome standard (cutoff score) for most achievement
tests is arbitrary. In PEIC, one possibility was to use the results for
Cuba as a standard for the Region. Another possibility was to use
the mean or median test score as the standard and to denote those
below the mean or median as vulnerable. Second, administrators in
Standards of Care
101

many countries voice concern about the “bottom third” of school-
children. Third, experience shows that children who repeat a grade
during the ﬁrst few years of school are prone to leave school early.
Based on the deﬁnition used, the PEIC data show that more than
one-half (50.5 percent) of all children in the Region are vulnerable in
one of these respects (15.5 percent of children, for example, repeated
a grade during the ﬁrst 3 years). The dichotomous variable in PEIC for
vulnerable versus not vulnerable thus pertains to about one-half of
the population studied.
Standards for Superior Schooling
For the analysis, standards also were established for each relevant co-
variate in the PEIC study. Table 1 notes the standards for the most im-
portant process variables identiﬁed by Willms and Somers (2000).
Pupils’ Demographic and Early Childhood Characteristics
To gauge the relative importance of the above standards, the princi-
pal covariates in the analysis also were dichotomized. The following
six characteristics were considered as demographic and early child-
hood variables.
Female. Of the children, 50.3 percent were girls and 49.7 percent
were boys.
High Parental Education. Children “at risk” were those whose parents
had 8 years or less of formal schooling. Of all children in the 
Region, 52.3 percent had parents with more than 8 years of
schooling.
Two-Parent Family. Some 80 percent of the children in the Region
lived in two-parent families.
Parents Read Frequently. Some 36.3 percent of all children in the 
Region lived in families where parents reported reading frequently
to their child.
102
J. Douglas Willms

Standards of Care
103
Table 1. Standards for Process Variables and the Percentage of Children in the 
Region Who Attended Schools That Met With the Standard
Percentage of 
children in the 
region who 
attended schools 
that met with 
Process variable
Standard
the standard
Small classes
Enrollments of 25 pupils or less
54.2
Adequate material
More than 6.574 (the Regional mean) instructional 
52.3
resources
materials available in the school. (To determine the mean, 
school principals were asked whether they had certain 
materials from a list of twelve items.)
Adequate library
At least 1,000 books in the school library
32.1
Well-trained 
An average of more than 3.46 years (the Regional mean) 
54.8
teachers
of teacher training for all teachers in the sample
Teachers working 
All teachers in the school work only one job 
52.5
only one job
Single-grade 
No multigrade classrooms in the school
12.6
classrooms
Pupils tested 
All teachers use tests regularly 
17.8
regularly
No ability grouping
No grouping of pupils by ability
38.7
Positive learning 
A learning climate higher than the Regional mean of 
51.3
environment
0.600. [The index comprises the mean of three variables: 
whether some pupils in the classroom disturbed others 
(no=1, yes=0), ﬁghts happened often (no=1, yes=0), 
and pupils in the class were good friends (yes=1, no=0). 
Responses were obtained from pupils’ questionnaires, and 
a composite mean for discipline was aggregated by school.]
Strong parental 
Parental involvement higher than the Regional mean of 
53.8
involvement
2.535. [The index comprises the mean of three variables: 
whether the parent participates in school-related activities 
(seldom=1, sometimes=2, always=3), knows his or her 
child’s teacher (no=1, a little=2, a lot=3), and attends 
parent–teacher meetings (never or seldom=1, almost 
always=2, always=3). Responses were obtained from 
parents, and a composite mean for parental involvement 
was aggregated by school.]

Child Attended Day Care. Some 74 percent of all children in the 
Region attended some form of day care.
Parents Involved in Child’s Schooling. Parents scoring 2.5 or higher on
the parental involvement index were considered involved. Some
60.9 percent of the children in the Region lived in families where
parents were involved in their schooling.
Childhood Vulnerability: Analysis and Findings
Using the established standards and the demographic and early
childhood variables, the relative importance of each factor was as-
sessed in a series of logistic regression models. The process variables
(e.g., attending large classes instead of small classes) are considered
risk factors.
Odds Ratios for Risk Factors
Table 2 presents the odds ratios derived from the logistic regression
coefﬁcients.
Sex and Family Background
This ﬁrst set of variables presented in Table 2 includes sex, single-par-
ent family, and low parental education. The results of the regression
analysis indicate that the odds of being vulnerable for boys was 8 per-
cent higher than for girls. Willms and Somers (2000) found that the
differences associated with gender were relatively small: Girls aver-
aged about 6 points higher on the language test, whereas boys aver-
aged about 2 points higher on the mathematics test; and boys took
slightly longer on average than girls to complete the ﬁrst 3 years of
schooling, but the difference was less than 1 month.
The odds of being vulnerable for a child in a single-parent family
was about 26 percent higher than the odds of being vulnerable in a
two-parent family. And, the most striking effect is associated with
having parents with a low level of education. The odds ratio for this
risk factor is 3.26, indicating that children whose parents had 
104
J. Douglas Willms

primary school education or less were more than three times as like-
ly to be vulnerable as children whose parents had at least some sec-
ondary schooling. This risk factor is by far the most important and
outweighs the effects of gender and family structure.
Sector and Urbanicity
Figures 5–7 demonstrated that a marked “socioeconomic divide” is
associated with school sector (public versus private) and urbanicity
Standards of Care
105
Table 2. Odds Ratios for Childhood Vulnerability Associated With Sex and Family 
Background, Urbanicity (Rural, Urban, Mega-city), Sector (Public, Private), 
Early Child Development, School Resources, and School Policy and Practice
Regression model/coefﬁcient
Variable
I
II
III
IV
V
Sex and family background
Male
1.08
1.08
1.06
1.11
1.10
Single-parent family
1.26
1.27
1.25
1.24
1.26
Low parental education
3.37
2.91
2.58
2.32
2.14
Sector and urbanicity
Rural
2.29
2.48
1.30
1.60
Urban public
1.57
1.76
1.33
1.58
Mega-city public
1.18
1.33
(1.03)
(1.07)
Urban private
2.23
1.31
1.25
1.31
Mega-city private (base)
(1.00)
(1.00)
(1.00)
(1.00)
Early child development
No day care
1.39
1.15
1.11
Infrequently reads to child
1.79
1.60
1.50
Low parental involvement
1.39
1.32
1.16
School resources
Large classes
1.62
1.54
Lacking classroom materials
1.72
1.68
Inadequate library
2.26
2.04
Low teacher training
(1.04)
(.94)
School policy and practice
Teachers working in other jobs
1.16
Multigrade classes
1.39
Infrequent testing
1.14
Ability grouping
(1.06)
Poor classroom climate
1.68
Low parental involvement at school
1.56
( ) Not statistically signiﬁcant.

(rural, urban, mega-city). To relate this ﬁnding to childhood vulner-
ability, the analysis included designation of mega-city private
schools as the baseline category, and odds ratios were determined to
indicate children’s risk associated with the other categories. The re-
sults suggest that the odds of being vulnerable in urban private
schools or mega-city public schools is about 20 percent higher than
in mega-city private schools. This substantial effect is almost as large
as that associated with living in a single-parent family, but it pales in
comparison with the effects associated with attending urban public
or rural schools. Compared with a child in mega-city private
schools, the odds of a child being vulnerable in urban public schools
was more than 1.5 times and, for a child in rural schools, more than
2.25 times.
Notably, the effects associated with low parental education are 
mediated by sector and urbanicity. The odds ratio for a child with
parents having low education decreased from 3.37 to 2.91 if the child
attended a mega-city private school.
Early Child Development
The variables included in this analysis are no attendance at day
care, infrequent parental reading to the child, and low parental in-
volvement. The effects of all three factors are substantial, as indi-
cated by the odds ratios of 1.39, 1.79, and 1.39, respectively. These
effects are evident after controlling for the other variables. Again,
the effects associated with low parental education are further medi-
ated by effective early child development. The odds ratio for low
parental education drops from 2.91 to 2.58 when the children at-
tend day care and are read to by their parents and when their par-
ent is involved in their schooling. These effects are especially strik-
ing because the factors were measured cursorily and do not account
for the amount of time in day care, the quality of day care, or par-
enting style and parental involvement. These more specific vari-
ables would be appropriate to capture and could be obtained in
similar studies.
106
J. Douglas Willms

School Resources
The next set of variables in Table 2 describes school resources. The
only factor that is not statistically signiﬁcant is teacher training. The
other factors have odds ratios ranging from 1.62 to 2.26, which are
surprisingly large, especially because these effects are attributable to
resources after accounting for sex and family background and for sec-
tor and urbanicity. These variables mediated the effects of low
parental education only slightly, from 2.58 to 2.32 for a child in a
school with good resources. However, these variables explained the
effects associated with sector and urbanicity (see “Effects by Sector
and Urbanicity” below).
School Policy and Practice
This set of factors is inﬂuenced more directly by school administra-
tors and teachers than are those pertaining to school resources. The
odds ratio for ability grouping was not statistically signiﬁcant, and
the odds ratios for the other factors ranged from 1.14 to 1.68. The 
effects of a poor classroom climate and low parental involvement at
school are particularly striking, with odds ratios of 1.68 and 1.56, re-
spectively. All the variables in this set further mediated the risk asso-
ciated with low parental education, reducing it to 2.14 for a child in a
school with good policies and practices.
Relative and Attributable Risks
Table 3 displays the relative and attributable risks for the variables as-
sociated with sex and family background and school factors. Four
variables would require large expenditures to improve the school sys-
tem—to reduce class size, obtain more classroom materials, improve
school libraries, and require that teachers be better trained. The rela-
tive risk associated with these variables is 1.50, 1.74, 2.29, and 1.12,
respectively. The data indicate, for example, that children who attend
schools with large classes (i.e., more than 25 pupils) are 1.5 times as
likely to be vulnerable as those who attend schools that meet the
standard. Similarly, children in schools without adequate classroom
Standards of Care
107

materials are 1.74 times as likely to be vulnerable as those who attend
schools with adequate classroom materials.
The attributable risk associated with large classes is 18.7 percent.
This ﬁnding suggests that childhood vulnerability could be reduced
by 18.7 percent if all children could attend small classes. The entire
story, no doubt, is much more complex, for these analyses are based
on simple bivariate cross-tabulations. For example, the most effective
teachers may be in schools with small classes, or the schools with the
most classroom materials may tend to be those with smaller classes.
Simply reducing class size may therefore not achieve the desired
results. Also, the variables, as deﬁned, may be “proxies” for other sig-
niﬁcant variables. For example, having an inadequate school library
has an attributable risk of 46.5 percent. Yet, increasing the size of all
school libraries will most likely not improve school outcomes accord-
108
J. Douglas Willms
Table 3. Relative and Attributable Risks for Childhood Vulnerability Associated 
With Sex and Family Background and School Factors
Relative risk
Attributable risk
Variable
(ratio)
(percent)
Sex and family background
Male
1.05
2.6
Single-parent family
1.10
2.0
Low parental education
1.74
26.1
Early child development
No day care
1.33
7.6
Infrequently reads to child
1.41
20.7
Low parental involvement
1.27
9.5
School resources
Large classes
1.50
18.7
Lacking classroom materials
1.74
26.1
Inadequate library
2.29
46.5
Low teacher training
1.12
5.0
School policy and practice
Teachers working in other jobs
1.23
10.1
Multigrade classes
1.22
2.8
Infrequent testing
1.11
8.6
Ability grouping
1.12
6.8
Poor classroom climate
1.49
19.5
Low parental involvement at school
1.53
20.0

ingly. These results, nevertheless, indicate the relative and absolute
importance of the variables selected.
The relative risks of the six factors pertaining to school policy and
practice range from 1.11–1.12, for ability grouping and lack of test-
ing, to 1.22–1.23, for multigrade classrooms and teachers working in
other jobs, to 1.49–1.53, for poor classroom climate and low parental
involvement at school. The attributable risks for the ﬁrst four factors
listed in the table range from less than 3 percent to slightly more
than 10 percent, but the attributable risks associated with poor class-
room climate and low parental involvement are considerable—about
20 percent.
Also worth noting is that the relative and attributable risks of be-
ing male or living in a single-parent family are very low. The relative
risk of living in a family with parents having a low level of education
is 1.74, and the attributable risk is 26.1 percent. These data suggest
that if all children could live in families with parents educated be-
yond primary schooling, childhood vulnerability could be reduced
by more than 25 percent. Achieving this is, of course, impossible in
the near future. Curiously, however, these relative and attributable
risks are the same as those associated with lack of classroom materi-
als, a factor that is not impossible to correct.
The analysis also indicates that parents’ actions (i.e., what they do)
are extremely important. The relative risk associated with parents
who read infrequently to their child is 1.41, and the risk for low
parental involvement in the child’s education is 1.27. These results
suggest that childhood vulnerability could be reduced by more than
20 percent if all parents read regularly to their child, and by almost
10 percent if all parents were involved in their child’s schooling.
Children who did not attend day care were 1.33 times more likely to
be vulnerable than those who did attend day care, and the attribut-
able risk is quite low—less than 8 percent.
Effects by Sector and Urbanicity
The above analyses provide a framework for assessing the relative im-
portance of the factors by sector and urbanicity. Table 4 presents the
Standards of Care
109

percentages of vulnerable children in each sector and urban category.
Based on the criteria used, 65.2 percent of the children in rural
schools were vulnerable. In the private sector, 29.0 percent were vul-
nerable in mega-city schools and 33.8 percent were vulnerable in ur-
ban schools. In the public (nonrural) sector, 39.9 percent of the chil-
dren were vulnerable in mega-city schools, and 49.6 percent were
vulnerable in urban schools. Similar to the ﬁndings for the entire 
Region, about one-half of all children in urban public schools were
vulnerable.
The major question raised by this analysis is: “How would the sec-
tors differ if all schools achieved the standards for school resources
and school policy and practice?” To answer this question, the odds
ratios were estimated for sector and urbanicity within a logistic re-
gression model. Mega-city private schools served as the base for com-
parison (1.0). The odds ratios for the other schools are greater than
1.0 because children were considered more likely to be vulnerable if
they were in one of these four categories. To assess the effects associ-
ated with the selected risk factors, the odds ratios were adjusted for
family background, early child development, school resources, and
school policy and practice, singly and in combination. Table 4 pre-
sents the results.
Table 4 shows that the odds of a child being vulnerable in a rural
school are more than 4.5 times that in a mega-city private school.
The odds ratios for a child in an urban public school is 2.41; in a
mega-city public school, 1.62; and in an urban private school, 1.25.
Some of the disparities are attributable to a child’s background.
When adjusted for family background and early child development
(FB/ECD), the odds ratios decrease considerably for a child in public
school: from 4.57 to 2.48 in a rural school, 2.41 to 1.76 in an urban
school, and 1.62 to 1.33 in a mega-city school. The odds ratio for a
child in an urban private school increases slightly, from 1.25 to 1.31.
When controlling for school resources (SR) only, the odds ratios
also decrease considerably for a child in public school: from 4.57 to
1.70 in a rural school, 2.41 to 1.54 in an urban school, and 1.62 to
1.11 in a mega-city school. The odds ratio for a child in an urban 
110
J. Douglas Willms

private school remains the same. Comparison of these results with
those for FB/ECD reveals an extremely important ﬁnding: The dis-
parities among sectors and urbanicity are related more strongly to
school resources than to a pupil’s family background and early child
development.
When controlling for school policy and practice (SPP) only, the
odds ratios do not change appreciably by sector or urbanicity. This 
result demonstrates clearly that disparities among sectors and urban-
icity are not attributable to school policy and practice, even though
these factors are extremely important within sectors and rural or 
urban settings.
Even when accounting for family background and early child 
development, these two signiﬁcant ﬁndings hold. Comparison of
FB/ECD only with FB/ECD+SR reveals a large decrease in the odds 
ratios whereas comparison of FB/ECD only with FB/ECD+SPP reveals
small decreases.
When controlling for family background and early child develop-
ment, school resources, and school policy and practice, the odds 
ratios do not change as dramatically as when not controlling for
Standards of Care
111
Table 4. Odds Ratios of Childhood Vulnerability by Sector and Urbanicity, Controlling 
for Family Background, Early Child Development, School Resources, and School 
Policy and Practice
Sector/urbanicity
Public
Private
Odds ratio/variable
Rural
Urban
Mega-City
Urban
Mega-City
Percentage of vulnerable children
65.2
49.6
39.9
33.8
29.0
Unadjusted
4.57
2.41
1.62
1.25
1.00
Adjusted for:
Sex and family background and
early child development (FB/ECD)
2.48
1.76
1.33
1.31
1.00
School resources (SR)
1.70
1.54
1.11
1.26
1.00
School policy and practice (SPP)
4.57
2.66
1.73
1.54
1.00
FB/ECD + SR
1.30
1.33
1.03
1.25
1.00
FB/ECD + SPP
3.16
2.14
1.52
1.52
1.00
FB/ECD, SR, + SPP
1.60
1.58
1.07
1.31
1.00
Note: The baseline for comparison is mega-city private schools.

school policy and practice. This ﬁnding suggests that some of the me-
diating effects of school resources on the differences among sectors
and urbanicity are further mediated by school policy and practice.
That is, maintaining a positive classroom climate and achieving high
parental involvement at school are probably easier when class sizes
are small, for example. In sum, the ﬁndings indicate that both school
resources and school policy and practice are important determinants
of school outcomes, but school resources (not school policy and prac-
tice) distinguish the results for rural schools versus nonrural schools.
Achieving High Standards in Latin America: Current Status
The analyses demonstrate the importance of achieving high stan-
dards for families and schools. Table 5 documents the percentage of
children in each country of the Region who are in families and
schools that meet these standards and the percentage of children who
are not vulnerable (i.e., are above the threshold for vulnerability).
A particularly interesting ﬁnding revealed in the table is that Cuba
scores high on virtually every measure—the exceptions are frequent
testing and no ability grouping. This ﬁnding suggests that Cuba’s
very high test scores are not attributable solely to parents’ higher lev-
el of education, but also are due to factors pertaining to early child
development, school resources, and school policy and practice.
When meeting with members of the Laboratorio, the Minister of Ed-
ucation for Cuba explained Cuba’s remarkable success with school
outcomes by ﬁrst noting not the quality of Cuba’s schools, but the
fact that almost every child attends a center for early child develop-
ment. Other factors, such as high levels of teacher training, were cit-
ed only secondarily.
Next Steps: Strengthening the Basis 
for Monitoring and Reform
The challenges in conducting international comparative studies of
early child development are enormous, and these challenges are 
especially acute in low-income countries. In comparison with other
112
J. Douglas Willms

Standards of Care
113
Table 5. Percentage of Children in Families and Schools That Meet the Standards Selected
Country/percent of children
Variable
AR
BO
BR
CH
CO
CU
HO
ME
PA
RD
VE
All
Family background
Two-parent family
84
83
82
84
74
78
64
89
79
72
70
80
High parental education
59
50
23
67
47
89
18
49
36
44
61
52
Early child development
Day care
87
70
78
70
67
94
59
84
50
67
86
75
Frequently reads to child
37
28
43
40
26
73
30
25
26
38
35
36
High parental involvement
51
48
65
66
69
84
57
53
62
49
70
61
School resources
Small classes
84
80
57
33
36
88
2
—
29
11
27
54
Classroom materials
79
18
71
94
48
69
4
57
13
25
30
52
Adequate library
43
7
56
45
21
76
17
5
12
8
27
32
High teacher training
12
58
48
80
58
73
39
60
11
50
43
55
School policy and practice
Teachers working one job
41
11
73
46
68
99
68
–
78
59
68
52
No multigrade classes
86
83
98
78
68
99
65
93
100
95
98
87
Frequent testing
41
53
31
86
24
39
57
72
27
14
45
46
No ability grouping
30
32
62
11
33
64
52
18
40
53
38
39
Good classroom climate
35
59
52
32
41
97
27
37
37
61
22
51
High parental involvement
29
10
56
73
76
98
32
33
55
26
87
54
Children not vulnerable
66
38
55
71
45
95
25
41
47
26
35
50
AR, Argentina; BO, Bolivia; BR, Brazil; CH, Chile; CO, Colombia; CU, Cuba; HO, Honduras; ME, Mexico; PA, Paraguay; RD, Dominican Republic; VE, R.B. de Venezuela.

national and international studies, PEIC stands out as a remarkable
achievement. The study provides a strong basis for monitoring early
child development. The ﬁndings indicate that one can accurately 
estimate socioeconomic gradients, discern the importance of school
resources, and identify the effect of investments in early childhood
by families and schools. Perhaps more than any other study, PEIC in-
dicates that parents’ and teachers’ actions (i.e., what they do with
their resources) can have an effect comparable to improving the level
of resources. If countries achieved the standards set forth in this
chapter, they would reduce the risk associated with low parental 
education by nearly one-half. Flattening the gradients is possible,
and some countries have already achieved many of the standards
proposed.
The framework for standards of care suggested in this chapter is
founded on several key considerations for low-income countries. For
these countries, the standards must: (a) be based on empirically de-
rived ﬁndings about their effects on measurable outcomes; (b) be
achievable through a coordinated effort by families, schools, and
governments; (c) be inexpensive to measure regularly; and (d) pro-
vide a means for gauging societal improvements over time.
Additional studies in Latin America would beneﬁt by including
many of the measures developed in PEIC and suggested herein. The
information gained from PEIC could be enhanced in several ways, as
suggested below. The ﬁrst suggestion would be costly to implement,
but the others would be relatively inexpensive.
1. Develop a study comparable to PEIC, but with a target popula-
tion of all 5-year-old children. A target population of even
younger children is preferable, but reaching all 5-year-olds may
be a sufﬁcient challenge for the next study. This study would be
conducted in conjunction with a study of all 9-year-old chil-
dren. By repeating the monitoring effort every 4 years, one
could assess the results for the 5-year-old cohort in the same
schools when the majority of children are 9 years old.
114
J. Douglas Willms

2. Give preference to studies focused on age cohorts rather than
grade cohorts. Although more complex administratively, a
study of age cohorts would indicate the progression of children
developmentally in school and control directly for any effects
associated with grade repetition.
3. Track “communities,” however deﬁned. For example, if a study
ﬁrst sampled communities, deﬁned geographically, and then
sampled schools and pupils, outcomes and socioeconomic gradi-
ents for the community could be examined and the stability of
the estimates could be discerned. By using multilevel models that
extend PEIC’s analyses and incorporating time as an element
(Willms and Raudenbush 1989), powerful information could be
obtained about the effects of policies and practices for early
childhood. Changes in intercepts and gradients could be related
to changes in policy and practice within local communities.
4. Integrate geography better into the analyses. In almost all re-
search on schools’ effectiveness, schools are treated as indepen-
dent entities and not in relation to other schools in the commu-
nity. Understanding of the roles of local communities could be
improved dramatically if sufﬁcient geographic data were avail-
able to display ﬁndings on country maps. Importantly, the ef-
fects of particular policies and practices could be documented
“on the ground.”
5. Integrate small-sample, quantitative and qualitative studies of
early child development into large-scale monitoring efforts. For
example, the Willms and Somers (2000) report indicates schools
that are particularly successful or unsuccessful in achieving high
standards, based on the number of pupils and level of resources.
Ethnographic studies are needed to understand why these
schools are successful. Small-scale studies could be piggybacked
onto large-scale studies to determine, for example, the results of
the lowest-performing schools 4 years after a concerted effort is
made to enhance their standards of school policy and practice,
as suggested in PEIC.
Standards of Care
115

Two immediate opportunities for building on PEIC’s ﬁndings are
in Brazil and Pakistan. The World Bank recently contracted to pro-
vide technical assistance to Brazil’s National Institute for Educational
Research (INEP). Brazil already has a sophisticated system for moni-
toring schools, which includes a school census. Under the new con-
tract, researchers could approach analysis of the monitoring data
from a gradient perspective and give greater emphasis to standards of
care, changes in community gradients over time, and geographic
variations. INEP could then exploit historical records of achievement
(e.g., over the past 10 years) to give educators and administrators
ﬁndings based on more than a 1-year snapshot.
The opportunity in Pakistan entails an operational research ap-
proach to studying human development. The Aga Khan University
(AKU) in Pakistan is developing an Institute of Human Development
and has acknowledged the important role that this institute could
play in research and training and in inﬂuencing policy formation in
developing and Muslim countries. This research could demonstrate
the importance of investments in human development in low-in-
come countries. An immediate opportunity is the development of a
study to examine the effects on children’s development (ages 0 to 6)
of a training program to improve parenting skills and increase par-
ents’ engagement in play and other literacy-related activities. This
training program could be delivered through AKU’s network of pri-
mary health care centers. Instruments and data collection procedures
for conducting monitoring on a wide-scale basis for children during
the early years could be developed as part of this research effort.
Conclusion
In recent years, low-income countries have increasingly participated
in large-scale international studies such as the Third International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the IALS, both con-
ducted in 1994. During 2000, several low-income countries partici-
pated in PISA, a study of academic achievement among 15-year-olds
conducted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
116
J. Douglas Willms

Development. This bold and important move by these governments
could yield long-term beneﬁts for their systems of schooling. Too
often, however, the ﬁndings of large-scale studies have little internal
effect. Too much emphasis may be placed on “horse-race” compar-
isons of average levels of achievement among countries, and few re-
sources are usually available for data analyses within countries.
Systems to monitor internal effects are needed. They could provide
information on changes in achievement levels over time, inequities
of achievement between males and females or among pupils of differ-
ent socioeconomic backgrounds, varying achievement levels among
jurisdictions, and the relationship between the quality of schools and
their material and human resources or policies and practices.
The PEIC study has provided invaluable information for analyzing
children’s educational outcomes within and between countries. The
standards of care derived from such analysis provide the basis for in-
vestments to improve children’s school outcomes in Latin America
and to monitor early child development. One of the most prominent
ﬁndings noted in the ﬁrst report on PEIC (UNESCO 1998) was the re-
markable success of Cuba: Its average test scores, for both reading and
mathematics, were about 2 standard deviations above the mean for
the Region. Two other important ﬁndings across the Region and in
most countries were that (a) the average test scores of pupils residing
in mega-cities (having more than 1 million people) were somewhat
higher than those of pupils in smaller cities and markedly higher
than those of rural pupils and (b) pupils in private schools tended to
have higher scores than those in public schools (UNESCO 1998).
The second report (Willms and Somers 2000), on which this
chapter is based, included among the outcomes a measure of the
time needed for pupils to complete the ﬁrst 3 years of primary
schooling. Most Latin American countries still practice grade reten-
tion and, in some cases, pupils may repeat a grade two or three
times before advancing to the next grade. The data show that
achievement test scores and grade repetition were strongly related
to children’s family background, school sector, and extent of urban-
ization. However, even after accounting for the pupils’ family back-
Standards of Care
117

grounds, the schools differed substantially in the academic achieve-
ment of pupils and the time pupils took to complete the ﬁrst 3 years
of primary school. Some, but not all, of this variation was attribut-
able to school resources, especially the availability of classroom in-
structional materials, adequate school library, small classes, and
well-trained teachers.
Further analysis showed that school policies and practices have
substantial effect. Test scores were higher and grade repetition was
less in schools which had teachers who did not hold other jobs, no
multigrade classes, frequent testing of pupils, and no grouping 
of pupils by ability. Two of the most important factors affecting 
outcomes were the learning climate of the classroom and the extent
of parents’ involvement in children’s schooling, at home and at
school.
It is hoped that these ﬁndings will provoke focused discussions
and dialogue about standards of care, as well as targeted investments
to improve children’s educational outcomes in Latin America and
elsewhere. Additional studies that build on the framework suggested
in this chapter would strengthen the basis for monitoring outcomes
and reforms.
Notes
This chapter extends the research for a report entitled Schooling Out-
comes in Latin America, which was prepared by the author and Marie-
Andrée Somers for UNESCO in cooperation with the Laboratorio Lati-
noamericano de Evaluación de la Calidad de la Educación.
Preparation of the report was supported by UNESCO, and this 
chapter, by the World Bank. The research was supported by the 
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, which funds the New
Brunswick/Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (NB/CIBC) Chair
in Human Development at the University of New Brunswick, and by
Human Resources Development Canada, Statistics Canada, and the
U.S. Spencer Foundation. The opinions expressed in this chapter are
solely the author’s.
118
J. Douglas Willms

Standards of Care
119
References
Audas, R., and J.D. Willms. 2000. Engagement and Dropping Out of
School: A Life Course Perspective. Report prepared for Human
Resources Development Canada. Ottawa.
Baron, R.M., and D.A. Kenny. 1986. The Moderator-Mediator
Variable Distinction in Social Psychological Research: Conceptual,
Strategic, and Statistical Considerations. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 51:1173–82.
Boyle, M.H., and J.D. Willms. 1998. Place Effects for Areas Deﬁned
by Administrative Boundaries. American Journal of Epidemiology
149(6):577–85.
Bryk, A.S., V.E. Lee, and J.B. Smith. 1990. High School Organization
and Its Effects on Teachers and Students: An Interpretative
Summary of the Research. In W. H. Clune and J. F. Witte, eds.,
Choice and Control in American Education. Volume 1: The Theory of
Choice and Control in Education. London: Falmer Press.
Coleman, J.S. 1988. Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital.
American Journal of Sociology 94 (supplement):S95–S120.
Dutton, D.B., and S. Levine. 1989. Overview, Methodological
Critique, and Reformulation. In J. P. Bunker, D. S. Gomby, and B.
H. Kehrer, eds., Pathways to Health. Menlo Park, Calif.: Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation.
Epelbaum, M. 1990. Sociomonetary Patterns and Speciﬁcations.
Social Science Research 19:322–47.
Fellegi, I., and M. Wolfson. 1999. Towards Systems of Social
Statistics: Some Principles and Their Application in Statistics
Canada. Journal of Ofﬁcial Statistics 15(3):373–93.
Fuller, B., and P. Clarke. 1994. Raising School Effects While Ignoring
Culture? Local Conditions and the Inﬂuence of Classroom Tools,
Rules, and Pedagogy. Review of Educational Research 64(1):119–157.
Gray, J. 1989. Multilevel Models: Issues and Problems Emerging 
from Their Recent Application in British Studies of School
Effectiveness. In D. R. Bock, ed., Multi-level Analyses of Educational 
Data. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Heyneman, S.P., and W.A. Loxley. 1983. The Effect of Primary-School
Quality on Academic Achievement across Twenty-nine High- and
Low-Income Countries. American Journal of Sociology
88(6):1162–94.
House, J., R. Kessler, R. Herzog, R.P. Mero, A.M. Kinney, and M.J.
Breslow. 1990. Age, Socioeconomic Status, and Health. The
Millbank Quarterly 68:383–411.
Kaplan, G.A., E.R. Pamuk, J.W. Lynch, R.D. Cohen, and J.L. Balfour.
1996. Inequality in Income and Mortality in the United States:
Analysis of Mortality and Potential Pathways. British Medical
Journal 312:999–1003.
Mirowsky, J., and P. Hu. 1996. Physical Impairment and the
Diminishing Effects of Income. Social Forces 74(3):1073–96.
Mueller, C.W., and T.L. Parcel. 1981. Measures of Socioeconomic 
Status: Alternatives and Recommendations. Child Development
52:13–30.
Offord, D.R., H.C. Kraemer, A.E. Kazdin, P.S. Jensen, and R.
Harrington. 1997. Lowering the Burden of Suffering from Child
Psychiatric Disorder: Trade-offs among Clinical, Targeted and Universal
Interventions. Toronto: The Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research.
Raudenbush, S.W., and J.D. Willms, eds. 1991. Schools,Classrooms,
and Pupils: International Studies of Schooling from the Multilevel
Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
Ritzen, J. 2000. Social Cohesion, Public Policy, and Economic Growth:
Implications for OECD Countries. Report prepared for Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development and Human
Resources Development Canada. Ottawa.
Rumberger, R. 1995. Dropping Out of Middle School: A Multilevel
Analysis of Students and Schools. American Educational Research
Journal 32(3):583–625.
Shepard, L.A. 1989. A Review of Research on Kindergarten Retention.
In L.A. Shepard and M.L. Smith, eds., Flunking Grades: Research and
Policies on Retention. London: Falmer Press.
120
J. Douglas Willms

Shepard, L.A., and M.L. Smith. 1989. Flunking Grades: A
Recapitulation. In L.A. Shepard and M.L. Smith, eds., Flunking
Grades: Research and Policies on Retention. London: Falmer Press.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural
Organization). 1998. Primer Estudio Internacional Comparativo.
Santiago, Chile.
UNESCO-OREALC (Regional Ofﬁce for Education in Latin America
and the Caribbean). 1992. Situación Educativa de America Latina y
del Caribe (1980–1989). Santiago, Chile.
Wilkinson, R.G. 1992. Income Distribution and Life Expectancy.
British Medical Journal 304:165–8.
———. 1996. Unhealthy Societies: The Afﬂictions of Inequality. London:
Routledge.
Willms, J.D. 1992. Monitoring School Performance: A Guide for
Educators. Lewes, U.K.: Falmer Press.
———. 1999. Inequalities in Literacy Skills among Youth in Canada and
the United States. International Adult Literacy Survey No. 6.
Ottawa: Human Resources Development Canada and National
Literacy Secretariat.
———. 2000. Three Hypotheses about Community Effects Relevant to the
Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustaining Economic
Growth and Well-being. Report prepared for Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development and Human Resources
Development Canada. Fredericton, N.B.: Canadian Research
Institute for Social Policy, University of New Brunswick.
———. Forthcoming. Vulnerable Children in Canada. Ottawa: Human
Resources Development Canada.
Willms, J.D., and S.W. Raudenbush. 1989. A Longitudinal
Hierarchical Linear Model for Estimating School Effects and Their
Stability. Journal of Educational Measurement 26(3):209–32.
Willms, J.D., and M.-A. Somers. 2000. Schooling Outcomes in Latin
America. Fredericton, N.B.: Canadian Research Institute for Social
Policy, University of New Brunswick.
Standards of Care
121

Wolfson, M., G. Kaplan, J. Lynch, N. Ross, E. Backlund, H. Gravelle,
and R.G. Wilkinson. 1999. Relation between Income Inequality
and Mortality: Empirical Demonstration. British Medical Journal
319:953–57.
Wolfson, M., G. Rowe, J.F. Gentleman, and M. Tomiak. 1993. Career
Earnings and Death: A Longitudinal Analysis of Older Canadian
Men. Journal of Gerontology 48(4):S167–79.
122
J. Douglas Willms

Chapter 5
Ensuring a Fair Start 
for All Children: 
The Case of Brazil
Mary Eming Young
Early childhood is a time of great vulnerability and opportunity.
Rapid and dramatic changes in physical and mental development oc-
cur during the ﬁrst 3 years of human life. These developmental
changes are currently viewed as the principal “building blocks” of
adult cognitive and emotional functioning. Research on the brain
shows that early experiences can shape individuals’ development (see
the chapter by Mustard in this volume) and that early childhood of-
fers a unique opportunity to change the life course of all children
and, especially, those at risk.
Many and various interventions have been undertaken worldwide
to take advantage of this opportunity, for the beneﬁt of children,
families, and society. The interventions focus on children, parents,
and families and often involve entire communities. The early child
development (ECD) programs enhance children’s physical and intel-
lectual growth during their early years through a range of services,
which include childcare, preschool, home visits by trained profes-
sionals, health and nutrition support, and parental education. The
programs may be based in homes or childcare centers.
Evaluation of these programs demonstrates clearly that early child-
hood interventions are effective in improving children’s success in
school and later life, especially for vulnerable, at-risk children who
123

124
Mary Eming Young
live in poverty or in low-income families. These children often are
born with low birthweights—a corollary of poverty and stunted de-
velopment—and often have illiterate parents or mothers with low ed-
ucation. The negative consequences for children of income poverty
have been well documented. They span the life course, from birth
(e.g., low birthweight) through toddlerhood and preschool years
(e.g., poor social and emotional competence, reduced cognitive test
scores) to adolescence (e.g., reduced completion of secondary school
and low literacy, early childbearing). Interventions early in life are
small investments that bring high returns for the physical, mental,
and economic well-being of children and the adults they become.
This chapter addresses the return on investments in early child de-
velopment, especially for poor children. The beneﬁts of preschool in-
terventions for these children are summarized from several well-
known U.S. interventions, and data from Brazil are shared as a case
example of the opportunities available and the possibilities for ensur-
ing a fair start for all children in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Early Interventions for Vulnerable Children: U.S. Findings
For all countries, ECD programs can promote learning readiness, in-
crease school enrollment, reduce grade repetition and drop out from
school, and increase individuals’ future earning capacity. Preschool
education is an important component of early child development
and results in children who are better prepared for primary school,
who perform better in school overall, and who often beneﬁt from im-
proved health and nutrition. The beneﬁts for vulnerable children are
especially large and help redress the inequities of their birth.
Research shows that early interventions particularly improve poor
children’s performance and achievement in primary school (Karoly
and others 1998). Most of the interventions in the United States re-
porting positive results for these children are center-based programs
for children ages 3–5 years (and some for children ages 0–3). Two no-
table U.S. interventions which utilized a quasi-experimental design
and targeted infants and young children beginning at birth are the

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
125
Abecedarian project in North Carolina and the Infant Health and De-
velopment Program at various sites across the country. The outcomes
of these efforts are summarized brieﬂy below.
Other types of early childhood interventions in other countries
have also yielded positive results. Some effective alternatives (e.g., in
Mexico, Turkey) emphasize education and enrichment of parents, es-
pecially mothers. The return on investment can be signiﬁcant, as de-
termined for the Perry Preschool Project, a third successful U.S. inter-
vention for low-income children summarized below.
The Carolina Abecedarian Project
The Carolina Abecedarian project was a single-site, randomized con-
trolled trial that enrolled 111 children at birth who were biologically
healthy but who came from very poor and undereducated families.
The criterion for admission was a score indicating extreme risk on a
thirteen-item high-risk index (Ramey and Ramey 1998). For example,
the mean maternal intelligence quotient (IQ) was 85; the mean 
maternal education was 10 years; and approximately three-fourths of
the mothers were unmarried.
The families of the control group (n=54) received pediatric follow-
up services, unlimited iron-fortiﬁed formula, social work services,
and home visits. The intervention group (n=57) received the same
services as the control group plus an early childhood education pro-
gram, Partners for Learning, which was developed for the interven-
tion and implemented in the participating child development cen-
ters. Partners for Learning is an education program focusing on the
ﬁrst 36 months of life (Sparling, Lewis, and Ramey 1995) and consists
of “games” that are incorporated into a child’s daily activities, which
address social, emotional, and cognitive development and particular-
ly emphasize language. The centers enrolled children after 6 weeks of
age and maintained a low child-to-teacher ratio (3:1 for children age
1 year or less and 4:1 for children ages 1–3 years). Parents received
home visits and attended parent group meetings.
The results have been reported widely (Campbell and Ramey 1994,
1995; Ramey and Ramey 1998; Ramey and others 2000). By 36

126
Mary Eming Young
months, the mean IQ scores were 101 and 84, respectively, for the in-
tervention and control groups. The positive effects of the early inter-
vention were greater for children of lesser-educated mothers than for
those of more-educated mothers.
Upon completion of the intervention at age 5, the children en-
tered primary school. They were studied and tested again at ages 12
and 15, and a follow-up to determine long-term effects was conduct-
ed at age 21. The children who received the early intervention per-
formed better than the control group throughout the 20 years (ﬁgure
1). At age 21, they had higher mental test scores and higher reading
scores, more were still in school (40 percent versus 20 percent), and
more were in college or had graduated from college (35 percent 
versus 14 percent). They were, on average, 2 years older when their
ﬁrst child was born (19.1 years versus 17.1 years), and they had a
higher employment rate (65 percent versus 50 percent).
Infant Health and Development Program
The Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP) was a longitudi-
nal, eight-site, randomized trial of the effectiveness of an ECD pro-
gram and family support services for approximately 1,000 low-birth-
weight, premature infants from birth to age 3 (Berlin and others
Figure 1. Abecedarian Project, Cognitive Test Scores, Ages 6.5–21 Years
Source: Campbell and Pungello (1999), Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill.

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
127
1998). The study is unique in structuring a randomly assigned com-
parison group. Eligible infants for the study had low birthweights
(2,500 grams or less); were premature (37 weeks or less postconcep-
tion); and were born between January 1985 and October 1985 in one
of eight participating medical institutions. The eligible infants were
stratiﬁed into two birthweight groups: lighter (< 2,001 grams) and
heavier (2,001–2,500 grams) and then randomized into an interven-
tion or comparison group. Two-thirds of the sample were in the
lighter group and one-third was in the heavier group. One-third of
the infants within each birthweight group was randomly assigned to
the intervention group, and two-thirds were assigned to the compari-
son group.
Of the 1,302 eligible infants, 985 were randomized and were the
principal sample. This sample came from racially and socioeconomi-
cally diverse families, which included African-American families
(52 percent), European-American families (37 percent), and Hispanic-
American families (11 percent). The families’ incomes varied broadly.
The intervention began immediately after the infants were dis-
charged from the hospital and continued until the children were 3
years old (corrected age). All infants received a pediatric follow-up,
including a medical and developmental assessment, and were re-
ferred for other services as needed. In addition, the intervention
group received (a) home visits on a weekly basis during the ﬁrst year
and then biweekly during the second and third years; (b) out-of-
home education in child development centers beginning at 12
months and provided for 20 hours per week; and (c) parent group
meetings at the child development centers every other month until
the end of the program, to receive childrearing information and 
social support.
The IHDP demonstrated positive outcomes and, as in the Abe-
cedarian project, the children of the poorest and least-educated
mothers gained the most beneﬁt (Berlin and others 1998; Duncan,
Brooks-Gunn, and Klebanov 1994; IHDP 1990; McCarton and others
1997). Compared with the comparison group, the children in the 
intervention group had higher cognitive development scores and 

128
Mary Eming Young
verbal scores at age 24 months and 36 months (ﬁgure 2). The positive
effects were sustained through age 5 and age 8 (follow-ups). The chil-
dren’s socioemotional development also showed positive effects.
They had fewer behavioral problems (based on the Richman-Graham
Behavior Checklist) at ages 24 and 36 months. Mothers reported 
fewer symptoms of depression and were more likely to be employed
by the time their children were 36 months old. During the 3 years of
the intervention, the mothers averaged more months of employment
than the mothers in the comparison group (Berlin and others 1998).
The Perry Preschool Project
The Perry Preschool Project targeted low-income children ages 3–5
years. At initial testing, the children selected ranged from 70 to 85 in
intellectual performance. The sample of 123 children was randomly
assigned to one of two groups: a program group (n=58) enrolled in
the preschool program, or a no-program group (n=65) not enrolled in
Figure 2. Infant Health and Development Program, Cognitive Development Over Time, 
Ages 12–36 Months
Source: Berlin and others (1998).

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
129
preschool. There were no differences in the children’s or parents’ abil-
ities or disposition before the preschool program began. The program
and no-program groups were matched in mean socioeconomic status,
mean intellectual performance, and percentage of girls and boys. The
intervention included a daily 2.5-hour classroom session every week-
day and a weekly 90-minute home visit on weekday afternoons for 30
weeks per school year for 2 years. The teacher:student ratio was 1:6.
At age 27, the students who had attended the program had an em-
ployment rate twice as high, a high school completion rate one-third
higher, 40 percent less crime, and 40 percent less teenage pregnancy
than the students who had been in the no-program group (Schwein-
hart, Barnes, and Weikart 1993). Importantly, the Perry Preschool
Project shows a strong return on investment. The estimated beneﬁt
to cost of this project is US$7 (in savings) to US$1 (cost). This return
is impressive and it highlights the very dramatic differences that can
be made with early interventions for disadvantaged children.
Indeed, much of the literature on international development con-
cludes that a comprehensive program of early childhood services is a
strong weapon against poverty, a builder of human capital, and one
of the best investments a country can make in its overall develop-
ment. Brazil is a case in point.
Brazil: A Case Example
Brazil is the ninth largest economy in the world, with a per capita
gross national product of US$4,720. Although ranked as an upper-
middle-income country, Brazil has a highly inequitable distribution
of wealth resulting in a large gap between rich and poor.
Poverty is associated with poor social indicators, especially for chil-
dren. Currently, in Brazil, 6.3 million children under age 6 are in fam-
ilies living in poverty. Children who are born poor, as correlated with
their mother’s education, have higher mortality rates, lower immu-
nization rates, and higher rates of malnutrition. They also have lower
access to early childhood services. These children tend to do poorly
in school, repeat grades, and eventually drop out of school.

130
Mary Eming Young
In 1998–99, the World Bank undertook a study to review the edu-
cational status of young children in Brazil and the policies and ser-
vices targeted to preschool children. The ﬁndings of this study
(World Bank 2001), summarized below, are important for all coun-
tries and relevant to their ECD efforts.
Early Childhood Services in Brazil
Public services for children younger than age 7 in Brazil consist of
day-care centers (crèches), for children up to age 3, and preschools
(prèescolas), for children ages 4–6. In 1999, the ofﬁcial age for enter-
ing primary school was 7; however, enrollment of 6-year-olds in pri-
mary school is considered optimal.
Since 1996, municipalities have been responsible for providing ele-
mentary and early childhood education, and Brazil’s constitution re-
quires that at least 25 percent of the budget be spent on maintaining
and developing education. Public preschools are generally staffed by
government employees, and they use a predetermined curriculum.
Private institutions (including for-proﬁt, nonproﬁt, and govern-
ment-subsidized organizations) play a substantial role in providing
preschool and day-care services and account for almost 44 percent of
the enrollments in formal programs. To meet the signiﬁcant demand
for preschools and day care, an array of nonformal ECD services are
also offered by community-based, nongovernmental, and religious
organizations in the public and private sectors. These nonformal,
low-cost alternatives to formal public preschools are estimated to
serve more than 1 million children through home visits, day-care
centers, and training and literacy centers.
Preschool Enrollment
In 1997, approximately 27 percent of Brazil’s 22 million children ages
0–6 years were enrolled in day-care and preschool programs. Approx-
imately one-half attended public facilities, and one-half attended pri-
vate facilities.
Data from Brazil’s National Household Survey (IBGE 1997a) show
that children in day care and preschool tend to be older and from

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
131
richer and urban families. Approximately 61 percent of Brazil’s chil-
dren are enrolled in early childhood programs by age 6 (excluding
primary school), compared with about 36 percent at age 4 and 55
percent at age 5. Enrollment for all children younger than age 3 aver-
aged 6–8 percent across Brazil’s regions, and only 1 percent of chil-
dren under age 1 attended day care. Regionally, enrollment was high-
est in the Northeast and Southeast, averaging about 50 percent for
children 4–6 years old. Enrollment in the Midwest, South, and North
and in rural areas everywhere was low in comparison.
Early education in Brazil is clearly an issue of rich versus poor. The
1997 household data show that the average rate of enrollment for
children ages 0–6 in the richest 10 percent of the population is 56
percent, or more than twice the rate (24 percent) for children from
the poorest 40 percent. Also, three-fourths of all preschool children
in Brazil attend urban schools, and more urban than rural children
participate in early education (32 percent versus 21 percent) at ages
0–6. The gap is largest in the Southeast region, followed by the Mid-
west, South, and Northeast.
Expenditures for Early Childhood Education
In 1995, Brazil spent approximately US$1 billion in public funds on
direct expenditures for early childhood education (Barros and Men-
donça 1999; World Bank 2001). The expenditures ranged from
US$37–$55 in the North and Northeast regions per child in preschool
to US$173 in the South, US$324 in the Midwest, and more than
US$660 in the Southeast. The state of São Paulo alone accounted for
75 percent of the nation’s total spending on early childhood services.
Total public spending for preschool in Brazil primarily reﬂects the
ECD budget of a single wealthy state, although almost two-thirds of
the country’s poor live in a region (the Northeast) which, in 1995, re-
ceived only 5 percent of these funds. Clearly, early childhood services
means something far different for children in this region, and other
poor or rural regions, than for children in São Paulo.
Despite its relative wealth, São Paulo also receives a disproportion-
ate share of social assistance for children ages 0–6. The state accounts

132
Mary Eming Young
for only 6 percent of the poor children served by these programs, but
receives almost 14 percent of the nation’s total budget for these pro-
grams. In contrast, a poor state, such as Bahia, which has 17 percent
of the poor children under age 7 served by social assistance programs,
receives only 5 percent of the total budget for these programs (Barros
and Mendonça 1999).
Is Brazil investing its educational resources appropriately and effec-
tively? Three ﬁndings are signiﬁcant (Barros and Mendonça 1999):
• Per-child spending at day-care and preschool levels is lower
than at any other level of education. In 1995, total public ex-
penditure for children ages 0–6 was approximately 17 times
lower per student than the amount spent on tertiary education.
• Municipalities are responsible for about 90 percent of the direct
expenses for preschool and day-care facilities, as well as elemen-
tary education, leaving few resources for ECD services. The ef-
fects are serious. For example, although malnutrition is most
dangerous during early childhood, only 13 percent of the bud-
get for school feeding is targeted to children ages 0–6.
• “Rich” children receive a disproportionate share of public ex-
penditures. All Brazilian children, rich and poor, have the same
constitutionally mandated access to preschool education; how-
ever, most public expenditures are disproportionately concen-
trated on educating nonpoor children.
Beneﬁts and Costs
As part of the assessment of early childhood education in Brazil, the
World Bank and the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, conducted an analysis to evaluate the effect of
preschool education on children’s nutrition, years of schooling, and
future earning capacity, for different age cohorts. The study utilized
data collected in 1996–97 for Brazil’s survey of living standards (IBGE
1997b), which covered about 20,000 citizens between the ages of 25
and 64 in approximately 5,000 households in urban and rural areas

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
133
in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil. The principal ﬁnd-
ings are as follows (Barros and Mendonça 1999):
• Attendance in preschool has a positive and signiﬁcant effect on
the average years of schooling ultimately attained. One addi-
tional year of preschool correlates with about a half-year in-
crease in the schooling ultimately attained, and the gain may be
higher for children of illiterate parents.
• Preschooling also has a positive and statistically signiﬁcant ef-
fect on the probability of completing a certain level of educa-
tion by a speciﬁc age. The rates for grade repetition are reduced
by 3–5 percentage points for each additional year of preschool.
The reduction in grade-repetition rates is especially important
in Brazil, where children average 1.4 years to complete a grade.
Reduced repetition increases the efﬁciency of schooling and de-
creases the costs of schooling.
• Attendance in preschool has both direct and indirect positive
effects on future earnings. For males, 1 year of preschool educa-
tion directly results in a 2–6 percent increase in future earnings.
Future income also is indirectly affected by increases in overall
schooling. In general, 1 year of primary school is estimated to in-
crease future income by approximately 11 percent (Barros and
Mendonça 1999). [The economic literature on education esti-
mates that 1 extra year of primary education increases some-
one’s future productivity by 10–30 percent (van der Gaag and
Tan 1998).] Because one additional year of preschool correlates
with a half-year increase in schooling, it produces an indirect
gain in future income of about 5 percent. The combined direct
and indirect effects of 1 year of preschool are, thus, a minimum
7 percent increase in potential lifetime income—for children
whose parents have only 4 years of education (ﬁgure 3). Impor-
tantly, the gains appear to be higher for children of illiterate
parents. These children could gain a 12 percent increase in fu-
ture earning capacity (ﬁgure 4).

134
Mary Eming Young
This ﬁnding supports claims by other countries that the beneﬁts of
early childhood education are higher for children of low-income
families than for children of middle- or high-income families. In the
Brazil study, preschool education did not appear to signiﬁcantly af-
fect women’s earnings, probably because of their informal participa-
tion in the workforce.
Based on these gains, the beneﬁt:cost ratio of investing in
preschool education is 2:1, demonstrating that each year of preschool
education yields a high return on investment. The beneﬁts outweigh
the costs and compare favorably with most beneﬁt:cost ratios for in-
dustrial and agricultural projects, which are less than 2:1 (van der
Gaag and Tan 1998).
Returns to Investment
If education is considered an investment in human capital, the re-
turns to this investment can be estimated. The beneﬁt-cost analysis
in the Brazil study shows a rate of return on preschool education of
7–12 percent. In other words, for each year of preschool education,
participants can expect a 7–12 percent increase in future income. The
Figure 3. Increase in Future Earning Capacity for Children Whose Parents Have 4 Years of
Education
Source: Derived from Barros and Mendonça (1999).

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
135
rate of return is 1.5 percent higher for the Southeast and tends to be
higher among whites.
Willingness to Pay for Preschool
A calculation of the present value of the income derived from 1 year
of attending preschool was compared with potential income without
attending preschool. The calculation indicates that families would be
willing to pay for preschool, especially those at higher-income levels.
By charging fees for those who can afford to pay them, Brazil, and
other countries, could extend preschool opportunities to more fami-
lies and children at risk, thereby further enhancing the return on in-
vestment.
Policy Implications
The beneﬁt-cost analysis conducted by IPEA and the World Bank sug-
gests that early intervention in the schooling of 4–6 year olds can
make a difference by improving their chances of attaining higher 
levels of education, reducing grade repetition, and earning a higher
income in the future. The main effect of preschool appears to be 
Figure 4. Increase in Future Earning Capacity for Children Whose Parents Are Illiterate
Source: Derived from Barros and Mendonça (1999).

136
Mary Eming Young
better preparedness for further schooling. Investing in good-quality
preschools can be expected to improve attainment and efﬁciency of
higher levels of future schooling. Because public preschools in Brazil
are accessible to both rich and poor, the indication of willingness to
pay is especially important. The beneﬁts of preschool education sub-
stantially outweigh the costs, which suggests that fees could be
charged to families that can afford them. Preschool could then be
subsidized or provided free to poor families that do not have access to
this educational opportunity, but would beneﬁt the most from it.
These ﬁndings are supported by similar studies in Brazil and else-
where. They imply three major policy actions:
1. Strengthen preschool ﬁnancing to increase enrollment and efﬁciency.
The research demonstrates an impressive willingness to pay for
preschooling. The actual fees being charged, however, underval-
ue the true demand. In Brazil’s Northeast, for example, not-so-
poor households are charged only a small fee per year. Institut-
ing a better fee structure would be an important measure for
improving the ﬁnancing of preschools without having to de-
pend on additional budgetary outlays.
2. Increase access to preschool and early childcare for the poorest children.
Increasing access to preschool for these children should be a na-
tional priority in Brazil and elsewhere. Brazil’s guarantee of free
preschool for every child is commendable, but targeting this
commitment to poor children will greatly enhance its effect.
This targeted strategy could be enhanced further by expanding
nonformal programs, as low-cost alternatives to standard public
services, and exploring public-private partnerships in early child
development.
3. Combine preschool with other ECD services and support parents. Com-
bining preschool with other ECD services is recommended.
Children ages 0–3, who are mostly cared for at home, need to be
connected with primary health programs. Parents should be
given information, support, and assistance for their efforts to
provide emotional support and stimulation for their children.

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
137
Brazil is taking major strides to improve its ECD services. The 
National Plan for Education (1998–2008) sets forth ambitious goals
and objectives for day care (ages 0–3) and preschool (ages 4–6) 
(ﬁgure 5).
Day Care (Ages 0–3)
Access Goal:
To expand day-care enrollments to at least a third of children 3 years or younger in the next 10 years.
• Expand the provision of day care at least 5 percent per year.
• Target poor children ﬁrst.
Quality Goal:
To ensure that day-care programs provide a comprehensive package of health, nutrition, and education 
services to children (ages 0 to 3); are in formats ﬂexible enough to meet families’ needs; and have 
higher-quality staff.
[Speciﬁc objectives are set for 1, 2, 5, and 10 years.]
Information, Monitoring, Quality Control Goal:
To set national ECD standards and establish a municipal system for monitoring private, public, and 
community day-care centers.
[Speciﬁc objectives are set for 1, 3, and 5 years.]
Preschool (Ages 4–6)
Access Goal:
To achieve universal preschool enrollment.
In 1 year:
• Expand public preschool enrollments, focusing on poor children, by at least 5 percent per year.
• Replace the classe de alfabetização program for disadvantaged 7-year-olds with preschool for 
children under age 6 and regular primary school for children 7 and older.
In 5 years:
• Set universal preschool enrollment for 6-year-olds as a Basic Education requirement.
In 10 years:
• Increase the enrollment of 4–6 year olds from the current 40 percent to 66 percent.
Quality Goal:
[Speciﬁc objectives are cited for 1, 3, 5, and 10 years to set and enforce national standards for 
preschool infrastructures, educational curricula and services, and professional training.]
Information, Monitoring, Quality Control Goal:
To set national ECD standards for preschools.
[Speciﬁc objectives are set for 1, 3, and 5 years.]
Source: Fujimoto-Gómez (1999).
Figure 5. Brazil’s National Education Plan, 1998–2008: Day Care (Ages 0–3) and Preschool
(Ages 4–6)

138
Mary Eming Young
As elsewhere in the world, such lofty goals must be matched by
commitment to funding. In its overall National Education Plan, Brazil
gives ﬁrst priority to elementary education for children ages 7–14, 
followed by education of adults deprived of basic learning during
childhood, and, then, early childhood services. Brazil’s early child-
hood services program requires adequate public support. Chronic 
underfunding and failure to target available resources to help poor
families continue to undermine the efﬁcacy of these services in Brazil.
The ﬁrst priority for any national ECD plan should be to ensure
that poor children receive ECD services comparable with those pro-
vided for more-fortunate children. Partnering with the private sector
can be an effective way for government to achieve its goals by lever-
aging its resources.
The Advance Brazil (Avança Brazil) Program is an example of the
promise of such public-private partnerships. It is a multiyear plan
(Plano Plurianual, PPA) of all governmental programs. “Atençao à 
Criança” is one of the Advance Brazil programs targeting early child-
hood, ages 0–6.
The “Atenção à Criança” Program
The “Atençao à Criança” Program for 2000–03 includes several
key objectives to overcome poverty and social exclusion. An
early childhood program is part of the framework. Overcoming
poverty and exclusion in Brazil is a challenging task because
Brazil has many inequities resulting from unequal income distri-
bution and a long history of slavery. These inequities are com-
pounded currently by budgetary crises, inability to respond to
increasing social demands, and heightened unemployment and
poverty resulting from globalization.
The “Atençao à Criança” Program is targeting the next decade
as the “Decade for Overcoming Poverty.” The program focuses
on the family, including education of parents. One program, for
children ages 0–6, has a 4-year budget of US$1 billion. The aim
is to integrate all efforts toward the healthy growth and devel-
opment of poor children, especially the poorest of the poor. The

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
139
basic strategy is to provide universal access to prenatal care for
poor women, universal registration (of birth) for all children,
early childhood education (formal and nonformal), and services
to families.
The educational programs include institutionalized day care and
preschools, part- and full-time; noninstitutionalized home day
care and “roving nurseries”; and alternative programs (e.g., by
nongovernmental organizations) offering health, social develop-
ment, education, nutrition, and family support. Services for fam-
ilies include nutritional, social, health, socioeducational, and in-
come-generating support for parents and their children. The
monetary resources for these activities are substantial, but have
previously been provided piecemeal. The “Atençao à Criança”
Program will integrate and direct all the resources for children
who truly need care.
Additional efforts within the program target children ages 7–14,
young adults ages 15–24, senior citizens over age 60, and peo-
ple with disabilities. Schools, families, and communities are fo-
cal points in all these efforts. The strategy for implementing
them involves decentralization, capacity building in the public
sector, monitoring and evaluation, and “driving” for results.
This social agenda is based on the coordination of effort and 
a policy of inclusion. The savings to Brazil are sizeable. A child 
in preschool costs no more than US$100, but a child on the
street costs US$200–$300, and a child in the penal system costs
US$1,000 a month. The expenses of exclusion are high.
Importantly, the “Atençao à Criança” Program includes the 
Minister of Finance and managers and presidents of companies,
which have a stake in investing in children. All expenditures will
be measured to assess them adequately and to understand the
gains that are made through inclusion, not exclusion. Investing
for children is a very positive human and economic strategy,
and the greatest effects are seen among the poor. 
Source: W.E. Aduan, Federal Secretariat for Social Assistance,
Brazil.

140
Mary Eming Young
Conclusion
To achieve greater equality in society, supportive efforts are needed
beginning with children just after birth. Quality interventions from
early infancy are clearly important and their positive effects have
been documented in well-controlled prospective studies and large-
scale retrospective studies, such as the Brazil study highlighted in this
chapter. Early childhood interventions signiﬁcantly improve the edu-
cational attainment and success of poor children as they develop and
mature. The needs are clear. Appropriate and cost-effective interven-
tions are available. Governments can make a commitment to early
child development and can coordinate targeted efforts to reach the
poorest families and children. The opportunities are many for provid-
ing children early learning experiences that will increase their
chances for later success and their society’s overall productivity.
Note
The data presented in this chapter are derived from three documents:
Brazil, Early Childhood Development: A Focus on the Impact of Preschools
(World Bank 2001); “Costs and Beneﬁts of Pre-School Education in
Brazil,” by R. Paes de Barros and R. Mendonça, Institute of Applied
Economic Research, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, November 1999; and
“Boosting Poor Children’s Chances,” by Gaby Fujimoto-Gómez, Or-
ganization of American States, November 1999. The description of
the Atenção à Criança Program is based on a presentation at the World
Bank Conference on Investing in Our Children’s Future, April 10–11,
2000, Washington, D.C., by Wanda Engel Aduan, Director, Federal
Secretariat for Social Assistance and State Secretary for Social Assis-
tance, Brazil.
References
Barros, R.P. de, and R. Mendonça. 1999. Costs and Beneﬁts of Pre-
school Education in Brazil. Background study commissioned to

Ensuring a Fair Start for All Children: The Case of Brazil
141
IPEA by the World Bank. Rio de Janeiro, Institute of Applied
Economic Research.
Berlin, L.J., J. Brooks-Gunn, C. McCarton, and M.C. McCormick.
1998. The Effectiveness of Early Intervention: Examining Risk
Factors and Pathways to Enhanced Development. Preventive
Medicine 27:238–45.
Campbell, F.A., and E.P. Pungello. 1999. The Carolina Abecedarian
Project. Website presentation on Long-Term Beneﬁts of Intensive
Early Education for Impoverished Children. Chapel Hill, N.C.:
University of North Carolina, Frank Porter Graham Child
Development Center. [www.fpg.unc.edu/~abc]
Campbell, F.A., and C.T. Ramey. 1994. Effects of Early Intervention
on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-up Study of
Children from Low-Income Families. Child Development
65:684–98.
———. 1995. Cognitive and School Outcomes for High-Risk African-
American Students at Middle Adolescence: Positive Effects of Early
Intervention. American Educational Research Journal 32:743–72.
Duncan, G.J., J. Brooks-Gunn, and P.K. Klebanov. 1994. Economic
Deprivation and Early Childhood Development. Child
Development 65:296–318.
Fujimoto-Gómez, G. 1999. Boosting Poor Children’s Chances.
Background report commissioned to the Organization of
American States. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, Human and
Social Development Sector.
IBGE (Instituto Brasileiro de Geograﬁa e Estatística) [Brazilian
Statistical Institute]. 1997a. Pesquisa National por Amostra de
Domicílios (PNAD) [National Household Survey]. Rio de Janeiro.
———. 1997b. Pesquisa de Padrões de Vida (PPV) [Living Standard
Measurement Survey]. Rio de Janeiro.
IHDP (Infant Health and Development Program). 1990. Enhancing
the Outcomes of Low-Birthweight, Premature Infants. Journal of
the American Medical Association 263(22):3035–42.
Karoly, L., P.W. Greenwood, S.S. Everingham, J. Houbé, M.R. Kilburn,
C.P. Rydell, M. Sanders, and J. Chiesa, eds. 1998. Investing in Our

142
Mary Eming Young
Children: What We Know and Don’t Know About the Costs and
Beneﬁts of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica,
Calif.:RAND.
McCarton, C.M., J. Brooks-Gunn, I.F. Wallace, C.R. Bauer, F.C.
Bennett, J.C. Bernbaum, R.S. Broyles, P.H. Casey, M.C.
McCormick, D.T. Scott, J. Tyson, J. Tonascia, and C.L. Meinert.
1997. Results at Age 8 Years of Early Intervention for Low-Birth-
Weight Premature Infants: The Infant Health and Development
Program. Journal of the American Medical Association
277(2):126–32.
Ramey, C.T., F.A. Campbell, M. Burchinal, M.L. Skinner, D.M.
Gardner, and S.L. Ramey. 2000. Persistent Effects of Early
Childhood Education on High-Risk Children and Their Mothers.
Applied Developmental Science 4 (1):2–14.
Ramey, C.T., and S.L. Ramey. 1998. Prevention of Intellectual
Disabilities: Early Intervention to Improve Cognitive
Development. Preventive Medicine 27:224–32.
Schweinhart, L.J., H. Barnes, and D. Weikart. 1993. Signiﬁcant
Beneﬁts: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27.
Monograph of the High/Scope Educational Research Foundation.
No. 10. Ypsilanti, Mich.: High/Scope Educational Research
Foundation.
Sparling, J., I. Lewis, and C.T. Ramey. 1995. Partners for Learning:
Birth to 36 Months. Lewisville, N.C.: Kaplan Press.
van der Gaag, J., and J.P. Tan. 1998. The Beneﬁts of Early Child
Development Programs: An Economic Analysis. Washington, D.C.:
World Bank, Human Development Network.
World Bank. 2001. Brazil, Early Child Development: A Focus on the
Impact of Preschools. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, Human
Development Network.

Part III
Evaluating the Effectiveness 
of Early Childhood Programs


145
Chapter 6
Investing in Effective 
Childcare and Education: 
Lessons from Research
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Childcare is becoming increasingly important in the United States
and around the world as more and more parents are working and
need care for their children. In addition, societies are increasingly in-
terested in providing educational experiences and stimulation for all
children to improve their chances of doing well in school and life.
Often these experiences are provided in full-day settings referred to as
childcare or in part-day programs such as preschool or prekinder-
garten. As more children are placed in these childcare and education
settings, understanding how the children are faring has become criti-
cally important. Children’s safety is only one issue; other concerns re-
late to children’s learning and development—while they are safe and
free from danger.
This chapter addresses four topics: the ingredients of quality child-
care and education, the supports needed to achieve quality, relation-
ships between quality and children’s development and well-being,
and investments to enhance children’s development. The research
and ﬁndings on these topics are described separately. Most of the re-
search reviewed has been conducted in the United States, but the
lessons learned may be relevant and pertinent to early child develop-
ment (ECD) programs worldwide. Additional research is needed to

146
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
appreciate the applicability of the ﬁndings in other national contexts
and with differing levels of resources.
Ingredients of Quality Childcare and Education
The Research
Early research in childcare and the literature on preschool interven-
tions provide a backdrop for understanding more recent studies of
quality childcare and education. Quality is a concept typically used
to describe features of program environments and children’s experi-
ences in these environments that are presumed to be beneﬁcial to the
children’s well-being based on research and practice. Researchers
have described empirical associations between features of childcare
environments and aspects of children’s growth and development.
The wisdom of practice has been captured by the National Associa-
tion for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) in its descriptions
of “developmentally appropriate practice” (Bredekamp 1987; NAEYC
1996). A number of authors have attempted to deﬁne and measure
quality childcare (Ferrar 1996; Ferrar, Harms, and Cryer 1996; Ferrar,
McGinnis, and Sprachman 1992; Harms 1992; Howes 1992; Layzer,
Goodson, and Moss 1993; Love, Ryer, and Faddis 1992; Phillips 1987;
Phillips and Howes 1987).
Two common features recur in these conceptualizations: a distinc-
tion between the dynamic (interactional) and static (structural) fea-
tures of a classroom, and an acknowledgment that the larger program
context (outside the classroom) is an important determinant of the
quality of children’s classroom experiences. Researchers have exam-
ined the variables representing both the classroom environment and
the larger program context. A review of this research suggests that
much progress has been made since Lamb and Sternberg (1990) con-
cluded that early research on childcare focused too much “on the ef-
fects of daycare per se instead of recognizing that daycare has a myri-
ad of incarnations and must always be viewed in the context of other
events and experiences in the children’s lives.”

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
147
In the past 5 to 10 years, researchers have recognized the “myriad
incarnations” of childcare by deﬁning and measuring many quality
variables, although they have not been as successful in understand-
ing contextual variables. Tables 1 and 2 present an overview of stud-
ies that have measured variations in childcare quality and outcomes
for children in center-based childcare (table 1) and in family child-
care (table 2).
The Findings
Researchers deﬁne the quality of early childcare and education in
many ways, yet all the deﬁnitions reﬂect two main dimensions, or
types of ingredients that correspond to the conceptual features just
described: (a) the structure of a program or classroom (i.e., the basic
setup that does not change much from hour to hour or day to day),
and (b) the dynamics of the program or classroom (i.e., the behavior
and interactions of the adults and children which change constantly
and are interdependent).
Classroom structure includes factors such as the size of the group
and the ratio of number of children to adults, as well as the composi-
tion of the group and safety factors. A classroom of twenty children
and two adults has a group size of twenty and a ratio of 10 to 1. This
structure is different from a classroom that has thirty children and
two adults. Different numbers of children at different ages also alters
the composition: A classroom of twenty 4-year-olds presents a differ-
ent environment than one with ten 4-year-olds, ﬁve 3-year-olds, and
ﬁve 2-year-olds. Classroom structure also includes the physical envi-
ronment, which should be arranged to assure the safety of children,
with electrical outlets covered, cleaning supplies locked up out of
reach of children, and facilities for adults to wash after diapering or
toileting. Staff characteristics, including education and training, as
well as the program director or supervisor and the support she or he
provides, are also part of the structure.
Classroom dynamics includes four components: teacher’s behavior,
children’s behavior, teacher–child interactions, and the stability and
continuity of interactions. A teacher’s behavior may be positive and/or

148
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
negative. Positive behaviors include attentiveness, encouragement, en-
gagement, sensitivity to children, and responsiveness to children’s
changing needs. Negative behaviors include harshness and detach-
ment. Other behaviors may occur, but these particularly positive and
negative behaviors are especially important for children, as shown by
research, and they can be measured by observation and recording.
With respect to children’s behavior, one might ask, “What are the
indicators of quality? Aren’t children just responding to the quality
in the center or the home?” Of course, what children do while they
are in a childcare setting at home or in a center is a good indicator of
the quality of the environment. For example, a child’s crying may in-
dicate hunger or a wet diaper or a teacher speaking harshly to, or ig-
noring, the child.
Teacher–child interactions are a special dimension for considera-
tion. Recognition of these interactions acknowledges that adults’ 
behaviors affect children and often are a response to children’s behav-
iors. In a quality childcare environment, teachers respond to chil-
dren when the children talk and do things. Giving children interest-
ing toys for play is not sufﬁcient if a teacher does not respond when
a child asks, “What is this?,” or if a teacher does not offer encourage-
ment when a child builds a tower of blocks.
Stability and continuity also are critical elements of classroom dy-
namics. Children need caregivers who are constant in their lives, and
teachers need to be consistent in the ways they respond to children.
In sum, the important ingredients of quality childcare and educa-
tion are:
• Classroom (and program) structure
– Appropriate and effective group size, child–staff ratio, com-
position, safety
– Supportive administration and services
– Staff characteristics
• Classroom dynamics
– Positive teacher behaviors (e.g., attentiveness, encourage-
ment, engagement, sensitivity, responsiveness)

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
149
– Positive child behaviors (e.g., interaction with materials, 
cooperation, joy)
– Effective teacher–child interactions (e.g., teacher responsive-
ness, verbal interaction)
– Stability and continuity.
Supports Needed to Achieve Quality
The Research
Research emphasizes the importance of childcare staff as supports for
achieving quality outcomes. These studies record a variety of staff
characteristics in relation to children’s outcomes. The variables in-
clude staff’s level of formal education (Howes, Smith, and Galinsky
1995; Ruopp and others 1979); extent of experience in childcare
(Kontos 1994; Ruopp and others 1979); specialized training in early
childhood education and other certiﬁcates or credentials (Howes,
Smith, and Galinsky 1995; Galinsky, Howes, and Kontos 1995);
turnover and changes among teachers (Howes and Hamilton 1993);
and experience of the center’s director (Phillips, McCartney, and Scarr
1987).
Compared with research on the ingredients of quality, this re-
search has been much less thorough and systematic in acknowl-
edging that children’s childcare experience occurs in the context of
other events and experiences in their lives. Some studies include such
variables in their analyses, as Belsky (1990) notes, but the research
overall does not yet yield ﬁrm conclusions about the effects of child-
care quality when controlling for other factors.
Some studies have examined variables describing child and family
characteristics, such as family income (Studer 1992), mother’s educa-
tion (Kontos 1991, 1994), mother’s employment (Kontos and others
1995), family structure (Kontos 1991; Schliecker, White, and Jacobs
1991), family socioeconomic status (Schliecker, White, and Jacobs
1991), child’s membership in a racial or ethnic group (Helburn and
others 1995), child’s age when initially enrolled in out-of-home care

150
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
(Howes 1990; Kontos 1991), child’s gender (Howes 1988; Howes and
Olenik 1986; Howes and Stewart 1987), duration of child’s day-care
experience (Field 1991; Kontos 1991), child’s temperament (Hestenes,
Kontos, and Bryan 1993), family social support (Howes and Stewart
1987; Lamb and others 1988), and family stress (Howes and Stewart
1987). These variables reﬂect the major advances that have been
made in the richness of childcare research during the past decade, but
additional, systematic research is needed to relate these variables to
children’s childcare experiences.
The Findings
The research ﬁndings pertaining to staff characteristics point to eight
factors that support quality childcare programs. These ingredients
are:
• Teacher education, especially specialized training in early child-
hood
• Inservice training beyond formal education
• Teacher experience with children
• Continuity of teaching staff—low turnover among the teaching
staff
• Adequate staff compensation—wages that allow staff to be com-
fortable in their jobs and not worry about better-paying oppor-
tunities elsewhere
• A center director with experience and training who can super-
vise and support staff
• Community partnerships—linkages with other agencies that
can provide health services and other supports
• Safe and appropriate physical space.
Relationship Between Quality and Children’s Development
and Well-Being
The relationship between childcare quality and children’s develop-
ment and well-being has been assessed in studies conducted in child-

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
151
care centers and in family childcare settings. The ﬁndings indicate di-
mensions of quality related to positive childcare outcomes, outcomes
associated with higher quality, and factors modifying the relation-
ship between childcare quality and outcomes. Research on preschool
interventions supports these ﬁndings.
Center-based Childcare: The Research
The twenty-eight studies listed in table 1 demonstrate associations
between various measures of childcare-center quality and one or
more child outcome measures. Synthesizing the ﬁndings of these
studies is complicated, however, because the studies differ in (a) de-
sign (contemporaneous, longitudinal, and pre-post); (b) age of chil-
dren (infant-toddler, preschool) during assessment and follow-up; (c)
measures of childcare quality; (d) demographics of the sample; and
(e) outcomes measured. In the table, the studies are grouped by type
of design and listed alphabetically by author. The ﬁrst nineteen stud-
ies used one-time, nonexperimental, contemporaneous designs. The
next seven studies used longitudinal designs, most with a one-time
follow-up assessment. The last two studies used pre-post designs, 
assessing the program quality and child outcomes at the beginning
and the end of speciﬁed periods.
Center-based Childcare: The Findings
Dimensions of Quality Linked With Positive Outcomes
As suggested earlier, the ingredients of quality childcare typically are
categorized into structural features, classroom dynamics, and staff
characteristics. Hundreds of variables have been studied to elucidate
these ingredients of quality.
The most commonly measured structural variable is child–staff ra-
tio. Considerable evidence shows that lower ratios (that is, fewer chil-
dren per adult) are associated with a wide range of positive develop-
mental indicators. The research also suggests that such structural
features are associated with children’s well-being because they can
provide the conditions that make possible more positive classroom
dynamics. The National Day Care Study (Ruopp and others 1979)

152
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
shows that children’s social and cognitive development is enhanced
in classrooms with a lower child–staff ratio and smaller group size.
The Florida Child Care Quality Improvement Study (Howes, Smith,
and Galinsky 1995) shows many signiﬁcant improvements in chil-
dren’s intellectual and emotional development after Florida institut-
ed stricter requirements for ratios in infant and toddler centers.
When the ratio was more favorable, children engaged in more cogni-
tively complex play with objects; showed higher levels of linguistic
narrative and discourse skills; were more securely attached to their
teachers; and showed less evidence of aggression, anxiety, and hyper-
activity. Improved ratios resulted in signiﬁcant changes in the pro-
gram environments. Teachers became more warm, sensitive, and nur-
turing; showed greater responsiveness and encouragement; and were
less negative in their disciplinary techniques.
Many studies using contemporaneous designs have shown strong
correlations between structural measures (such as ratio) and program
dynamics. When classrooms have lower ratios, the amount of adult
interaction with children is greater (Layzer, Goodson, and Moss
1993), and teachers and children interact in more beneﬁcial ways
(Whitebook, Howes, and Phillips 1989). When classrooms score high-
er on structural dimensions such as safety and health, they are also
rated as more developmentally appropriate (Love, Ryer, and Faddis
1992).
The Florida study is especially useful in helping to disentangle the
effects of different dimensions of quality. By using a pre-post design,
Howes, Smith, and Galinsky (1995) demonstrate that changing one
structural variable—which is readily regulatable—leads to inter-
twined effects: overall (global) quality improves, teacher–child inter-
actions improve, and children’s well-being is enhanced along a num-
ber of dimensions. Howes and colleagues also note that the largest
increases in some outcomes occur when classrooms add teachers with
higher credentials and improve their child–staff ratios.
Other studies support the conclusion that ratio, in and of itself, is
not the most important determinant of children’s well-being. Dunn
(1993) ﬁnds no signiﬁcant relationship between ratio or group size

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
153
and children’s social and cognitive development. Using an experi-
mental pre-post design, Love, Ryer, and Faddis (1992) ﬁnd that
changing ratios to less favorable conditions in California childcare
centers does not signiﬁcantly affect dynamic quality measures or se-
lected aspects of children’s behavior in the classroom.
Many studies have investigated the inﬂuence of a teacher’s (or,
more generally, caregiver’s) qualiﬁcations on other indicators of pro-
gram quality and child outcomes. The National Child Care Stafﬁng
Study (Whitebook, Howes, and Phillips 1989), the largest study to 
focus on staff characteristics, yields three pertinent conclusions: 
(a) teachers tend to provide higher-quality care and services to chil-
dren, as measured through “appropriate and sensitive caregiving,”
when they have had more formal education, more early childhood
training at the college level, and earn higher wages and beneﬁts; (b)
children are more competent in social and language development
when they attend centers with lower staff turnover; and (c) higher-
quality centers have higher staff wages, a better adult work environ-
ment, lower teacher turnover, and a more highly educated and
trained staff.
In summary, studies are showing important relationships between
a number of the dynamic variables describing childcare-center quali-
ty and measures of children’s development or well-being. Variables
such as appropriate caregiving, developmentally appropriate prac-
tices, and caregiver responsiveness describe caregiver–child interac-
tions and the social environment in ways that directly affect chil-
dren’s daily experiences. A number of studies have failed to show
strong relationships between structural features of a program or class-
room. Those that do (e.g., the Florida study) demonstrate that struc-
tural/regulatable features do not operate in isolation but imply (and
perhaps cause) positive changes in the classroom dynamics. Structur-
al features seem to “set the stage,” or provide the necessary condi-
tions, for positive dynamics to occur. By themselves, variables such as
lower ratios, smaller group sizes, and safer physical equipment and
space do not improve language development or enhance the cogni-
tive complexity of children’s play. Nevertheless, they may be 

154
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
extremely important as conditions that permit caregivers to be more
responsive and to create developmentally appropriate experiences for
children.
Outcomes Associated With Higher Quality
Although most studies have focused on associations between quality
measures and children’s socioeconomic behavior and development,
some studies have also measured children’s cognitive development,
particularly language development. A few longitudinal studies have
assessed children’s academic performance following their childcare
experience. All of this research suggests that children are socially,
emotionally, and cognitively better off when enrolled in higher-qual-
ity childcare centers.
When the quality of childcare is higher, peer interactions (includ-
ing associative-cooperative levels of play) are “more optimal” (Field
1980); social development (including considerateness and sociability)
is more positive (McCartney and others 1985; Phillips, McCartney,
and Scarr 1987); affect is more positive (Howes 1990); and social skills
(such as creativity, independence, extroversion, and interest in inter-
acting with other children) are more advanced (Cost, Quality, and
Child Outcomes Study Team 1995). Also, the complexity of play be-
haviors with peers relates positively to indicators of quality (Dunn
1993; File and Kontos 1993; Howes, Smith, and Galinsky 1995), and
higher levels of social problem-solving skills are apparent in higher-
quality centers (Holloway and Reichart-Erickson 1988).
When enrolled in higher-quality classrooms, children exhibit few-
er or less serious behavior problems (Howes, Smith, and Galinsky
1995; Kontos 1991; Love, Ryer, and Faddis 1992) and better social ad-
justment, including less socially deviant behavior (Dunn 1993; Kon-
tos 1991). Children also comply more with, and are less resistant to,
adult requests (Howes and Olenick 1986; Peterson and Peterson
1986); are more cooperative, responsive, and innovative (Ruopp and
others 1979); are more securely attached to their teachers (Howes,
Phillips, and Whitebook 1992); and are both adult- and peer-oriented
(Howes, Phillips, and Whitebook 1992).

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
155
Studies also have demonstrated the negative social manifestations
associated with lower levels of quality. For example, lower quality
childcare is associated with children’s greater solitary play and aim-
less wandering (Vandell and Powers 1983); uninvolvement in class-
room activities (Love, Ryer, and Faddis 1992); more intense “negative
affects,” such as frowning and crying accompanied by vocalizations
and body movements (Hestenes, Kontos, and Bryan 1993); and less
sustained verbal interactions (Peterson and Peterson 1986).
Self-control, or the self-regulation of behavior, is considered an im-
portant precursor to a successful school experience. The few studies
that have measured this outcome show positive associations with
program quality. For example, Howes and Olenick (1986) ﬁnd that
children in high-quality centers have higher levels of self-regulation
than children in low-quality centers. Task orientation (another be-
havioral characteristic valued by elementary schools) also is greater
among children attending higher-quality centers (McCarthy and oth-
ers 1985; Phillips, McCartney, and Scarr 1987).
In addition, several studies show positive associations between re-
ceptive language and center quality (Cost, Quality, and Child Out-
comes Study Team 1995; McCartney and others 1985; Schliecker,
White, and Jacobs 1991; Studer 1992). Others show that children in
higher-quality care settings perform better on tests of premath skills,
such as counting and making comparisons (Cost, Quality, and Child
Outcomes Study Team 1995) and verbal intelligence (McCartney
1984). At younger ages, children in settings with less verbal commu-
nication and less adult responsiveness show lower levels of language
development (Melhuish and others 1990a).
Longitudinal studies following children into kindergarten, ﬁrst
grade, and beyond show that children from higher-quality childcare
centers are less distractible, more task-oriented, and more considerate
(Howes 1988, for kindergarten); have fewer behavioral problems
(Howes 1988, for ﬁrst grade); and are happier, less shy, and more so-
cially competent and have friendlier interactions with peers (Vandell,
Henderson, and Wilson 1988, for age 8). Studies following children
in the preschool years, after their participation in center-based care as

156
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
infants, show enduring associations with indicators of quality such as
more positive and gregarious behavior with peers and less social
withdrawal and aggression (Howes and Hamilton 1993) and greater
personal maturity and social skills with peers and adults (Lamb and
others 1988). Children who attended higher-quality childcare pro-
grams make better academic progress and are rated higher on school-
related skills, such as class participation, in the ﬁrst grade (Howes
1988) and, by the sixth grade, are assigned to a gifted program at a
higher rate (Field 1991) and receive higher math grades (Field 1991).
Factors Modifying the Relationship Between Childcare Quality and Outcomes
Researchers are increasingly recognizing the importance of control-
ling for child and family background variables when analyzing rela-
tionships between quality indicators and child outcome measures
(Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes Study Team 1995; Phillips, Mc-
Cartney, and Scarr 1987). The research in this area has not been sufﬁ-
ciently systematic to make broad generalizations about these interac-
tions, and the ﬁndings may differ between settings because the
studies focused on different factors, measures, and contexts. The di-
vergent analysis strategies used (some inappropriately) further com-
plicate generalizations across studies.
Several studies have examined differential effects depending on
the age when children enter childcare. Howes (1990), for example,
ﬁnds that teachers’ socialization practices better predict children’s
outcomes when children enrolled as infants, but that families’ social-
ization practices best predict outcomes for children who enrolled as
toddlers. Kontos (1991), however, who studied 3–5 year olds, ﬁnds no
differential effects.
Other studies have attempted to determine whether quality indi-
cators operate differently for girls and boys. Howes and Olenick
(1986) ﬁnd different patterns of relationships among childcare, fami-
ly, and child and parent behaviors. In particular, childcare quality
predicts self-regulation and task persistence in toddler boys but not in
girls, leading the authors to conclude that boys are more sensitive to
the quality of care. Howes (1988) analyzed the combined effects of

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
157
high quality and stable arrangements separately for boys and girls in
the ﬁrst grade and ﬁnds that academic skills are predicted by stability
alone for girls, but that both stability and high quality predict acade-
mic skills for boys.
Family-based Childcare: The Research
Less research has focused on family-based childcare than on center-
based care. The research on family-based care shows extremely wide
differences in deﬁnitions and measurements of quality, geographic
settings, and families’ socioeconomic status and racial and ethnic
compositions. Because family childcare more commonly serves in-
fants and toddlers, the variation in ages is less than in center-based
studies. Table 2 summarizes data from eight studies conducted be-
tween 1981 and 1995. A multisite study, Quality in Family Child
Care and Relative Care (Galinsky and others 1994; Kontos and oth-
ers 1995), has contributed signiﬁcantly to the understanding of the
relationship between the quality of family childcare and children’s
development.
Family-based Childcare: The Findings
Dimensions of Quality Linked With Positive Outcomes
Important elements of quality associated with positive outcomes in
family childcare include global quality (Goelman and Pence 1988;
Howes and Stewart 1987; Kontos 1994; Kontos and others 1995);
stability of care (Howes and Stewart 1987); caregiver’s training
(Galinsky, Howes, and Kontos 1995); provider intentionality or pro-
fessionalism and commitment to children (Kontos and others
1995); caregiver’s behaviors and characteristics, such as sensitivity
and responsiveness (Kontos and others 1995); and structural fea-
tures such as group size (Howes and Rubenstein 1981; Kontos and
others 1995). “Intentionality,” identiﬁed by Kontos and others
(1995), has not previously been articulated, but may be a key indica-
tor of quality in family childcare (and perhaps center-based care).
Kontos and colleagues argue that providers will give better-quality
care if they are professionally prepared, seek opportunities to learn

158
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
about childcare and child development, actively plan for children’s
experiences, and are actively involved in networks of other family
childcare providers.
The Quality in Family Child Care and Relative Care study identi-
ﬁes the relationship between providers and parents as potentially
crucial. Relatives are often assumed to be in the best position to pro-
vide needed childcare. However, in the study by Kontos and others
(1995), the care provided by relatives (usually grandparents) was
more likely to be rated as inadequate and the relatives were less sen-
sitive and responsive in interacting with the target child. The au-
thors note that, “when adults care for children under less than ideal
circumstances (poverty, social isolation, not their chosen profession),
the children are less likely to get the warmth and attention that par-
ents rate as important attributes of quality childcare” (Kontos and
others 1995, pp. 204–05).
Outcomes Associated With Higher Quality
As with the center-based studies, the outcomes measured in family
daycare include cognitive and socioemotional development and focus
especially on child–caregiver attachment. Goodman and Andrews
(1981) ﬁnd that adding a home-teaching educational program of 2 to
4 hours per week in a family day-care setting signiﬁcantly improves
children’s receptive language, readiness skills, and basic concepts.
Howes and Stewart (1987) show the importance of childcare quality
on children’s level of play with peers and objects, and Kontos and oth-
ers (1995) measure children’s object play as a reﬂection of their level
of cognitive development. Children in regulated care were more fre-
quently engaged in high-level object play than were children in care
provided by relatives. Other studies show that higher-quality care re-
sults in improved development of social skills and personal maturity
(Lamb and others 1988), less aimless wandering and more involve-
ment in activities (Galinsky, Howes, and Kontos 1995), more vocaliza-
tions to peers (Howes and Rubenstein 1981), and enhanced sociability
(Kontos 1994). Kontos and colleagues (1995) ﬁnd few behavior prob-
lems in children in childcare provided by families and relatives.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
159
The strength of a child’s attachment with a caregiver has been an
important outcome in studies of infants and toddlers. The security
and trust that accompany secure attachments enable children to use
available resources and materials better. Studies show a greater securi-
ty of attachment when caregivers are sensitive and responsive (Kon-
tos and others 1995) and when they have received specialized train-
ing (Galinsky, Howes, and Kontos 1995). The Quality in Family Child
Care and Relative Care study shows no differences in security scores
across different types of providers (Kontos and others 1995). Prelimi-
nary ﬁndings from another multisite childcare study (NICHD Early
Child Care Research Network 1996) suggest that secure infant–moth-
er attachment (at 15 months of age) results from a complex interac-
tion of quality of childcare and quality of mother–infant interactions
at home. A preliminary report of this study indicates that attachment
may be adversely affected by poor-quality childcare (i.e., where care-
givers are inattentive).
Research on language development shows that children beneﬁt
particularly in improved receptive vocabulary. Goelman and Pence
(1987, 1988) and Goodman and Andrews (1981) ﬁnd higher levels of
language development among children attending higher-quality
family childcare. However, Kontos and colleagues (1995) ﬁnd that
structural and process variables do not predict communicative com-
petence (adaptive language); however, ratings by the providers may
not have been a reliable method for assessing children’s language.
Kontos and colleagues also report that the percentage of children en-
gaged in high-level peer play and object play is less than expected
given the children’s ages. They conclude that “children in family-
based care are not experiencing caregiving environments likely to
promote optimal development” (Kontos and others 1995, p. 163).
Factors Modifying the Relationship Between Childcare Quality and Outcomes
Several studies show differential effects of quality in relation to fac-
tors such as a family’s socioeconomic status (Kontos 1994; Kontos
and others 1995), maternal employment (Kontos and others 1995),
and child’s gender (Howes and Stewart 1987). These ﬁndings are too

160
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
few, however, to warrant any ﬁrm conclusions about the most impor-
tant factors moderating the relationship between family childcare
and outcomes. The research does provide the foundation for future
studies.
In sum, the research summarized in tables 1 and 2 shows that the
quality dimensions most commonly associated with positive out-
comes are:
• Lower child–staff ratios and smaller group sizes
• Appropriate caregiving
• Developmentally appropriate practices
• Caregiver responsiveness.
Child outcomes associated with higher-quality childcare are:
• Improved language
• Enhanced social skills
• Reduced behavior problems
• Increased cooperation.
Lower child–staff ratios and smaller group sizes are important 
because they make possible more-positive dynamics. When teachers
have to interact with fewer children, they can better respond to 
individual children, pay attention to each child, give appro-
priate care, and create a developmentally appropriate classroom 
environment.
However, although structural features such as good ratios and
group sizes make positive dynamics possible, they do not guarantee
quality in teacher–child interactions. Staff have to know how to
make the best of good conditions. Staff supports, such as appropriate
training and effective supervision, are essential.
Investments in effective structures and supports yield positive dy-
namics and outcomes. Children have better vocabulary and commu-
nication skills, interact more positively with their peers and adults,
and are less likely to be aggressive.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
161
Preschool Interventions: Research on Quality
Much of the research and evaluation of preschool programs and in-
terventions supports these ﬁndings and reinforces the importance of
quality care and education in early childhood. Although childcare
and preschool settings are generally distinguished by the nature and
extent of services provided, the classroom dynamics are similar in
both settings and, in many countries, childcare and education are
combined in integrated service programs. The literature on preschool
interventions, however, does not allow for comparable reviews of the
correlates or effects of quality, because researchers have only recently
begun to emphasize descriptions of quality dimensions in their stud-
ies. They have been more likely to contrast two or three treatment
groups, or an intervention and a control group, rather than treating
quality as a continuous variable for measuring child outcomes. The
Perry Preschool study (Schweinhart, Barnes, and Weikart 1993),
Abecedarian project (Campbell and Ramey 1994), and Syracuse Fami-
ly Development Research Program (Lally, Mangione, and Honig
1987) are examples of these types of studies. Nevertheless, these stud-
ies can legitimately be interpreted as evidence of the beneﬁts of en-
hanced program quality because the programs were designed as high-
quality interventions. In each case, the children’s outcomes were
contrasted with the outcomes for children who attended lower-quali-
ty ECD programs or no ECD program.
In the literature on preschool education, quality is most often as-
sociated with the concept of developmentally appropriate practice.
In a review of this literature, Bryant and colleagues (1994) identify
several studies that illustrate the relationship between quality, de-
ﬁned as developmentally appropriate practice, and child outcomes.
For example, the High/Scope study, conducted in the 1960s, shows
that children who attend a developmentally appropriate, child-cen-
tered program are better adjusted socially than similar children who
attend a teacher-directed program implementing a direct-instruction
curriculum (Schweinhart, Weikart, and Larner 1986). In a study of
children attending state preschool programs in North Carolina,
Bryant, Peisner-Feinberg, and Clifford (1993) found that children’s

162
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
communication abilities at the end of preschool are positively associ-
ated with appropriate caregiving and that vocabulary development
in kindergarten is positively associated with the quality of preschool.
Burts and colleagues (Burts and others 1992; Hart and others 1995)
show that children’s attendance in developmentally appropriate
kindergartens is associated with fewer stress behaviors. Also, Bryant
and colleagues (1994) show that children who attend higher-quality
Head Start classes have better cognitive, although not social, out-
comes at the end of the Head Start year (see also the chapter by
Tarullo in this volume).
Investments to Enhance Children’s Development
The existing research demonstrates that the following ﬁve types of
investment are most important for enhancing children’s early devel-
opment:
1. Well-trained staff who are motivated and committed to their
work with children
2. Facilities that are safe and sanitary and accessible to parents
3. Ratios and group sizes that allow staff to interact appropriately
with children
4. Supervision that maintains consistency
5. Staff development that ensures continuing and improving
quality.
But, what if resources are scarce? What if a particular state or com-
munity cannot afford to ﬁnd or build good facilities or ﬁnd enough
staff? The research conducted thus far is not sufﬁciently precise to in-
dicate which elements of quality are most important. Investing in ad-
ditional ongoing research is essential.
Ongoing Research and Evaluation
To develop and improve effective childcare programs, information
about existing programs must be collected and evaluated continu-

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
163
ously. Researchers have used a variety of statistical methods to assess
the effects of childcare quality on children’s well-being. These in-
clude nonexperimental designs (contemporaneous, longitudinal, and
pre-post), to compare outcomes for children who attend classrooms
or centers of different quality, and experimental studies, to compare
outcomes for children who attend childcare classrooms randomly as-
signed to different quality-of-care conditions. All methods have a role
to play in improving the understanding of important ingredients of
quality in ECD programs.
Nonexperimental Designs
Most studies have relied on nonexperimental designs, for observing a
sample of children attending a representative set of classrooms or
centers in particular locales. These studies measured the quality of
care provided, as well as developmental outcomes, and compared
outcomes for children attending higher- and lower-quality centers.
Different statistical methods were used for contemporaneous, longi-
tudinal, and pre-post designs.
Studies employing a contemporaneous design measure childcare qual-
ity and outcomes at approximately the same time. They assess the
contemporaneous effects of childcare quality on outcomes by com-
puting correlation coefﬁcients between the outcome and quality mea-
sures and determining the statistical signiﬁcance of the correlation 
coefﬁcients (see, for example, Howes, Phillips, and Whitebook 1992).
Studies employing a longitudinal design assess the long-term effects
of childcare experiences of varying quality on children’s outcomes.
These studies obtain follow-up data for children who participate in
good- and poor-quality childcare. The follow-up assessments are con-
ducted at varying periods after the children’s childcare experience.
The statistical models estimated in the studies using a longitudinal
design are similar to those estimated in studies using a contempora-
neous design. Researchers usually begin their analyses by calculating
the correlation coefﬁcients between a center’s quality and the out-
come measures and then estimating regression models to control for
child and family background variables.

164
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Studies employing pre-post designs assess the effect of changes in
center quality on children’s well-being. These studies compare the
outcomes of separate cross-sections of children before and after a
change in center quality (pre-post cross-section designs), or compare
the outcomes of longitudinal samples of children who do, or do not,
experience a change in center quality (pre-post longitudinal de-
signs). The most important study using a pre-post cross-section de-
sign is Howes, Smith, and Galinsky (1995), which assessed the effect
of changes in Florida’s requirements for childcare facilities’
child–staff ratios on the quality of the children’s development. The
study by Howes and Hamilton (1993) is an example of a pre-post
longitudinal design.
Experimental Designs
Experimental, or randomized, designs are the most rigorous
methodology for estimating internally valid effects of a center’s
quality on children’s well-being. With this design, classrooms in a
sample of childcare centers are randomly assigned to different qual-
ity-of-care groups, and children requiring childcare are randomly
assigned to the classrooms. Randomization ensures that there are
no systematic observable or unobservable differences between chil-
dren assigned to the different classrooms, except for the quality of
care they receive, and that there are no systematic differences be-
tween the quality of teachers assigned to the different quality-of-
care groups.
However, because parents or childcare staff may want to select spe-
ciﬁc teachers for certain children, randomly assigning children to
classrooms is seldom feasible. Therefore, a more realistic design is to
allocate children to speciﬁc classrooms (either by parents’ or staff’s
choice, or randomly) and then randomly assign classrooms to differ-
ent quality-of-care conditions. This design, however, may produce
less-precise estimates of the effects of childcare quality for a sample
size than when all children are also randomly assigned to classrooms,
because there is a greater chance that the average characteristics of
children will differ across classrooms. Hence, the standard errors of

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
165
the estimated effects of childcare quality must take into account that
a different allocation of classrooms to the quality-of-care groups
could produce different results. Although not focusing on child out-
comes, Love, Ryer, and Faddis (1992) conducted a study that illus-
trates some of the strengths and problems of using an experimental
design to assess the effects of structural variables on classroom dy-
namics and children’s behavior.
Randomized designs are, in theory, the most effective designs for
obtaining reliable information on the effects of a policy intervention.
Because these designs are often difﬁcult to implement, however, they
usually have practical limitations, and program staff are often unwill-
ing to participate in randomized studies. Thus, many studies employ-
ing randomized designs use only program sites that agree to partici-
pate. The estimates of effect, based on experimental designs, must
therefore be interpreted with caution.
Research Needs
The advantages and shortcomings of these nonexperimental and ex-
perimental methods are discussed in detail in Love, Schochet, and
Meckstroth (1996). Because nonexperimental designs are more prac-
tical (less expensive and difﬁcult than experimental designs), they are
likely to prevail in future research. For future studies using nonexper-
imental methods to estimate the effects of a center’s quality, two spe-
ciﬁc recommendations are as follows:
1. For studies employing contemporaneous or longitudinal de-
signs, estimate models using established statistical methods that
correct and test for systematic, unobservable differences be-
tween the characteristics of children who enroll in centers of
different quality or in no centers.
2. Using pre-post designs, conduct additional studies to compare
outcomes of a cross-section of children who attend childcare be-
fore a change in the center’s quality with those of a separate
cross-section of children who attend childcare after the change
is made.

166
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Conclusion
Extensive research over the past 20 years has found strong, positive
relationships between a variety of quality measures and various di-
mensions of children’s development and well-being. Most of the re-
search reviewed in this chapter addresses programs in the United
States, and circumstances in the developing world likely could alter
the speciﬁcs of particular relationships. Nevertheless, the research
suggests that investments in ﬁve areas may have the greatest beneﬁt:
(1) well-trained staff who are motivated and committed to their work
with children, (2) facilities that are safe and sanitary and accessible to
parents, (3) ratios and group sizes that allow staff to interact appropri-
ately with children, (4) supervision that maintains consistency, and
(5) staff development that ensures continuing and improving quality.
Consistent investments in the structures and supports for early child
development can yield tremendous payoffs by improving the well-be-
ing of children and their families and communities. Investments in
research and evaluation will enable child development programs to
continue to ﬁnd ways to improve and increase their effectiveness.
Acknowledgments
This chapter draws on a review conducted with the support of the
Rockefeller Foundation and published as Love, J.M., P.Z. Schochet,
and A.L. Meckstroth, “Are They in Any Real Danger? What Research
Does—and Doesn’t—Tell Us About Child Care Quality and Children’s
Well-Being.” Child Care Research and Policy Papers: Lessons from Child
Care Research Funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. Princeton, N.J.:
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., May 1996.
References
Belsky, J. 1990. Parental and Nonparental Child Care and Children’s
Socioemotional Development: A Decade in Review. Journal of
Marriage and the Family 52:885–903.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
167
Bredekamp, S. 1987. Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early
Childhood Programs Serving Children from Birth Through Age 8.
Washington, D.C.: National Association for the Education of
Young Children.
Bryant, D.M., M. Burchinal, L.B. Lau, and J.J. Sparling. 1994. Family
and Classroom Correlates of Head Start Children’s Developmental
Outcomes. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 9:289–309.
Bryant, D.M., E.S. Peisner-Feinberg, and R.M. Clifford. 1993.
Evaluation of Public Preschool Programs in North Carolina. Chapel
Hill, N.C.: Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center.
Burts, D.C., C.H. Hart, R. Charlesworth, P.O. Fleege, J. Mosely, and
R.H. Thomasson. 1992. Observed Activities and Stress Behaviors
of Children in Developmentally Appropriate and Inappropriate
Kindergarten Classrooms. Early Childhood Research Quarterly
7:297–318.
Campbell, F.A., and C.T. Ramey. 1994. Effects of Early Intervention
on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-Up Study of
Children from Low-Income Families. Child Development
65:684–98.
Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes Study Team. 1995. Cost, Quality,
and Child Outcomes in Child Care Centers: Public Report.
Denver: University of Colorado at Denver, April.
Dunn, L. 1993. Proximal and Distal Features of Day Care Quality
and Children’s Development. Early Childhood Research Quarterly
8:167–92.
Ferrar, H.M. 1996. Places for Growing: How to Improve Your Child Care
Center. Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Ferrar, H.M., T. Harms, and D. Cryer. 1996. Places for Growing: How to
Improve Your Family Child Care Home. Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica
Policy Research, Inc.
Ferrar, H.M., E. McGinnis, and S. Sprachman. 1992. The Expanded
Child Care Options (ECCO) Approach to the Development of
Enhanced-Quality Center-Based Child Care. Princeton, N.J.:
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., December.

168
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Field, T. 1980. Preschool Play: Effects of Teacher:Child Ratios and
Organization of Classroom Space. Child Study Journal
10(3):191–205.
———. 1991. Quality Infant Day-Care and Grade School Behavior
and Performance. Child Development 62:863–70.
File, N., and S. Kontos. 1993. The Relationship of Program Quality to
Children’s Play in Integrated Early Intervention Settings. Topics in
Early Childhood Special Education 13(1):1–18.
Galinsky, E., C. Howes, and S. Kontos. 1995. The Family Child Care
Training Study: Highlights of Findings. New York, N.Y.: Families and
Work Institute.
Galinsky, E., C. Howes, S. Kontos, and M. Shinn. 1994. The Study of
Children in Family Child Care and Relative Care: Highlights of
Findings. New York, N.Y.: Families and Work Institute.
Goelman, H., and A. Pence. 1987. Effects of Child Care, Family, and
Individual Characteristics on Children’s Language Development:
The Victoria Day Care Research Project. In D. Phillips, ed., Quality
in Child Care: What Does Research Tell Us? Washington, D.C.:
National Association for the Education of Young Children.
———. 1988. Children in Three Types of Day Care: Daily
Experiences, Quality of Care and Developmental Outcomes. Early
Childhood Development and Care 33:67–76.
Goodman, N., and J. Andrews. 1981. Cognitive Development of
Children in Family and Group Day Care. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry 51:271–384.
Harms, T. 1992. Preschool and Child Care Setting Characteristics.
Paper prepared for the National Center for Education Statistics.
Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina, November.
Hart, C.H., D.C. Burts, M.A. Durland, R. Charlesworth, M. DeWolf,
and P.O. Fleege. 1995. Stress Behaviors and Activity Type
Participation of Preschoolers in More and Less Developmentally
Appropriate Classrooms. In preparation.
Helburn, S., and others. 1995. Cost Quality and Child Outcomes in
Child Care Centers: Executive Summary. Denver: University of
Colorado at Denver, January.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
169
Hestenes, L., S. Kontos, and Y. Bryan. 1993. Children’s Emotional
Expression in Child Care Centers Varying in Quality. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 8:295–307.
Holloway, S.D., and M. Reichhart-Erickson. 1988. The Relationship
of Day Care Quality to Children’s Free Play Behavior and Social
Problem Solving Skills. Early Childhood Research Quarterly
3(1):39–53.
Howes, C. 1988. Relations Between Early Child Care and Schooling.
Developmental Psychology 24(1):53–57.
———. 1990. Can the Age of Entry into Child Care and the Quality
of Child Care Predict Adjustment in Kindergarten? Developmental
Psychology 26(2):292–303.
———. 1992. Preschool Experiences. Paper prepared for the National
Center for Education Statistics. Los Angeles: University of
California at Los Angeles, September.
Howes, C., and C. Hamilton. 1993. The Changing Experience of
Child Care: Changes in Teachers and in Teacher-Child
Relationships and Children’s Social Competence with Peers. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 8:15–32.
Howes, C., and M. Olenick. 1986. Family and Child Care Inﬂuences
on Toddler’s Compliance. Child Development 57:202–16.
Howes, C., D. Phillips, and M. Whitebook. 1992. Thresholds of
Quality: Implications for the Social Development of Children in
Center-based Child Care. Child Development 63:449–60.
Howes, C., and J. Rubenstein. 1981. Toddler Peer Behavior in Two
Types of Day Care. Infant Behavior and Development 4:387–93.
Howes, C., E. Smith, and E. Galinsky. 1995. The Florida Child Care
Quality Improvement Study: Interim Report. New York, N.Y.: Families
and Work Institute.
Howes, C., and P. Stewart. 1987. Child’s Play with Adults, Toys, and
Peers: An Examination of Family and Child-Care Inﬂuences.
Developmental Psychology 23(3):423–30.
Kontos, S. 1991. Child Care Quality, Family Background, and
Children’s Development. Early Childhood Research Quarterly
6:249–62.

170
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
———. 1994. The Ecology of Family Day Care. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly 9:87–110.
Kontos, S., C. Howes, M. Shinn, and E. Galinsky. 1995. Quality in
Family Child Care and Relative Care. New York, N.Y.: Teachers
College Press.
Lally, J.R., P.L. Mangione, and A.S. Honig. 1987. Long-Range Impact
of an Early Intervention with Low-Income Children and Their
Families. San Francisco: Center for Child and Family Studies, Far
West Laboratory for Educational Research and Development,
September.
Lamb, M.E., C.P. Hwang, A. Broberg, and F.L. Bookstein. 1988. The
Effects of Out-of-Home Care on the Development of Social
Competence in Swedish Preschoolers: A Longitudinal Study. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 3:379–402.
Lamb, M.E., and K.J. Sternberg. 1990. Do We Really Know How Day
Care Affects Children? Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology
11:351–79.
Layzer, J.I., B.D. Goodson, and M. Moss. 1993. Observational Study of
Early Childhood Programs, Final Report Volume 1: Life in Preschool.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.
Love, J.M., P. Ryer, and B. Faddis. 1992. Caring Environments—
Program Quality in California’s Publicly Funded Child Development
Programs: Report on the Legislatively Mandated 1990–91 Staff/Child
Ratio Study. Portsmouth, N.H.: RMC Research Corporation.
Love, J.M., P.Z. Schochet, and A.L. Meckstroth. 1996. Are They in
Any Real Danger? What Research Does—and Doesn’t—Tell Us
About Child Care Quality and Children’s Well-Being. Child Care
Research and Policy Papers: Lessons from Child Care Research Funded
by the Rockefeller Foundation. Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc., May.
McCartney, K. 1984. Effect of Day Care Environment on Children’s
Language Development. Developmental Psychology 20(2):244–60.
McCartney, K., S. Scarr, D. Phillips, and S. Grajek. 1985. Day Care as
Intervention: Comparisons of Varying Quality Programs. Journal
of Applied Developmental Psychology 6:247–60.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
171
Melhuish, E.C., E. Lloyd, S. Martin, and A. Mooney. 1990a. Type of
Child Care at 18 Months—II. Relations with Cognitive and
Language Development. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry
31(6):861–70.
Melhuish, E.C., A. Mooney, S. Martin, and E. Lloyd. 1990b. Type 
of Child Care at 18 Months—I. Differences in Interactional 
Experience. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 31(6):
849–59.
NAEYC (National Association for the Education of Young Children).
1996. Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early Childhood
Programs Serving Children From Birth Through Age 8: A Position
Statement of the National Association for the Education of Young
Children. Washington, D.C.: Author, July.
NICHD (National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development) Early Child Care Research Network. 1996. Infant
Child Care and Attachment Security: Results of the NICHD Study
of Early Child Care. Symposium presented at the meeting of the
International Conference on Infant Studies, Providence, Rhode
Island, April.
Peterson, C., and R. Peterson. 1986. Parent-Child Interaction and
Day Care: Does Quality of Day Care Matter? Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology 7:1–15.
Phillips, D.A. 1987. Epilogue. In D.A. Phillips, ed., Quality in Child
Care: What Does Research Tell Us? Washington, D.C.: National
Association for the Education of Young Children.
Phillips, D.A., and C. Howes. 1987. Indicators of Quality in Child
Care: Review of Research. In D.A. Phillips, ed., Quality in Child
Care: What Does Research Tell Us? Washington, D.C.: National
Association for the Education of Young Children.
Phillips, D., K. McCartney, and S. Scarr. 1987. Child-Care Quality
and Children’s Social Development. Developmental Psychology
23(4):537–43.
Ruopp, R.R., J. Travers, F. Glantz, and C. Coelen. 1979. Children at the
Center: Final Results of the National Day Care Study. Cambridge,
Mass.: Abt Books.

172
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Schliecker, E., D.R. White, and E. Jacobs. 1991. The Role of Day Care
Quality in the Prediction of Children’s Vocabulary. Canadian
Journal of Behavioral Science 23(1):12–24.
Schweinhart, L.J., H.V. Barnes, and D.P. Weikart. 1993. Signiﬁcant
Beneﬁts: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27.
Monographs of the High/Scope Educational Research Foundation, no.
10. Ypsilanti, Mich.: High/Scope Educational Research
Foundation.
Schweinhart, L.J., D.P. Weikart, and M.B. Larner. 1986. A Report on
the High/Scope Preschool Comparison Study: Consequences of
Three Preschool Curriculum Models Through Age 15. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 1:15–45.
Studer, M. 1992. Quality of Center Care and Preschool Cognitive
Outcomes: Differences by Family Income. In P.A. Adler and P.
Adler, eds., Sociological Studies of Child Development, vol 5.
Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.
Vandell, D.L., V.K. Henderson, and K.S. Wilson. 1988. A
Longitudinal Study of Children with Day-Care Experiences of
Varying Quality. Child Development 59:1286–92.
Vandell, D., and C. Powers. 1983. Daycare Quality and Children’s
Free Play Activities. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry
53:293–300.
Whitebook, M., C. Howes, and D. Phillips. 1989. Who Cares? Child
Care Teachers and the Quality of Care in America: Final Report: 
National Child Care Stafﬁng Study. Berkeley, Calif.: Child Care 
Employee Project.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
173
Table 1. Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Cost, Quality, and
Child Outcomes
Study Team (1995)
Dunn (1993)
• 826 children (age 4)
• 181 centers
• 15% African American
68% white
6% Hispanic
4% Asian
63% of mothers have 
less than bachelor’s 
degree
• 60 children (ages 
3 to 5)
• 30 classrooms in 
24 centers
• 90% white
10% African American
Middle socioeconomic 
status
77% two-parent 
families
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational measures of class-
room quality
• Direct assessments, teacher rat-
ings, and self-reports of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment, staff in-
terviews, and questionnaires to
measure classroom quality
• Direct assessment, teacher ratings,
and child achievement tests to
measure child outcomes
• Receptive language
• Prereading skills
• Premath skills
• Self-perceptions of
competence
• Level of social play
• Attitudes toward
childcare
• Social skills
• Sociability
• Social adjustment
• Social play
• Cognitive develop-
ment and intelligence
• Cognitive play
• Higher classroom quality index was associated with:
–Greater receptive language ability
–Higher premath skills
–More advanced social skills
–More positive self-perceptions
• Effect of quality on receptive language was greater
for minority children.
• Children with married parents and those attending
centers that offered less variety and more guidance
(or more “total limits”) were rated as better socially
adjusted; children attending centers that provided
more total limits had higher levels of complex social
play.
• Children attending classrooms with higher overall
quality and whose caregivers had a child-related col-
lege major and less experience in the center scored
higher on a test of intelligence.
• Child–staff ratio and group size did not predict chil-
dren’s social and cognitive development.
Studies using contemporaneous designs
continued

174
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Field (1980)
File and Kontos
(1993)
• 80 children (ages 3 
to 4)
• Four center-based
preschool classrooms
• 100% white
Middle socioeconomic 
status
• 28 children (ages 2.5 
to 6)
• 6 to 12 center class-
rooms (exact number
not provided)
• Demographic charac-
teristics not provided
50% had mild or moder-
ate cognitive and/or 
speech and language 
delays.
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 9-month period)
• Observational assessment of quality
on two dimensions
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 2-week period)
• Observational assessment of quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Peer interactions
• Play behaviors (fanta-
sy play, associative-
cooperative play)
• Cognitive play level
(functional, construc-
tive, and dramatic
play)
• Social play level (soli-
tary, parallel, and in-
teractive play)
• Children attending classrooms that had low
teacher–child ratios and partitioned, special play ar-
eas exhibited more optimal behaviors (including in-
teractions with peers, verbal interactions, fantasy
play, and associative-cooperative play).
• Positive teacher interactions with children, a charac-
teristic indicative of high-quality classrooms, were
related to a higher level of children’s social play.
Less teacher involvement in routine activities, less
watching, less support of cognitive play, and more
overall teacher uninvolvement were also related to
higher levels of social play.
• Children’s experiences with their teachers were not
related to their level of cognitive play.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
175
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Goelman and Pence
(1987 and 1988)
Hestenes, Kontos,
and Bryan (1993)
• 105 children (approxi-
mately 3 to 4 years of
age, ages not provided)
• 53 centers
• 52 family day-care
providers
• Predominantly white 
(Canadian)
Range of socioeco-
nomic status 
represented
50% two-parent 
families
• 60 children (ages 3 
to 5)
• 26 centers
30 classrooms
• Range of social classes 
represented
Race/ethnicity of 
children not provided
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 1-year period)
• Observational assessment and par-
ent ratings of classroom quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection on
two separate occasions)
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Language develop-
ment
• Peer interactions
• Play activities 
(solitary, cooperative)
• Emotional expression
(positive versus nega-
tive affect, intensity
of affect, duration of
affect)
• Temperament 
(approach, adapt-
ability, intensity,
mood, and rhythm)
• Among children attending center-based care, quality
of care did not predict language development
scores.
• Children in center-based care engaged in more high-
quality “information activities” than children in family
day care. However, for children in family childcare,
the amount of information activities was not related
to quality.
• Low levels of classroom engagement by teachers
predicted more intense negative affect among chil-
dren; children whose teachers showed high levels of
classroom engagement displayed more intense posi-
tive affect, controlling for temperament and child de-
mographics.
continued

176
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Holloway and 
Reichhart-Erickson
(1988)
Howes and Olenick
(1986)
• 55 children (age 4)
• 15 centers
• 4% African American
94% white
2% Asian
91% two-parent 
families
Predominantly middle 
socioeconomic status
• 89 children 
(ages 1.5 to 3)
• Eight centers
• 10% African American
70% white
13% Hispanic
7% Asian (based 
on race/ethnicity 
of father)
69% two-parent 
families
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 3-week period)
• Observational measures of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment and
caregiver reporting of classroom
quality measures
• Direct assessment (in home and
center) and parent ratings of child
outcomes 
• Free-play activities
• Social reasoning and
problem solving
• Peer interactions
• Compliance
• Resistance
• Self-regulation
• Children engaging in high-quality interactions with
teachers and children attending centers with lower
child-teacher ratios scored higher on a test of social
reasoning skills.
• In centers that were better able to accommodate
groups of varying sizes, had smaller classes, and of-
fered a variety of age-appropriate materials, children
scored higher on a test of social reasoning skills.
• In centers with a more spacious layout, children
spent more time in focused, solitary play and less
time observing.
• Quality indicators were not signiﬁcantly related to
negative or positive social interactions with peers.
• Children attending high-quality centers were more
compliant and less resistant and were more likely to
self-regulate (or refrain from touching food and for-
bidden new toys).
• Quality of care predicted self-regulation and resis-
tant behavior among boys but not girls.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
177
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Howes, Phillips, and
Whitebook (1992)
Howes and 
Rubenstein (1981)
• 414 children 
(ages 1 to 4.5)
– 68 infants
– 175 toddlers
– 171 preschoolers
• 233 center classrooms 
• Full range of social 
classes represented
21% African American
73% white
• 40 children (ages 
1.5 to under 2)
• Eight centers
16 family day-care 
homes
• 33% African American, 
Hispanic, or Asian
67% white
Predominantly 
two-parent families
Middle socioeconomic 
status
• Contemporaneous design 
• Observational assessment of quality
• Direct assessment of children
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of 
classroom quality
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Attachment with
teacher
• Social orientation
• Interaction with peers
• Peer social behaviors
• Peer social interaction
• Structure of peer play
• Children in classrooms rated higher on “appropriate
caregiving” were more likely to be classiﬁed as se-
cure (but not as avoidant or ambivalent).
• Children in classrooms rated higher on “developmen-
tally appropriate activities” were more likely to be
both adult- and peer-oriented.
• The greater use of nonportable objects (indicative 
of a quality environment) in centers was positively
related to the level of interactive play.
• No overall differences in the frequency of socially 
directed peer behaviors were present between 
family day care and center care.
continued

178
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Kontos (1991)
Love, Ryer, and 
Faddis (1992)
• 100 children 
(ages 3 to 5)
• 10 centers
• Predominantly white
Range of socioeco-
nomic status and 
urban/rural families 
represented
57% two-parent 
(married) families
• Ages 3 to 5 (94% 3-4
year olds)
• 112 center classrooms
62 agencies
• 37% African American
19% white
32% Hispanic
13% Asian
23% limited English 
proﬁcient
Families eligible for 
childcare subsidy 
(average of only 1.4 
children per agency 
paid full fee)
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tions and child assessments col-
lected over a 1-day period)
• Observation and state licensing in-
struments used to assess quality
• Caregiver ratings and child perfor-
mance on standardized tests used
to assess child outcomes
• Pre-post design; contemporaneous
• Classrooms randomly assigned 
to change ratio after fall data 
collection
• Contemporaneous assessment 
of classroom quality and child 
outcomes
• Teacher ratings of behavior problems
• Observer ratings of stress behaviors
• Cognitive 
development
• Language 
development
• Social development
• Behavior problems
• Stress behaviors
• Crying and ﬁghting
• Involvement in 
activities
• Family background variables were signiﬁcantly relat-
ed to several measures of children’s cognitive and
language development.
• Overall quality (a measure of a minimum level of qual-
ity) predicted better social adjustment scores and
fewer behavior problems among children, controlling
for family background and childcare experience.
• Age of entry into childcare and duration of the child-
care experience were not signiﬁcant predictors of
child development outcomes.
• In classrooms that were more developmentally 
appropriate, children showed less stress and less
crying and ﬁghting.
• In classrooms that were more developmentally 
inappropriate, children were more uninvolved in
classroom activities and showed higher levels of
stress.
• When caregivers were attentive and encouraging,
children showed less stress; when caregivers were
more harsh, critical, and detached, children showed
higher levels of stress.
• In classrooms rated higher on scheduling, safety,
and health, there was less crying and ﬁghting.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
179
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
McCartney (1984)
McCartney, Scarr,
Phillips, and Grajek
(1985)
Peterson and 
Peterson (1986)
• 166 children 
(ages 3 to 5)
• Nine centers
• 80% black Bermudians
20% white Bermudians
84% spent most of 
work week in day 
care by age 2.
• 166 children (compari-
son group: 72 children)
(ages 3 to 6)
• Nine centers
• 78% black Bermudians
22% white Bermudians
Comparison group 
(100% black 
Bermudians)
• 66 children (24 in home
care) (ages 3 to 5)
• Four centers
• Predominantly white
Predominantly middle 
socioeconomic status
• Contemporaneous design (obser-
vational and child data collection
over a 4-month period)
• Observational measures of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child outcomes
• Caregiver ratings of child outcomes
• Contemporaneous, comparison group
design (observations and child data
collection over a 4-month period)
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child perfor-
mance on standardized tests; parent
and caregiver ratings used to assess
child outcomes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child outcomes 
• Verbal intelligence
• Verbal interaction
with caregivers
• Verbal interaction
with peers
• Language 
development
• Cognitive skills
• Receptive language
• Communication skills
• Sociability
• Considerateness
• Dependency
• Intelligence
• Task orientation
• Parent-child 
interaction
• Verbal 
communication
• Compliance
• Children attending centers with higher overall quality
ratings were more likely to have greater verbal intel-
ligence and language development, controlling for
family background, age of entry in care, and number
of hours in care.
• Children who attended centers that allowed greater
levels of child-initiated conversation, had many visi-
tors, had less noise, and provided little free-play time
scored higher on tests of language development.
• Low-income children attending a high-quality day-
care intervention program had better language skills
and were more considerate and sociable, compared
with children attending other center programs of
lower, but varying, quality. Findings hold when chil-
dren attending the high-quality program are com-
pared with a group with similar family backgrounds.
• Children attending low-quality centers performed
worse on sustained verbal interactions and compli-
ance with task-oriented instructions than either chil-
dren attending high-quality centers or children re-
ceiving maternal care in the home; no differences
existed in these two outcomes for children receiving
either high-quality center care or maternal care.
continued

180
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Phillips, McCartney,
and Scarr (1987)
Schliecker, White,
and Jacobs (1991)
• 166 children 
(ages 3 to 5.5)
• Nine centers
• 78% black Bermudians
22% white Bermudians
68% from two-parent 
families
85% spent most of 
work week in day 
care by age 2.
• 100 children (age 4)
• 10 centers
• Predominantly white 
Range of socioeco-
nomic status 
represented
63% two-parent 
families
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 4-month period)
• Observational assessment and staff
reporting of quality 
• Teacher and parent ratings of child
outcomes
• Contemporaneous design (observa-
tional and child data collection over
a 2-week period)
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes 
• Sociability
• Considerateness
• Dependence 
• Intelligence 
• Task orientation
• Aggression
• Hyperactivity
• Anxiety
• Language develop-
ment and compre-
hension
• Children in centers with higher overall quality were
more socially developed in considerateness, socia-
bility, intelligence, task orientation, and anxiety, con-
trolling for age at entry, time in childcare, and family
background.
• Children having greater levels of verbal interaction
with caregivers were more considerate, sociable, in-
telligent, and task-oriented.
• In centers with directors who had greater levels of
experience, children were less aggressive and anx-
ious but also were less considerate and sociable.
• Day-care quality (measured dichotomously) and so-
cioeconomic status (a combined measure of in-
come, occupation, education, and family structure)
both signiﬁcantly predicted vocabulary comprehen-
sion; day-care quality may be particularly important
for single-parent, female-headed households.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
181
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Studer (1992)
Vandell and Powers
(1983)
• 95 children in families
currently using child-
care center or nursery
at time of the 1986 Na-
tional Longitudinal
Study of Youth (ages 
3 to 4)
• All two-parent families
• 55 children 
(ages 3 to 4)
• Six centers
• White
Middle socioeconomic 
status
Two-parent families
Attended day care an 
average of 2 years
• Contemporaneous design
• Parental report of quality through
survey responses
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of behavior
• Receptive language 
• Interaction with peers
• Interaction with
adults
• Vocalization with
peers
• Vocalization with
adults
• Solitary play
• Unoccupied behaviors
• Special training of caregiver, group size, and ratio
were unrelated to receptive language ability.
• Composite quality index was positively associated
with receptive language ability only for low-income
subsample.
• Composite quality index was negatively related to
receptive language ability for lower-middle-income
group.
• Children attending centers rated as high quality
were more likely to have positive interactions and
vocalizations with adults.
• Children attending low-quality centers were more
likely to engage in solitary play and aimless wander-
ing.
• No differences were found in peer-directed behav-
iors and interactions in centers of varying quality.
continued

182
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Field (1991)
• 56 children. Average
age 11.5 at follow-up.
(Children began day
care when less than 2
years old and contin-
ued for average of 2.7
years.)
• Six centers
• Study 1: 28 children
Study 2: 56 children
• Heterogeneous sample 
by race/ethnicity 
(including African 
American, white, 
Hispanic; percent-
ages not given)
Middle socioeconomic 
status, highly edu-
cated families
• Longitudinal design (parent reports
of child’s early care experience
used as baseline data)
• Caregiver reporting of classroom
quality measures
• Direct assessment and parent and
teacher ratings of child outcomes 
• School grades
• Test scores
• Assignment to gifted
program
• Work/study habits
• Leadership
• Emotional well-being
• Adult/child relations
• Peer relations, attrac-
tiveness, assertive-
ness, aggressivity,
popularity
• Children who had spent more time in high-quality
day care were more likely to show more physical af-
fection during peer interactions, to be assigned to
the gifted program, and to receive higher math
grades.
Studies using longitudinal designs

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
183
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Howes (1990)
Howes (1988)
• 80 children (same 
children examined in
Howes and Olenick
1986) (ages 3 to 7 pri-
marily)
• Began at ages 1.5 to 3
(see Howes and
Olenick 1986)
• Eight centers (estimate)
• 9% African American
74% white
13% Hispanic
1% Asian
76% two-parent 
families
• 75 children enrolled in
laboratory elementary
school.
• Childcare experience at
age 4. Follow-up at ﬁrst
grade.
• 12% African American
69% white
12% Hispanic
6% Asian
Mothers’ median edu-
cation level: 14 years
70% two-parent 
families
• Longitudinal design
• Observational assessment and
caregiver reporting of classroom
quality measures
• Direct assessment and parent and
teacher ratings of child outcomes 
• Longitudinal design
• Observational measures of class-
room quality
• Teacher ratings of child outcomes
• Compliance, 
resistance
• Self-regulation
• Social adjustment/
peer interactions 
(social play, social
pretend play, positive
affect)
• Academic progress
• School skills (inde-
pendence, group
skills, participation
skills)
• Behavior problems
• Preschool children attending high-quality centers en-
gaged in more social pretend activities, displayed
more “positive affect” relative to angry and dis-
tressed behavior, and were rated by teachers as
having sociable relations with peers.
• Kindergarten children who entered lower-quality
centers as infants were rated by teachers as more
distractible, less task-oriented, and less considerate,
compared with children who entered higher-quality
centers as infants.
• Among children enrolled as infants, childcare quality
(measured through teacher socialization practices)
best predicted child outcomes; among children en-
rolled as toddlers or preschoolers, family socializa-
tion practices best predicted child outcomes.
• For girls, stable childcare arrangements predicted
academic skills, controlling for family characteristics.
• For boys, stable arrangements and high-quality care
predicted academic skills, controlling for family char-
acteristics.
• For both boys and girls, high-quality care predicted
enhanced school skills and low behavior problems.
continued

184
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Howes and 
Hamilton (1993)
Lamb, Hwang,
Broberg, and 
Bookstein (1988)
• 72 children (48 at follow-
up) (ages 1 to 2). Follow-
up at ages 4 to 5.
• 5 centers (and one large
family day-care home) at
start; 54 centers over
course of study
• 14% African American
61% white
25% Hispanic or Asian
67% middle socio-
economic status
• 140 children (ages 1 to 2).
Follow-up at ages 2 to 4.
• 53 centers
33 family day-care homes
54 maternal home care 
situations
• 100% Swedish children
Range of socioeconomic 
status represented
100% two-parent 
families
Older mothers (average 
age = 31)
• Longitudinal design
• Observational assessment of
quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Longitudinal design
• Observational assessment of
caregiver quality and home 
quality; parent ratings of social 
support
• Direct assessment of child 
outcomes
• Social competence
with peers (complex
play; prosocial, gre-
garious, aggressive,
and withdrawn be-
haviors) 
• Personal maturity 
(independence, 
ego resiliency, and 
control)
• Sociability 
• Adult–child 
interaction
• Peer play
• Activity level
• Children having more changes in teachers were rat-
ed as lower in positive and gregarious behaviors and
higher in social withdrawal and aggression.
• Children who had secure teacher–child relationships
(or teacher–child relationships that changed in a
positive direction) had more positive, gregarious,
and prosocial interactions with their peers and were
less withdrawn and aggressive.
• Changes in children’s childcare center or setting
were not related to children’s social competence
with peers.
• As measured at follow-up, children’s sociability 
and personal maturity were not related to type of
childcare.
• The quality of care (regardless of type of provider)
and family social support predicted personal mat-
urity and social skills with familiar peers and un-
familiar adults.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
185
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Melhuish, Lloyd,
Martin, and Mooney
(1990a); Melhuish,
Mooney, Martin, 
and Lloyd (1990b)
Vandell, Henderson,
and Wilson (1988)
• 193 children (age 1.5).
Assessments at 5 and
18 months.
• Focus groups:
–Home care—57
–Relative care—30
–Family day care—74
–Center care—32
• 100% British
Range of socioeco-
nomic and educa-
tional status
• 20 children (age 4).
Follow-up at age 8.
• Six centers
• White
Middle socioeconomic 
status
• Longitudinal design
• Observational measures of child-
care quality
• Direct assessment, observer rat-
ings, and parent reports of child
outcomes
• Longitudinal design
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct and videotaped assessment
of children
• Observer, parent, and peer ratings
of behavior
• Language 
development
• Cognitive 
development
• Interaction with peers
• Interaction with
adults
• Solitary play
• Unoccupied behaviors
• Children in center-care settings that provided less
verbal communication with and less responsiveness
to children scored lower on a measure of language
development.
• Children attending centers rated as high quality
tended to have more friendly interactions with
peers, were assessed as happier and more socially
competent, and were less likely to be viewed as
“shy”; results were relatively consistent at ages 
4 and 8.
• Having positive interactions with adults at age 4
was signiﬁcantly correlated with ratings of empathy,
social competence, and peer acceptance at age 8.
continued

186
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Howes, Smith, and
Galinsky (1995) 
• 880 children (ages 10
months to 5 years).
(Different children ex-
amined during baseline
and follow-up data col-
lection; second follow-
up completed in spring
1996)
• 150 centers
• Range of socioeconom-
ic status and urban/rur-
al families represented
in the state of Florida
(other demographic
characteristics not re-
ported)
• Pre-post design
• Observational assessment of class-
room and teacher quality
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Peer play
• Object play
• Adaptive language
proﬁciency
• Behavior problems
• Attachment to 
caregiver
• Changing child–teacher ratio requirements for in-
fants from 6:1 to 4:1 and for toddlers from 8:1 to 6:1
resulted in more complex child play both with peers
and objects, more secure attachment to caregivers,
greater adaptive language proﬁciency, and fewer be-
havior problems (including aggression, anxiety, and
hyperactivity).
• Children in classrooms meeting professional stan-
dards for child–teacher ratios engaged in more elab-
orate peer play and had higher adaptive language
scores, compared with children in classrooms with
higher ratios.
• Children in classrooms that improved by shifting to
teachers with Child Development Associate (CDA)
credentials or CDA equivalency had the largest in-
crease in complexity of peer play and security of
caregiver attachment. Children in classrooms with
college-educated teachers who had early childhood
training engaged in more complex peer play, had a
more secure attachment with their caregiver, and
had higher adaptive language scores. 
Studies using pre-post designs

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
187
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Ruopp, Travers,
Glantz, and Coelen
(1979)
• 1,600 children (ages 3
to 5). (Infant/toddler
substudy: ages 6
weeks to 3 years)
• 49 centers in three
cities in quasi-experi-
ment; eight centers in
one public school dis-
trict in randomized ex-
periment
• Infant/toddler sub-
study: 74 groups of
children and 54 centers
• 65% African American
30% white
Range of socioeco-
nomic status, with 
low-income over-
represented
Less than 50% 
two-parent families
• Pre-post design (observational and
child outcome data collection over a
1-year period)
• Observational measures of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Randomized experiment and quasi-
experiment
• (Note: The ﬁndings for preschoolers
are from the 49-center quasi-exper-
iment and are generally supported
by ﬁndings from the separate, ran-
domized experiment.)
• Cognitive 
knowledge/school
readiness
• Receptive language
ability
• Adult–child interac-
tion
• Social behaviors (co-
operation, innovation,
apathy, distress)
• Fine and gross motor
skills
• Preschool children attending centers with smaller
group sizes engaged in more adult–child social inter-
action, were more cooperative, responsive, and in-
novative, and made greater gains in receptive lan-
guage ability; the effect of group size on receptive
language ability was independent of child age, gen-
der, race, family income, and other socioeconomic
background characteristics.
• Preschool children in centers that promoted reﬂec-
tive, innovative, and involved behavior showed
greater gains in receptive language ability and cogni-
tive knowledge. Children in centers where care-
givers exhibited high levels of social and managerial
interaction with children showed more rapid gains 
in receptive language ability. The effects of these
center and caregiver characteristics on receptive
language ability and cognitive knowledge were 
independent of child age, gender, race, family 
income, and other socioeconomic background 
characteristics.
• Preschool children attending centers with teachers
better trained or educated in child-related ﬁelds 
had more social interactions with teachers, were
more cooperative, compliant, and involved, and had
greater gains in cognitive knowledge; neither years
of teacher experience nor level of formal education
showed a consistent relationship to child outcomes.
continued

188
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 1 (continued). Center-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Ruopp, Travers,
Glantz, and Coelen
(1979) 
(continued)
• Relationships between preschool child–caregiver 
ratios (5:1 to 10:1) and caregiver and child behavior
were neither strong nor consistent; ratio was 
unrelated to gains in child test scores.
• Toddlers attending centers with better child–staff 
ratios exhibited less overt distress; toddlers cared
for by experienced staff exhibited more apathetic
behavior; the degree of specialized staff training had
no effect on child distress, child apathy, or exposure
to potentially dangerous situations.
• Infants attending centers with better child–staff 
ratios exhibited less overt distress, less apathetic
behavior, and were exposed to fewer potentially
dangerous situations; infants cared for by better 
educated but less experienced staff exhibited less
apathy and were exposed to fewer potentially 
dangerous situations; infants cared for by staff with
specialized training showed no signiﬁcant behavioral
differences.
Note: The table includes only ﬁndings that the authors report as statistically signiﬁcant.
Source: Love, J.M., P.Z. Schochet, and A.L. Meckstroth. 1996. Are They in Any Real Danger? What Research Does—and Doesn’t—Tell Us About Child Care Quality and Children’s Well-Being. Child
Care Research and Policy Papers: Lessons from Child Care Research Funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., May.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
189
Table 2. Family-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Goelman and Pence
(1987 and 1988)
Goodman and 
Andrews (1981)
• 105 children (ages 3 to
4). Speciﬁc ages not 
provided.
• 53 centers
• 52 family day-care 
providers
Predominantly white 
(Canadian)
Range of socioeconom-
ic status represented
50% two-parent families
• 52 children (ages 2.5 to 4)
• 32 family day-care
providers (enhanced)
• (Control group receiving
nonenhanced family day
care: 8 children)
• (Comparison group 
receiving center-based
care: 68 children, three
centers)
• 43% white
57% African American
• Contemporaneous design 
(observational and child data 
collection over a 1-year period)
• Observational assessment and
parent ratings of classroom 
quality
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Contemporaneous design
• An educational intervention was
used to assess quality (the inter-
vention varied in intensity among
three treatment groups but in
each case focused on the devel-
opment of linguistic compe-
tence).
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Language develop-
ment
• Peer interactions
• Play activities (soli-
tary, cooperative)
• Cognitive 
performance
• Verbal intelligence
• Children attending high-quality family day-care
homes had higher average scores for language 
development than children attending lower-quality
family day-care homes.
• Amount of “information activities” was not related
to quality.
• Children receiving an enhanced family day-care 
intervention showed greater improvement in 
cognitive performance on three standardized tests
than did either control group children in family 
day-care settings or comparison group children in
professionally run group day-care centers.
Studies using contemporaneous designs
continued

190
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 2 (continued). Family-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Howes and 
Rubenstein (1981)
Howes and Stewart
(1987)
• 40 children (20 in 
family day care) 
(18 to 24 months)
• Eight centers
16 family day-care 
homes
• 33% African American, 
Hispanic, or Asian
67% white
Predominantly two-
parent families
Middle socioeconomic 
status
• 55 children (ages 11 
to 30 months)
• 55 family day-care
homes
• Heterogeneous social 
classes and parent 
educational levels 
(including 18% low 
socioeconomic 
status)
82% two-parent 
families
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of class-
room quality
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of family
day-care quality
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Peer social behaviors
• Peer social interaction
• Structure of peer play
• Play with peers
• Play with objects
• Play with adult care-
givers
• Among family day-care homes, smaller group sizes
and the presence of older peers in the group posi-
tively inﬂuenced children’s vocalization to peers.
• No overall signiﬁcant differences in the frequency of
socially directed peer behaviors were found be-
tween family day care and center care.
• A greater number of changes in the family day-care
provider was associated with lower-level play with
objects and peers.
• For boys, earlier childcare entry and fewer changes
in provider were also associated with higher-level
play with objects.
• Higher overall quality of care was related to higher
levels of competent play with adults and with ob-
jects; for girls, the relationship was also signiﬁcant
for higher-level play with peers.

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
191
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Kontos (1994)
Kontos, Howes,
Shinn, and Galinsky
(1995); Galinsky,
Howes, Kontos, and
Shinn (1994)
• 57 children (ages 2.5 to
4 years)
• 30 family day-care
providers
• Middle socioeconomic 
status
82% two-parent families
• 226 children (ages 10
months to 5 years)
• 226 family day-care
providers
• 42% white
23% African American
31% Hispanic
Heterogeneous social 
classes and maternal 
educational levels
81% two-parent families
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of family
day-care quality
• Direct assessment and teacher rat-
ings of child outcomes
• Contemporaneous design
• Observational assessment of family
day-care quality
• Direct assessment, observer rat-
ings, and caregiver ratings of child
outcomes
• Cognitive play
• Intelligence quotient
• Language interaction
• Receptive vocabulary
• Social play and socia-
bility
• Peer play
• Attachment security
• Social adjustment/be-
havior problems
• Object play
• Use of language 
• Children in family day-care homes that were rated at
a higher level of overall quality were signiﬁcantly
less likely to engage in simple cognitive and social
play, were rated as signiﬁcantly more sociable, and
scored higher in receptive vocabulary, controlling for
maternal education, caregiver experience, and con-
ditions of caregiving.
• Children in higher-quality family day-care homes
who had mothers with more education and care-
givers with less experience were rated as signiﬁ-
cantly more sociable.
• Children in higher-quality family day-care homes
who had mothers with a higher level of education
scored signiﬁcantly higher in receptive vocabulary.
• Children with sensitive and responsive caregivers
were more likely to be securely attached to their
caregivers.
• Children who spent more time with their caregiver,
were cared for in homes with more children per
adult, and had caregivers who used more-respon-
sive interactions engaged in a greater amount of
play with objects; children with more-educated
mothers and more-responsive caregivers engaged in
more high-level object play.
• Larger group sizes and child–staff ratios were relat-
ed to more peer play.
continued

192
John M. Love, Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth
Table 2 (continued). Family-based Childcare Studies That Examine Quality of Care and Child Outcomes
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Kontos, Howes,
Shinn, and Galinsky
(1995); Galinsky,
Howes, Kontos, and
Shinn (1994)
(continued)
Galinsky, Howes,
and Kontos (1995)
• 130 children (ages 1 to
5, approximate; exact
ages not given)
• 130 family day-care
providers
• Geographic diversity
(other sample demo-
graphics not provided)
• Pre-post design
• Observational assessment of family
day-care quality
• Direct assessment and observer
ratings of child outcomes
• Peer play
• Attachment security
• Object play
• Higher global quality was related to more object
play, more high-level object play, and better child at-
tachment security; however, higher global quality
was related to less high-level peer play.
• Neither family background characteristics nor child-
care characteristics (structural or process quality)
predicted children’s language development or social
adjustment.
• Maternal working conditions and number of hours
worked were unrelated to all aspects of children’s
development.
• Children with caregivers who had participated in a
16-hour training course behaved in a manner indica-
tive of a secure attachment with their caregiver,
were more engaged in activities (such as listening
to stories), and spent less time wandering aimlessly,
compared with children whose caregivers did not 
receive the special training course.
Studies using pre-post designs

Investing in Effective Childcare and Education: Lessons from Research
193
Sample size/ages/
Relationships between quality
Study (date)
demographics
Design and methodology
Outcomes measured
and child outcomes
Lamb, Hwang,
Broberg, and 
Bookstein (1988)
• 140 children (ages 1 to
2). Follow-up at ages 2
to 4.
• 53 centers
• 33 family day-care 
homes
54 maternal home care 
situations
• 100% Swedish children
Range of socioeco-
nomic status repre-
sented
100% two-parent 
families
Older mothers 
(average age = 31)
• Longitudinal design
• Observational assessment of care-
giver quality and home quality; par-
ent ratings of social support
• Direct assessment of child out-
comes
• Personal maturity (in-
dependence, ego re-
siliency, and control)
• Sociability 
• Adult-child interaction
• Peer play
• Activity level
• The quality of care (regardless of type of provider)
and family social support predicted personal maturi-
ty and social skills with familiar peers and unfamiliar
adults.
• As measured at follow-up, there was no signiﬁcant
relationship between type of childcare and children’s
sociability or personal maturity.
Studies using longitudinal designs
Note: The table includes only ﬁndings that the authors report as statistically signiﬁcant.
Source: Love, J.M., P.Z. Schochet, and A.L. Meckstroth. 1996. Are They in Any Real Danger? What Research Does—and Doesn’t—Tell Us About Child Care Quality and Children’s Well-Being. Child
Care Research and Policy Papers: Lessons from Child Care Research Funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., May.


Chapter 7
Mapping and Documenting 
Effective Programming
Judith L. Evans
Participants and professionals observing or engaged in early child-
hood activities and programs tend to judge whether an activity or
program is effective based on intuitive, overall impressions and,
sometimes, mental checklists of “critical features.” The signs of an ef-
fective early childhood program include a range of factors deﬁned by
professionals based on their individual experiences and goals, which
may differ substantially. Figure 1 lists examples of the questions asked
by early childhood professionals when evaluating the effectiveness of
an early childhood program.
To examine in greater depth the effectiveness of early childhood
programs, the Bernard van Leer Foundation launched the Effective-
ness Initiative (EI) in January 1999 in partnership with the Consulta-
tive Group on Early Childhood Care and Development. The question
being explored in this initiative is, “What makes early childhood pro-
grams effective, in a variety of contexts, for diverse participants and
stakeholders—from children, to parents, to community members and
policymakers?” The emphasis in this initiative is on the effectiveness
of the process of early child development (ECD) programming, rather
than speciﬁc outcomes of ECD programs. This chapter describes the
key features of the initiative, including the participating programs,
the organization and underlying assumptions, and the qualitative re-
search tools and strategies used to collect and analyze program data.
195

196
Judith L. Evans
For the Program
•Is the child central to what is going on? For example, when there are discussions about the
program, is the focus on what is happening for children or on the facilities?
•What is the nature of child-adult interactions?
•Do the children stay “on task” when a stranger walks in?
•Is there a predictable structure to each day (timetable) that includes unstructured time and
space?
•Are children and adults healthy and clean? What does “healthy and clean” mean, given the
context?
•What is the nature of parent (mother and father) involvement in the program?
•Is there an acknowledgment of the value of individual differences and contributions?
•Are people able to adapt to new situations?
•Are the early childhood activities based on cultural characteristics? For example, are children
allowed to look at adults directly? Are children allowed to ask questions of adults?
•What evidence is there for the kind of training that caregivers, teachers, parents, and supervi-
sors have received?
•What kind of support (e.g., follow-up, advice) is provided to teachers, parents, and other par-
ticipants by the organizers of the program?
•Is the program comprehensive? Does it address children’s physical development (health and
nutrition) and psychosocial development and the rights of children and families?
•Are there opportunities for children and adults to express themselves verbally and creatively?
•Does the curriculum include music and drama and other expressive opportunities?
•What use is made of storytelling?
•Is there fun, laughter, and joy (“a spring in the feet and a sparkle in the eye”) of the children
and caregivers?
For the Setting
•Is the environment conducive to learning? For example, is children’s work displayed and are
there materials and opportunities for exploration and problem solving?
•Is there a high level of activity and constructive noise?
•What is the child-to-adult ratio? Is it appropriate for the context? Does it vary based on the age
of the children?
•What kinds of “coverage” does the program provide? Is it inclusive or exclusive in enrolling
children with disabilities?
•Is there a monitoring and evaluation system in place?
•Is provision made for children’s transition to primary school?
•Are people (of all ages) asking interesting questions for which they may not necessarily have a
“right” answer”?
•Do people (of all ages) acknowledge they do not know all the answers, and are they willing to
engage with others in seeking solutions?
Source: Brainstorming session, 1999 Meeting of the Consultative Group on Early Childhood Care and Development.
Figure 1. Early Childhood Programs: Possible Indicators of Effectiveness

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
197
The EI is an in-depth, 5-year exploration to better understand 
in what ways programs are effective for diverse participants, com-
munities, and cultures. The initiative involves a qualitative study of
programs that have been in place for at least 10 years and the devel-
opment of methods and “maps” for examining other programs in
the future. The goals are twofold:
• To gain deeper insight into the components of effective early
childhood programs
• To stimulate interagency and international dialogue on effec-
tiveness, beyond the present scant measures and indicators of
program success.
The EI also is designed to test the use of qualitative research meth-
ods, which are relatively well developed in other disciplines, in inter-
national early childhood development. The initiative is not expected
to yield a template for successful or ideal programs, but will “map”
dimensions of effectiveness in speciﬁc programs and identify patterns
of effectiveness across diverse settings.
Available data, published during the past 5 years by the Consul-
tative Group on Early Childhood Care and Development, the World
Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and other organiza-
tions, document the economic benefits of investments in early
childhood. These data emphasize long-term economic outcomes
benefiting individuals and industrialized societies, as measured by
economic productivity. Although the ECD field has benefited great-
ly from the research generating these data, the findings should not
constrain the continued search for effective early childhood pro-
grams. An economic emphasis narrows understanding of the full
impact of effective early childhood programs on individual chil-
dren, families, and communities. Also, current research findings
emphasize preschool programs, and the potential benefits of home-
based, parent support, and community development programs
have not been explored in any depth.
One of the challenges for the EI is to create a set of methods and
data that are broader than, but as persuasive as, current economic

198
Judith L. Evans
analyses of the beneﬁts of early childhood programs. The aim is to
understand the impact of a wide variety of early childhood strategies
and to complement the quantitative research already conducted with
qualitative research tools and methods.
Key questions for the EI are: What makes an early childhood pro-
gram “work”? What aspects of a program are working? What can we
learn from programs that feel “right” in some ways but wrong in oth-
er ways? How does a program change over time? Are effective pro-
grams always effective? Are programs effective for only one set of
stakeholders, or are they meeting the needs of different sets of stake-
holders? Are they effective in the same ways for the various stake-
holders? Can a program that is failing to make a difference in one di-
mension nevertheless be effective in another?
The Effectiveness Initiative
The participants, organization, assumptions, and status of the EI are
described below. A discussion of the tools and strategies being used
follows.
Participants
The EI focuses on ten programs selected from more than forty pro-
grams funded by a variety of organizations, foundations, donor agen-
cies, and government. The ten programs are geographically diverse
and illustrate a variety of approaches to ECD. Each program appears
to meet the deﬁnition of an effective ECD program, that is, a program
that meets the developmental and cultural needs of young children
and their families in ways that enable them to thrive. Figure 2 brieﬂy
describes the programs.
Organization
Organization of the EI has involved selection and preparation of re-
search teams, framing of meaningful questions, and development of
processes to enhance individuals’ skills in listening, understanding,
and interpreting people’s experiences and situations.

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
199
1. Madrasa Resource Center (MRC) — Kenya
The Madrasa Project was created to provide a preschool experience for young children (ages
3–6 years) to help prepare them for school and provide basic religious teachings. The program
has been expanded to Zanzibar and Uganda. The MRC, which is based in Mombasa, provides
training and support. Uniquely, the program:
•Was developed by the Muslim community in response to its needs
•Combines traditional Koranic teachings and more secular education
•Prepares children to enroll and perform better in primary school
•Is experimenting with a unique ﬁnancing system (community-based endowments)
•Provides a model for other Muslim countries.
2. Assoçiação de Criança Familia e Desenvolvimento (CFD) — Mozambique
Since 1995, CFD (the Association for the Child, Family, and Development) has focused on a 
variety of community-based activities, which include enabling almost 500 community network
groups to systematize spontaneous ECD activities. Uniquely, the CFD program:
•Enlists community network groups as active development agents, which is crucial for the
emerging Mozambique civil society
•Stimulates daily recreational activities for children based on culturally appropriate methods
•Restores traditional healing ceremonies to help children and families in psychosocial distress
after Mozambique’s civil war
•Shifted from Save the Children’s Children and War Project to effectively support community 
initiatives within a broader mission and a longer-term perspective.
3. Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) — India
Since 1972, SEWA has been committed to the empowerment of women and the creation of 
autonomous unions organized for women who work in the informal sector. Since 1989, SEWA
has been organizing and operating crèches (for children ages birth–3 years) for women working
in the tobacco industry in rural 
Kheda district and, more recently, in urban settings. Uniquely, the program:
•Was the ﬁrst trade union in India to begin childcare services
•Was the ﬁrst organization to address the needs of tobacco workers who had not been 
organized by the major central unions
•Was the ﬁrst organization to systematically establish crèches and create a ﬁnancing 
mechanism for them
•Works at the grassroots and policy level simultaneously.
4. Association for the Advancement of the Ethiopian Family and Child (ALMAYA) — Israel
ALMAYA originated in 1985 as the Community and Educational Project for Beta Israel, an 
ancient Jewish community in Ethiopia which emigrated to Israel. The project became an 
independent, nonproﬁt association in 1990. The National ALMAYA Resource, Dissemination,
and Training Center supervises programs in approximately twenty-ﬁve towns throughout Israel,
Figure 2. Programs Included in the Effectiveness Initiative
continued

200
Judith L. Evans
Figure 2 (continued). Programs Included in the Effectiveness Initiative
trains paraprofessionals and professionals, develops educational materials to enhance the
community’s Ethiopian heritage, and educates others about Beta-Israel’s Ethiopian origins and
life in Israel. Uniquely, the program:
•Exempliﬁes working with immigrant children and families in Israel
•Effectively responds to large waves of immigration
•Demonstrates how Ethiopian paraprofessionals can serve as agents of community change and
role models, linking their community with the broader Israeli society
•Provides a model for paraprofessional training that incorporates cultural sensitivity and on-the-
job and regular in-service training.
5. Community-based Family Education (Mount Pinatubo) — Philippines
This program was initiated with communities affected by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. Based
on an assessment of local culture, programs were developed with the community and include
early childhood activities, parent education, and micro-enterprise projects. Income from the 
latter is shared equally by families, the cooperative, and the program. Uniquely, the program:
•Works effectively within the community to deﬁne the community’s needs
•Exempliﬁes how to respond in an emergency situation
•Illustrates the synergies possible with an integrated, multipronged approach
•Illustrates how nongovernmental organizations can work with government and communities to
achieve sustainable programs
•Provides an example of community-derived funding for an early childhood project.
6. Proyecto de Mejoramiento Educativo, de Salud y del Ambiente (PROMESA) — Colombia
This integrated community-based early childhood education program was designed initially as
an alternative participatory approach to ECD that could serve as a model of integrated social
development and as a research and development project. Beginning in 1978 with 100 families
in four small farming and ﬁshing villages on the coast of Colombia, the program now serves 
approximately 7,000 families along the coast and in the interior, and variations of the approach
are being implemented elsewhere in Colombia and in other countries. Uniquely, the program:
•Relies on parents and community leaders as the main educational agents in the program
•Uses project staff as facilitators in development and links to other institutions
•Emphasizes interinstitutional coordination locally and regionally
•Emphasizes the children’s program as the basis for integrated and sustainable social devel-
opment
•Integrates evaluation, monitoring, and research.
7. Programa No-formal de Educación Inicial (PRONOEI) — Peru
This began as a nutrition program in the mid-1970s and evolved into a community-operated
preschool. Later it became a model for nonformal education and was adopted by the Ministry 
of Education. Uniquely, the program:
•Was developed in collaboration with the community and at its request
•Adapted a proven curriculum model (the High/Scope curriculum)
continued

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
201
Figure 2 (continued). Programs Included in the Effectiveness Initiative
•Used resources from the community for implementation
•Used men from the community as teachers
•Has been evaluated several times
•Has been adopted ofﬁcially as a national model program and is replicated in other parts of
Latin America and elsewhere.
8. Samenspel (Playing Together/Joint Action) — Netherlands
Samenspel was established in 1989 as a small-scale project to test strategies for reaching im-
migrant 
families (primarily from Morocco and Turkey) and to explore ways to encourage mothers with
young children to participate in play afternoons. Training programs for teams of multi-ethnic
play leaders developed gradually. Samenspel groups can be found at play-group and communi-
ty centers and within self-help and immigrant organizations. Uniquely, the program:
•Provides an informal, low-key, and easily accessible mechanism for introducing immigrant
women and children to the Dutch language and culture
•Emphasizes capacity-building based on experiential learning that draws from people’s knowl-
edge and experience
•Uses a ﬂexible and adaptable approach for working with people from different contexts who
have similar needs.
9. Agueda Movement (Bela Vista) — Portugal
The Agueda Movement began with creation of the Bela Vista preschool and is a conscious effort
to provide for children who are socially marginalized. Outreach efforts to raise awareness led to
community-based action and more inclusive activities to reduce duplication among Portugal’s
various social services and to increase access for children and families that are not being served.
Uniquely, the program:
•Works within the infrastructure to make services more appropriate
•Raises awareness at community and national levels
•Develops additional services, as required, to meet identiﬁed needs
•Has a nonhierarchical organizational structure and decisionmaking process.
10. Madres Guias (Guide Mothers) — Honduras
This home- and center-based preschool program is designed to help children transition easily
from home to preschool and then to primary school. The service providers, Guide Mothers, are
local women trained to work with families in their homes and with children as they enter
preschool. A radio program associated with the effort provides child development messages.
Uniquely, the program:
•Has a well-developed curriculum and training process
•Plans to develop a training institute to train others in the country and elsewhere using their
model
•Has a well-developed social support network for responding quickly to emergencies (e.g., the
devastation by Hurricane Mitch).

202
Judith L. Evans
Research Teams
For each of the ten programs, teams of four or more persons (general-
ly, two local and two nonlocal) have been organized and consist of
the program staff and local consultants, staff from other EI programs
and the Bernard van Leer Foundation, experts in relevant disciplines
(e.g., statistics, data analysis, and cost-beneﬁt studies), and staff from
international organizations funding ECD programs. These teams de-
velop the initial site-speciﬁc questions and processes for engaging di-
verse stakeholders in “mapping” the details, evolution, and experi-
ences of a program. The teams are supported by an advisory group of
international early childhood professionals and foundation staff.
They meet periodically to share their tools, methods, experiences,
questions, concerns, and understanding.
Meaningful Questions
The framing of meaningful questions is key to generating under-
standing. Too often, development workers and/or funders ask ques-
tions that may limit people’s responses, may not be salient, and
may not reveal the real meaning of people’s experiences. Getting
beyond what we already know how to ask and hear is extremely
difficult. In fact, Pearce (1971, p. 70) claims that, “We hear only the
question to which we are capable of finding an answer.” For the EI,
the challenge is: Can some new questions be developed?
The EI is speciﬁcally exploring tools that help validate intuition
(i.e., to better articulate or justify the sense that things are, or are not,
working), which cannot be justiﬁed by a checklist or standardized in-
strument. By creating additional methods for observing and making
sense of the contexts of programs, the EI can enhance the develop-
ment workers’ “toolkit” and help identify adequate language to vali-
date “out-of-the-box” thinking.
New Processes
In addition to being able to ask new questions, listening better 
to better understand responses is an organizing feature of the 
EI. “Listening” does not denote a condescending, perfunctory, 

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
203
half-hearted effort of forming conclusions as information is pre-
sented. Rather, listening means finding ways to receive people’s 
responses fully before trying to analyze, interpret, or categorize
their meaning; it means “staying open” to hearing, seeing, and 
understanding.
The EI also emphasizes use of an appropriate lens for obtaining
and viewing data. This lens combines an objective (observer or out-
sider’s) perspective (the “etic” approach) and a subjective (actor or in-
sider’s) perspective (the “emic” approach) (Levi-Strauss 1966). The
synthesis of these two approaches to listening will yield a fuller pic-
ture of effective programming than otherwise possible.
Assumptions
The EI staff bring explicit and implicit assumptions to the initiative
based on their own practices and experiences. They have an agenda
for action and strive to offer something to help others change (im-
prove) their lives, and they hold certain beliefs about the nature of 
effectiveness. These beliefs, which have been incorporated into the
EI, are as follows:
• Effectiveness cannot be deﬁned in terms of a universally agreed-upon
truth. No single dimension would make every early childhood
program “effective.” Truths are multiple, and disagreement
about the components of an effective program is part of the
process of understanding.
• Effectiveness is not a static concept. The effectiveness of an effort
changes over time and with changing conditions.
• Effectiveness cannot be placed on a linear scale that ranks programs
from most effective to least effective.
• Effectiveness resides in an organization and varies within an organiza-
tion. Because some parts of an organization may be stronger
than others, effectiveness is best represented as a proﬁle.
• Effectiveness takes time to identify and understand. The essence of ef-
fective early childhood programming cannot be captured in a
snapshot. Understanding effectiveness requires living with, and

204
Judith L. Evans
experiencing, multiple, dynamic situations and time to recog-
nize effectiveness in both process and outcomes.
• Effectiveness is the result of experience and is a composite of many
experiences.
Current Status
The EI is well under way, and the energy, enthusiasm, and commitment
of the EI participants is stimulating, directly and indirectly, a wide
range of activities. The EI is already experiencing the beneﬁts of synergy
among the different programs, team members, and methods. Multiple
team meetings have been held at each site, members of all teams have
met in a series of workshops, and both regional meetings and interna-
tional conferences have been convened. These meetings have provided
opportunities to create a shared vision, probe serious questions collec-
tively and publicly, formulate questions more thoughtfully, share
strategies and questions in teams’ working language (e.g., Spanish), pre-
sent developments to audiences unfamiliar with the EI, and suggest
possibilities for applying the process and results in other contexts.
Qualitative Research Tools: Meaning in Language
Qualitative research offers validated and tested tools that can be
adapted for examining all the dimensions and complexity of ECD
programs (Coffey and Atkinson 1996; Moustakas 1994). Utilizing
data sources such as individual stories and anecdotes, interviews,
ﬁeld notes, recordings of natural interactions, documents, pictures,
and other graphic representations, qualitative research can capture
human experiences that are not approachable with quantitative
methods (Geertz 1983).
The EI aims to develop various analytical tools to reveal a layered
understanding, and different facets, of meaning. This research avoids
a reductionist summing up of data, recognizes and explores complex-
ity as much as possible, and views people as analyzers of meaning
even as they create meaning. People live their lives embedded in 
language, so why do researchers turn to numbers to deﬁne truth?

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
205
Language is at the heart of meaning. As noted by Barritt and col-
leagues (1979), qualitative research seeks data dominated by language
and cultural understanding, not numbers. Numbers are important,
but they should not be the only points of reference. By focusing on
language, the EI can highlight aspects of experience that might other-
wise go unmarked. Barritt and colleagues (1979, ch. 6, p. 83) note
that, “Analysis of language requires rhetorical skill, the attention to
meaning, and the struggle to say it right; we cannot escape the tradi-
tion; we have to use it.”
The EI offers an opportunity to validate an approach that allows
people to tell their stories in their own language, without others’ im-
mediate classiﬁcation, censorship, or interpretation. Collectively, the
teams interpret the stories together and broaden the basis for analysis
in the hope of truly hearing what is being told. This approach will
provide insight into a community’s values, beliefs, and practices and
how to work within a culture to foster more equality—insights that
are more difﬁcult to obtain with other participatory techniques, such
as Participatory Learning for Action (PLA). Robert Chambers’ (1997)
reﬂections on the development of the PLA methods, which he has
successfully promoted, reveal that he has realized the limits of such
open methodologies to “get at” meaning. Using open methodologies
for gathering data is not sufﬁcient, and meaning can only be under-
stood by working more skillfully with data that are generated in vari-
ous ways. When data are reduced, knowledge and understanding are
compromised.
Most of the tools in the EI toolkit have been used previously by the
EI participants and are being sharpened and used in different ways.
The EI teams are expanding the use of questions, storytelling, and
other narrative means and are learning and applying new methods of
analysis and interpretation to better understand the effectiveness of
early childhood programs. The tools being used include the develop-
ment and organization of questions from different perspectives and
the use of analogies to “map” program contexts, the gathering of sto-
ries about effective programs from groups of participants, and inter-
views with various stakeholders.

206
Judith L. Evans
The Initial Questions
For the EI, an advisory committee of early childhood programmers,
policymakers, and practitioners initially met to develop a set of ques-
tions about the nature of effective organizations. These questions,
which were organized into different “cuts,” or “maps,” of a program’s
history, were shared during initial site visits to encourage the EI par-
ticipants to reﬂect on their organization’s history and the evolution
of the program in the future. All programs adopted this initial set of
questions, which consists of a set of overlapping “maps” for describ-
ing a project over time, beginning with the project’s origin. The time-
line and questions for each program relate to key events, change
points, and crucial moments in the program’s evolution. The speciﬁc
dimensions of these “cuts” are as follows:
• Inﬂuences. This cut consists of a description of everything that
has inﬂuenced the program over time (e.g., economic, political,
and cultural effects and changes; participants’ perception of
changes). Two aims are to capture the effect of serendipity and
personal choices on the program and to understand the effects
of available ﬁnancial and physical resources.
• Attitudes and Values. This cut is to identify and explore the under-
lying implicit and explicit assumptions of program participants
(e.g., the values and beliefs about children’s development and
the way children learn, the value of intervening and the types
of intervention thought to be appropriate). Attitudes and values
affect the types of activities undertaken in a program.
• Organizational Structure. This cut involves creating an organiza-
tional chart and describing changes over time (e.g., in the pro-
gram’s leadership).
• Organizational Culture. This cut is to identify processes within
the organization for addressing problems, overcoming obsta-
cles, making decisions, recruiting, hiring and training staff,
and other concerns. This cut also provides information on
who participates in the program at different times and in dif-
ferent ways.

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
207
• Linkages. This cut charts the types of linkages formed with other
organizations, individuals, donors, and government, as well as
the organization’s networks and its roles in these networks.
• Outcomes. This cut highlights the inﬂuences of the organization
(e.g., on children and families, staff, community, other organi-
zations) from the perspectives of various stakeholders and
places the organization in a broader context (e.g., in relation to
government policy).
• Mapping the Future. Speculative mapping is used to identify how
key stakeholders envisage the future and the development of
the program over time with respect to its underlying philoso-
phy; assumptions, goals, and activities; organization; decision-
making processes; linkages; and outcomes.
A River Analogy
The course of an ECD program can be compared to the life of a riv-
er, developing from a small spring or stream with a certain course
or direction and influenced by many things as it flows from small
beginnings into a lake or ocean. The depth and breadth of rivers,
and projects, are determined by multiple contextual factors. Some
flow in a predictable path, but most are diverted in some way from
their natural course; at times, they are fed by tributaries and widen
to cover more ground, and other times they shrink from drought;
sometimes, dams impede their progress or cause them to flood and
destroy fertile ground; some rivers flow into lakes and maintain
their identity, while others flow into the ocean to become part of 
a broader sea, losing their uniqueness. Programs, too, progress 
in distinctive ways, and their courses and contours can be traced
and mapped.
This type of analogy has been, and can be, used to spark creativity
and help program teams tell and share their story with others. For the
EI, the river analogy has helped participants visualize their projects;
encouraged staff to share their experiences differently; stimulated
lively discussions about key events, inﬂuences, and outcomes; and
helped participants gain a deeper understanding about the dynamics

208
Judith L. Evans
of their program. Such discussions would not have arisen with the
application of more standardized instruments, such as interviews and
questionnaires.
Storytelling
Telling one’s story is not always easy or natural, and it may be cen-
sored or “cut short” by others. Telling a program’s story is compound-
ed by two additional factors. First, the program implementers or ben-
eﬁciaries do not necessarily know what outsiders want to know about
their story, and, second, listeners may not hear the story as experi-
enced by the teller. Outsiders’ retelling of a program’s story may not
be recognizable to the program participants, and outsiders may not
be able to identify aspects that make the program effective or are 
perceived by others as being effective. Eliciting the full richness of a
story is a challenge for the EI and other initiatives.
Storytelling is used to access different sources, data, and ways of
processing data. By gathering and analyzing stories, a better under-
standing can be gained of effective early childhood settings. The EI
participants are asked to think of a moment in any ECD setting when
they said, “This is really working.” They are asked to describe this
moment in writing in as much detail as possible. The stories are then
shared among the group, and the group “codes” their meaning by
identifying all words that have meaning and combining these later to
identify themes. By analyzing and interpreting their stories in this
way, the participants gain a better understanding of their shared con-
cepts, attitudes, and practices and become aware of different views
about the relevant features of a successful program. This storytelling
method enables researchers to:
• Focus on the meaning of effectiveness in a particular ECD set-
ting (i.e., understanding the participants’ understanding of ef-
fective ECD programming)
• Generate a data set without requiring participants to agonize
over writing long essays
• Give participants the tools to analyze their own stories

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
209
• Use stories to identify common and shared themes
• Use themes as a basis for more informed dialogue with those
who are “living the experience.”
Interviews
In the EI, program teams are conducting individual interviews with a
wide variety of stakeholders (i.e., people at the site), who may include
those currently involved in the program (parents, community mem-
bers, staff, direct beneﬁciaries), past participants, local and national
government ofﬁcials, representatives of nongovernmental organiza-
tions, and funders. Summarizing data collected for PROMESA, ﬁgure
3 indicates some of the important themes and issues that may
emerge about a program’s effectiveness from these interviews. The
successes and failures identiﬁed can then be explored further with
the participants.
Individual interviews can enhance understanding of how organi-
zations have evolved and their effects over time. Individuals have
many stories to tell and will have unique and different perceptions of
a program’s evolution, for they have entered the program at different
times and come from diverse backgrounds. Combining their stories
with the perceptions and experiences of persons outside the program
is another challenge in constructing a good, sound story of a pro-
gram’s effectiveness.
Qualitative Research Strategies: Embedded Communications
Each of the tools described above serves a speciﬁc function in gather-
ing and analyzing data. Together, they offer a beginning, integrated
set of activities to help determine effective ECD programming. The
tools are not discrete activities, but are interwoven and form the
toolkit for the EI. Creating the tools and instruments is part of the
strategy to engage EI participants in qualitative research. Teams are
developing and testing tools while also developing strategies for data
analysis. Designing a communication strategy that helps to convey
the EI process as well as outcomes is a related and essential effort. The

210
Judith L. Evans
1. Continuity and stability in an organization (which may lead to solid performance and/or
sedentarianism) vs. change and turnover (which might undercut actions or provide 
dynamism)
2. The importance of “tolerance of ambiguity” vs. an imposing structure
3. The personal growth and development of participants at various program levels, as both
means and end
4. The process of recognizing one’s capacities (at community and institutional levels)
5. The need to construct credibility with communities and funders and the process for doing so
6. Building and maintaining local conﬁdence when operating at a distance
7. Forms of reinforcing internal and intrinsic motivation among program participants
8. The importance of a play approach to learning
9. The timing of separation by project “outsiders” and the effects of separation
10. Voluntarism vs. payment
11. Forms of integration and their implications for functioning; constructing a “transdisciplinary”
view
12. Achieving sustainability; solving immediate problems vs. taking a longer view
13. Respecting local values and cultures and strengthening local customs while introducing new
customs and values; deﬁning the custodian of knowledge
14. The role of “connections” in the success of a program
15. Forms (and effects) of program dissemination
16. Building a workable system for registering and using program information which is not over-
burdening
17. Discretion, tact, and diplomacy as styles of functioning internal to an organization and in 
relation to others outside
18. Organizations as families and the rule of families in organizations, particularly in relation to
handling differences without “breaking apart”
19. The importance of different forms of communication
20. Converting adversity and crisis into opportunity and advantage
21. The place of (or need for) welfare aid (“asistencialismo”) within a program that empha-
sizes empowerment
22. The centrality of people within organizations vs. the centrality of organizations
23. Delegating responsibility
24. Strategies that allow communities and staff members to appropriate (“buy into”) a particu-
lar program philosophy
25. Combining disparate interests in joint actions for the common good; becoming “profes-
sional” without succumbing to difficulties associated with professional organizations,
forms of training, and organizational attitudes.
Source: Myers 1999.
Figure 3. Themes and Issues Emerging About PROMESA in Colombia

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
211
EI is enhancing the ability of all participants to engage openly in a re-
view process that shares results as it proceeds.
Traditional social science research uses a linear communications
model. Researchers (sometimes with funders) choose the research
focus, determine the research questions, and design the research
activities, which usually include data gathering, sorting, analyzing,
and interpreting and the writing up of results. Each step of this
process is accomplished separately in sequence. The goal of this
traditional method is to maintain objectivity in the research, exter-
nal to the person conducting the research. Information is gleaned
as the research moves from one activity to the next, and partici-
pants (respondents) at one stage are usually excluded from the next
stages. Rarely is information gathered, sorted, and reflected back 
to the respondents, giving them a chance to generate other ques-
tions, reshape the study, and dialogue with researchers about the
nature of their experience and knowledge. They are not asked to
help interpret their experience and are frequently not given the 
results of the research. Data technicians also are uninvolved after
they have provided the data. Researchers analyze, write, and report
the research results to an audience, which frequently does not 
include the groups with whom or for whom the research was 
conducted.
The qualitative research approach used in the EI requires a differ-
ent communication model which may be termed embedded commu-
nication (Ilfeld 2000). Ideally, such research allows information to
ﬂow in all directions, through dialogue between diverse stakehold-
ers and through collective design and implementation of the pro-
ject. Three distinct, but interrelated, communication activities with-
in this model are: (1) collecting and gathering raw data and
information, (2) working with and analyzing the information and
data, and (3) communicating the new understandings and knowl-
edge to diverse audiences.
Each activity embodies all the steps in a traditional research de-
sign: framing questions; gathering data, sorting data, analyzing data,
and interpreting data; and writing up or representing these data. The

212
Judith L. Evans
levels of activity represent increasing levels of reﬁnement and polish,
with level 1 focused on manipulating raw data and gathering infor-
mation broadly, level 2 focused on shaping “ﬁrst drafts” and ﬁrst con-
clusions that are discussed with participants in a consultative process,
and level 3 focused on shaping more formalized communications for
audiences within and outside of the participants. The three levels can
be viewed as a spiral, with each level inﬂuencing the others. For 
example, a decision to create a web site (level 3) may trigger a deci-
sion to collect new data and reexamine certain issues (level 1); and a
sorting of information (level 2) from a series of interviews (level 1)
may suggest a new direction for questioning (level 1), a new way to
understand the experience (level 2), or the outline for a potential
video (level 3). Figures 4 and 5 depict and describe the activities in
this embedded communications model for qualitative research.
Figure 4. Embedded Communications Model for Qualitative Research

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
213
Figure 5. The Embedded Communications Model: Description of Activities
Activities:
•Keep personal scrapbooks 
and journals—take notes, 
jot down thoughts and 
experiences regularly
•Conduct meetings, dis-
cussions, and e-mail 
exchanges among parti-
cipants
•Capture and write up spe-
ciﬁc experiences of ideas
(focused documentation)
•Generate understanding 
or insights through work-
shops, observations, site
visits, etc.
•Collect program data, 
including anecdotes and
stories, quotes, statistics,
interviews, etc.
•Brainstorm and collectively
problem-solve, recall, 
explore, and question
•Review existing documen-
tation and records to select
those relevant to the effort
•Record (photograph, video-
tape, and audiotape)
1. Getting it Down:
Collecting, capturing, 
and generating raw 
data
3. Making Products:
Formatting knowledge 
for communications with 
diverse audiences
2. Working with the Data:
Applying lenses; sorting, 
analyzing, and framing 
knowledge
Activities:
•Write professional, scien-
tiﬁc, popular nonﬁction, 
and creative and dramatic
descriptions
•Develop audiovisual ma-
terials (e.g., videos, photo
documentaries, graphic 
illustrations, PowerPoint™
presentations, slide shows,
plays, television and radio
shows)
•Develop meeting and work-
shop activities
•Conduct public and profes-
sional awareness and edu-
cation campaigns using
supportive materials (e.g.,
booklets and brochures,
websites, CD-ROMs, media
spots)
•Develop proposals and 
research designs for further 
work
•Design program activities 
and plans for future pro-
gram actions
Activities:
•Sort materials, often using 
a particular focus or “lens”
(e.g., all materials having to
do with turning points, or
all topics of interest to par-
ents and parent educators)
•Analyze themes and high-
light key elements, con-
cepts, and information
•Create a framework for 
organizing ﬁndings (usually
suggested by the themes
and insights that emerge)
•Shape documents and 
materials into a logical and
intuitively meaningful order
•Embellish frameworks with 
details, examples, and illus-
trations taken from the raw
data
Ideally, all participants in a qualitative research activity are viewed
as communicators. Mechanisms will be needed to capture each par-
ticipant’s and group’s collective ideas, thoughts, experiences, and
concerns. Participants should identify how they will record their
thought processes. To record private thoughts and insights consis-
tently across a group, the individuals can be asked to keep “books of

214
Judith L. Evans
shadows,” or notebooks, where they jot notes, make sketches, paste
quotations, and otherwise capture the “shadows” of ideas, thoughts,
and experiences in one place. Group devices for collating informa-
tion (see ﬁgure 6) could include “the wall” (a wall or bulletin board
where people can place representations of the various kinds of knowl-
edge they are gathering). Other group devices, such as an electronic
Figure 6. Matrix of Learning at Program Sites: Questions and Issues
Site
What are 
How did 
Questions 
we learning?
we learn it?
raised/implications
By doing it, sharing and
building by using new
methodologies, develop-
ing participatory tools
and instruments, creat-
ing space for discussion
and reﬂection, using the
ﬂexibility of the program.
Through daily recording,
observing, regular meet-
ings, focus group discus-
sions, home visiting, in-
terviewing.
How to ensure that what we
are doing is also a relevant
process for the program and 
its actors; how to promote
changes within the program;
how to safeguard the demands
generated by the process; 
learn more about childrearing
patterns and ﬁnd ways to have
them taken into account by 
policymakers.
Organize and analyze informa-
tion; apply what we have
learned from other teams and
partners; documentation?; ulti-
mate aim — self-sustaining
communities that can address
their own situation.
Build bridges among
the different actors;
learn from and get
children involved 
regardless of age; 
listen to all the 
voices; strengthen
self-concept within
Latin America; value
our experience.
Learning to ask the
right questions at the
right time, and to
simplify and modify
information for pro-
gram partners, need
for more in-depth
look at program.
Peru
Philippines
continued

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
215
bulletin board, a shared ﬁling system, a group Intranet site, or book-
shelves and tables for arraying materials, also could be used.
Figure 6 presents a matrix used in the EI to collate information
gathered within and between sites. These types of matrices are use-
ful for identifying issues to address and sharing information and
experiences.
Figure 6 (continued). Matrix of Learning at Program Sites: Questions and Issues
Questions that 
Questions that we 
Experience that 
we ask ourselves
ask other programs
we like to share
Issues
How do we estab-
lish limits for data
gathering; how can
we get to know
more about other
teams’ work, and
learn from them;
how to contribute 
to generate effec-
tiveness within the
program, even when
the El ends; what
impact are we going
to have on different
stakeholders.
Interrelatedness of
tools, capacity build-
ing, techniques, and
strategies.
Charts from commu-
nities, work on pro-
ﬁles and attitudes,
organizing data, good
ideas for improving
communications.
What did they learn
from passing on
leadership to locals;
livelihood projects;
advocacy; training
and capacity build-
ing; migrants and
displaced families;
child-to-child ex-
changes; communi-
cations; workshops
with everyone.
Return of information
and capacity to build
knowledge from ex-
perience; recognize
the changes that ex-
perience generates.
Share work in prog-
ress (speciﬁcally,
training of govern-
ment day-care work-
ers) and how these
maximize beneﬁts;
generate more infor-
mation with commu-
nities; encourage ad-
vocacy to inﬂuence
policymakers.
Limits of data gath-
ering, insights into
other programs’
strengths, the El’s
way of exploration,
impact on different
stakeholders.
Application of the
learning to strength-
en our program; inte-
gration of program
content and ap-
proach with tools
and methods; form
of documentation.

216
Judith L. Evans
In any group, each individual will offer different communications
skills, interests, and aptitudes—as an articulator of ideas and
thoughts, notetaker, interviewer, organizer of material, systems
thinker, analyst, or tracker of details. Some individuals are more 
comfortable writing, whereas others prefer speaking, listening, pho-
tographing, taping, or devising actions. The group should embrace
the contributions of all the individuals and enable them to partici-
pate fully in the documentation and communication effort.
The exchange of knowledge is both enriched and distilled by the
codifying of it. A collating committee can sort through and track the
information collected from individuals and the group. Codifying the
knowledge improves the chances that knowledge will be exchanged
effectively. For this reason, communications and documentation are
integral parts of every activity and should be embedded throughout
the qualitative research project.
Conclusion
The EI effort is pursuing the development and use of a variety of tools
for gathering and processing data to achieve a better understanding
of the observations made and to learn from the process. Whereas
quantitative research begins with a blueprint of ﬁxed and prescribed
methods and procedures that are used with conformity across all
sites, qualitative research consciously avoids having a normative blue-
print and seeks to identify patterns and individual differences in case
studies that would not become evident in research based on ﬁxed as-
sumptions. The qualitative research approach adopted for the EI en-
ables researchers to obtain both information and insights on process.
The research outcomes may conﬁrm intuitive understandings and
validate programming decisions that are made based on these under-
standings. Beyond outcomes, however, the EI effort is equally or even
more valuable because of the process undertaken. More than ﬁfty
people from around the world have embarked on a journey together
and are actively engaged in a dialogue to generate questions and
methodologies to address these questions which will contribute far

Mapping and Documenting Effective Programming
217
beyond the EI. The cross-site exchanges, periodic meetings of all team
members, and frequent sharing of information and activities foster
joint ownership of qualitative research tools and strategies that can
be used to assess ECD programs in a wide variety of early childhood
settings. This type of ongoing evaluation is needed to support contin-
ued learning and improvement in ECD programming. Qualitative re-
views and evaluation should be built into all programs as an impor-
tant measure for ensuring that the scarce resources for ECD are
invested wisely in effective programs. Overall, the EI promises to pro-
vide the ECD ﬁeld a better understanding of the requirements for cre-
ating effective ECD programs in diverse settings and contexts, using
diverse programming approaches.
Note
This chapter is adapted from “When ECD Works: Mapping the Con-
tours of Effective Programming,” by G. Salole and J. L. Evans in Early
Childhood Matters #93, a publication of the Bernard van Leer Founda-
tion, and the Coordinators’ Notebook #23, a publication of the Consul-
tative Group on Early Childhood Care and Development.
References
Barritt, L. S., A. J. Beekman, H. Bleeker, and K. Mulderij. 1979.
Science Not Method. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Chambers, R. 1997. Whose Reality Counts? Putting the First Last.
London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Coffey, A., and P. Atkinson. 1996. Making Sense of Qualitative Data:
Complementary Research Strategies. London: Sage Publications.
Geertz, C. 1983. Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive
Anthropology. New York: Basic Books.
Ilfeld, E.M. 2000. Embedded Research. Bernard van Leer Foundation,
The Hague, Netherlands.
Levi-Strauss, C. 1966. The Savage Mind. London: Weidenfeld and
Nicolson.

218
Judith L. Evans
Moustakas, C. 1994. Phenomenological Research Methods. London:
Sage Publications.
Myers, R. 1999. Effectiveness Initiative: An Evaluation of PROMESA:
Report on a Visit to Colombia, August 27 to September 1, 1999.
The Consultative Group on Early Childhood Care and
Development. Tlalcoligia, Mexico.
Pearce, J.C. 1971. The Crack in the Cosmic Egg. New York: Washington
Square Press.

219
Chapter 8
Effective Early Childhood 
Programs: The U.S. Head 
Start Experience
Louisa B. Tarullo
In 2000, the U.S. Head Start program marked its ﬁfth year of develop-
ment and implementation of program performance measures. As the
United States’ premier early childhood education program, Head
Start is leading the way in developing and reporting on accountabili-
ty of services, which Head Start provides each year to more than
800,000 children and their families. From the initial planning of this
accountability system in 1995 to publication of the third progress re-
port (Administration on Children, Youth, and Families 2001), Head
Start has made dramatic progress in establishing outcome-oriented
accountability. The system combines the best attributes of scientiﬁc
research with program-level reporting and monitoring. It is based on
consensus-driven criteria for program accountability.
This chapter describes Head Start’s initiative of program perfor-
mance measures and the Family and Child Experiences Survey, a cen-
tral part of this initiative. Data collected in the survey are being used
to assess Head Start’s outcomes and to reﬁne the overall program.
The Program Performance Measures Initiative
The Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq. 1994) deﬁnes program per-
formance measures as “methods and procedures for measuring, 

220
Louisa B. Tarullo
annually and over longer periods, the quality and effectiveness of
programs operated by Head Start agencies” that will be used to identi-
fy strengths and weaknesses in the Head Start program—both nation-
ally and by region—and to pinpoint areas requiring additional train-
ing and technical assistance. Speciﬁcally, the program performance
measures were developed in accordance with the recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Head Start Quality and Expansion; the
mandate of section 641A(b) of the Head Start Act, as reauthorized in
1994; and the Government Performance and Results Act (Public Law
103–62 of 1993).
In 1995, Head Start undertook a consensus-building process to de-
velop the program performance measures. The process included dis-
cussions with staff and parents in the Head Start program; representa-
tives of early childhood organizations; researchers; experts in
education, child development, and early intervention; and ofﬁcials
in the Head Start bureau of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services.
Conceptual Framework
In 1996–97, Head Start developed a conceptual framework for the
program performance measures and revised and condensed the ini-
tial measures. The conceptual framework uniﬁes and organizes the
measures and shows the linkages between process and outcome mea-
sures for Head Start children and families (see ﬁgure 1).
The conceptual framework is based on the ultimate goal of Head
Start: to promote the social competence of children. Social compe-
tence is deﬁned as a child’s every-day effectiveness in dealing with
the present environment and later responsibilities in school and life.
For a 5-year-old child who is ending preschool and entering primary
school, an important life challenge and key test of social competence
is school readiness (i.e., whether the child has acquired the skills, un-
derstandings, and behaviors that help ensure successful functioning
in the new environment).

Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
221
Head Start has adopted the “whole child” view of school readiness
recommended by the Goal One Technical Planning Group of the U.S.
National Education Goals Panel (Goal One Technical Planning Group
1991, 1993). In this view, school readiness is a multifaceted phenom-
enon comprising ﬁve developmental domains important to a child’s
readiness for school: physical well-being and motor development, so-
cial and emotional development, approaches to learning, language
usage and emerging literacy, and cognition and general knowledge.
Each domain is represented in the battery of measures used to assess
the performance of Head Start programs. The performance measures
account for the interrelatedness of cognitive, emotional, and social
development; physical and mental health; and nutritional needs.
Figure 1. Head Start’s Program Performance Measures: Conceptual Framework

A child’s social competence is at the top of the conceptual frame-
work, depicted as a pyramid. Five objectives support this outcome:
• Objective 1. Enhance children’s healthy growth and develop-
ment.
• Objective 2. Strengthen families as the primary nurturers of
their children.
• Objective 3. Provide children with educational, health, and nu-
tritional services.
• Objective 4. Link children and families to needed community
services.
• Objective 5. Ensure well-managed programs that involve par-
ents in decisionmaking.
Each objective is critical for helping children of low-income fami-
lies attain their full potential. The objectives represent key corner-
stones of the Head Start program. Objectives 1 and 2 represent out-
comes or results that the program is designed to produce. Achieving
both objectives is critical to the ultimate success of Head Start. Be-
cause parent involvement and family support are key tenets of Head
Start, both child and family-oriented outcome measures are included.
Objectives 3, 4, and 5 are on the lower tiers of the pyramid and con-
tain key process measures for attaining objectives 1 and 2 and the ul-
timate goal of enhancing children’s social competence. An important
aspect of the pyramid is the strong empirical connection between the
provision of quality services (process measures) and improvements in
child development (outcome measures).
Program Performance Measures
Head Start has set forth twenty-four program performance measures
grouped under the ﬁve program objectives (see ﬁgure 2).
For each program performance measure, performance indicators
specify how the measure will be assessed. Figure 3 shows a section of
Head Start’s program performance measures matrix, which includes
the objective, performance measure, performance indicator, data
222
Louisa B. Tarullo

Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
223
OBJECTIVE 1: Enhance Children’s Healthy Growth and Development.
1. Head Start children demonstrate improved emergent literacy, numeracy, and 
language skills.
2. Head Start children demonstrate improved general cognitive skills.
3. Head Start children demonstrate improved gross and ﬁne motor skills.
4. Head Start children demonstrate improved positive attitudes toward learning.
5. Head Start children demonstrate improved social behavior and emotional well-being.
6. Head Start children demonstrate improved physical health.
OBJECTIVE 2: Strengthen Families as the Primary Nurturers of Their Children.
7. Head Start parents demonstrate improved parenting skills.
8. Head Start parents improve their self-concept and emotional well-being.
9. Head Start parents make progress toward their educational, literacy, and 
employment goals.
OBJECTIVE 3: Provide Children With Educational, Health, and Nutritional Services.
10. Head Start programs provide developmentally appropriate educational environments.
11. Head Start staff interact with children in a skilled and sensitive manner.
12. Head Start programs support and respect children’s cultures.
13. Head Start assures children receive needed medical, dental, and mental health services.
14. Head Start children receive meals and snacks that meet their daily nutritional needs.
15. Head Start programs provide individualized services for children with disabilities.
OBJECTIVE 4: Link Children and Families to Needed Community Services.
16. Head Start parents link with social service agencies to obtain needed services.
17. Head Start parents link with educational agencies to obtain needed services.
18. Head Start parents link with health care services to obtain needed care.
19. Head Start parents secure childcare in order to work, go to school, or gain 
employment training.
OBJECTIVE 5: Ensure Well-Managed Programs that Involve Parents in Decisionmaking.
20. Head Start programs are well-managed.
21. Head Start parents are involved actively in decisions about program operations.
22. Head Start programs employ qualiﬁed staff.
23. Head Start programs support staff development and training.
24. Head Start programs comply with Head Start regulations.
Figure 2. Head Start’s Program Performance Measures, by Objective

224
Louisa B. Tarullo
source, and 1997–98 data. The performance indicator for the ﬁrst per-
formance measure under objective 1, “Head Start children demon-
strate improved emergent literacy, numeracy, and language skills,” is
a change in the children’s emergent literacy, as measured by assess-
ments of the children.
A more process-oriented measure (not shown) for objective 3 (Pro-
vide children with educational, health, and nutritional services) is
“Head Start assures children receive needed medical, dental, and
mental health services.” The performance indicator for this measure
is the number and percent of Head Start children who received need-
ed medical services as reported by the program.
Progress on the indicators supporting each objective is being docu-
mented in periodic reports. Data are obtained from agency resources
such as Head Start’s program information report (PIR), regional ofﬁce
reports, and outcomes for classrooms, teachers, families, and children
reported in Head Start’s Family and Child Experiences Survey.
OBJECTIVE 1: Enhance Children’s Healthy Growth and Development
Performance
Performance
measure
indicator
Data source
1997–98 Data
1. Head Start (HS) 
HS children’s 
Child Assessment
4-year-old HS children 
children demonstrate 
emergent literacy.
(Woodcock-Johnson ﬁnishing the program had 
improved emergent 
Letter-Wood 
median standard scores of 
literacy, numeracy, 
Identiﬁcation).
89.8 (compared with the 
and language skills.
national mean of 100). HS 
children gained 1.6 points 
from fall to spring (no gain 
compared with norms).
Woodcock-Johnson 
4-year-old HS children 
Dictation.
ﬁnishing the program had 
median standard scores 
of 88.1 (compared with the 
national mean of 100).
In HS, children gained 1.5 
points. In kindergarten, 
children gained 4.6 points.
Figure 3. Sample of Head Start’s Program Performance Measures Matrix

Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
225
Head Start’s Family and Child Experiences Survey
Head Start’s Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) is a 
central part of the program performance measures initiative.
Through FACES, researchers are gathering comprehensive data on
the cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development of chil-
dren participating in Head Start; the characteristics, well-being, and
accomplishments of families; the quality of Head Start classrooms;
and the characteristics, needs, and opinions of teachers and other
staff in Head Start.
The survey provides data on a nationally representative sample of
Head Start programs, centers, classrooms, children, and parents. The
sample is stratiﬁed by three variables: region of the country (north-
east, midwest, south, or west); urbanicity (urban versus rural); and
percentage of minority families in the program (50 percent or more
versus less than 50 percent).
FACES includes six phases of data collection. The ﬁrst phase
(spring 1997) consisted of a ﬁeld test of approximately 2,400 children
and parents from a nationally stratiﬁed random sample of forty Head
Start programs. The ﬁeld test established the feasibility of large-scale
interviewing of parents and assessment of children using selected in-
struments. The test also provided valuable information on the status
of Head Start programs, children, and families.
The second and third phases (fall 1997 and spring 1998) consisted
of data collection on a sample of 3,200 children and families in the
same forty Head Start programs. The spring 1998 phase included 
assessments of children completing the Head Start program and of
Head Start graduates completing kindergarten (a kindergarten ﬁeld
test). Data also were collected from interviews with parents and 
ratings by kindergarten teachers. The kindergarten cohort was subse-
quently followed into ﬁrst grade.
The fourth phase (spring 1999) consisted of data collection in the
forty Head Start programs and a follow-up of former Head Start chil-
dren into kindergarten. The ﬁfth phase (spring 2000) concluded the
kindergarten follow-up of children who completed Head Start in

226
Louisa B. Tarullo
spring 1999 and of ﬁrst graders who completed Head Start in 1998.
The sixth phase in spring 2001 completed the ﬁrst-grade follow-up of
children who completed Head Start in spring 1999. Continuing Head
Start’s commitment to ongoing assessments using performance mea-
sures, a new nationally representative cohort was selected for data
collection beginning in fall 2000. Sampling 2,800 children and their
families from forty-three new Head Start programs across the nation,
FACES continues to examine child outcomes, program quality, and
family well-being and achievements.
Figure 4 presents the study design of FACES. Through the six
phases, researchers have been able to assess the effects of Head Start
by comparing children and their parents before (pre-Head Start) and
after (post-Head Start) exposure to the program. Because of the full
cooperation of the Head Start programs studied and the diligent
ﬁeldwork conducted by the research teams, the completion rates 
for FACES are high, averaging more than 80 percent on all survey
measures.
FACES: Findings
The FACES data collected during fall 1997 and spring 1998 offer im-
portant ﬁndings on the change in children’s growth and develop-
ment, the consistency of classroom quality, and the characteristics
and accomplishments of Head Start families throughout the 1997–98
year. Follow-up into kindergarten reveals important information on
Head Start graduates’ performance in school. Key ﬁndings from
1997–98 are presented below.
Does Head Start Enhance Children’s Healthy Growth and Development?
Participation in Head Start can enhance a child’s growth and devel-
opment. The data show the following:
• The typical child completing Head Start possessed the early lit-
eracy and numeracy knowledge and skills, as well as the social
skills, that indicate a readiness to learn when the child reaches
kindergarten and ﬁrst grade.

Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
227
Figure 4. FACES Study Design: Samples and Data Collection

• Head Start children showed signiﬁcant gains in vocabulary and
writing skills and in social skills during the Head Start year. The
children showed little progress, however, in letter recognition
and book knowledge.
• During the year, the children’s play became more complex, and
they became more involved in interactive play with peers—an
indicator of social development.
• Children who complete Head Start are “ready to learn,” as
shown by the extent of their learning by the end of kinder-
garten. By the end of kindergarten, Head Start graduates made
substantial gains in word knowledge, letter recognition, math
skills, writing skills, and phonemic awareness.
Does Head Start Strengthen Families as the Primary 
Nurturers of Their Children?
Participation in Head Start can strengthen families as primary nurtur-
ers. The data indicate the following:
• Primary caregivers (usually parents) were equally likely to be
married or single. The typical caregiver was young (between 20
and 30 years of age), had at least a high school diploma or a
graduate-equivalent degree (GED), and was employed. Despite
the high proportion of caregivers in the workforce, 85 percent
of the households participating in Head Start received supple-
mental sources of income.
• More than two-thirds of Head Start parents reported that they
read to their children at least three to ﬁve times a week. Impor-
tantly, the frequency of parents’ reading was linked to a child’s
vocabulary scores, and children who were read to more often
showed greater word knowledge at the end of the year.
• Head Start parents cited signiﬁcant accomplishments during the
year. More primary caregivers were employed (an increase of 2
percent from fall to spring); 9 percent obtained a license, certiﬁ-
cate, or degree; and fewer received welfare assistance (a decline
of 3.5 percent from fall to spring).
228
Louisa B. Tarullo

• Head Start parents cited Head Start as an important source of
support in rearing their child. They also reported a greater sense
of control over their own lives at the end of Head Start than at
the beginning.
• Fathers appeared to play an important and positive role in the
lives of children. When the father was not present in the home,
the resources available to the family, both socially and ﬁnancial-
ly, were reduced. Families without fathers in the household were
more likely to be exposed to violent crime or domestic violence.
• Most parents were active in their Head Start program, and ap-
proximately 80 percent had visited with Head Start staff in their
home, attended a parent-teacher conference, and observed a
classroom.
• More than 85 percent of parents were very satisﬁed with the ser-
vices their child received to help the child grow and develop,
prepare the child for kindergarten, and identify and provide
other services for the child.
Does Head Start Provide Children With High-Quality 
Educational, Health, and Nutritional Services?
The quality of Head Start services is good. Key indicators include the
following:
• The quality in Head Start classrooms has been consistently rated
as good over three points of measurement by trained observers.
In fall 1997, the average Early Childhood Environment Rating
Scale (ECERS) score across Head Start’s 518 classrooms was good.
Nearly one-ﬁfth of the classrooms were rated as very good or ex-
cellent, and no classroom was rated inadequate. These ratings
compare favorably with those reported for other preschool and
childcare programs.
• The average numbers for both class size and child:adult ratios
were far better than those required by Head Start’s program per-
formance standards and the accreditation standards of the Na-
tional Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC).
Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
229

• Most Head Start teachers have good teaching qualiﬁcations.
Nearly one-third of all teachers had a bachelor’s or graduate 
degree, and teachers averaged nearly 12 years of teaching expe-
rience. The educational level of teachers correlated with the
quality of classrooms; that is, the higher a teacher’s educational
level was, the better the classroom quality was.
What Is the Link Between Classroom Quality and Child Outcomes?
The observed quality of Head Start classrooms is linked to children’s
outcomes. The data show the following:
• Children in Head Start classrooms that had richer teacher–child
interaction and more language learning opportunities had high-
er vocabulary scores. Also, children in classrooms that had low-
er child:adult ratios showed greater gains in vocabulary scores
during the year.
• Children in classrooms rated higher for their learning environ-
ment materials spent more time in simple interactive play or
pretend play and less time in noninteractive play.
Conclusion
The Head Start program performance measures initiative was
launched in 1995. By 1999, Head Start had collected extensive infor-
mation on its program’s performance. Through FACES, Head Start
has accumulated data on the change in children’s performance dur-
ing one or more years of participating in Head Start, the kindergarten
progress of Head Start graduates, the quality and characteristics of
Head Start programs, and the well-being and achievements of Head
Start families. The data show that Head Start can enhance children’s
growth and development; strengthen families as primary nurturers of
children; provide high-quality educational, health, and nutritional
services to children; and improve children’s outcomes.
The performance data have proved useful for documenting the 
accountability of Head Start externally and for improving the 
230
Louisa B. Tarullo

program internally. During Head Start’s 1998 reauthorization, ofﬁ-
cials were able to report to the U.S. Congress on the quality of Head
Start programs and the knowledge and skills of children who com-
pleted these programs. In addition, FACES data were presented to the
Advisory Committee on Head Start Research and Evaluation, which
was mandated and charged by the U.S. Congress to provide recom-
mendations on the design of a study or studies to determine the na-
tional impact of Head Start. FACES data also have been disseminated
widely within Head Start. The data are used in continuing efforts to
improve Head Start and to reﬁne training and technical assistance.
Researchers have presented FACES ﬁndings at national conferences of
researchers and practitioners, including Head Start’s National Re-
search Conference and meetings of the Society for Research in Child
Development and the National Head Start Association. The data and
ﬁndings reported are important evidence of the value of investments
in early child development.
Notes
This chapter is derived from the third progress report on Head
Start’s program performance measures initiative. The full report, 
referenced below, can be accessed at the following website:
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/core. The FACES study is being
conducted by Westat, Inc., Abt Associates, Inc., Ellsworth Associates,
Inc., and The CDM Group, Inc. It is directed by the Commissioner’s
Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Administration on Children,
Youth, and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. The author represents a team of researchers who prepared this
report, including: Nicholas Zill, Gary Resnick, Ruth Hubbell McKey,
David Connell, Robert O’Brien, Mary Ann D’Elio, and Cheryl Clark.
References
Administration on Children, Youth, and Families. 2001. Head Start
FACES: Longitudinal Findings on Program Performance. Third Progress
Effective Early Childhood Programs: The U.S. Head Start Experience
231

Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Goal One Technical Planning Group. 1991. The Goal One
Technical Planning Subgroup Report on School Readiness. In
National Education Goals Panel, ed., Potential Strategies for Long-
term Indicator Development: Reports of the Technical Planning
Subgroups. Report No. 91–0, pp. 1–18. Washington, D.C.:
National Education Goals Panel.
———. 1993. Reconsidering Children’s Early Development and
Learning: Toward Shared Beliefs and Vocabulary. Draft Report to
the National Education Goals Panel. Washington, D.C.: National
Education Goals Panel.
Government Performance and Results Act (Public Law 103–62).
1993.
Head Start Act, Section 641A(b), 42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq. 1994.
232
Louisa B. Tarullo

Chapter 9
Elements of Quality in 
Home Visiting Programs: 
Three Jamaican Models
Kerida Scott-McDonald
Young children in poor Jamaican communities face overwhelming
disadvantages of neglect, abuse, and inappropriate care owing to par-
ents’ lack of knowledge, time, and resources as well as high emotion-
al stress. The children are placed further at risk because the tradition-
al supports of extended families have weakened and affordable
programs offering compensatory beneﬁts to parents and children are
not available or are of poor quality. The outcomes of these two fac-
tors, interacting cyclically over time, are dysfunctional families and
new generations of children who become economically and develop-
mentally deprived parents.
In Jamaica, approximately one in every three children under the
age of 4 (i.e., approximately 70,000 children) lives in poverty. Home-
based early childhood programs represent perhaps the greatest hope
for breaking the cycle of poverty in this country. International re-
search conﬁrms that high-quality early childhood services can make
a vast difference in the lives of children and that these services have
the most signiﬁcant effect on those who are economically deprived.
Jamaica has achieved commendable preschool coverage, reaching 85
percent of all 4–5 year olds, but opportunities for infants and chil-
dren from birth to age 3 are extremely limited. Day-care coverage for
this age group is currently low (approximately 14 percent), and most
233

234
Kerida Scott-McDonald
programs are offered by private operators at rates far exceeding the
capability of poor families.
The government, which is faced with a crippling burden of debt
and competing demands from the social sector, cannot be expected
to support wide-scale expansion of center-based childcare. Also, for-
mal day-care services can be considered inappropriate and irrelevant
in rural areas having the greatest incidence of poverty and where
mothers are most often unemployed or earning their living in and
around their homes.
Home visiting programs offer an important alternative in Jamaica
for increasing the access of poor families to early childhood interven-
tions and, ultimately, for building social capital. This chapter exam-
ines elements of quality that may be useful benchmarks in delivering
such programs. Three home visiting models currently operating in Ja-
maica are reviewed to identify practices that appear to have con-
tributed signiﬁcantly to the success of the interventions. The three
models offer the same basic ingredients of psychosocial stimulation
for children as well as counseling, education, and parental support.
The programs all serve children living in poverty, but each program
serves distinctly different populations. The three programs are the:
• Roving Caregivers Program, which serves the needs of children
of teenage mothers and families
• Community-Based Rehabilitation Program, which assists young
children with disabilities
• Malnourished Children’s Program, which addresses the nutri-
tional and psychosocial needs of children admitted to the hos-
pital for malnutrition.
Together, these programs address the three main principles under-
lying the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)—survival,
protection, and development. Any home visiting program considered
for implementation on a national scale must give sufﬁcient emphasis
to each of these rights and goals for children. A brief overview of the
three programs follows.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
235
Overview
Roving Caregivers Program
The Roving Caregivers Program (RCP) is a core initiative implement-
ed under the Community and Home-Based Learning component of
the government of Jamaica/United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) Basic Education and Early Childhood Development Pro-
gram. The objective of the initiative is to ensure development and
expansion of effective and low-cost delivery of early childhood ser-
vices to meet developmental needs of children ages birth to 3 years.
RCP is a nonformal, multidimensional, integrated program of child
development and parenting education. The basic ingredients in-
clude childcare, environmental education, referral information, per-
sonal development, skills training, and income generation.
RCP is implemented by the Rural Family Support Organization
(RuFamSo) in two rural parishes in central Jamaica. These parishes
were identiﬁed as the pilot region for implementation of the govern-
ment’s new policy on integration of early childhood education. Ru-
FamSo, which has strong linkages with several development and in-
ternational agencies, provides integrated services for families. Besides
RCP, these services include the Teenage Mothers Project, Male Adoles-
cent Program, Uplifting Adolescents Program, and Home-Based Nurs-
ery Program. All programs, including RCP, are a spinoff of the initial
Teenage Mothers Project.
Initiated in 1992 as a joint effort with the Bernard van Leer Foun-
dation, RCP is designed to assist high-risk families. Community child
health clinics help target beneﬁciaries. RCP deploys a cadre of child
development promoters to model stimulation activities in homes and
to deliver parenting education messages. The caregivers (or rovers),
who carry out their tasks on foot, are young secondary school gradu-
ates recruited from the communities in which they live. Rovers are
selected based on the recommendations of their former school princi-
pals or guidance counselors. Depending on the proximity of the
homes, interventions are organized for individuals and groups.

236
Kerida Scott-McDonald
RCP has a strong training component. Rovers receive 1 week of
preservice training and regular inservice training consisting of 1-day
workshops every 2 weeks and 1-week courses every 3 months. The
workshops are held to discuss issues and concerns related to visits, to
review weekly plans, and to make play materials for stimulation ac-
tivities. Home visits are monitored closely by project ofﬁcers who
conduct onsite supervisory visits every 2 weeks.
Within approximately 6 years, RCP has expanded from ﬁfteen to
twenty-ﬁve districts and currently beneﬁts 3,500 children ages birth
to 3 years and 700 homes in approximately sixty communities. In
1998, under a government poverty eradication initiative, the roving
caregivers model was successfully tested in an urban setting, in
eleven depressed inner-city communities for the beneﬁt of 1,300
children.
Community-Based Rehabilitation Program
The Community-Based Rehabilitation Program is part of the Dedicat-
ed to the Development of the Disabled (3D) organization, which was
established in 1985. 3D is committed to rehabilitation and integra-
tion of persons with disabilities into their communities by teaching
and assisting caregivers to help persons with disabilities function at
their highest potential. The community program offers a range of ser-
vices, including early stimulation for children at risk of developing
slowly, early identiﬁcation of disabilities, assessment of abilities, de-
velopment of individual home plans to enhance a child’s abilities,
group and individual parental counseling, psychoeducational assess-
ments for school-aged children, and referrals to other agencies. The
home-based program was initiated in one of Jamaica’s fourteen
parishes and now operates in four parishes, serving approximately
1,000 families. The children beneﬁting from the program are from
birth to 6 years old who exhibit signiﬁcantly slow or delayed devel-
opment in one or more areas of self-help, speech and language, and
motor or cognitive behavior.
Children are referred to 3D’s community program by parents, doc-
tors, nurses, day-care centers, social workers, and school teachers. 

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
237
After referral, a complete assessment is conducted of the child using
the Denver Developmental Screening Test. The child receives a com-
plete medical examination and, after diagnosis, is placed in an inter-
vention program administered by a child development aide. Based
on the assessment, interviews with parents and community mem-
bers, and observations in the home setting, the aide develops an indi-
vidual child and home plan. When this groundwork is completed,
the aide begins to guide parents in strategies for stimulation. Aides
usually visit each child at least twice each month, beginning with
weekly visits and then less frequently as the program progresses.
Problems requiring an assessment by a specialist or a speciﬁc inter-
vention are referred to other agencies. Each aide visits between
twelve and twenty children each week and attends weekly case con-
ferences with the project’s supervisor to discuss child program and
teaching methods. Initial training received by the aides is reinforced
in continuous in-service training.
Malnourished Children’s Program
The Malnourished Children’s Program was established in 1994 by the
Child Development Research Group of the Tropical Metabolism Re-
search Unit (now renamed the Tropical Medicine Research Institute,
TMRI) of the University Hospital of the West Indies to address early
deﬁciencies of children hospitalized for malnutrition. Before initia-
tion of this outreach program, hospital personnel observed that
many children who recovered and were sent home from the TMRI
had to be readmitted for the same condition after a short time. To ad-
dress this problem, TMRI pioneered intervention strategies to reduce
the high readmission rate by conducting follow-up home visits to
monitor children discharged from the TMRI.
During each home visit, staff focus on stimulation, environ-
mental factors potentially detrimental to the child’s health, and
the child’s nutritional status and possible need for food supple-
mentation. Parents of children admitted to the TMRI participate 
in an ongoing weekly program consisting of parenting education
and a social welfare project. TMRI helps parents develop income-

238
Kerida Scott-McDonald
generating skills, begin self-help projects, and find jobs or shelter.
TMRI also provides food packages, bedding, and clothing for
needy, unemployed parents. The parents are required to attend at
least twelve workshops and, on completion, are awarded a certifi-
cate of participation.
In addition to individual home visits, TMRI operates a community
outreach program at three locations in poor communities within the
Kingston metropolitan area, which has a high prevalence of malnu-
trition. This program includes regular psychosocial stimulation of
children ages 3 and less, supported with a mobile toy-lending library.
TMRI also has extended its parenting and child stimulation services
to Jamaica’s only exclusive hospital for children, through a weekly
program at the nutrition clinic.
Home Visiting Programs: Elements of Quality
Twelve elements of quality can be noted in the practices of the three
model programs described above. These elements, which have con-
tributed signiﬁcantly to the success of the programs, are:
1. Linkage of childcare supports with family supports
2. Recognition of women’s multiple roles as mothers, homemak-
ers, and income earners
3. Transfer of skills to the clients and households
4. Flexibility in service delivery
5. Acknowledgment of family conﬁgurations and building on ex-
isting networks for children
6. Sustainability of the program play materials
7. Strong referral systems and access support
8. High staff retention
9. Documentation
10. Strong feedback and monitoring mechanisms
11. Research orientation leading to action
12. Proactive measures to ensure sustainability and institutional-
ization.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
239
The ﬁndings and impressions presented below for each element
are based on interviews with program directors, staff members, and
recipients as well as observations of meetings, training sessions, and
other interventions. For analysis, the author assumed that the stan-
dards for program inputs were strongly related to the desired program
outcomes, but made no attempt to establish direct connections be-
tween inputs and outcomes.
Linkage of Childcare Supports With Family Supports
All three programs described above are based on the primary princi-
ple that children cannot be assisted in isolation. The programs 
approach interventions on behalf of children from a holistic perspec-
tive, by providing support to families while giving direct supports to
children.
As noted previously, RCP is a spinoff of the Teenage Mothers Proj-
ect, which was established initially to address the problem of teen
pregnancy (Jamaica’s rate of teenage pregnancies is 108 per 1,000, the
highest in the Caribbean). The project was expanded to include other
services when it was realized that the problem of teen mothers could
not be addressed in isolation. RCP, the home visiting program, was
initiated to overcome the limited effects of intervening with only the
teenage mother and her baby. A demonstration nursery provides day
care for children while teenage mothers attend academic and skill-
training classes, as well as counseling and self-esteem-building ses-
sions. Sessions for fathers of the babies and for grandmothers (the
mothers of the teenage girls) are also available. This multilayered
strategy involves the entire family network, and the program has had
an almost 100 percent success rate in preventing second pregnancies
among the teenagers.
In the 3D program, both parents are required to participate in the
intervention for their child with a disability. The roles of each family
member are articulated in the home plan to encourage total support
for the child. Also, in recognition of the importance of the wider
community in inﬂuencing the development of the child, the aides
work to build supportive relationships between families.

240
Kerida Scott-McDonald
In the Malnourished Children’s Program, staff strive to increase
the economic stability of families by identifying employment oppor-
tunities and making job referrals for fathers. For each case, home vis-
its facilitate ongoing identiﬁcation of speciﬁc and interconnected so-
cial, environmental, and economic needs of children and their
families.
Recognition of Women’s Multiple Roles as 
Mothers, Homemakers, and Income Earners
A signiﬁcant proportion of the households in Jamaica (45 percent)
are headed by females. In addition, the participation of females in the
labor force is low, amounting to only 10 percent of women, com-
pared with 20 percent of males. Because of this double disadvantage,
each program closely links childcare strategies to maternal care and
support. In group parenting sessions, the following pertinent topics
are addressed: referrals to antenatal clinics; promotion of breastfeed-
ing, nutrition education, reproductive health, and environmental hy-
giene and safety; and training and support for income-generating ac-
tivities.
In the 3D program, the sessions on reproductive health cover pre-
natal and genetic counseling. Parenting sessions include emphasis on
time management, to help mothers cope with the additional de-
mands of children with disabilities. The Malnourished Children’s
Program, which targets children whose survival and growth are par-
ticularly at risk, places signiﬁcant emphasis on income-generation
opportunities for mothers. Staff attempt to match the interests and
abilities of each mother with marketable skills. The program sponsors
mothers to take advantage of skill-training opportunities in areas
such as childcare, geriatric care, dressmaking, and hairdressing.
Mothers with very low literacy levels receive practical in-house train-
ing in areas such as setting tables, making beds, and relating to em-
ployers, to prepare them for domestic work. The program also pro-
vides tangible support to mothers who wish to buy and sell food or
goods, buying these items in bulk and offering them to mothers at
signiﬁcantly reduced prices.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
241
Transfer of Skills to Clients and Households
The three home visiting programs emphasize the empowerment of
parents and the transfer of skills to their households through trained
and monitored outreach workers. In RCP, parents are selected as par-
ent group leaders for income-generating projects, thus building lead-
ership skills, conﬁdence, and self-esteem. Roving caregivers model
stimulation activities for children with the expectation that parents
will continue these activities between visits. Involving parents direct-
ly is a signiﬁcant challenge initially because the rovers’ visits are fre-
quently viewed by parents or caregivers as opportunities to gain child
supervision so that they can attend to household chores. However,
the program emphasizes the guiding of parents in strategies for in-
cluding stimulation-type activities in routine household tasks.
In the Malnourished Children’s Program, parents are selected as
play leaders for group stimulation sessions, and outreach workers ob-
serve and guide these activities. Parents also are asked to lead food-
preparation demonstrations using cooking equipment traditionally
found in their homes. In the 3D program, clients who demonstrate
particular coping skills are selected and trained to become communi-
ty rehabilitation workers. This strategy, which relies on the total
transfer of skills, helps sustain and strengthen the gains of the overall
program.
Flexibility in Service Delivery
A positive characteristic common to all the programs is ﬂexibility in
implementation. For example, RCP implemented stimulation activi-
ties initially in individual homes, but subsequently modiﬁed this ap-
proach for homes in close proximity (e.g., communal dwelling units
consisting of several homes) to conduct activities in shared spaces
within yards. This adaptation yielded an additional beneﬁt because
messages about child development reached many other adults in ad-
dition to those ofﬁcially participating in the program. The children
are grouped by age, and they beneﬁt from social interaction during
stimulation activities. When homes are more distant, RCP continues
with individual home visits.

242
Kerida Scott-McDonald
In the 3D program, homes are far apart and clients convene in
health centers. In the Malnourished Children’s Program, visits are
conducted in high-density areas in suitable and available spaces (e.g.,
community centers, basic schools, under trees). Basic schools are
community-operated and government-subsidized preschools catering
to children ages 4–5 and providing a high level of coverage (approxi-
mately 95 percent) of the age cohort.
Maintaining ﬂexibility in the organization of programs helps en-
sure that they are adapted to local conditions and meet the needs of
staff and the circumstances of parents and communities. The pro-
grams also demonstrate ﬂexibility in the type of assistance provided
to families (i.e., the content of service delivery). All the programs ac-
knowledge that families and children differ in their needs and stage
of development and that the delivery of services and the types of sup-
port must be customized to accommodate these differences.
For example, the Malnourished Children’s Program supports a va-
riety of income-generating activities, based on the particular
strengths or circumstances of the adults, rather than a predetermined
group activity for all. In the 3D program, each home plan, which
guides the interventions provided, is designed based on an assess-
ment of that family’s circumstances.
Acknowledgment of Family Conﬁgurations and 
Building on Existing Networks for Children
Child-shifting and alternate caregiving are commonplace in Jamaica.
Rural-to-urban migration is common, and approximately 20,000 in-
dividuals emigrate from Jamaica each year. As a result, the variety of
family conﬁgurations is myriad and the support networks for chil-
dren are complex.
All three programs make a strong effort to identify primary and
secondary caregivers and to work with these persons interchangeably.
RCP regularly involves signiﬁcant others in its stimulation and par-
ent education activities. The 3D program’s strategy incorporates a
child-to-child approach, particularly when mothers work outside
their homes and the intervention depends on the participation of

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
243
siblings. In the Malnourished Children’s Program, parents are asked
to bring neighbors to the TMRI for training so that these individuals
can sustain the children’s activities when the parents are absent.
Sustainability of the Program Play Materials
The application of child development knowledge in a program’s prac-
tices is a major determinant of quality for any early childhood inter-
vention. For example, the fact that young children learn most effec-
tively through experiential play is now ﬁrmly established. To grasp
basic concepts and to develop sensory and motor systems, young
children need a variety of concrete, hands-on materials.
However, providing a continuing and adequate supply of learning
materials is a major challenge for early childhood programs in devel-
oping countries such as Jamaica. Although many early childhood ac-
tivities can be done with items from the natural environment, some
learning materials must be specially made. When there is no source
of these materials locally, center-based programs must import items
at great expense and then replenish them frequently as stocks dwin-
dle or become worn.
A positive characteristic of all three home visiting programs is
their emphasis on strategies for sustaining stimulation and other
program materials. In RCP, outreach workers encourage use of
household items and construction of stimulation materials. They
spend part of their biweekly sessions making toys for upcoming vis-
its, and parents are taught to make toys in parent group sessions.
Still, maintaining a sufﬁcient supply of materials for the number of
households visited is difﬁcult. In addition, some of the materials
that are made are not durable, and the costs to replace them are
high. Also, certain materials, to support children’s manipulative
skills, cannot be made easily by the rovers. To resolve this problem,
RCP is establishing a small-scale production facility for materials de-
velopment, linking the production of toys to the training of out-of-
school youth in marketable skills.
The Malnourished Children’s Program hires a person to make toys
for the mobile toy-lending library. Students from a national technical

244
Kerida Scott-McDonald
and vocational training program and parents also help make toys. In
a continuing collection drive, community-based factories and entre-
preneurs are asked to donate “trashables” (e.g., cardboard, tins, cloth
scraps, wood ends). In the 3D program, parents are taught to make
toys as well as adaptive aids, which can be prohibitively costly for
poor families.
Strong Referral Systems and Access Support
Another common strength of the programs is their use of available
community and other resources and infrastructure to support opti-
mal child development. Recognizing their respective advantages and
limited capacities, they draw heavily on other services (e.g., child
health clinics, the public health department, the Food-for-the-Poor
organization, the women’s crisis center, the Jamaica adult literacy
program) to meet multiple needs of families. The programs enhance
the awareness of clients about these services and provide practical
support to facilitate access to them.
For example, the Malnourished Children’s Program will pay for a
multiparous woman to receive tubal ligation, if desired, at the family
planning unit. The 3D organization will provide transportation for
clients to access alternative services, and parent leaders will accompa-
ny clients on their ﬁrst visit to these services. The organization also
acts as a referee to enable clients to access beneﬁts offered by credit
unions or insurance programs.
Building on existing social systems is a key strategy for all three
programs. Their experience demonstrates that information, by itself,
is not sufﬁcient and that active referrals are needed. Families living in
poverty with children at risk need help to seek help.
High Staff Retention
Stability of stafﬁng is another element of quality observed in the
three home visiting programs. The administrators of these programs
recognize that job satisfaction helps ensure staff stability which, in
turn, is a prerequisite for staff growth and development. In RCP, out-
reach workers matriculate into the program directly from secondary

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
245
schools and generally stay for approximately 3 years, leaving to ex-
plore new career opportunities. Their average 3-year tenure enables
the program to beneﬁt from their accumulated knowledge and expe-
rience, in the delivery of home visits and the modeling of program
delivery for new recruits.
In the 3D program, outreach workers most often begin as beneﬁ-
ciaries and stay in the program for an average of 10 years. The fact
that the employee’s own children beneﬁt from the program is a main
incentive for staying. Other incentives include opportunities for pro-
fessional and self-development, as well as guaranteed beneﬁts of em-
ployment, such as health insurance.
Documentation
Each home visiting program strongly emphasizes documentation of
processes and materials utilized in the program. This documentation
is an effective strategy for ensuring continuity. In RCP, weekly activi-
ty guides are prepared to guide rovers in child stimulation and par-
enting education during home visits. These guides are placed in an
activity “bank” that is drawn from and built on over time. In addi-
tion, a video documentary that describes the program has proven
useful for training new caregivers and informing potential donors
about the scope and nature of RCP.
The 3D program has established an entire documentation unit
that includes cameras and video-editing facilities. This unit has
documented the 3D training program in twelve videos with accom-
panying written material. Leaflets describing the program have
been produced for distribution, and assessment tools have been 
developed to determine and record the children’s developmental
levels. The Malnourished Children’s Program has published book-
lets to reinforce workshop topics and has compiled manuals on
making toys.
To build on and strengthen the documentation of each of these
programs, UNICEF is supporting development of a home-visiting
manual. The hope is that this manual could be used as a national
guide for home visiting early childhood programs.

246
Kerida Scott-McDonald
Strong Feedback and Monitoring Mechanisms
Closely related to maintaining standards in any program is having
a well-organized and meaningful system of feedback and monitor-
ing. Such a system is well-established in each of the three programs
and deserves to be highlighted as an important element of quality.
In RCP, full-day feedback sessions are held every 2 weeks to review
progress in the home visits, discuss strategies for overcoming
emerging problems, and highlight and reinforce positive experi-
ences. In addition, project officers accompany rovers at specific 
intervals to provide supervision and guidance onsite. The Malnour-
ished Children’s Program’s monitoring component is similar ex-
cept that feedback and planning sessions are held weekly and
progress is recorded in a written logbook. In the 3D program, a case
file is established for each child and the cases are reviewed weekly
to discuss each child’s progress. In addition, all staff are required to
contribute to an evaluation meeting, held quarterly. Monitoring in
this program is based on the “manpower model,” which consists of
a community-based rehabilitation coordinator who oversees the
work of supervisors who, in turn, oversee community rehabilita-
tion workers.
Research Orientation Leading to Action
All three home visiting programs are experimental or extensions and
improvements of innovative programs that are testing new methods
and materials for accomplishing their missions more effectively. Sig-
niﬁcantly, each program places heavy emphasis on research as part of
its agenda. This research has helped to validate the programs and to
justify further funding, as well as providing useful information for
guiding practice. In two programs, the research is being used to sub-
stantiate the government’s taking the programs to scale.
In RCP, the development of the children has been assessed using
an internationally recognized instrument, and a tracer study was con-
ducted on children in primary school 12 years after the RCP interven-
tion. The effect of training on the knowledge of roving caregivers also
has been evaluated.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
247
Research conducted in the 3D program to validate an identiﬁca-
tion and assessment instrument (The Ten Question Screening Tool)
has led to utilization of this tool by paraprofessionals in several devel-
oping countries. Recent research on community attitudes, which
showed that neighbors are more likely to respond supportively if a
family demonstrates strong acceptance of a child with a disability,
stimulated revision of the program’s strategies.
Internationally recognized research on the effects of food supple-
mentation and stimulation (Grantham-McGregor and others 1991),
conducted in the Malnourished Children’s Program, supports the
concept that psychosocial intervention can compensate for deﬁcits
associated with early malnutrition. Researchers in the program have
conducted a longitudinal study of children from the program who
are now 20 years old. More recently, research on the reasons for hos-
pital readmission of children with malnutrition has led to a reﬁning
of program strategies, which has resulted in the end of readmissions
for children participating in the program.
Proactive Measures to Ensure Sustainability 
and Institutionalization
Sustainability is a critical and most-sought-after component of in-
tervention. A strong element of quality in the programs has been
their proactive orientation toward securing sustainability and insti-
tutionalization. In particular, two of the three programs have as-
sumed a role in mainstreaming their innovations. These programs
planned strategically for various phases of their life cycle. From suc-
cessful, small pilot projects operating on a trial-and-error basis, they
moved through expansion and replication, during which services
increased in scope and coverage. In this second phase, much net-
working was undertaken to increase the awareness of stakeholders
about the programs’ products and processes and to secure partner-
ships for sustainability.
For example, RCP established linkages with Jamaica’s Social Devel-
opment Commission, the national coordinating agency for com-
munity development and the government’s poverty eradication 

248
Kerida Scott-McDonald
program. RCP also asked the public health department to help with
education and training of parents; various church groups to provide
leadership; and other organizations and private entities to provide ﬁ-
nancial or in-kind contributions. In some cases, this networking was
informal and one-to-one. In addition, RCP’s advisory board held sev-
eral consultation workshops with stakeholders and circulated the
proceedings widely.
In a third phase, programs are attempting to transfer their mod-
els beyond the previous controlled conditions and to test their
strategies in more realistic operating venues in existing programs
and services. Through strong advocacy, RCP has secured govern-
ment support to extend its coverage by using National Youth Ser-
vice workers to implement the program in one of seventeen early
childhood resource centers. Similarly, in one parish, the 3D pro-
gram is conducting a pilot project utilizing government workers to
deliver its services.
The Challenges Remaining
Figure 1 provides an overview of the three home visiting programs re-
viewed in this chapter. Although these programs exhibit twelve criti-
cal elements of quality for early childhood interventions, many ques-
tions, challenges, and concerns remain and need to be addressed
thoughtfully. Key issues include:
• Avoiding a “hand-out mentality” which measures a program’s
worth by the food or other tangible beneﬁts distributed
• Ensuring sustainability of food contributions
• Addressing the power and status of women and men
• Balancing the tension between promoting children’s rights and
respecting cultural beliefs and practices
• Ensuring provision of reinforcing public educational messages
• Devising strategies for increasing a program’s coverage while
maintaining quality.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
249
Program
Roving 
3D Community-Based 
Malnourished 
Description
Caregivers Program
Rehabilitation Program
Children’s Program
Implementing
Rural Family Support 
Dedicated to the 
Tropical Medicine
agency
Organization (RuFamSo)
Development of the 
Research Institute, 
Disabled (3D)  Organization
University Hospital of 
the West Indies
Start Date
1995
1985
1994
Population
Poor families:
Families of children with 
60 admitted per year
250 Homes
disabilities (~1,000)
Children 3 months to
750 Children
3 years
Children birth to 3 years
Services
Psychosocial stimulation, 
Training of families to 
Psychosocial stimulation, 
counseling, parental 
stimulate/teach life skills
counseling, parental 
education and supports, 
Early identiﬁcation/ assess-
education and supports
income generation
ment of ability/disability
Group stimulation and 
Teenage Mothers Project
Individual home plan
parent sessions in 
Male Adolescent Program
Individual/group parent 
communities
counseling
Mobile toy-lending library
Medical clinics
Linkage of Childcare Supports With Family Supports
Demonstration nursery for
Both parents required to 
Assistance with income 
children
attend clinic
generation and job 
Academic and skill training 
Family roles deﬁned to 
referrals
classes for teen mothers
support child
Recognition of Women’s Multiple Roles as Mothers, Homemakers, and Income Earners
Promotion of reproductive 
Fertility management
Matching mothers and 
health and family planning
Prenatal and genetic 
skills
Home hygiene and safety
counseling
Supporting mothers via 
Training and support for 
Time management
sponsored attendance 
income generation
at other programs and 
in-house training
Transfer of Skills to Clients and Households
Parents selected as parent 
Majority of community 
Parents selected as play 
group leaders
rehabilitation workers 
leaders
are parents
Parents lead food 
demonstrations
Flexibility in Service Delivery
Distant homes: one-to-one
Distant homes: clients 
High-density areas: 
Close homes: group visit
convene in health centers
visits conducted in 
community centers, 
basic schools, and 
under trees
Figure 1. Overview of Three Home Visiting Programs in Jamaica
continued

250
Kerida Scott-McDonald
Figure 1 (continued). Overview of Three Home Visiting Programs in Jamaica
Program
Roving 
3D Community-Based 
Malnourished 
Description
Caregivers Program
Rehabilitation Program
Children’s Program
Acknowledgment of Family Conﬁgurations and Building on Existing Networks for Children
Involvement of grand-
Involvement of siblings and 
Working mothers bring in 
mothers 
schoolchildren
caregivers and neigh- 
Child-to-child
bors for training
Sustainability of the Program Play Materials
Parents taught to make 
Parents taught to make and 
Person hired to make toys 
simple toys in parent 
use adaptive aids
for mobile toy-lending 
group sessions
library
Youths in Male Adolescent 
Parents and technical and 
Program make toys
vocational students help 
make toys
Collection drive
Strong Referral Systems and Access Support
Child health clinics
Psychological assessments
Women’s crisis center
Housing trust
Jamaica adult literacy 
National insurance program
program
Food-for-the-Poor
Family planning unit
Credit union
High Staff Retention
Rovers remain 3 years, 
Community rehabilitation 
on average
workers remain 10 years, 
on average
Incentives and professional 
development opportunities
Documentation
Weekly stimulation guides
Documentation unit
Booklets to reinforce 
Video documentary
Training program docu-
workshop topics
Home-visiting manual
mented in twelve videos 
and written packages
Leaﬂets and assessment 
tools
Strong Feedback and Monitoring Mechanisms
Workshops biweekly
Case ﬁle for each child
Logbook
Supervision onsite
Weekly case review
Timetable for visiting 
Quarterly evaluation of 
discharged children
child’s progress
Weekly feedback and 
“Manpower model”
planning sessions
Supervision onsite
continued

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
251
Figure 1 (continued). Overview of Three Home Visiting Programs in Jamaica
Program
Roving 
3D Community-Based 
Malnourished 
Description
Caregivers Program
Rehabilitation Program
Children’s Program
Research Orientation Leading to Action
Developmental assessments Research to validate identiﬁ-
Longitudinal studies
Tracer studies of children
cation and assessment 
Research to determine 
Evaluation of impact of 
tool
reasons for readmis-
training on rover’s 
Research on community 
sions
knowledge
attitudes
Mix of interventions for 
greatest effect
Proactive Measures to Ensure Sustainability and Institutionalization
Advocacy by advisory 
Pilot project in one parish 
board
to train government 
Consultations with stake-
workers to deliver program
holders
The greatest overall challenge for the home visiting programs is to
ensure full institutionalization. As part of its new policy on the inte-
gration of early childhood (day-care and preschool) services, the Ja-
maican government is grappling with whether and how it should
take an early childhood home visiting program to scale. In light of
the new policy, UNICEF is supporting an in-depth, strategic review of
Jamaica’s national early childhood program. This assessment in-
cludes a study of the feasibility of taking the home visiting model(s)
to scale. UNICEF will be examining ﬁnancial projections, targets and
strategies, and existing structures, as well as the possibility of ex-
panding the role of community health aides, deployed by the Min-
istry of Health, to include child development and early stimulation
activities with health and nutrition services currently delivered to
families.
To introduce a home visiting program on a national scale, regard-
less of the model or combination of models used, and to ensure that
the economic returns on scarce resources are maximized, a well-
structured system for targeting children, families, and communities

252
Kerida Scott-McDonald
needs to be developed. Information will be needed for determining
the status of children, families, and communities in order to identify
areas of greatest need and areas least likely to meet the needs without
intervention. Clearly, general improvements in child survival,
growth, and development depend on improvements in the home and
in the community that shelters, nourishes, socializes, and protects a
young child. Linking early childhood home visiting programs with
more general community-based initiatives and social investments,
which involve attention to community conditions and development
of social infrastructure (e.g., supports for breastfeeding, nutrition,
safe water, shelter) is critical.
Some might argue that social institutions in developing countries
such as Jamaica do not have the capacity to incorporate such inter-
ventions, but accepting this notion would be fatalistic. High-quality
programs for young children living in poverty have demonstrated,
more than any other innovation, the ability to narrow the gap be-
tween rich and poor and to break the intergenerational cycle of
poverty.
However, formal programs in childcare centers and professional
interventions have proven to be too expensive for poor families
and, in many cases, culturally irrelevant or insensitive to family
needs. As signatories to the CRC, national governments are bound
to the examination of alternative strategies for assisting families 
in childrearing. Article 18 of the CRC outlines the state’s respon-
sibility as follows: to “render appropriate assistance to parents/
guardians for childrearing and develop institutions, facilities, and
services for childcare.” Home visiting programs such as those de-
scribed in this chapter must be included among the social services
provided for poor families. The link between early child develop-
ment and poverty is well understood, and the maximum effective-
ness and sustainability of efforts on behalf of children depend on
direct parental involvement.

Elements of Quality in Home Visiting Programs: Three Jamaican Models
253
Conclusion
The home visiting programs reviewed in this chapter combine deliv-
ery of services to children, caregivers, and communities by providing
stimulation and play activities, education and support of parents,
promotion and organization of community involvement, and refer-
ral to agencies that offer educational, health care, economic, and oth-
er opportunities and support for children and adults. The approaches
supporting early child development, particularly for children ages
birth to 3 years, are comprehensive, holistic, and complementary.
They incorporate, as noted, twelve essential elements of quality that
should be part of any home visiting early childhood program.
The great challenge remaining for these three programs and con-
cerned stakeholders is the mainstreaming of the programs within the
nation’s delivery of social services by the governmental sector, the
nongovernmental sector, or a combination of both through creative
partnerships. Because of competing social demands and limited re-
sources, the home visiting programs will need to be examined care-
fully for their ﬁt with the range of family needs and the intervention
strategies, services, and personnel available.
References
Grantham-McGregor, S.M., C.A. Powell, S.P. Walker, and J.H. Himes.
1991. Nutritional Supplementation, Psychosocial Stimulation,
and Mental Development of Stunted Children: The Jamaica Study.
Lancet 338:1–5.


Part IV
The Private Sector’s 
Inﬂuence on 
the Public Sector


Chapter 10
Role of the Private Sector 
in Early Child Development
Robert G. Myers
The private sector has an important and significant role to play in
improving the development of young children. This chapter pre-
sents a framework for discussing the private sector’s potential con-
tributions and highlights specific ways for this sector to contribute.
The chapter is organized into four sections: clarification of the con-
cept of early child development (ECD) and reasons for supporting
ECD; definitions of the private sector; review of the sometimes-
conflicting reasons for advocating private versus public care and
education; and suggested ways of increasing the involvement of
the private sector, especially companies and individuals, in sup-
porting early childhood activities. Key points are summarized in
the conclusion.
Early Child Development
The concept of ECD includes terms such as early childhood, child de-
velopment, childcare, and early education. Although often used in
distinct ways, these terms, together, convey the essence of ECD. Ap-
preciating the substance of ECD is important when considering the
reasons for supporting ECD and the implications for private-sector
involvement.
257

258
Robert G. Myers
Deﬁnitions
In this chapter and volume, early childhood encompasses the period
from conception until entry into school at about age 6 or 7. The peri-
od may be extended through ages 7 and 8 when designing ECD pro-
grams, to include the articulation between preschool programs and
grades 1 or 2 of primary school. Early childhood is the period when
the brain develops almost to its fullest and when humans learn to
walk and talk, begin to establish moral foundations, gain self-conﬁ-
dence, and develop a general world view. This early period provides
the foundation for later living and learning.
Child development is a multifaceted, integral, and continual process
of change as children become able to handle ever-more-complex lev-
els of moving, thinking, feeling, and relating to others. Physical,
mental, social, and emotional development occurs as a child interacts
with his or her surrounding environments—the family, community,
and broader society.
Childcare consists of the actions taken by caregivers in the home or
a nondomestic setting to ensure children’s survival and to promote
their growth and development. Good care responds to children’s ba-
sic physical, mental, social, and emotional needs, determined biolog-
ically and by the cultural and socioeconomic context and environ-
ment. Too often, childcare is considered narrowly as custodial care
that provides only protection and the fulﬁllment of biological needs,
without regard for children’s mental, social, and emotional develop-
ment. Also, the needs of caregivers, as well as children, are important
considerations when discussing forms of care. For example, some-
times, parents’ needs take precedence over children’s needs when
choosing among childcare options.
Early education, or early learning, is the process of acquiring knowl-
edge, skills, habits, and values through experience, experimentation,
reﬂection, observation, and/or study and instruction during early
childhood. Education is a crucial part of child development and in-
volves a gradual unfolding of biologically determined characteristics.
Unfortunately, early education is often associated narrowly with

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
259
mental development occurring in preschool centers which, as their
name implies, are designed to prepare children for success in school,
giving little attention to broader developmental needs or care.
Although often labeled and organized separately, childcare and
early education programs should offer the same basic program ele-
ments to help children develop their maximum potential. Childcare
programs must meet parents’ as well as children’s needs, and there-
fore may have different hours of operation than early education pro-
grams; however, the basic attention given to the children should 
be the same. In the discussion below, the terms “early childcare and
development,” “early childhood education and care,” and “ECD” are
used interchangeably.
Why Support ECD Programs?
Common sense and scientiﬁc ﬁndings suggest that the early years of
childhood are critical for formation of intelligence, personality, and
social behavior and that a child who develops well during these years
will have greater opportunities in life, be more productive, and, very
likely, be a better citizen. The reasons why societies should want to
invest in ECD have been elaborated elsewhere (e.g., Myers 1995).
Some of these reasons may resonate more than others in particular
groups and settings. Six arguments for ECD are, in brief:
1. Human Rights. Children have a right to live and develop to their
full potential. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
and other international organizations supported by local hu-
man rights organizations have vigorously promoted this posi-
tion, based on the near-universal signing of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, which includes the right to healthy de-
velopment. However, some governments do not ﬁnd this argu-
ment for supporting early childhood programs particularly
compelling.
2. Moral and Social Values. Humanity transmits its values through
children, beginning in infancy. This argument will be forceful
for those who believe that core values are being lost and/or that

260
Robert G. Myers
the particular values of their cultural group are not represented
adequately in a homogeneous system of childcare and educa-
tion supported by government.
3. Economic Productivity. Society beneﬁts economically from im-
proved early development by greater productivity in later life.
This argument may be attractive to governments and business-
es concerned about economic growth and competing in a
world economy. However, as suggested later in this chapter,
the general economic beneﬁt and the chain of effects from ear-
ly childhood through schooling to greater economic produc-
tivity may not convince private companies to invest in ECD
(versus, for example, investing in secondary or technical edu-
cation). Potentially more convincing for many employers is
the notion that childcare programs may free up women to
work and thereby increase the immediate availability of an im-
portant source of labor.
4. Cost-Savings. Investments in ECD are preventive and can reduce
later needs for, and costs of, social welfare programs, remedial
school programs, healthcare, and judicial and criminal services
(Schweinhart and others 1993). This argument should be par-
ticularly attractive to governments, but may not be to private
businesses or individuals because the immediate private 
(versus social) beneﬁt to the ﬁrm or person may not be great 
or evident. Private decisions do not usually incorporate social
externalities.
5. Program Efﬁcacy. The efﬁcacy of health, nutrition, education, and
women’s programs can be improved by combining these pro-
grams with ECD. Combined efforts result in enhanced interac-
tive effects among health, nutrition, and early stimulation.
From the perspective of industry and commerce, childcare pro-
grams may be good investments because workers (especially
women) will lose less worktime due to child-related concerns.
6. Social Equity. Providing a “fair start” may help modify distressing
socioeconomic and gender-related inequities. This argument
will appeal particularly to governments and nongovernmental

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
261
organizations concerned with creating a more equitable society
and to groups that have not had equal access to services. For in-
dustry, this argument may have to be linked to the notion of
achieving greater social stability (a climate in which companies
can operate with greater security) and to the altruistic values of
company managers (which may also have an economic payoff
because a company will be viewed as socially responsible).
Backed by scientiﬁc studies, this combination of social arguments
should be compelling to governments and social organizations. How-
ever, the arguments may not be convincing to private ﬁrms or indi-
viduals because of the lack of a direct, private payoff. If governments
do not act, the potential social beneﬁts offered by ECD programs to
the general population (e.g., crime reduction and related judicial
costs) would be lost.
Implications for the Private Sector
Much discussion of private-sector involvement in education has been
focused on higher and secondary education, with only some atten-
tion given to primary schools. Although parts of this broad discus-
sion are pertinent to ECD, discussion of private-sector involvement
in early childhood programs must differ for several reasons in addi-
tion to the obvious difference in children’s ages. Four characteristics
of ECD are particularly pertinent to discussion of private-sector in-
volvement in this arena. These are the evolution of the ﬁeld of early
childhood education, the breadth and the selective nature of educa-
tional systems, and the “tension” between ECD and women’s work.
Evolution of the Field
Early childhood education is at a different stage in ﬁnancing, opera-
tion, and public-private control than other educational levels. Prima-
ry school education, for example, has become largely a public re-
sponsibility throughout the world, although this has not always
been the case. Until the late nineteenth century in Europe, for exam-
ple, religious organizations dominated in the provision of primary

262
Robert G. Myers
schooling, a trend that seems to be mirrored currently for early
childcare and education in many countries.
In contrast, childcare and early education for healthy develop-
ment of young children is essentially a private-sector responsibility,
particularly in the developing world and especially for children under
age 4. Mangenheim (1999) shows that the private-sector bias in early
childcare and education also is characteristic of the United States.
In many parts of the developing world, care and education during
a child’s early years continue to be almost exclusively the responsibil-
ity of the family, with relatively little ﬁnancial support from govern-
ment. And, a large proportion of formal and informal childcare and
early education programs are operated by nongovernmental, and of-
ten religious, organizations. In most countries, preschool education is
not obligatory or universal, and governments therefore are not con-
cerned legally with educational support at this level. This situation is
similar to that for upper secondary and higher education, although
the tradition of public involvement at these levels is much longer
than for ECD.
There are, of course, important exceptions to the dominance of
the private sector, broadly deﬁned, in attending to young children.
Preschool for children during the year immediately preceding entry
into primary school has become obligatory in some countries. And,
Latin America has a growing number of governmental educational
programs for young children, reaching down to age 4 and some-
times age 3. In Europe, the public sector is deeply involved in 
supporting childcare and early education by a variety of strategies.
In socialist countries, an intense governmental effort was made 
previously to fund and operate programs for young children, but
much of this work has been undone with the shift of political 
and economic policies during the 1990s. In India, a very large num-
ber of children beneﬁt from the public Integrated Child Develop-
ment Service.
In countries where the private sector is already dominant in ECD
and early education, “privatization” may not be the main issue. In-
stead, the task may be to identify ways that the private sector can

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
263
help parents to educate their children, can improve existing child-
hood programs operated within the private sector, and can partner
with government to improve access to, and quality of, ECD programs
ﬁnanced and administered by government. In some countries, the
concern may be how to make early childhood programs more public
and how to involve governments in a ﬁeld they have been reluctant
to enter.
Breadth
Most discussions of private-sector education have focused on chil-
dren’s participation in schools and what they learn there. However,
early development and learning mostly occur outside schools in oth-
er educational and learning environments such as the family and
community. Because development occurs as children interact with
their environment(s), programs to improve early child development
must encompass complementary strategies linked to the different en-
vironments that surround a child (Bronfenbrenner 1979). These
strategies (Myers 1995) include:
• Attending to children in centers outside the home (creating an
alternative environment for care and education)
• Educating and supporting parents, focusing on the home envi-
ronment
• Supporting child-centered community development programs,
focusing on changing the general conditions that affect child
development in communities
• Strengthening the capacity of social institutions created to 
attend to children and families (in centers, homes, or com-
munities)
• Advocating and legislating creation of a better policy and legal
environment for programs.
The private sector can be involved in many more ways of improv-
ing early child development than by operating early childhood cen-
ters or providing resources to organizations that operate centers.

264
Robert G. Myers
Selectivity
As children ascend in the educational system, they grow older and
become a more select group socially and economically, particularly in
the developing world. As they age, they also approach and then pass
the legal age for entering the formal labor force. Through selection,
the families of children who remain in the educational system are
more likely to be able to pay for their child’s education. Children
from low-income families are more likely to be selected out of the
system, and children who remain come from families with more re-
sources. Also, children who remain are usually more able and more
qualiﬁed than others for a position that will pay well after they com-
plete school, making loans for education a feasible option.
From the perspective of the corporate sector, investing in these
more-select children may make sense because companies will need a
well-qualiﬁed workforce, especially in this time of globalization.
These same conditions of selectivity, linked to age and labor-market
availability, are less applicable to discussions of children during their
ﬁrst 5 or 6 years of life, even though many young children in the de-
veloping world work at a very early age.
Tension Between ECD and Women’s Work
Early childhood programming is at the intersection of education and
care, and it relates directly to a tension in allocating women’s time
between children’s development and women’s work. Although, in
theory, this tension applies to both parents, most societies continue
to assign women the almost exclusive role of caregiver, hence, the
phrase “women’s work.” Because care is part of ECD, the discussion
of ECD extends well beyond the boundaries of educational institu-
tions and budgets to include other parts of public bureaucracies and
home care by parents or others. Discussion of ECD programs also in-
cludes not only their effects on children’s performance and produc-
tivity in school and later life and work, but also the family members’
(especially mothers’ and older sisters’) earning and learning power as
potential contributors to the labor force. This potential tradeoff be-

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
265
tween care and participation in the labor force recedes in importance
as children mature and enter higher levels of education.
The Private Sector
Different meanings applied to the term “private sector” color and
sometimes derail discussions of ECD. Failing to clarify the meaning
of private sector can compromise discussions, because different orga-
nizations and individuals have different vested interests in the out-
comes of early care and development, the types of resources they can
offer, and their organizational ways.
Deﬁnitions
At a very general level, “private” connotes that which belongs to spe-
ciﬁc and separate individuals or groups, whereas “public” refers to
goods and concerns held in common. Presently, “public” is usually
equated with a government’s statements and roles as representative
of a people’s common concerns. Hence, a contrast is often made be-
tween the private sector and the governmental sector. The tendency
to equate “public” with “governmental,” however, may contradict
the original meaning of the word public. When a government truly
represents a people’s concerns, it may accurately be termed a “public”
institution. However, in a dictatorship, the concerns of the govern-
ment may or may not be public concerns and the people have no
ownership or control of the government.
During the twentieth century, the role of governments in provid-
ing education increased rapidly, particularly at the elementary school
level. Education (and schooling) came to be viewed as a public good
that should be provided free of charge, often within the framework of
a welfare state. During the past two decades, however, the welfare
state has been challenged and initiatives to “privatize” social services,
including education, have arisen.
Figure 1 presents the various dimensions of the private sector as re-
lated to early childcare and education. In many discussions, these di-
mensions are combined to represent the private sector, which is

266
Robert G. Myers
viewed as everything that is not governmental or everything “outside
government” (van der Gaag 1995). The ﬁgure demonstrates that a
broad deﬁnition which contrasts the private and governmental sec-
tors encompasses organizations established explicitly to provide ser-
vices and products that may or may not be educational. The private
sector broadly includes proﬁt and nonproﬁt institutions, religious
and nonreligious institutions, nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), community groups, and private voluntary organizations
(PVOs). Both organizations and individuals are included.
In some discussions, the deﬁnition of private sector as related to
early childcare and education is limited to private care and education
services provided directly by businesses or social groups (column 2,
rows A and B). In others, the deﬁnition is focused on all activities
(row A, columns 1 and 2) conducted for private proﬁt by only the
business community.
The distinction between organizations that are directly involved in
care and education (column 2) and those that are not (column 1)
helps clarify discussions about “privatization” versus “involving the
Noncare/noneducation 
Care/education products 
Dimension
purposes and products
(services, training, materials)
(column 1)
(column 2)
A. Business organizations
Large organizations
Steel company, bank
Kindercare
Medium or small organizations
Shoe repair shop
Home daycare center
B. Social organizations
Community groups
Local women’s group
Women’s group care center
NGOs/PVOs
Churches
Religious group
Religious preschool
Philanthropies
General foundation
Childcare foundation
C. Private individuals
Adults without children
Mother in home, tutor
NGOs, Nongovernmental organizations; PVOs, private voluntary organizations.
Figure 1. Dimensions of the Private Sector as Related to Early Childcare and Education

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
267
private sector.” Whereas privatization involves the shifting of owner-
ship and operation (and sometimes ﬁnancing) from governmental to
nongovernmental organizations or individuals (that is, into column
2), “involving the private sector” suggests a broader search for ways
to involve private institutions and individuals that are not already di-
rectly involved in programs of care and education; emphasis is placed
on column 1, but the concept pertains to all parts of the ﬁgure. In-
volving the private sector may consist of ﬁnding ways to:
• Shift institutions and individuals from column 1 to column 2 as
owners, operators, or caregivers (i.e., privatizing), or
• Capture resources from all parts of the private sector that could
be used by public or private institutions for care and education
to improve child development.
The advantages and disadvantages of privatization have been
much debated and are not speciﬁcally addressed in this chapter.
Rather, the focus is on the broader theme of “involving the private
sector” in care and education.
Private-Sector Involvement: Statistics
Statistics on the involvement of the private sector in childcare and
education mostly report enrollments of children in formal institu-
tions owned and operated by business or social organizations (col-
umn 2, rows A and B). The data include enrollments in for-proﬁt
and nonproﬁt educational institutions, religious and nonreligious
institutions, and community groups and PVOs directly involved in
education. The statistics omit the educational contributions of busi-
ness or social organizations not established explicitly for education-
al purposes, and they do not reﬂect individual or informal home
care and education.
The statistical and administrative deﬁnition of private-sector in-
volvement rarely, if ever, distinguishes explicitly among ownership,
operation, or control of organizations and sources of ﬁnancing. The
dominating criterion almost always seems to be ownership. As noted

268
Robert G. Myers
by Bray (1998), this deﬁnition of “private” is problematic because of
organizations’ different combinations of ﬁnancing, operation, and
control. For example, ﬁnancing may be provided by the government,
but operation and control may be nongovernmental, as for the bur-
geoning “charter” schools in the United States. Or, institutions creat-
ed and operated by the government may be ﬁnanced largely by non-
governmental sources, as are many community-based centers that are
ofﬁcially sanctioned and supervised by the government, but support-
ed by community volunteers.
In the recent reviews prepared for the Year 2000 Evaluation of Edu-
cation for All, most countries reported that a certain percentage of
students enrolled in early childhood programs are enrolled in private
(i.e., nongovernmental) programs. This percentage varies widely
among the countries. For example, in Cuba, early childhood educa-
tion and development is considered the responsibility of the govern-
ment, and the percentage of private institutions is reported as zero. In
various African countries and parts of the Middle East, however, the
government places heavy responsibility for early care and education
on families and local community organizations, and enrollment in
these “private” initiatives is reported as 100 percent. The data for
these countries do not indicate the extent of governmental support
to subsidize the programs.
Nevertheless, for educational statistics in general (and data on ear-
ly education and care in particular), the nongovernmental, adminis-
trative deﬁnition of private appears to be the deﬁnition of choice or
of least resistance. Because most statistics do not include the contri-
butions of private, unregistered institutions that are providing care
and education, the estimates of private-sector activity may be signiﬁ-
cantly underreported.
Involving Institutions
Figure 1 distinguishes between business and social organizations, a
distinction that corresponds approximately, and respectively, to “for-
proﬁt” and “not-for-proﬁt.” When using this distinction, discussion
of the private sector could be limited to organizations created to

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
269
make a proﬁt for those who own and operate the institution (i.e., to
row A). This deﬁnition is derived from an economic decisionmaking
framework which relates efﬁciency and effectiveness to an organiza-
tion’s desire to maximize proﬁts. The deﬁnition can be applied to a
ﬁrm that produces and sells an educational service or product (col-
umn 2, row A) and/or to a business that operates in another market
(column 1, row A).
Applied narrowly, this economic deﬁnition excludes all not-for-
proﬁt institutions such as churches, community groups, or voluntary
organizations, even if they operate a school or childcare center and
charge fees. In ﬁgure 1, these not-for-proﬁt organizations are grouped
together in a separate, “social” category because their motivation is
supposedly social and altruistic (i.e., serving the public good, rather
than seeking private gain).
Distinguishing a business sector from a social sector in relation to
proﬁt-seeking behavior is problematic because the behavior of proﬁt-
seeking and nonproﬁt organizations may be similar. Many “nonprof-
it” organizations operate as proﬁt-making, seeking new markets and
trying to perform cost-effectively. A not-for-proﬁt educational organi-
zation often charges fees and may actually earn proﬁts, but may (or
may be required to) distribute or disguise its proﬁts by paying higher
salaries or reinvesting them in the organization. In addition, not-for-
proﬁt organizations may seek to maximize nonmonetary beneﬁts
(such as socialization to a particular religious orientation) that are
more private than social. Conversely, a for-proﬁt, noneducational
business organization may use its proﬁts (at least partially) altruisti-
cally to support nonproﬁt and public undertakings, including child-
care and education programs. Or, for-proﬁt educational institutions
may utilize “sliding” fee scales to allow subsidies for some students,
an action that is not aimed at maximizing proﬁts.
If private sector is deﬁned only in economic terms, then “privatiza-
tion” becomes a narrow concept of privately owned and operated or-
ganizations seeking greater control of a deﬁned market and motivat-
ed by a desire to maximize proﬁts. Social organizations would be
excluded.

270
Robert G. Myers
Although the distinctions between proﬁt and nonproﬁt blur, the
difference is sufﬁcient enough for societies to continue to distinguish
them legally. Also, social organizations are expected to more closely
represent the public interest, compared with proﬁt-driven businesses,
and to have certain operational advantages over government bureau-
cracies and corporations. These advantages relate, for example, to
their organizational structure and their ability to interact with local
populations and adjust to cultural differences.
Figure 1 further segregates large organizations from small and
medium organizations [e.g., “mom and pop” (mostly “mom” in this
case) operations]. When discussing privatization or the role of the
private sector, emphasis is usually given to large ﬁrms, in the hope of
identifying large-scale, rapid, and efﬁcient ways to improve systems.
In the developing world, however, most nongovernmental childcare
and education programs are operated by small groups, communities,
or individuals, with larger social, but usually not business, organiza-
tions (e.g., religious groups or international NGOs) sometimes in-
volved. The combination of small, as well as large, enterprises (and
particularly, small enterprises delivering a service) constitutes a major
category of private-sector organizations involved in the operation of
early childcare and education programs.
Figure 1 also segregates social organizations as community
groups, NGOs and PVOs, churches, and philanthropies. These cate-
gories may overlap (e.g., a community group may be rooted in reli-
gious beliefs), and the groups may differ substantially in motiva-
tion, ways of becoming involved in care and education, and persons
to convince about involvement (e.g., the local priest, mayor, or
women’s leader). Except for philanthropies, which have funds to
provide, many of the other groups, including NGOs and PVOs,
must seek funds and/or operate with donations of time and in-kind
contributions.
Size, again, is an issue. Although not conveyed in ﬁgure 1, involv-
ing an international NGO or philanthropy that has an annual budget
of US$100 million is different than inviting a local women’s group to
donate time and money to organize a service.

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
271
Involving Individuals and Families
A different perspective of “private” is needed for discussions of in-
volving individuals and families. Their private role may be as imme-
diate providers of childcare and education or as users of, and payers
for, these services (see ﬁgure 1, column 2). Or, individuals and fami-
lies may be considered potential sources of support for care and edu-
cation programs (if they do not have children) (see column 2). In ei-
ther case, the discussion shifts from the power of private and public
producers to the power of private consumers, who may choose to be
at-home providers of care and education.
Families and individuals have their own criteria for choosing
whether to (or how much and how to) invest in early childcare and
education in or outside the home. Their incentive to invest may be a
child’s development in a center or work-related childcare needs. Their
information about options and their knowledge of the possible bene-
ﬁts for the child may be extensive or limited. Their choices will be af-
fected by the characteristics of available services [e.g., cost (in relation
to ability to pay), distance, ﬂexibility of hours, quality, and conﬁ-
dence in the program].
Understanding how families make their decisions to invest time
and money in early childhood programs, including care and educa-
tion at home versus nongovernmental or governmental settings out-
side the home, is important. Their decisions may be affected, for ex-
ample, by:
• Offering private education at different prices and of different
quality
• Offering public subsidies as direct payments, scholarships, tax
credits, or vouchers for use in private or public programs as the
user chooses
• Extending parental work leaves
• Providing additional information about available programs.
From the perspective of families and individuals, the concept of
privatizing education is associated more with increasing the choices

272
Robert G. Myers
for potential users to meet particular needs than with shifting the op-
erational base from governmental to nongovernmental institutions.
Choice is viewed as good in and of itself and is linked to a market-
based orientation of knowledgeable consumers, high competition,
and availability of many options (see Plank and Sykes 1999). These
conditions are not currently present in most developing countries.
In the recent dispute at the National Autonomous University of
Mexico, a public institution, students demonstrated against privatiza-
tion, deﬁned as the introduction of modest fees for some students ac-
cording to their ability to pay. It did not involve a change in the op-
eration and control of the university, which would continue to be a
public institution. Although the students won their 9-month ﬁght
against privatization, the demand for entrance into higher education
shifted, interestingly, toward private institutions, which increased
their enrollments and thereby increased privatization of higher edu-
cation in Mexico.
Along with the notion of improving private choices, the idea of in-
creasing parents’ share of the cost of care and education (i.e., making
a greater private investment) has also become more popular in recent
years. Governments have begun to introduce fees for public pro-
grams, a form of privatizing, and to encourage development of pri-
vately operated schools for families who can pay for them, leaving
the government to serve others. These ways of capturing private
funds from families for care and education programs may increase
the choices for some families but reduce those for others, and they
may create greater inequities if not accompanied by subsidies. These
considerations are relevant to discussions of private versus public care
and education.
Private Versus Public Care and Education
At least six general concerns “drive” discussions of public versus pri-
vate ﬁnancing, operation, and control of social programs, including
early care and education. These concerns are:

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
273
• Availability of resources and educational opportunity
• Efﬁciency and cost-effectiveness
• Accountability
• Quality
• Equity
• Diversity and choice.
The relative weight given to each of these concerns, as they are
converted into criteria for judging the effects, will set the tone and af-
fect viewpoints of private-sector involvement.
Availability of Resources and Educational Opportunity
The concern that governments simply cannot ﬁnd sufﬁcient money
for adequately ﬁnancing education programs, including early child-
hood programs, is widespread. Competing demands for governmen-
tal funds lead to underﬁnancing and “a need to restrain expenditures
so as to reduce deﬁcits and debts” (Tooley 1999). This concern is usu-
ally linked to the expressed desire to improve access and coverage of
programs for children who are “left out” because governmental funds
are scarce.
Regardless of whether governments have the ability to increase
funds for early childhood programs, the proportion of a govern-
ment’s budget allocated for these programs is minimal—often less
than 1 percent of the total education budget in most developing
countries, an amount that is virtually invisible in their gross 
domestic product. Even when health expenditures are included,
the allocation is small, and transfers from planned expenditures for
defense, security, or even other educational levels are not deemed
feasible.
Accordingly, businesses, communities, and other social organiza-
tions and individuals are considered the ﬁrst “alternative” sources of
funding to supplement limited government capacity (or willingness
to spend) for early childhood (or other care and education) programs.
The search for private funding:

274
Robert G. Myers
• Motivates exploration of additional ways for the corporate and
business world (i.e., the noneducational, proﬁt-making part of
the private sector) to be convinced to use its resources for the
public good by supporting programs
• Provokes interest in programs operated by community groups
and voluntary organizations, which can capture new funds or
involve individuals in giving their time to provide early child-
care and education
• Leads to initiatives that require or entice parents to pay for ser-
vices offered through private, and sometimes public, programs.
Seeking alternative ﬁnancing broadly in the private sector may, or
may not, reduce the public role in operating and controlling pro-
grams. While recognizing that obtaining additional funds from the
private sector may be desirable, some critics continue to view the
state’s role of protector as important and necessary, and they suggest
that the search for alternative funding can have undesirable results.
For example, the costs of private programs may thwart the participa-
tion of low-income families in care and education programs unless
the public continues to provide free services or help defray the costs
of private services. Private-sector involvement could thus adversely
affect equity (see “Equity” below).
Additionally, governments may have an “excuse” not to allocate
funds to these programs, leaving their support to the whims of vari-
ous private groups. One suggested alternative is that governments
should strengthen their position by increasing taxes for families that
can afford to pay and using these revenues to expand early care and
education programs.
Efﬁciency and Cost-Effectiveness
Another concern is the common complaint that public programs are
administered inefﬁciently and use the scarce resources they can ob-
tain poorly. The bureaucracy is viewed as large and lethargic, and
possibly corrupt, not directly accountable to the users of its services,
subject to political inﬂuence, and having little incentive to improve

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
275
the administration of its programs. Presumably, programs that are
privately operated within a competitive system would need to be ac-
countable to users and therefore seek the most efﬁcient and cost-ef-
fective ways of providing early care and education. The emphasis
here is more on operation and control than on direct funding, which
could come from public sources via vouchers or from users’ direct
payments.
In a review of a private secondary education, Bray (1998) suggests
that more research is needed to conﬁrm the already considerable evi-
dence that private schools are more efﬁcient than public ones. Clear-
ly, circumstances vary widely among different settings depending on
the populations served by private or public systems.
While acknowledging that the search for efﬁciency is legitimate
and even necessary, some critics are concerned that the cult of efﬁ-
ciency can distort educational goals and distract operators from their
primary task of educating and caring for children. These critics sug-
gest that an organization can be efﬁcient but ineffective, or, perhaps,
have a limited standard of effectiveness (e.g., children ﬁnish school
without repeating grades), while disregarding whether children learn
and develop in an integrated way. These critics are concerned about
the increasingly common view of children as “products.”
Also, in the ECD ﬁeld, using funds for half-day programs focused
on 5-year-olds may be efﬁcient if the primary purpose is to prepare
children for school, but this focus de-emphasizes other purposes, for
example, meeting the needs of parents who must work longer hours
and seek full-day programs for younger, as well as older, preschool
children. Similarly, having large numbers of children per caregiver or
teacher may be efﬁcient, but the children are then likely to be “herd-
ed” rather than helped to learn.
Efﬁciency must be viewed in terms of outcomes and not simply
mechanistic accomplishments (e.g., timely delivery of “inputs,”
meeting payrolls for teachers, reducing grade repetition). A central
question with regard to private versus public funding and operation
of programs is whether the deﬁnition of outcomes is narrowly orga-
nizational and monetary or broader and more humanitarian.

276
Robert G. Myers
Accountability
Accountability is closely related to efﬁciency. In this case, it refers
more to the delivery of results than to forms used in delivering them.
Accountability is the meeting of standards and the responding to
users’ articulated personal and social desires.
Although national governments spend public monies on educa-
tion, they are only generally accountable to the public. Bureaucracies
are entrenched and most public servants cannot be voted out or re-
placed by the public. Locally, where school boards and committees
interface directly with their constituents, the administrators and
teachers in public schools may be held directly accountable for the
services delivered. Yet, for the most part, little attention is given to
early childcare and education. Moreover, criticizing those who are
viewed as experts (in childhood education) is not considered appro-
priate in many parts of the developing world.
One may assume that accountability will improve if private insti-
tutions operate childcare and education centers and/or if parents
have to pay fees for a service. However, this assumption may not be
accurate in cultures where market values do not dominate and lines
of authority and forms of relationships differ from those in the mar-
ket-oriented developed world. Bray (1998) provides examples of both
situations.
Quality
As with accountability, advocates of private-sector education pro-
grams argue that these programs, which charge fees, will be of higher
quality than public-sector education because the programs have to be
responsive to clients within a competitive environment. This argu-
ment is not linked primarily to lack of funding, although this issue
may be relevant, but to features of private education, such as the abil-
ity to clearly deﬁne outcomes and expectations, the selection and re-
tention of good teachers (Rothstein, Carnoy, and Benveniste 1999),
the use of evaluation, and a greater propensity to innovate (Finn,
Manno, and Vanourek 2000). The argument depends on the assump-
tion that users will be able to deﬁne, recognize, and monitor quality

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
277
and that quality will be a primary consideration when they choose
among programs.
A contrasting argument suggests that allowing private organiza-
tions to operate programs could reduce quality because tangential,
but related, factors (market imperfections) may inﬂuence users’ deci-
sions, interfere with competition, and diminish an organization’s re-
sponsibility for accountability. For example:
• Low-income parents who must work may need childcare, but
they may have little choice among programs because they can-
not pay for expensive programs and must avail themselves of
low-cost, potentially low-quality private alternatives if higher-
quality public programs are not available or accessible or oper-
ate during their work hours. In this instance, distance, hours,
and cost take precedence over quality.
• Parents may not be aware that they qualify for programs that
would provide quality care and education and/or they may not
be informed of the potential beneﬁts of a quality program that
offers services beyond simple custodial care. Knowledge is not
uniformly distributed.
These “imperfections” in the system may allow operators to “cut
corners” and reduce quality, for example, by hiring inexperienced
caregivers and teachers at low salaries. Operators may offer users ac-
ceptable tradeoffs (e.g., longer hours, but reduced quality).
In a study of selected public and private schools in California,
Rothstein, Carnoy, and Benveniste (1999) suggested that the location
of schools in high- or low-income areas was more important to 
the clarity of a schools’ goals and the teachers attracted to a school
than whether the school was public or private. The results of a 
recent comparative study in Latin America (Casassus and others
1998) showed that the test scores for children in Cuba (an entirely
public system) were clearly superior to those for children in 
Colombia (which has mostly private elementary and secondary
schools).

278
Robert G. Myers
In a recent survey (Myers 2000a) conducted for the Year 2000 Eval-
uation of Education for All, at least three ECD professionals from dif-
ferent developing world settings mentioned that the number of pri-
vate organizations providing very-low-quality early childcare and
education was expanding rapidly, and they urged institution of gov-
ernment controls. In sum, the availability of private organizations for
early childcare and education does not guarantee higher-quality pro-
grams and may even result in lower-quality programs, depending on
the circumstances.
Equity
Discussions of the role of the private sector become more negative
when focusing on equity. In this instance, the private sector is often
cast as a villain, a possible source of inequity, rather than social cor-
rection. Most private offerings are assumed to be available only to
those who can pay for them, a situation that can create (or reinforce)
a divided social system. In this case, the elite have access to quality
private schooling, while the poor “make do” with an inferior public
system, and urban children are favored over rural children.
Tooley (1999) suggests that this assumption may be misconceived
because (a) the public provision of services can be inequitable and
has hidden costs, and (b) innovative private programs for disadvan-
taged populations can be identiﬁed. Tooley (1999) presents eighteen
examples of privately operated programs which demonstrate the po-
tential beneﬁts of private education, mainly at secondary and higher
education levels. He highlights operators that established “tutoring”
programs which became large-scale, alternative education programs
characterized by low fees and results comparable with, if not better
than, those of public institutions. However, Tooley does not clarify
the meaning of “low cost” or the beneﬁt of these programs to the
poor, as distinguished from the lower-middle-class or middle-class
population.
Some argue (Sancho 1999) that tapping alternative sources will en-
able governments to target public subsidies better and to increase the

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
279
ﬂow of funds to programs for the poor. The unstated assumption is
that this ﬂow of funds will reduce inequities because the poor will
have greater access to programs. However, if private programs tend to
be of better quality than public programs, as is also argued, a two-
tiered system will be created, and inequity will be related to quality
rather than to access. That is, the public system will provide “second-
rate” programs for the poor, and the private system will provide qual-
ity programs for those who can pay. Lack of access to quality pro-
grams is seldom considered an indicator of continuing inequity.
This view may be exaggerated because, as already noted, high-
quality public programs exist, as well as poor-quality private pro-
grams. Nevertheless, there are sufﬁcient examples of inequitable, bi-
furcated systems related to quality. Equating increased access directly
with improvements in equity should be questioned.
Diversity and Choice
Discussions of private education also involve questions related to the
choices among diverse approaches. The offerings of public education
tend to be homogeneous, and large-scale public programs have difﬁ-
culty responding to parents’ demands for speciﬁc attention during
the school years to cultural and religious differences. Public school
systems also have difﬁculty entertaining alternative curricula, which
has led to the growth of private schools operated by religious or cul-
tural groups that are in the minority or are attracted to speciﬁc curric-
ula (e.g., Montessori, creative arts) not sanctioned by educational au-
thorities.
These tendencies within public schools may be moderated by de-
centralized systems with local control of curricula and the hiring of
teachers. However, there will still be groups whose desires are not ad-
equately represented in the public school system, and these groups
have, historically, developed their own schools as a preferable alter-
native. The desire to respond to parental desires and to marginalized
social groups can be applauded as a celebration of diversity, but may
also reinforce social disjunctions and separateness.

280
Robert G. Myers
Involving the Private Sector
The broad view of the private sector, adopted in this chapter, includes
business and social organizations and individuals that are not direct-
ly involved in providing early childcare or education, but have re-
sources that could be tapped to beneﬁt young children. Two of the
components depicted in ﬁgure 1—business organizations and adults
without children (column 1, rows A and C)—could become much
more involved in early care and education. Potential ways of involv-
ing these businesses and individuals are suggested below.
Involving Private Enterprise
Noncare, noneducation businesses may desire to invest in, or sup-
port, early childhood programs because of enlightened self-interest,
social responsibility, and/or altruism. With regard to their self-inter-
est, businesses may wish to consider three pertinent ﬁndings:
• Research suggests that company employees who do not have to
worry about the care of their children will be better workers and
have less absenteeism.
• The good publicity gained from participating in social programs
can help sell products.
• Some forms of contributions can result in tax exemptions.
Improving the quality and productivity of the labor force is advan-
tageous to private companies, for their own self-interest and the gen-
eral public interest. The growing research literature on ECD links in-
vestments in early childhood to better performance in school and
enhanced productivity later. Although the fact that healthier, more
intelligent children will be more productive workers later in life is in-
tuitively obvious, employers sometimes have difﬁculty accepting this
long chain of causality because it is hard to envision and such invest-
ments do not yield immediate payoffs. The connection between edu-
cation and productivity is more obvious and convincing for pro-
grams at secondary and university levels, when the children and

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
281
youth are older and the direct relationship between training and
work can be visualized more easily.
Support can be provided, or is already being provided, to ECD pro-
grams by private businesses in several general ways—within compa-
nies, outside companies in the broader social arena, and collectively.
Possible ways to contribute are suggested below.
Within Companies
One way of supporting early care and education is “at home,” focus-
ing on company employees. When government does not require
companies to provide childcare or maternity beneﬁts, some ﬁrms
have taken the initiative to provide these beneﬁts to their own em-
ployees. The beneﬁts may include:
• Instituting ﬂexible work hours so that parents can better attend
to childcare at home.
• Establishing a childcare or early education center onsite, operat-
ed by the ﬁrm or under contract with a separate service pro-
vider. Whether onsite services will be useful and successful 
depends somewhat on the distance employees have to travel to
work. This approach has not been particularly effective in many
developing countries because working mothers do not want
their children to endure long trips twice a day on crowded pub-
lic transportation.
• Providing parents with a cash beneﬁt or voucher to be used for a
program that meets certain standards.
• Providing parental education programs for employees.
• Asking employees to contribute to general social programs (e.g.,
the United Fund in the United States, which usually includes
some support for early childhood programs) or to more-speciﬁc
early childhood programs sponsored by the company or con-
ducted by others.
The suggestions above entail “extra” expenses for a business,
which many companies in the developing world are not willing to

282
Robert G. Myers
entertain, particularly when their comparative advantage in the
world market depends on maintaining low production costs. Com-
panies are not likely to take these actions unless they see direct ben-
eﬁts to productivity or have a large social conscience. An example is
the noncompliance with laws in many developing countries which
require businesses with more than a certain number of female em-
ployees to provide a childcare center onsite. Even in these situa-
tions, most ﬁrms do not provide day care, and most governments
do not enforce the law. In some settings, the result may be institu-
tion of a “cap” on hiring female labor (to keep the numbers low and
avoid providing childcare), or female laborers are hired temporarily
and rehired periodically (or let go) so that the ﬁrm can avoid paying
a beneﬁt.
Partly because businesses are reluctant to provide employees with
childcare and early education beneﬁts, many governments have in-
cluded childcare within mandated social security beneﬁts. Other
ways governments have helped companies afford these beneﬁts for
their employees include allowing companies an exemption from tax-
es or from paying child-related social security beneﬁts if the compa-
nies provide their own services or other beneﬁts.
Outside Companies, the Broader Social Arena
Another approach, which can generate even wider support for ECD,
is for ﬁrms to provide support for new or ongoing programs operated
by governments, private educational ﬁrms, organizations in the so-
cial sector, or individuals. The business community does, and can,
support these efforts in many ways—by paying taxes, supporting
philanthropies, contributing to social trust funds, “adopting”
schools, and donating products or services. Taxes and philanthropic
programs are the two most prominent indirect forms of contribu-
tions by private enterprise to ECD for the public good. These forms of
contribution are addressed below, as are the other, more direct, ways
to contribute to ECD.
Paying Taxes. Tax contributions by private enterprise to support so-
cial programs, including programs for young children, are sometimes

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
283
overlooked, perhaps because they are not always visible to the public
and do not involve direct, easily credited actions by companies. Con-
tributions to ECD that are made through general taxation and budget
allocations are likely to be small for individual companies and for the
entire private sector because tax rates are relatively low, ways may be
found not to pay taxes, and a very small proportion of general bud-
getary allocations are spent on young children.
Sometimes, however, taxes are earmarked. Paying into a social se-
curity fund used, in part, to support childcare programs operated by
the public sector or an approved agent is one form of earmarking.
Mexico and Sweden are two countries that earmark taxes in this way,
whereas the United States does not (Myers 2000b). These funding
arrangements, which tap private-sector funds, are usually shared with
employees, who pay a portion of their salary into the fund, and gov-
ernment, which contributes from general revenues. The earmarked
funds also may be used to support maternity and job-leave beneﬁts
for parents. Liberal arrangements for maternity support are available
in Sweden and most socialist countries. In the developing world,
however, they are seldom available or are honored only in special cir-
cumstances. And, unless companies are monitored, earmarked taxes
may deter some from hiring female employees, because these em-
ployees will increase a company’s costs.
In Colombia, one variant of this form of contribution is the re-
quirement that each organization, private or public, pay a 3 percent
payroll tax designated for early childhood activities of the Colombian
Institute for Family Welfare. The program supported is organized and
controlled by the government and operated by communities, as is
usually the case when private-sector contributions are made through
taxes to the government.
Establishing a Philanthropy. Philanthropic giving has expanded great-
ly across the developed world, but is still in its infancy in most coun-
tries of the developing world. Nevertheless, foundations established
by major companies operating in the developing world are beginning
to gain social importance. A philanthropy established by a business
to donate all or part of its funds to ECD may continue to be linked

284
Robert G. Myers
closely to the company or may become totally independent, operat-
ing as part of the not-for-proﬁt social sector.
Funds from a philanthropy can be used to support many possible
initiatives to improve early child development. For example, they
can support centers operated privately or publicly, and they can be
used for the full range of complementary strategies in ECD (e.g., cen-
ters, parental education, child-centered community programs, train-
ing and other forms of capacity building, advocacy).
Recent history indicates a relatively low level of involvement of
philanthropies in ECD, although speciﬁc data are not available. How-
ever, the trend appears to be changing slowly as increased contribu-
tions are spurred perhaps by the search for new activities to support,
new knowledge about the importance of early childhood, changing
social and economic conditions, human rights considerations, and
other reasons. The cases described in the next chapter (e.g., the
Abrinq Foundation for Children’s Rights, the Aga Khan Foundation)
illustrate the growing philanthropic involvement of the private sec-
tor. However, despite these pioneer and continuing efforts, the shift
toward greater support for ECD does not appear to apply yet to the
developing world in a signiﬁcant way.
Establishing and Helping to Operate a Social Trust Fund. Businesses could
become more directly involved in ECD by establishing and helping
to operate a social trust fund. As a demand-responsive form of in-
volvement, the fund would support programs proposed by care and
educational institutions, rather than preset packages of activities.
Businesses could operate the fund like a philanthropy or have a much
more active and protagonistic role (e.g., providing direct technical or
legal support to early childcare and educational institutions, offering
loans, becoming involved in advocacy efforts).
A social trust fund is an excellent opportunity for building partner-
ships across sectors to support ECD, involving governments, private
enterprises, and international organizations in contributing to a com-
mon fund. All contributors and potential users could be represented
on an oversight, governing committee, and an NGO could be estab-
lished to operate the programs using the fund’s resources. The fund

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
285
could operate nationally, internationally, or within countries in par-
ticular geographic or political areas.
A major purpose of the fund would be to help create and strength-
en ECD programs. Activities would be focused on helping communi-
ties, NGOs, and small entrepreneurs establish and improve programs,
and the fund could provide additional support to institutions ﬁ-
nanced and/or operated by government. Emphasis could be placed
on developing strategies of self-sufﬁciency for institutions serving
lower-income groups that cannot afford to pay the full costs of ser-
vices. Technical assistance could be provided to help eligible institu-
tions develop proposals for funding.
“Adopting” a School. Programs for companies to adopt a school have
been established in Costa Rica and Paraguay. The companies offer the
school a range of assistance, such as helping with construction; pur-
chasing or donating materials; and providing management advice,
scholarships, and food. One example is the Arauco Company in
Chile which provides support to various local community schools
(UNICEF and Fundación Andes 1994). For privately operated schools,
companies may help support a capital fund, sometimes on a match-
ing basis, to provide a guaranteed, ongoing source of ﬁnancial sup-
port from the earnings of the fund.
Donating Products or Services. In the past, private enterprise often has
provided in-kind assistance to various parts of the educational sys-
tem. The most notable example of this assistance is the large-scale do-
nation of new computers. In the United States, for example, a mecha-
nism has been created to recycle computers replaced by businesses. A
similar mechanism could be created in developing countries to help
communities and NGOs administer and provide early childcare and
education. Other in-kind contributions by private enterprise have
been mostly for elementary schools and include donations of school
supplies (e.g., paper, crayons, books), construction materials, and
sometimes food.
Other opportunities for involvement that are less related to imme-
diate needs or expenditures are also available. For example, for com-
munity or private schools, industry could donate products that can

286
Robert G. Myers
be resold, and donations could be used to build sustainability by
helping local institutions develop their own capital funds. Or, indus-
try could offer management assistance to schools, for most institu-
tions of early education are administered by individuals who have no
management experience. Courses could be developed to help direc-
tors of early childhood centers, operated by community organiza-
tions or NGOs, perform self-diagnoses of the centers’ organizational
and ﬁnancial condition.
Some larger private businesses will be able to offer specialized assis-
tance, such as computer support or other examples suggested below:
• Book publishers could provide courses for entrepreneurs in early
childcare and education using books and materials they already
sell.
• Banks could offer small loans, possibly on favorable terms, to
small entrepreneurs in education. Or, credit card arrangements
could be made, similar to those used to accumulate “frequent
travel” miles, to assign a small percentage of one’s purchases to
a fund for care and education.
• Communications organizations can help publicize educational
options and offer expertise and “air time” to support campaigns
for early distance education and to sensitize and inform parents
(e.g., CNN’s current agreement with UNICEF, the World Health
Organization, and others to inform the public about children’s
rights). Telephone companies could allow messages to be print-
ed on their telephone bills to reach a large number of families.
Collective Involvement
Besides the possibilities for individual companies’ involvement in
ECD, collective contributions from the private sector are also possible
and perhaps more feasible. Examples of collective involvement in ed-
ucation include the Coffee Growers Association in Colombia and the
Sugar Growers Association in Guatemala.
Establishing a committee to help monitor whether particular ﬁrms
are providing the beneﬁts or services that should be provided under

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
287
law in relation to young children could be one form of collective in-
volvement. A “seal” could be created to identify companies consid-
ered to be “child friendly.”
Involving Private Citizens
Private citizens who are not parents can play a role as individual phil-
anthropists in support of ECD. Other opportunities have been ad-
dressed elsewhere, such as use of vouchers, which privatize education
and increase parents’ choices for their children’s education, and indi-
viduals’ donation of time to help care for or educate young children,
a phenomenon often found in many settings of the developing
world, but not the developed world.
Individual Philanthropy
In the developed world, churches, charities, hospitals, and other or-
ganizations have long recognized the value of soliciting funds from
private individuals, a tradition of microphilanthropy that has devel-
oped and perhaps been abused. Large international NGOs (e.g., Save
the Children, Christian Children’s Fund, Plan International, World
Vision) are among the institutions that have used this approach to
support programs to improve the condition of children in the devel-
oping world. These organizations have been very successful in ob-
taining funds by establishing programs for individual donors to
“sponsor” a child or family in the developing world, drawing their
funds mostly from individuals in the developed world. Although
some of this philanthropic tradition also exists in the developing
world, individual philanthropy is not as strong as in the developed
world, partly because the number of middle- and upper-income peo-
ple who can individually donate funds is much smaller.
Nevertheless, individual involvement in childrearing by nonpar-
ents in communities of the developing world may be very high be-
cause of extended family and kinship arrangements and traditions
of community work. In addition, similar to the developed world, a
new approach to involvement is arising as individuals are asked to
make ﬁnancial contributions to social programs. For example, in

288
Robert G. Myers
Bangladesh, GrameenPhone appeals directly to individuals for ﬁ-
nancial assistance, and, in Colombia, the Center for International
Development and Education is experimenting with an appeal for
donations from Colombians living outside Colombia.
The explosion of the Internet greatly expands possibilities for mi-
crophilanthropy to a new level. For example, a small European group
used the Internet to appeal for assistance after Hurricane Mitch, rais-
ing US$200,000 almost overnight. Because of this success, the group
is considering developing a mechanism for similar appeals that
would include, for potential donors, a “menu” of NGOs in the devel-
oping world and short presentations of their programs. The organiza-
tions (and appeals) would be screened independently to validate their
authenticity, experience, and need. One technology is already avail-
able to facilitate such an effort. As reported in TIME magazine
(Schenker 2000), “… technology industry executives spoke to some
of the world’s largest banks at the [recent] Davos meeting about using
digital certiﬁcates so that small amounts of money can be transferred
between individuals.” Undoubtedly, there are many examples of sim-
ilar potentially fruitful efforts in the developing world, and docu-
menting them and learning from their successes and failures would
be useful.
Conclusion
This chapter has explored possible opportunities for involving com-
ponents of the private sector in early child development. The main
observations are summarized as follows.
1. Involving the private sector is different from privatizing. “Priva-
tization” is a much narrower concept that refers to the shifting
of ownership and operation, and sometimes ﬁnancing, from
governmental organizations to nongovernmental organizations
or individuals. “Involving the private sector” is a broad notion
that refers to the wide participation of all components of the
private sector in a full range of activities.

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
289
2. For early child development in the developing world, privatiza-
tion may not be the main issue, as suggested by the very high
proportion of private-sector support for early childcare and edu-
cation programs and the high proportion of early childhood
programs operated privately. Rather, the task may be to identify
ways for various parts of the private sector to help parents with
their child’s education, to improve existing childhood programs
operated by the private sector, and to partner with government
to improve access to, and quality of, programs ﬁnanced and ad-
ministered by the government. Attention may need to be given
to making early childhood programs more public and involving
governments in a ﬁeld they have been reluctant to enter.
3. The arguments for investing in ECD may be compelling to gov-
ernments and different social organizations, but may not be
convincing to private businesses or individuals that may expect
direct, private payoffs, or returns, from their investments, par-
ticularly if the businesses or individuals are not already involved
in early childcare or education. If the private sector does not as-
sume some responsibility in this area, and governments do not
act, ECD programs will be underinvested (i.e., the level of pri-
vate-sector beneﬁts will not match the level of social beneﬁts
ECD programs can provide).
4. The assumption that there are knowledgeable consumers and
competitive markets in many settings of the developing world is
doubtful. The lack of these ingredients in many settings under-
cuts existing arguments for privatization, which postulate im-
proved quality, accountability, and efﬁciency by offering incen-
tives to private providers or funds to consumers for choosing
among options.
5. The criteria for evaluating the effects of increased involvement
by the private sector or privatization of early childcare and edu-
cation include changes in levels of funding, access, accountabil-
ity, efﬁciency, quality, diversity and choice, and equity. Apply-
ing these criteria may lead to contradictory conclusions. For
example, the tendency to use the criteria of funding and access

290
Robert G. Myers
often leads to neglect of equity and differences in quality, or in-
equity. Shifting the balance between public and private support
affects these criteria in different settings, and researchers have
yet to accumulate all the evidence about these effects.
6. The opportunities for involving noneducation and noncare
businesses in early childcare and education are many. One
promising approach is their participation in establishing and
operating social trust funds.
7. Individual microphilanthropy is another promising approach
for tapping private-sector resources that has not been promoted
or examined widely within the developing world.
Note
In writing this chapter, the author beneﬁted from papers or thoughts
by Jeffrey Puryear, Miriam Waiser, Claudio Castro, Henry Levin,
Stephen Heyneman, Mark Bray, and Ellen Mangenheim. The respon-
sibility for the contents is solely the author’s.
References
Bray, M. 1998. Privatization of Secondary Education: Issues and
Policy Implications. In J. Delors, ed., Education for the Twenty-First
Century: Issues and Prospects. Paris: UNESCO.
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1979. The Ecology of Human Development.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Casassus, J., J.E. Froemel, J.C. Palafox, and S. Cusato. 1998. Primer
Estudio Internacional Comparativo Sobre Lenguaje, Matemática y
Factores Asociados en Tercero y Cuarto Grado. Santiago, Chile:
UNESCO, Regional Ofﬁce for Education in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Chile), Latin American Laboratory for Evaluation and
Quality of Education.
Finn, C.E., B. Manno, and G. Vanourek. 2000. Charter Schools in
Action: Renewing Public Education. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Role of the Private Sector in Early Child Development
291
Mangenheim, E. 1999. Preschools and Privatization. Paper presented
at the conference on Setting the Agenda for the Center of the
Study of Privatization in Education. Columbia University,
Teachers’ College. Mimeo [Forthcoming from Westview Press in a
volume edited by H.M. Levin.]
Myers, R. 1995. The Twelve Who Survive: Strengthening Programs of
Early Childhood Development in the Third World. Ypsilanti, Mich.:
High/Scope Press.
———. 2000a. Early Childhood Care and Development, A Global
Review: 1990–1999. Paper for UNICEF and The Education for 
All Forum, contributed to the Year 2000 Evaluation of Education
for All. Paris: The Education For All Forum. [Available on
http://www.unesco.org/education/efa]
———. 2000b. Financing Early Childhood Care and Education
Services. In M. Neuman, ed., International Journal of Educational
Research 33:75–93.
Plank, D., and G. Sykes. 1999. How Choice Changes the Education
System: A Michigan Case Study. In C. Soudien and P. Kallaway,
eds., Education, Equity and Transformation. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, in cooperation with
UNESCO Institute for Education.
Rothstein, R., M. Carnoy, and G. Benveniste. 1999. What Public
Schools Can Learn from Private Schools. Aspen, Col.: Economic
Policy Institute.
Sancho, A. 1999. Sintesis del la Conferencia sobre Oportunidades de
Inversión en Educación Privada en Países en Desarrollo. Washington,
D.C.: International Finance Corporation.
Schenker, J.L. 2000. Plans to Dotcom the World. TIME Europe, Feb.
14, 40.
Schweinhart, L., H. Barnes, and D. Weikart (with W.S. Barnett and A.
Epstein). 1993. Signiﬁcant Beneﬁts. The High/Scope Perry Pre-school
Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, Mich.: High/Scope Press.
Tooley, J. 1999. The Global Education Industry. Lessons from Private
Education in Developing Countries. London: Institute of Economic
Affairs, in conjunction with International Finance Corporation.

292
Robert G. Myers
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) and Fundación Andes.
1994. Aportes de la Empresa Privada al Mejoramiento de la Educación
en Chile. Santiago: UNICEF.
Van der Gaag, J. 1995. Private and Public Initiatives. Working Together
for Health and Education. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Chapter 11
Communities Can Make 
a Difference: Five Cases 
Across Continents
Simone Kirpal
This chapter presents ﬁve case studies of community-based early
child development (ECD) programs. The cases are examples of good
practice, which gives priority to extensive involvement of the local
community to create ownership and establish successful, cost-effec-
tive, and sustainable programs. The case studies highlight ways the
private sector can inﬂuence public policy and provide insight on two
key issues:
• How do effective ECD programs involve local communities to
become culturally and ﬁnancially sustainable?
• Can private-public partnerships enhance the potential for tak-
ing ECD programs to scale?
Both questions are closely related. Knowing how high-quality ECD
programs can reach the most vulnerable and poorest children and
enhance their life chances without being prohibitively costly is im-
portant for providing technical support to governments, advocating
for ECD programs, facilitating decisionmaking about these programs,
and justifying investments in them. Moving programs to scale and
increasing their accessibility by lowering unit costs is one way of
reaching out to poor children and to rural areas. Yet, if programs are
293

294
Simone Kirpal
meant to have a lasting effect on changing and improving the condi-
tion of children and society, they must be culturally sustainable and
respond to local needs and demands. Only if local communities are
involved in programs and take ownership of them will ECD programs
persist and continue to have the same positive effects when outside
donors cease their funding.
Five Case Studies: Overview
The ﬁve cases presented in this chapter share certain commonalities.
They all provide direct ECD preschool or center-based services to
poor communities. In addition, all programs have developed a train-
ing component to train teachers and/or caregivers. They all rely on
some form of community support and are struggling with the issue of
scaling up to reach more children. The cases, all examples of effective
programs, are summarized brieﬂy below and described separately in
greater detail later in the chapter.
The Montessori Preschool Project in Haiti offers a 9-month teacher
training course for scholarship students from poor communities who
have relatively low education levels, enabling them to become certi-
ﬁed Montessori preschool teachers. On graduation, the teachers are
given ﬁnancial support to return to their community to establish
preschools, mostly in poor and rural areas, if the local communities
provide the necessary resources for the schools to become ﬁnancially
sustainable after a few years. Since its inception in 1986, the project
has trained more than 450 teachers and has supported forty-three
preschools spread throughout Haiti, serving approximately 2,000
children each year. Recently, two additional centers for training
teachers have been established to increase local capacity for early
childhood education.
The Mother-Child Day Care Center Services (MCDCCS) in Uganda
provides low-cost, high-quality childcare for children ages 0–10 years
to help poor working mothers living in slums and rural trading areas
become economically self-reliant. The program aims to improve the
condition of young children by empowering mothers and supporting

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
295
their development so that they can better provide for their children.
In addition to providing a safe and stimulating environment for chil-
dren and reliable childcare services, which enables mothers to work,
the three MCDCCS centers offer a variety of integrated programs,
which include counseling on child health and breastfeeding, family
planning, parenting skills, and literacy. Approximately 6,600 chil-
dren have beneﬁted from the program since the ﬁrst center opened in
1987.
SERVOL is a nongovernmental organization (NGO) in Trinidad
and Tobago that has developed and administers several education
programs in disadvantaged and poor areas of the country. The pro-
grams include an early childhood care and education (ECCE) effort, a
parent outreach program, an alternative school enrichment initiative
for secondary school students, a skill training program for adoles-
cents, and a high-technology course for young people ages 20–25
years. All programs, including content and monitoring, are operated
entirely by individuals in the community. Initiated in 1971, SER-
VOL’s programs have gradually become sustainable ﬁnancially and,
in 1987, the government of Trinidad and Tobago, through the Min-
istry of Education, established SERVOL as its agent for nonformal ed-
ucation and assumed payment of salaries for teachers and instructors.
Currently, SERVOL administers, manages, and closely monitors 160
public ECCE centers in Trinidad and Tobago.
The Aga Khan Foundation supports two efforts, the Madrasa Re-
source Centers (MRC) in Kenya, Uganda, and Zanzibar, which work
with disadvantaged Muslim communities to help establish commu-
nity-owned and community-managed preschools, and Improving Pre-
and Primary Education (IPPS) in rural Sindh, Pakistan, which helps lo-
cal communities establish and manage their own preschools and pri-
mary schools. These efforts emphasize the strengthening of local ca-
pacity to improve the quality of basic education and often involve
partnerships with NGOs and local governments. The IPPS and MRC
project teams conduct community awareness and mobilization activ-
ities; help develop curricula and leadership skills; identify partners’
roles and responsibilities; and train and support communities and

296
Simone Kirpal
school management committees in organizing, establishing, manag-
ing, and ﬁnancing their own ECD activities or primary schools. Spe-
cial emphasis is given to the education of girls and the empowerment
of women by, for example, ensuring that girls constitute at least 50
percent of the total enrollment and selecting and training local
women as teachers, heads of schools, and members of school man-
agement committees. By early 2000, the MRCs were working with 
approximately 130 communities across East Africa, and the IPPS 
project, which began in 1996, was working with 12 communities to
establish preschools and primary schools. IPPS plans to expand to 
another six to eight communities in rural Sindh and to work with
mothers and other caregivers, focusing on children under 3 years old
and on childrearing practices in the home.
The Step by Step program differs from the other four cases in not
originating from within a local community in a developing country.
Instead, the program was designed originally for former communist
countries and implemented initially in Central and Eastern Europe
and the Former Soviet Union. Gradually, the program has spread to
other parts of the world, including Haiti, Mongolia, and South Africa.
Step by Step provides a teaching methodology to guide and support
education reform. It includes materials, courses, and training pro-
grams, for teachers and caregivers, which introduce child-centered
teaching methods and support community and family involvement
in preschool and primary education. The aim is to engender demo-
cratic ideas and principles within young children and their families
by encouraging children to make choices, take responsibility, express
their ideas with creativity, and develop critical thinking skills. The 
institutional reform process is reinforced by training teachers and 
administrators at preschool and primary school levels, introducing
new course content and interactive teaching methods at universities
and pedagogical institutes, encouraging cooperation on educational 
content and policies among different government ministries, and 
establishing national associations for parents and teachers. In 2000,
its sixth year of operation, Step by Step was training 40,000 teachers 

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
297
annually in twenty-eight countries and serving more than 500,000
families and children in preschools and primary schools. The pro-
gram cooperates with more than 300 institutions which train, and re-
train, teachers to implement new practices.
Table 1 summarizes the activities and types and forms of partner-
ships in the ﬁve cases. Following on the framework suggested by 
Myers in the preceding chapter, the table identiﬁes involvement of
the public and/or private sectors; includes community within the 
private sector; and indicates the role of the community in initiating,
contributing to, or participating in the programs.
Table 1. Five Successful ECD Programs: Overview
Projects
Montessori
MCDCCS
SERVOL
MRC/IPPS
Step by Step
Childcare, 
ECCE centers,
Preschools,
Preschools,
Preschools,
training,
teacher training, training,
teacher
teacher 
parent 
parent 
capacity 
training,
Type of program
training
education
education
building
methodology
Community
initiative
no
✓
✓
✓
no
Community 
contribution
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Community 
participation
no
no
✓
✓
✓
Support from 
international 
donors or 
foundations
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Government support 
or involvement
no
✓
✓
✓
✓
Financial 
Preschools: ✓
Preschools: ✓
✓(At 
sustainability
Training: no
no
✓
Training: no
country level)
ECD, Early child development; ECCE, early childhood care and education.
✓, Yes.
Private sector
Community involvement

298
Simone Kirpal
Features of a Successful ECD Program
Comparison of the ﬁve examples of good practice in this chapter 
suggests several common features that account for their success. The
programs give priority to the following essential elements:
• Child-centered approach
• Parental involvement and family support
• Community ownership
• Cultural and ﬁnancial sustainability
• Training and capacity building
• Integration within a broader framework of development
• Private-public partnerships.
Child-centered Approach
Each of the ﬁve programs has adopted a child-centered approach that
supports the integral development of each child through services ad-
dressing a child’s cognitive, motor, psychosocial, and emotional de-
velopment simultaneously. The teaching methods give priority to the
development of individual attributes and social skills, such as self-es-
teem, conﬁdence, responsibility, problem solving, and critical think-
ing. This approach distinguishes these programs from the countries’
traditional, mainstream educational programs, which feature large
classes; rote learning and memorization; a purely academic, no-play
orientation; no group activities; and preschools conceived as an ex-
tension of primary schools, without accounting for the speciﬁc devel-
opmental needs of 3–5 year olds. The underlying values of the child-
centered approach are particularly important when targeting poor
and vulnerable children to enhance their life chances, because these
children are often marginalized, stigmatized, and suffer from low self-
esteem.
Parental Involvement and Family Support
A variety of adults and family members are integral to a child’s daily
life. One of the most effective ways of supporting a child’s develop-
ment is to build on the knowledge and skills that these individuals 

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
299
already have and to give them additional resources to enhance their
roles as caregivers. Both SERVOL and the MCDCCS programs are sup-
porting families and working directly with parents, particularly
mothers. By working with adults and family members, the programs
are extending their beneﬁts to caregivers, as well as children.
ECD programs have a much greater effect when activities and pat-
terns of communication and interaction are reinforced consistently
between the program setting and the home environment. Also, a
child’s positive development is more likely to be sustained when ECD
activities are integrated into the child’s daily life than when provided
for only a few hours a day. The effect of any ECD program will be lim-
ited if the program is conducted in isolation. When ECD-related ac-
tivities are replicated at home, by working with parents and modify-
ing their behaviors and parent-child interactions, the program’s
outreach is extended and beneﬁts other siblings and children in the
household. This extension is particularly important for children from
poor households because ﬁnancial constraints often allow families to
send only a very limited number of young children from the same
household to educational programs such as preschools. By working
with parents and achieving these spill-over effects, and thus beneﬁt-
ing children who do not attend any form of early stimulation pro-
gram, the programs attain a broad outreach at relatively low cost. Par-
ents acquire a better understanding of their child’s developmental
needs and are encouraged to support their child’s educational devel-
opment later on, thus increasing the chances that a child will contin-
ue schooling beyond pre-primary education. Parents’ interest in their
child’s educational achievement is an important factor that affects a
child’s future school performance positively (Young 1996).
Involving parents in school and classroom activities familiarizes
them with the teaching environment and the (child-centered) teach-
ing method used and ultimately increases their acceptance of the en-
tire formal education system. This acceptance is important, because a
considerable number of poor families are reluctant to give priority to
investing in formal education for their children. In addition, unedu-
cated individuals and members of socially excluded and marginalized

300
Simone Kirpal
groups often have difﬁculty understanding the education system and
interacting with formal institutions. They may be unfamiliar with ad-
ministrative procedures, feel uncomfortable and discouraged when
having to communicate with administrators, and avoid interacting
with teachers and school ofﬁcials. In turn, the education systems in
developing countries often tend to discourage parental participation
(e.g., in Haiti, parents are not permitted in the classrooms). Nonfor-
mal or semiformal ECD programs can bridge this gap by providing 
a point of entry for parents to participate in children’s development
and, ultimately, support them in their educational achievements 
later on.
Community Ownership
In this chapter, “community” refers to the (local) community where
an ECD program is anchored. It includes all formal and informal
structures, social groups, and individuals. Formal institutionalized
structures may include those mentioned by Myers in the preceding
chapter (social organizations, community groups, NGOs, private vol-
untary organizations, religious organizations, business organizations,
as well as local government). Generally, community involvement ex-
tends across private (for-proﬁt, not-for-proﬁt) and public sectors.
Except for the Montessori Preschool Project (in which all pre-
schools are privately owned by individuals), the cases highlighted in
this chapter are founded on extensive community involvement in 
ﬁnancially supporting, implementing, and managing ECD programs.
The programs have established partnerships with the communities
and rely on the communities as local resources for reducing a pro-
gram’s costs and improving a program’s quality. Community 
involvement and ownership are crucial to a program’s effectiveness.
However, the dynamics of community mobilization, contribution,
empowerment, and participation affect programs differently and
may, or may not, foster desired outcomes.
Community involvement is a complex process implying a wide
range of activities and commitments. “Community contribution”
and “community participation” are referred to herein as two different

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
301
dimensions of community involvement. A local community may be-
come involved in an ECD program by providing different types of
contribution, including labor and in-kind support (e.g., to help con-
struct a school building, operate a food canteen, or organize fundrais-
ing activities). Parents may also contribute to a program’s content
and quality by, for example, assisting in the classroom or creating
teaching materials. Some authors refer to this type of community in-
volvement, providing “inputs,” as “passive participation.” Evans, 
Myers, and Ilfeld (2000, p. 35) describe this participation as “the con-
tribution of each individual to a common endeavor—a contribution
of time, or labor, or money, or knowledge, or of several of these.” In
passive participation, parents and communities have little control or
say over what actually happens for their children.
A stronger form of community involvement is the active partici-
pation of a local community, beyond mere consultations with com-
munity groups and parents to obtain input. Active participation in-
cludes shared responsibility by the groups for decisions that are
made. Although passive participation is useful and may be neces-
sary (e.g., the presence of parents or community leaders at meet-
ings), a program is more likely to be sustainable if this participation
is complemented by a community’s active participation in making
decisions about the program and sharing responsibilities for imple-
menting it. Active participation requires, and results in, community
decisionmaking and community management. When a program is
controlled by a community, the community is much more likely to
take ownership of it.
Experience shows that community involvement, in general, is ef-
fective for reducing a program’s costs and creating at least minimal
ownership by the community. However, the active participation of a
community substantially increases potential effectiveness and long-
term sustainability by fostering an extension of services, building lo-
cal capacity, and empowering communities. The challenge for all
ECD programs is to nurture this approach over time and to acknowl-
edge communities as equal, full-ﬂedged partners, rather than mere re-
sources (Rugh and Bossert 1998). Among the cases in this chapter,

302
Simone Kirpal
SERVOL and the MRC and IPPS projects are two examples that are
pursuing this type of partnership approach most effectively.
Cultural and Financial Sustainability
In poor countries where resources and capacities of the public sector
are limited, parental and community involvement are prerequisites
for achieving long-term sustainability of ECD programs after outside
funding has ceased. Long-term sustainability is a key issue for each of
the cases presented in this chapter. All of the programs began as
small-scale initiatives and have expanded gradually in response to de-
mands from their local communities.
Sustainability has two different aspects: cultural and ﬁnancial. Cul-
tural sustainability refers to program content and teaching methods
that reﬂect the local community’s knowledge and practices of child
development and socialization. In general, an ECD program is more
likely to be culturally appropriate when initiated from within the lo-
cal community through a participatory process, from the beginning,
for program development and implementation. The SERVOL and
MRC and IPPS projects exemplify how long-term sustainability can
be achieved through active participation and establishment of a cul-
turally responsive program.
An alternative approach to achieving cultural sustainability is to
adapt training and teaching methods to respond to the educational
and cultural context of the community and society. The Montessori
Preschool Project and Step by Step program have adopted this ap-
proach. They offer a relatively ﬂexible didactical framework (Montes-
sori) or a teaching and classroom methodology (Step by Step) that
can be adapted and modiﬁed to incorporate a community’s local lan-
guage, educational background, and cultural context.
Financial sustainability refers to continued funding and support to
maintain and ensure the viability of a program after outside funding
has ended. ECD programs designed to serve the poorest and most dis-
advantaged children in a community cannot exist solely on the con-
tributions of these children’s parents. As demonstrated by the cases in
this chapter, additional ﬁnancial or in-kind support from local com-

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
303
munities and/or governments is needed to maintain these ECD pro-
grams over time. Each program is pursuing a different strategy for
achieving ﬁnancial sustainability, but all rely on local community
structures and individuals for cofunding their activities.
For example, SERVOL partners with the government which is re-
sponsible for paying the salaries of teachers and instructors. The MRC
and IPPS projects, Step by Step, and the Montessori Preschool Project
rely on community contributions and support from local groups
(e.g., churches, government, foundations), which provide buildings,
matching grants, and even long-term subsidies. For both Step by Step
and the MRC and IPPS projects, fundraising is important for support-
ing and promoting the programs. Both programs also have intro-
duced microcredit schemes and use of endowment funds to increase
their communities’ ﬁnancial resources, for the beneﬁt of all partici-
pants.
The MCDCCS program in Uganda has innovatively combined
microcredit schemes and income-generating activities to support
children and mothers through the ECD centers. The program specif-
ically aims to increase household incomes, in the belief that all chil-
dren in a household will beneﬁt if mothers are empowered and sup-
ported ﬁnancially to better provide for them. The MCDCCS centers
directly provide childcare services for working mothers; childcare
and employment opportunities in small-scale, income-generating
projects for unemployed mothers; and microcredit opportunities for
all mothers. Throughout the program, the women’s ability to pay
childcare and health services fees has increased constantly over the
years and the children’s health and nutritional status has improved
signiﬁcantly.
Training and Capacity Building
In all the cases, the mere provision of childcare or preschool services
is complemented by high-quality training for childcare providers or
preschool teachers. All the programs have been supplemented gradu-
ally by signiﬁcant capacity-building activities, to increase their local
community’s capacity to maintain and expand the program over

304
Simone Kirpal
time. Although these training efforts were conceived initially as a
tool to facilitate small-scale, local capacity building for the programs,
the training components have, in all ﬁve cases, evolved into separate,
independent entities advocating holistic training approaches or
methodologies for ECD. Typically, these training components are ac-
companied by a series of training manuals and materials. The teach-
ing methodologies used by SERVOL, the MRC and IPPS projects, and
Step by Step have expanded far beyond their initial contexts to be
adopted, adapted, and further reﬁned by other programs in other
countries. This expansion demonstrates that an ECD training pro-
gram can, in itself, be an important tool for scaling up successful ECD
initiatives beyond their country of origin.
Integration Within a Broader Framework of Development
Integrating early interventions within the broader framework of de-
velopment reinforces and helps sustain ECD programs in the long
term. Several of the cases in this chapter have embedded ECD inter-
ventions in other projects designed to support parents and local com-
munities. For example, the core ECD programs in the MRC and IPPS
projects, MCDCCS, and SERVOL are sustained by a range of comple-
mentary programs addressing human, social, and economic develop-
ment more broadly. Among the cases, the MRC and IPPS projects ap-
ply the most structured strategy and approach for mentoring
communities, to strengthen local capacity, develop leadership skills,
raise awareness, and mobilize the community. Two key principles
pervade their activities: (a) empowering local women through sup-
port and training and ensuring that women are represented on all
management committees, and (b) enabling communities to manage
and ﬁnance their own schools.
The MCDCCS program is centered on the needs of poor working
mothers and empowerment of them by providing childcare and 
related services. MCDCCS’ integrated approach combines childcare
services and training of childcare providers with parent education
and other services for mothers (e.g., health education and literacy;
counseling on breastfeeding, family planning, parenting skills, and

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
305
HIV/AIDS; gender equality) and income-generating opportunities for
unemployed mothers. All these activities and services are integrated
within each center.
SERVOL has taken a different approach, to establish gradually a se-
ries of stand-alone, but complementary, programs which include
ECCE services, parenting programs, programs for secondary school
dropouts and adolescents, and higher training for young men and
women. With a life-cycle approach and programs for different age
groups, SERVOL aims to break the intergenerational cycle of poverty.
Private-Public Partnerships
Most of the programs highlighted in this chapter began as demand-
driven, small-scale projects, with one preschool or center, in response
to a community’s immediate needs. As the community’s demand for
ECD services increased, the local initiatives began to seek outside
funding from international donors (e.g., private foundations, bilater-
al and multilateral organizations) to be able to serve more children
and improve the quality of the programs.
For example, both the Montessori Preschool Project and the 
MCDCCS program were established and maintained on a small scale
for about 15 years, receiving extensive community support and small
grants from international donors. Both programs were well received
by their communities, helped mothers and caregivers, beneﬁted the
children enrolled, and were ﬁnancially sustainable locally. However,
major investments are now needed to expand the programs to other
communities and to broaden the scope of the programs. To secure its
viability, the MCDCCS program is seeking to establish new centers
and to invest in additional small-scale, income-generating projects.
The Montessori Preschool Project is seeking to expand its teacher
training program by establishing more training centers and offering
continuing professional development for school teachers from all 
educational levels (preschool to secondary education), particularly
primary school teachers.
Although such major investments will help to consolidate a pro-
gram, expand its outreach, and maintain or even improve its quality,

306
Simone Kirpal
most donors will not continue to fund a program substantially over a
long term. Innovative models for private-public partnerships within
countries are needed to take ECD programs to scale and to sustain
them over time. In general, international donors cease or reduce their
funding after 10–15 years. SERVOL is one example. Outside donors
are often willing to support local educational initiatives, but are also
interested in actively supporting or creating incentives to establish a
structure that will enable programs to become viable and self-sustain-
ing over time. Having such a supportive structure is a prerequisite for
moving programs to scale and should be developed at different lev-
els—within the community, through capacity building and commu-
nity support, and regionally and nationally, through generating an
enabling environment and legal guidance.
The MRC and IPPS projects have focused on developing this sup-
portive structure at the community level by strengthening the capac-
ities of local project teams to enable communities to develop, imple-
ment, and monitor the MRC preschool program on a larger scale and
to manage the IPPS preschools and primary schools. The projects also
encourage local NGOs to partner with local governments.
The Step by Step program is working locally as well as regionally
and nationally, but is giving priority to initiating an institutional
reform process that will ultimately be accepted and supported by
government institutions. SERVOL is a unique case of a nonformal
ECD program moving to scale and becoming financially sustain-
able through private-public partnership. Although now fully sup-
ported by the government, legally and financially, SERVOL has
been able to remain truly community-based and community-man-
aged and, yet, is the government’s formal agent for delivering non-
formal education services and administering 160 public ECCE cen-
ters. SERVOL is truly a success story, but the process has taken more
than 20 years.
Conclusion
The goal of any community development program should be to en-
able a process that will be maintained after outside funders leave.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
307
One way to begin this process is to have those who will ultimately be
responsible for the program take ownership of it from the beginning.
A partnership approach to planning, funding, and implementing a
program enables parents and community members to gain the
knowledge and skills they will need to continue the initial program
(sustainability) and to create additional programs on their own
(replicability).
In early child development, parental and community involvement
is a particular strength and resource for achieving highly effective
programs that are culturally appropriate. In addition, parental in-
volvement will increase the potential that elements of the programs
are replicated at home and integrated into children’s daily life, there-
by also extending the program’s beneﬁts to other children in the
household.
Because resources at the household level are extremely limited in
poor countries, communities become crucial partners in providing
financial and in-kind support for ECD programs. In countries that
have weak institutional capacities, communities are the greatest as-
set. But, communities alone cannot establish and maintain large-
scale programs. They need support from other stakeholders, includ-
ing governmental and nongovernmental agencies, local funders,
and the private sector. Long-term financial sustainability of ECD
programs can only be ensured when both the private and public
sectors become equally involved in supporting an ECD initiative
and creating an enabling environment for developing the program
further. Ultimately, these partners will complement parents’ and
families’ contributions to fund and maintain a program in the long
term. The case studies in this chapter demonstrate that new forms
of private-public partnership need to be developed and institution-
alized to reinforce these processes because support from interna-
tional donors is usually temporary and limited in taking ECD pro-
grams to scale.
Community mobilization and parental participation are relative-
ly easy to achieve in early intervention programs, compared with
other educational services, because preschool education and other

308
Simone Kirpal
ECD services for children ages 0–6 years benefit children, parents,
and other household members directly. Although Lokshin and Tan
(2000) refer to improvements in child outcomes through ECD in-
terventions as “direct” benefits, and Myers (1995) refers to the pos-
itive effects of ECD programs on household income levels and well-
being as “indirect” (or immediate) benefits, this distinction may
not be necessary. “Freeing up” family members for economic activ-
ities or attendance at school by providing childcare services can
also be interpreted as a direct benefit of ECD programs, and en-
hanced parenting skills benefit parents, children, and younger sib-
lings equally.
These beneﬁts accrue from all ECD services that provide some
form of childcare. The services beneﬁt parents, and particularly
mothers, by providing increased opportunity for income-generating
activities. They also beneﬁt other family members, especially older
siblings, by liberating them from childcare responsibilities, in many
cases enabling, especially, girls to continue their education. Programs
that also provide counseling on the broader aspects of child develop-
ment (e.g., health, nutrition, breastfeeding) support parents in their
roles as caregivers, enhance their parenting skills, and educate and
empower them.
Another factor resulting in a high level of parental support for
ECD programs, compared with, for example, sending children to pri-
mary or secondary school, may be the relatively low opportunity
costs for families as preschool-age children are not expected, in most
societies, to help in the household or on the farm and generally are
not yet, or only randomly, involved in economic activities.
The unique combination of these features in ECD programs offers
great promise for mobilizing families and communities with limited
resources in developing countries to invest in young children at an
early stage. As exempliﬁed by the ﬁve case studies in this chapter,
ECD programs that combine these features are most likely to be effec-
tive and sustainable and to have the greatest impact on children,
families, and communities. Each of the ﬁve cases is described in de-
tail below.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
309
1.
Haiti: Montessori-Based Teacher Training 
and Preschools
The Montessori Preschool Project provides high-quality, internation-
ally recognized teacher training. Through a scholarship scheme, in-
dividuals with limited economic resources are ﬁnancially supported
to become certiﬁed preschool teachers and to open their own
preschools. The project was created and is supported by the Peter-
Hesse Foundation, Solidarity in Partnership for One World, a non-
proﬁt organization registered in Germany and Haiti. Peter Hesse
started the foundation in 1981 for the purpose of sustaining small
self-help projects for poor people in Haiti. Initially, the foundation
focused on 2-day seminars on project management for self-help
groups and on alleviation of small ﬁnancial bottlenecks, mostly for
rural initiatives. In 1984, the foundation changed its emphasis to
early childhood care and development, which led to creation of the
foundation’s ﬁrst teacher training center (in 1986), the Centre
Montessori d’Haiti.
Mission
The Montessori Preschool Project aims to inﬂuence Haiti’s education
sector, at public and private levels, by demonstrating that high-quali-
ty early childhood education is possible—even with limited re-
sources—if the quality and length of teacher training are adequate.
The mission of the Montessori program is to give poor children a bet-
ter chance to develop themselves early enough through quality
teacher training and creation of community-based preschools. The
training of qualiﬁed teachers translates directly into increased local
capacity to provide early stimulation and education programs of
good quality to children ages 2.5–5 years.
Cultural Context
Haiti’s culture is based heavily on oral communication. Teachers are
accustomed to memorizing and reciting teaching material, but have
difﬁculty applying this knowledge in the classroom. To improve 
application, most of the Montessori training course is presented

310
Simone Kirpal
through oral instruction in Creole, the local language. In addition,
the project adapted the curriculum to the needs of student teachers
in Haiti, adding substantial practice time to help them transfer theo-
ry into practice. The student teachers must complete supervised in-
ternships, create didactical material, and be able to adapt everyday
objects as teaching tools. Haitian teachers compensate for a shortage
of books and materials by developing their own lessons, teaching ma-
terials, and visual aids.
Methodology and Approach
Montessori education embraces a child-centered philosophy that em-
phasizes individuals’ learning paths and the capabilities of each
child. Children can access different kinds of materials freely and are
encouraged to learn at their own pace. The freedom for purposeful
activity allows children to develop not only their intellectual facul-
ties, but also their powers of deliberation, intuition, independence,
and self-discipline, as well as the social awareness and behavior need-
ed to function in the world. Teachers and children are taught mutual
respect and nonaggressive behavior; competition is strictly avoided.
In the Montessori approach, didactical materials present knowl-
edge to children in an orderly way so that their intellect can classify
the information into an organized system of thought. This process of
working with the material exercises a child’s intellect constantly and
expands the child’s mental abilities. The effectiveness of the material
derives from the thoughtfully planned manner of its presentation,
which ﬂows from:
• Concepts presented in isolation (which reduces the confusion
of receiving too many ideas at once), to
• Appreciation of various difﬁculties in isolation, from easiest to
most difﬁcult (for young children, from concrete to abstract), to
• Use of a graduated series of self-teaching materials suited to the
various stages of a child’s development, to
• Incorporation of body movement (occupation) for speciﬁc pur-
poses (i.e., combining movement and mental concentration).

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
311
More than 50 percent of the didactical material for Montessori
preschools, including most reading material, is produced locally.
Teachers make most of the material at the beginning of the academic
year. In addition, one basic set of imported Montessori teaching ma-
terials, which costs approximately US$1,000, is provided to each new
preschool. Because the Montessori teaching material beneﬁts the
child’s cognitive development even when a teacher does not fully un-
derstand the didactical background, teachers who do not completely
comprehend the Montessori pedagogy can become effective teachers.
From training in the Montessori teaching method, people from poor
communities and with relatively low levels of education have be-
come certiﬁed teachers.
Children attending Montessori preschools range in age from 2.5–5
years and, in exceptional cases, 6 years. Classes are not divided by age
groups, and children are invited to learn from each other and to in-
teract across ages. Older children learn to take pride in helping weak-
er and smaller children and, thereby, enhance their social skills.
Implementation
Montessori student teachers complete a 9-month training course, a
final examination, and two 6-week internships in an affiliated
Montessori school. They can receive three types of diplomas: assis-
tant’s diploma, national teacher diploma, and international
Montessori directress/director diploma. All student teachers are 
examined and given their diploma by the Centre Montessori
d’Haiti. To obtain the international diploma, students must pass 
all parts (written, oral demonstration, practical) of the national 
examination conducted by the Centre Montessori d’Haiti, dem-
onstrate a complete understanding of the Montessori philosophy,
and pass a second examination conducted by an outside, inter-
nationally recognized specialist. About 20 percent of all Montes-
sori-trained student teachers have obtained the international
Montessori directress/director diploma, which certifies them as
Montessori teachers entitled to teach and open schools in Haiti
and around the world. After teaching for 1 year, they can also 

312
Simone Kirpal
become assistant student teacher trainers in one of Haiti’s Montes-
sori training centers.
About 50 percent of all Montessori student teachers are scholar-
ship students who sign a contract with the Centre Montessori d’Haiti
which obliges them to teach for 3 years in a poor community after
they complete their training. Most teachers return to their own locale
to establish a school, and most extend their commitment beyond the
initial 3-year agreement.
All Montessori project preschools throughout Haiti are strongly
linked by their common structures, teaching philosophy, and admin-
istrative organization. Each summer break, the teachers gather for a
3-week workshop to share experiences and enrich their teaching
skills. During 1996–97, the Centre Montessori d’Haiti interrupted its
teacher training courses to strengthen the Montessori preschool
structure across Haiti and to conduct evaluations. Also in 1996, sev-
enty-ﬁve Haitian Montessori teachers established the Association
Montessori d’Haiti (AMOH), a professional teachers group.
Evolution
The Montessori Preschool Project in Haiti began in 1986. Since then,
forty-three Montessori preschools have been established, and forty-
one are still operating, having persisted in Haiti’s turbulent years of
political instability. They provide services, in sixty preschool classes,
for about 2,000 children each year from poor communities.
Sustainability and increasing local teaching capacity are essential
aspects of the project. When it began, one Montessori training cen-
ter, with a preschool class of twenty-ﬁve children, trained twenty
teachers in the ﬁrst 9-month course. Both the center and the class
were directed by expatriates. Under the leadership of a London-
trained Montessori specialist from Trinidad, the capacity of the center
soon grew to an annual average of forty students, mostly women. Re-
cently, two additional training centers were established with ﬁnancial
support from the Peter-Hesse Foundation and are linked closely to
the original center. With all three centers, the Montessori project cur-
rently has the capacity to train sixty teachers each year.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
313
The forty-one operating Montessori preschools include one for
children with human immunodeﬁciency virus infection, one for deaf
children, and two attached to an orphanage. Since the project began,
an average of three new preschools open each year. Over the years,
only one preschool has ceased operation, and one has returned to
Haiti’s traditional system of rote learning. Classes remain “small”
(thirty children per class), compared with the traditional Haitian
classrooms of sixty children. To date, 450 teachers have been trained;
297 have received national teacher diplomas, and 83 have received
international teaching diplomas. The increase in local capacity to
train qualiﬁed teachers translates directly into increased capacity to
provide high-quality stimulation and education programs for
preschool-aged children. The children stay in the Montessori schools
an average of 2 to 3 years. Of the 2,000 children enrolled each year,
only about 10 percent drop out. About 660 children graduate each
year, and more than 80 percent continue on to primary school. Par-
ents do not seem to favor enrollment of boys over girls at the
preschool level, which helps to increase the number of girls going on
to primary school.
Financial Support
The average annual ﬁnancial support for the Montessori Preschool
Project has been US$100,000 or less. Often far less has been available,
but funding has always been sufﬁcient to support the project. Financ-
ing is secured privately by the founder and approximately ﬁfty indi-
vidual donors per year. The German government occasionally assists
with small grants to cover exceptional needs. The United Nations De-
velopment Programme (UNDP) and the German Development Ser-
vice (DED) have ﬁnanced a U.N. volunteer in past years.
The foundation’s funding supports overall project coordination
and supervision and scholarship students who later teach in schools
for disadvantaged children in poor communities. In addition, each
new preschool receives US$3,000–$4,000 in startup funds which are
used to purchase a basic set of Montessori teaching material, help
with school construction and administrative organization, and 

314
Simone Kirpal
procure technical advice. Montessori graduates are encouraged, and
ﬁnancially supported, to open Montessori preschools for children at
risk if the local community provides support to enable the school to
become sustainable in the long term.
Other financial resources are limited, but sufficient to sustain
the preschools and are secured through school fees and community
in-kind contributions (e.g., providing a building). The Montessori
training centers raise financial contributions from the regular fees
paid by student teachers who are not on scholarship. The two re-
cently established training centers are paying back startup funds to
the project by providing scholarships for a number of student
teachers each year.
Principles of Success
The success of the Montessori Preschool Project can be attributed to
the following characteristics.
• Driven by Demand. The Montessori Preschool Project started small
and has expanded in a sustainable manner.
• Community-based. Schools are opened only when requested by a
community and when community involvement proves to be re-
liable.
• Teacher Ownership. Teachers privately own the schools and are ac-
countable for ﬁnancing, student performance, and school repu-
tation.
• Financially Sustainable. Schools and training centers become ﬁ-
nancially independent after approximately 1 year.
• Culturally Relevant. The project builds on indigenous cultural 
patterns, and the teaching methods are adapted to the local 
language (Creole) and oral culture.
• Well-defined Selection Criteria. Selection criteria for student
teachers are clearly defined, and scholarship students are
screened carefully to ensure their future commitment to rural
communities.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
315
• Low-income Employment Opportunities. The project provides em-
ployment opportunities for low-income individuals. Poor stu-
dents who have completed secondary education can become
qualiﬁed and certiﬁed teachers and are supported to open their
own preschools.
• Economically Inclusive. The program brings together teachers and
children from different economic backgrounds. The combina-
tion of poor and rich students helps the schools become ﬁnan-
cially sustainable and achieve a good reputation.
• Successful Teaching Method. The Montessori approach builds self-
esteem, conﬁdence, problem-solving skills, and positive life 
attitudes.
Outlook
The Montessori Preschool Project is making strides in going to scale,
program evaluation, and advocacy and visibility.
Going to Scale
Haiti continues to have a great unsatisﬁed demand for high-quality
preschools. With the two new Montessori training centers, training
capacity has increased from twenty to sixty teachers per academic
year. This increase is expected to have long-term spill-over effects as
new teachers open new preschools in poor communities.
To improve the educational standard in Haiti, better teacher train-
ing is needed at all school levels. The Peter-Hesse Foundation pro-
poses to establish a resource center to provide assistance and profes-
sional development for teachers of preschool and primary school. To
improve their skills in teaching and curriculum development, teach-
ers using the center would be able to participate in continuing edu-
cation and special-topic seminars with professional education ex-
perts. They would have professional assistance to access print and
electronic media materials, do research, and review didactical materi-
als for speciﬁc classroom needs. To reach working teachers, the 
center would be available to any teacher from the public or private

316
Simone Kirpal
sector and would remain open during off-work times (e.g., Saturdays,
vacation periods).
Program Evaluation
In addition to its own 1996–97 evaluation, the Centre Montessori
d’Haiti is pursuing an independent external evaluation of the proj-
ect’s effect on the educational outcomes of poor children and the
professional development of proﬁcient preschool teachers.
Advocacy and Visibility
Promoting high-quality early child development and education as a
priority in development politics, in Germany and internationally, is
an important part of the foundation’s activities. For broader visibility,
the foundation registered as an NGO and is represented in several
childcare networks and at international early child development and
U.N. conferences. The foundation’s “Three Suggestions for One
World Development” was selected as input from NGOs to the U.N.
World Summit for Social Development, held in March 1995. The
Montessori Preschool Project was also internationally selected for
presentation at EXPO 2000 in Hannover, Germany.
2.
Uganda: Community-Based Mother-Child 
Day Care Center Services
Community-Based Mother-Child Day Care Center Services (MCDCCS)
provides modern, affordable childcare for working mothers living in
the slums and rural trading areas of Uganda. The target group is poor,
disheartened, and homeless mothers who cannot afford to pay for
regular childcare services and who are not reached, permanently, by
national and international programs addressing the needs of women
and girls.
Using an integrated approach, MCDCCS offers a variety of pro-
grams to help these women, including formal and nonformal educa-
tion (e.g., literacy courses), counseling on breastfeeding and family
planning, promotion of safe motherhood, public health education

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
317
(e.g., hygiene and nutrition) for children and mothers, assistance
with health issues and immunization, promotion of gender equality
and girl’s education, enforcement of positive childrearing practices,
training of childcare workers to the certiﬁcate level, and creation of
employment opportunities for mothers through income-generating
projects and microcredit facilities.
The microcredit facilities from the centers’ revolving funds are
MCDCCS’ most important services. For many women, these facilities
offer the only way to borrow money to cover their social, domestic,
and business-expansion needs and to pay school fees for their chil-
dren. Loans are most often used to pay for prompt medical treatment
for sick children.
Mission
MCDCCS has adopted the philosophy that “women empowered are
children liberated.” Its mission is to improve the conditions of young
children and end the cycle of poverty, illiteracy, and ignorance, be-
ginning with their mothers. The belief is that, once poor women are
freed from constant childcare and are given the chance to become
economically active, the future of children will be ensured.
Cultural Context
In many African countries, including Uganda, men strive to show
their worth by fathering as many children as possible. This practice is
particularly true for unemployed, low-income, working-class men.
Uganda’s illiteracy rate is high, and studies reveal that the number of
educated and self-sufﬁcient women is low, compared with other
countries. The majority of women carry the burden of childbearing
and childrearing, often with little or no ﬁnancial support. High illit-
eracy and birthrates remain a problem that stalls the productivity and
potential of many women.
In 1997, the Uganda government introduced Universal Primary
Education (UPE), for four children per family initially and with plans
to include all Uganda’s children in the near future. This proposal was
intended to beneﬁt girls; however, their traditional role at home and

318
Simone Kirpal
in the workplace makes their attending school from early ages on,
without interruption, almost impossible. Several other government-
launched programs directly related to the advancement of women 
in Uganda do not reach the poorest and most marginalized women
and mothers because they are not able to take advantage of these 
programs.
Methodology and Approach
The MCDCCS program aims to improve the condition of young
children by empowering mothers to become economically produc-
tive and less ignorant. When women are liberated from constant
childcare and become involved in ﬁnancial activities, the future 
of their children is safer, healthier, and more productive, and girls
are freed from their roles as surrogate mothers caring for younger
siblings.
A breakthrough can be made only if women and family issues are
addressed together and the speciﬁc needs of targeted women are tak-
en into account. When low-cost, high-quality childcare services are
provided for infants from a few days old to children more than 10
years old, mothers can become self-reliant economically and provide
better for their children’s basic needs.
In contrast with traditional Ugandan childcare centers, which are
expensive and provide services for children aged 3 and older, the
MCDCCS centers focus on children from ages 0–8+ years. MCDCCS’
general approach is integrated and holistic, and the program address-
es issues such as child health, family planning, gender concerns, and
special needs of girls. Besides providing a safe environment for chil-
dren and educating their mothers, the centers train caregivers and
teachers and generate employment opportunities for women through
small-scale, income-generating projects and microcredit schemes.
MCDCCS is an important step toward increasing women’s inde-
pendence and helping them attain a position to negotiate greater
control over family planning and birthrates, safe motherhood, and
the curbing of sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV/AIDS. An
integrated approach also fosters education of women at the grass-

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
319
roots level and supports health initiatives (e.g., immunization cam-
paigns) and the practice of positive public health habits (e.g., proper
use of latrines).
Implementation
Three MCDCCS centers are currently operating. Oriented wholly to-
ward serving mothers’ needs, they are located near the workplace
(i.e., markets) so that mothers can conveniently drop off and pick up
their children. The centers operate from 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. If a
child is less than 1 year old, the mother is required to come in period-
ically to breastfeed. The centers offer hourly drop-off arrangements
and after-school care for older children. They also help mothers ac-
quire immunization cards, which are required for all children, and
keep track of immunization records.
Over time, the centers have become special places for both moth-
ers and children. They have become focal points for learning, teach-
ing, and relaxing—places where women can openly discuss their
major concerns of daily life. The centers also are vital safe havens
where battered women and children in crisis can ﬁnd shelter and
counseling. More than 90 percent of battered women who seek
refuge come with their children. Trust and understanding, which
are nurtured in the centers, build a foundation for broader health
and education programs, particularly family planning services.
These services are open as well to women who do not have children
in the centers.
Basic data on the centers are monitored carefully and regularly.
Some important ﬁndings are as follows:
• Between 1987 and 1999, more than 900 mothers used MCDCCS
services and approximately 6,600 children beneﬁted from the
program.
• Children who attend the centers beginning at an early age (i.e.,
from a few days to 1 year old) perform much better in all aspects
of child development and skill learning than children who be-
gin coming to the centers at age 3 or later.

320
Simone Kirpal
• Infant mortality among MCDCCS children is extremely low (3
out of 6,600 children compared with Uganda’s average of 83 per
1,000 live births) .
• The growing demand for family planning services has led to a
decreased number of very young children (less than 1 year old)
in the centers, from a daily average of twenty-ﬁve in 1987 to
four in 1999.
As women are liberated from childcare duties, they can engage 
in economic activities to better provide for their family. A mother’s
ability to pay the monthly fees for childcare services promptly can 
be interpreted as a direct indicator of a reduction in poverty. Between
1987 and 1999, the number of MCDCCS mothers who paid promptly
increased from 20 percent to 50 percent despite a tenfold increase 
in fees.
Mothers who attend the centers’ programs soon become agents of
positive change within their homes, communities, and workplaces.
Community-level indicators for evaluating and monitoring the effect
of the MCDCCS centers include:
• Increased number of women requesting family planning ser-
vices
• Improved weight and overall health status of children attending
the centers
• Decreased infant and child mortality rates
• Increased immunization coverage
• Increased school readiness and, thus, school attendance, espe-
cially for girls
• Increased literacy rate among girls
• Decreased population growth rates
• Decreased rate of sexually transmitted diseases, especially
HIV/AIDS
• Improved living conditions for center children diagnosed with
HIV/AIDS, as a result of receiving proper care, adequate feeding,
and prompt medical treatment

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
321
• Better opportunities for center mothers diagnosed with
HIV/AIDS, to continue working if they can
• Reduced violations of children’s rights (e.g., sexual abuse, child
marriage, child mothers)
• Improved parenting skills of women.
Evolution
In 1994, a group of Ugandan women, who were members of the
Uganda National Council of Women (now known as the National As-
sociation of Women Organizations in Uganda, or NAWOU), initiated
a project for underprivileged women. The aim was to give poor
women struggling in Ugandan slum areas a chance to become more
productive economically, more conﬁdent, and better able to care for
their children properly.
This group identiﬁed the burden of continual childbirth and child-
rearing as the greatest handicap to economic productivity of women
and increased school enrollment rates for girls. Affordable, high-qual-
ity, mother-child day-care centers were proposed as a practical solu-
tion to enhance poor children’s chances by providing a safe, healthy,
and stimulating environment. In addition, these centers provided a
setting for gradually introducing related educational and health pro-
grams.
After the project was initiated, the mothers began to view the day-
care centers as special places where they could ask for advice on al-
most everything concerned with daily life. Related educational and
health programs were introduced gradually and, in time, the centers
evolved into sanctuaries where local women and children could
learn, teach, and relax.
Financial Support
The MCDCCS strategy combines income-generating efforts with ﬁ-
nancial support from international donors and assistance from na-
tional governmental and nongovernmental agencies. The program
generates money by collecting small fees from the mothers for child-
care services (as mothers’ potential for economic productivity 

322
Simone Kirpal
increases, they are expected to pay higher fees for services); engaging
in income-generating activities, such as poultry (selling eggs and
hens) and pig farms; operating small farms and gardens for subsis-
tence-level production of local fruits and vegetables; charging fees for
training services; and renting out the main hall of the centers for spe-
cial events.
MCDCCS offers employment possibilities for unemployed moth-
ers who use the centers’ childcare services. An average of sixty work-
ers per month, mostly mothers, are employed in the three centers
and for the income-generating projects.
The Ministry of Education provides technical assistance to main-
tain the legal and professional status of the centers and a training
school. Family planning materials are supplied by the City Council of
Kampala, Department of Health. The program also receives major
technical and ﬁnancial support from NAWOU, which promotes
MCDCCS locally and helps establish international contacts. In the
past, the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
(SIDA) provided a grant of US$15,000, and the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) provided a
grant of US$25,000.
At the Development Marketplace 2000, held February 8–9, 2000,
in Washington, D.C., MCDCCS received US$90,000. The Develop-
ment Marketplace provides a forum to identify and nurture innova-
tive ideas in the development community. In a competition open to
NGOs, businesses, academia, foundations, and bilateral and multilat-
eral agencies, the Development Marketplace awarded approximately
US$5 million in startup funds for project proposals to reduce poverty.
MCDCCS committed the new funds to improve and update the three
existing centers; expand services by starting three new centers; in-
crease its income-generating potential by producing children’s books
and teaching material and expanding farm production; increase local
capacity—through training, supervision, improved teaching material,
performance assessments, and evaluation—to provide high-quality
childcare services; introduce new elements, such as music and com-
puter equipment and skills; and launch a major marketing campaign

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
323
(e.g., using posters, radio, newspaper, and TV announcements) to cre-
ate awareness of child development issues related to health and edu-
cation in the early years and the positive role of the family.
Principles of Success
The success of the MCDCCS program can be attributed to the follow-
ing characteristics.
• Holistic Approach. Creatively, MCDCCS combines early child de-
velopment, parent education, and family planning with job cre-
ation and income-generating activities.
• Targeted Needs. The program is designed to meet the speciﬁc
needs of one of the poorest and most marginalized groups in
Uganda—illiterate and excluded women in slum areas.
• Community-based. The centers are community-based and adjust
their programs to meet mothers’ needs.
• Flexible. The program is ﬂexible in providing education and
health programs on demand.
• Monitoring. The centers carefully monitor the children’s growth
and their motor and cognitive development.
• Linkages. MCDCCS has wide and various spill-over effects be-
cause the centers establish linkages between nonformal educa-
tion for women, health education, and family planning with
other national health and immunization campaigns.
• Empowerment. MCDCCS alleviates poverty at the grassroots level
through empowerment.
Outlook
The MCDCCS program is planning for long-term sustainability, inﬂu-
encing public policy, and improving literacy among Ugandan
women.
Sustainability
With six centers, MCDCCS plans to become ﬁnancially sustainable
by expanding its income-generating activities, providing professional

324
Simone Kirpal
training for teachers and caregivers, and enhancing the ability of
mothers to pay higher fees for childcare.
Advocacy
MCDCCS envisions having a broader inﬂuence on public policy by
raising awareness of the need for mother-child services in communi-
ties and eventually achieving a nationwide effect.
Literacy
One center program that has not reached most MCDCCS women is
literacy. The mothers’ key objective is survival and, beyond that, they
rely on the centers to enable them to increase proﬁts from their busi-
nesses. They cannot imagine spending precious time studying. The
mothers also note that, because they are now able to educate their
children, the children can read and write for them if needed. As long
as women are poor and struggling to survive, they will not consider
literacy a priority. Only by establishing day-care centers on a massive
scale will girls be able to begin their education early and in large
numbers. These centers, in the long term, will dramatically help re-
duce the number of illiterate women in Uganda.
3.
Trinidad and Tobago: Integrated Education 
and Early Childhood Program
SERVOL (Service Volunteered for All) is an NGO in Trinidad and To-
bago that administers high-quality education programs in disadvan-
taged areas. The programs include a parent outreach program for par-
ents ages 17–30, an early childhood program for children ages 2.5–5,
a nonformal secondary school program for children ages 13–16, a hu-
man development and skill training program for adolescents ages
16–20, and a high technology program for young men and women
ages 20–25.
All programs are operated entirely, both in content and monitor-
ing, by people from the community. Each of the 160 early childhood
centers and 40 adolescent centers operate under the auspices of a 

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
325
village board of education, which hires and ﬁres teachers in consulta-
tion with SERVOL. These boards convene monthly meetings to ob-
tain input from parents, and they regularly canvas 4,500 adolescents
to obtain their views on the effectiveness of the programs and sugges-
tions for improvement, which are then implemented.
Mission
SERVOL is “igniting the ﬁres of hope.” It is an organization of weak,
frail, ordinary, imperfect, and yet hope-ﬁlled and committed people
seeking to help weak, frail, ordinary, imperfect, and hope-drained
people become agents of attitudinal and social change in a journey
that leads to total human development.
Cultural Context
The Black Power riots, which took place in Trinidad and Tobago in
1970, were interpreted by Fr. Pantin, the founder of SERVOL, as a
“cry for help” from the ghetto. As he walked up the hill of Laventille
to try to respond, he was confronted by the social problems of the
area and its people: unemployment, poverty, and low self-esteem. Fr.
Pantin observed that the main cause of these problems was a total
breakdown of family life, coupled with inappropriate parenting prac-
tices. Not knowing how to respond to the situation, he decided to
begin by listening to the people and helping them start their own
small projects.
The people ﬁrst asked SERVOL to establish early childhood pro-
grams (focused on day care, not education), and they subsequently
challenged SERVOL to give their children access to quality educa-
tion, computers, and advanced electronics. SERVOL became a peo-
ple’s organization committed to the building of bridges between the
ghetto and the world of commerce and industry by offering high-
quality programs to low-income families. To ensure that these pro-
grams meet international standards, SERVOL’s Early Childhood
Teachers’ Certiﬁcate is validated by Oxford University, and its Hi-
Technology programs are examined by the ﬁrm of Cambridge Infor-
mation Technology.

326
Simone Kirpal
Methodology and Approach
SERVOL’s pioneers believed that previous efforts to help poor people
had been largely unsuccessful because well-meaning “do-gooders”
assumed, with cultural arrogance, that they could organize interven-
tion programs without consulting the beneﬁciaries. SERVOL insists
on beginning by asking, “How can we help you?”, and then by listen-
ing attentively to the response, before attempting to organize any 
projects. SERVOL calls this type of intervening in the lives of people
“respectful intervention.”
SERVOL’s pioneers also observed that many poverty programs at-
tempted to address one or more problems in isolation but that pover-
ty reaches every aspect of life and demands an integrated approach.
Although lack of ﬁnancial resources is clearly an important factor, it
is not the most debilitating afﬂiction of poor people. More perni-
cious is the sense of powerlessness and hopelessness that, for most
poor people, makes climbing out of “the pit of poverty” virtually im-
possible. To meet this challenge, SERVOL embraces the empower-
ment of individuals, families, and communities through integrated
educational programs designed to revive hope.
SERVOL’s guiding principle is to use people from the community
to develop the community. Ninety percent of the 600 teachers, train-
ers, and administrative staff are grassroots community members. All
programs are truly community-based and parent-oriented. The com-
munity boards of education manage the SERVOL centers; employ the
teachers and instructors; pay their salaries and their National Insur-
ance and Health Surcharge contributions (from government funds
transferred to their accounts by SERVOL); monitor teachers’ atten-
dance, punctuality, and performance; and dismiss delinquent teach-
ers in consultation with SERVOL.
Implementation
The aims of SERVOL are implemented through a variety of programs
to reach across a range of age groups in the community. Five major
programs are described below. These programs have stood the test of

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
327
time and their current success reﬂects a sometimes long and difﬁcult
development effort.
Parent Outreach Program
Guided by latest research ﬁndings in neuroscience and the social sci-
ences, SERVOL established the Parent Outreach Program (POP) to
give poor children a good start. Evidence shows that children’s
growth and development between 0 and 3 years largely determine
how they will develop and learn subsequently and that, by the time
they reach age 6, they are resistant to change. Waiting for children to
enter primary school is too late to begin to attack the effects of pover-
ty. Efforts must begin with pregnant mothers, many of whom are sin-
gle parents who, because of ﬁnancial and psychological stress, may
neglect or batter their children.
To reach these families, SERVOL has trained twenty-ﬁve POP facili-
tators who visit the remote villages and ghettos of Trinidad and Toba-
go each day, going from house to house, making friends with parents,
and helping them deal with their problems with small children and
life in general. The facilitators praise the parents for their accomplish-
ments and counsel them on the importance of proper nutrition,
breastfeeding, and alternatives to physical punishment. In subse-
quent meetings, small groups of parents share common problems
and possible solutions. The facilitators also teach the parents income-
generating crafts enabling them to earn money while staying home
with their children.
An extension of the POP program is Parent Partners. Under this ac-
tivity, one parent from the village agrees to be trained to work with
the POP facilitator, and small day-care facilities, for three or four chil-
dren, are established in the houses of selected parents who are willing
to be trained in day-care skills.
POP facilitators do not project the conventional image of profes-
sionals who have all the answers, an approach that may intimidate
parents; rather, the facilitators praise the parents for their accom-
plishments in difﬁcult situations and convince them that they are
the primary educators of their children and can solve their own

328
Simone Kirpal
problems with a little help. The POP program has been received en-
thusiastically by thousands of parents, acknowledging their growth
in parenting skills and self-conﬁdence. Many have become successful
entrepreneurs in making crafts and other products while staying
home to care for their children.
ECCE Program
SERVOL has established and supervises a national ECCE program that
involves 160 centers and more than 300 teachers serving almost
5,000 children ages 2.5–5 years. All teachers have been carefully
trained, and most have received an Early Childhood Teachers’ Certiﬁ-
cate validated by Oxford University.
Like POP, this program is guided by SERVOL’s belief that “what
goes on in the home is more important than what goes on in the
school.” A high-quality early childhood education that is commu-
nity-based, parent-oriented, and administered by trained teachers
is one of the most important ways to bring about desirable, funda-
mental change in poverty situations. The ECCE program extends
empowerment from the child and parents (emphasized in the 
POP program) to the community and, importantly, encourages and
permits teachers to influence parents’ childrearing practices. The
program is intended to have a cumulative effect on parental 
practices over time. The community actively participates in the 
operation of the centers, which are managed by the village board
of education.
Junior Life Center Program
With few exceptions, all children enter primary school in Trinidad
and Tobago (ages 5–12). However, only 80 percent of the 30,000 chil-
dren who attend and complete primary school enter secondary
school. The vast majority of this large number of children who drop
out come from poverty areas and are so “turned off” by the tradition-
al educational system that special approaches are needed to rekindle
their hope. SERVOL’s Junior Life Center (JLC) program offers more
than 6,000 children ages 13–16 an innovative curriculum designed to

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
329
restore self-esteem and enable them to rejoin the mainstream educa-
tional system.
In this program, classes are small (one teacher for twenty-ﬁve stu-
dents), and each corner of the classroom has a special function, serv-
ing as a miniature bank, post ofﬁce, department store, or supermar-
ket. These “props” are used to teach literacy and mathematics and to
demonstrate that learning can be fun. Data show that 70 percent of
these children perform very well in the post-primary examination
and are able to return to traditional secondary schools.
Adolescent Development Program
Another feature of the educational system is the high number of
16–19 year olds who do not complete school or complete school
functionally illiterate and with limited knowledge. Reasons include
poverty (resulting in chronic absenteeism), substance abuse, and an
overly academic approach to education that is unsuitable for young
people seeking vocational training. SERVOL’s Adolescent Develop-
ment Program (ADP) is designed to serve these young people and has
graduated more than 40,000 adolescents over the past 30 years.
ADP is a four-stage program. It begins with a 3-month intensive
attitudinal component, which transforms hostile adolescents who
have battered egos into confident young adults who learn to un-
derstand themselves through a variety of courses in, for example,
self-awareness, spirituality, literacy, emotional understanding, rap
sessions, public speaking, and art analysis—all administered by
trained staff. Most importantly, both young men and women are
exposed to an Adolescent Parent Program in which they learn
about the needs of their future children and interact with babies
and toddlers in reinforcing practical sessions held in the centers’
day-care units.
In the second, 9-month, stage, the young adults pursue technical
training in a skill of their choice from fourteen vocational courses of-
fered. They are then placed with private companies for job training,
which is evaluated by the company. At the end of this training peri-
od, they graduate from SERVOL and seek employment or apply to

330
Simone Kirpal
SERVOL’s sister organization, FUND-AID, for a small loan to purchase
equipment and become micro-entrepreneurs.
SERVOL graduates have a reputation as reliable and hardworking
employees, most of whom ﬁnd a job within a year. A number of sur-
veys reveal that 78 percent of all companies interviewed would give
preference to SERVOL graduates because they display a more positive
work attitude and a good work ethic, a result that was conﬁrmed in a
1998–99 study. Evaluation studies also show that SERVOL’s female
graduates tend to postpone childbearing until their mid-20s—a sig-
niﬁcantly higher age than the norm of 16–18 years. So far, SERVOL
has not had any problem with any “delinquent” students taken in at
the request of the Ministry of Education. Each year, the Ministry asks
SERVOL to accept thirty to forty adolescents who are deemed un-
manageable by their school principals; at the end of the 3-month
ADP, these young people can return to their original school or pursue
a vocational course with SERVOL.
Hi-Tech Program
Five years ago, SERVOL assessed its accomplishments after 25 years.
Despite its documented success, dissatisfaction arose with its gradu-
ates’ lack of access to technology careers. Although SERVOL had suc-
cessfully trained thousands of carpenters, practical nurses, electri-
cians, and other skilled experts, most of whom had secured
employment, SERVOL’s graduates had no access to the world of high
technology that was sweeping over Trinidad and Tobago. As a conse-
quence, SERVOL explored funding possibilities to provide opportuni-
ties for technology careers.
Recently, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) agreed to
fund SERVOL’s Hi-Tech project, offering postgraduate courses in
computer technology, digital electronics, and computer control elec-
tronics in one of SERVOL’s three Hi-Tech centers, which graduate
400 students yearly. Local industry hires many of these graduates im-
mediately. Among the 1998–99 class, 53.0 percent were placed in
jobs immediately and 20.7 percent opted for further education. Only
26.3 percent of all graduates could not be placed or contracted.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
331
Evolution
Three months after Fr. Pantin walked into the ghetto of Laventille in
1970, he confessed to a resident, Chaca, that he was “getting
nowhere” and was thinking of returning to his teaching post at St.
Mary’s College. Chaca was vehement in his protest: “You cannot do
that! It is true that you have done nothing more than get jobs for a
few dozen kids, but what you have really done is to bring hope to the
area. Every morning you walk up the hill, those watching you think,
maybe tomorrow it will be my turn to get a job. And once people
have hope, they will continue the struggle.”
Initiated in 1971, SERVOL achieved sustainability in 1987 when
the government of Trinidad and Tobago, through the Ministry of Ed-
ucation, established SERVOL as its agent for nonformal education
and assumed payment of the salaries of teachers and instructors,
which were formerly paid through grants from overseas foundations.
In 1992, based on a very special private-public partnership agree-
ment, the Ministry of Education assumed full ﬁnancial responsibility
for SERVOL’s programs.
SERVOL still “walks up the hill” every day, but Fr. Pantin and Cha-
ca have been replaced by thousands of adolescents, hundreds of ear-
ly childhood educators, and scores of outreach workers who visit
parents. This growing number of trainees, instructors, and preschool
children proclaim silently to people throughout Trinidad and Toba-
go: “We are SERVOL and we bring with us a message of hope.”
Financial Support
1971–86
In this initial period, SERVOL depended heavily on the ﬁnancial sup-
port of overseas foundations. The main contributors were the
Bernard van Leer Foundation, The Netherlands (for the ECCE Pro-
gram); Misereor, Germany (for ADP); Helvetas, Switzerland (for infra-
structure development); the Inter-American Foundation, United
States (for rural agricultural and development programs); Save the
Children, Canada; and Development and Peace, Canada (for training
and equipment).

332
Simone Kirpal
Although SERVOL’s programs clearly provided a valuable service to
Trinidad and Tobago, the government provided no support initially,
except for two contributions for the construction of two adolescent
centers. However, the business community and the public provided
signiﬁcant support. Eventually, SERVOL was able to derive some 15
percent of its total income from the production of its adolescent
training departments, which accepted construction and maintenance
contracts from customers.
1987–91
The new government in 1986 asked SERVOL to expand the ECCE
Program and the ADP across Trinidad and Tobago. Unfortunately,
the new government had inherited an almost bankrupt economy
and had few funds available to support expansion. With support
from three foundations that had been providing significant fund-
ing over the previous years (the Bernard van Leer Foundation, Mis-
ereor, and the Inter-American Foundation), SERVOL was able to ne-
gotiate a 5-year contract with the Ministry of Education. Under this
contract, SERVOL secured foundation support for the expanded
program over the next 5 years (1987–91) on a declining basis, 
beginning with total funding for 1987 and dwindling to zero fund-
ing in 1992; the Ministry of Education provided minimal funding
in 1987 and gradually increased its contribution to total support 
in 1992.
1993–2000
In 1992, the Bernard van Leer Foundation indicated that it would
cease funding for SERVOL. This announcement posed a ﬁnancial
challenge because the Ministry of Education funded only salaries of
teachers and instructors and SERVOL depended entirely on the foun-
dation for support of administrative and infrastructure expenses.
SERVOL proposed that the foundation help establish an endow-
ment fund to eventually make SERVOL independent of overseas ﬁ-
nancial support. SERVOL launched a vigorous fundraising campaign,
focusing on banks and local business conglomerates, and the founda-

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
333
tion matched every dollar SERVOL collected. SERVOL’s endowment
fund currently has approximately US$3.5 million and SERVOL is al-
most self-sufﬁcient.
SERVOL and the Ministry of Education currently have a tacit
agreement whereby the Ministry ofﬁcially recognizes SERVOL as its
agent for the development and dissemination of early childhood and
adolescent programs in Trinidad and Tobago. Since 1990, the govern-
ment budget includes an annual subvention to SERVOL. SERVOL op-
erates relatively autonomously in implementing its nonformal educa-
tion programs, with the stipulation that it submit regular reports and
annual audited accounts to the Ministry.
The government has entrusted the entire ECCE program to SER-
VOL, and SERVOL plays an active role in inﬂuencing public policy
and the funding of ECCE programs. When SERVOL began to devel-
op its own ECCE program in the 1970s, the government of Trinidad
and Tobago was not interested in early intervention programs. The
only public program consisted of ﬁfty preschools based in commu-
nity centers and managed and staffed by young women with little
or no training. SERVOL embarked on a public education program to
alert the population to the importance of the early years of child-
hood. By 1981, SERVOL had become known throughout the
Caribbean as the agency that offered high-quality training for early
childhood educators. Over the past 20 years, SERVOL has trained
approximately 600 teachers from all over the Caribbean region to
certiﬁcate level, as validated by Oxford University. As a net effect,
the SPICES curriculum developed by SERVOL is now used widely
throughout the Caribbean and has been adopted for teacher train-
ing programs at the School of Continuing Studies of the University
of the West Indies.
Four recent, signiﬁcant events highlight SERVOL’s importance and
positive effect on ECCE in Trinidad and Tobago:
• Maintaining Government Support. When the new government in
1992 slashed the ECCE budget by 40 percent, SERVOL mobi-
lized the 150 communities operating parent-supported ECCE

334
Simone Kirpal
centers. As a result, the Senate postponed discussion of the na-
tional budget until the government guaranteed restoration of
the ECCE budget.
• Securing IDB Funding. SERVOL had campaigned to increase the
salaries paid to the training staff and teachers of its 150 centers.
In 1996, the IDB, Ministry of Planning and Development, and
SERVOL signed a grant agreement which effectively doubled the
salaries and signiﬁcantly improved the status of teachers. This
agreement implies that the Ministry of Education will assume
this ﬁnancial commitment when the IDB grant expires.
• Expanding POP into the Ministry of Education. In 1993, the govern-
ment commissioned a task force to review the entire education
system of Trinidad and Tobago, and SERVOL’s executive director
was asked to chair the ECCE subcommittee. One of the subcom-
mittee’s resolutions suggested application for a loan to build
and staff ﬁfty new preschools and to augment POP by paying
for twenty-ﬁve additional parent outreach facilitators. This reso-
lution signaled a breakthrough in educational policy.
• Establishing an Association for ECCE. By 1999, enthusiasm for ECCE
had increased remarkably, fueled largely by the growing number
of trained personnel emerging from SERVOL. A number of these
graduates formed an association for ECCE in Trinidad and Toba-
go which included ECCE personnel from the private and public
sectors.
Principles of Success
The success of SERVOL can be attributed to the following charac-
teristics.
• Idealism. Idealism permeates the organization, empowering peo-
ple to transform their own lives every day. SERVOL shows how a
person, in contact with small children, adolescents, mentally
challenged individuals, parents, and communities, can become
a change agent. The SERVOL staff complete each day exhausted,
but electriﬁed, because by helping others change, they are
themselves transformed in rewarding and satisfying ways.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
335
• Decentralization. SERVOL is a decentralized organization and all
participants have enough room and autonomy to be creative. As
the organization expands, bureaucracy is avoided as much as
possible.
• Constant Training and Retraining of Staff. As a relatively small orga-
nization, SERVOL invests much time and money in continual
training of staff and building sustainable capacity in order to be
able to rely on its own human resources and to promote staff
within the organization. Staff members have risen from instruc-
tors and coordinators to the highest levels of administration,
and approximately 25 percent of the staff were formerly trainees
in the ADP or ECCE program.
• Tight Fiscal Control. All of SERVOL’s ﬁnances are carefully con-
trolled. Vouchers and receipts are required for even minor ﬁ-
nancial transactions.
• Fulﬁllment and Satisfaction. Most signiﬁcantly, SERVOL offers
everyone an opportunity to contribute to a noble, righteous
cause outside of themselves. Many of SERVOL’s dedicated staff
stay at SERVOL even when apprentices they have trained 
return and say they are making more money than their 
instructors.
Outlook
SERVOL is striving to reach out to more children, extend ECCE pro-
grams to children ages 0–2.5, and engage private childcare centers in
ensuring high-quality standards. SERVOL has also successfully ex-
panded its programs to other countries worldwide.
Going to Scale
SERVOL has established the groundwork for high-quality ECCE in
Trinidad and Tobago and seeks to build on this accomplishment by
expanding the program so that every child ages 2.5–5 years has access
to high-quality services. To reach out to the majority of the poorest
children, the number of the current 160 public ECCE centers must be
doubled or even tripled.

336
Simone Kirpal
Extended ECCE
By the time a child enters an ECCE center, inappropriate parenting
practices during the first years may have already caused consider-
able damage. One aim is to extend the current ECCE programs to
children between the ages of 0 and 2.5 years to complement the 
efforts of the POP program. Support of preventive programs is far
easier and less expensive than repairing damage that has already
occurred.
Improved Private ECCE
In addition to the 160 public ECCE centers that SERVOL closely
monitors and regularly evaluates, Trinidad and Tobago has approx-
imately 600 privately operated ECCE centers, most of them lacking
supervision and adequate quality standards. More support for pri-
vate childcare centers and monitoring is needed to improve their
operations, train teachers, and ensure that the center structures are
adequate.
Expansion to Other Countries
SERVOL has expanded its ADP and ECCE program to almost every
country in the English-speaking Caribbean and as far aﬁeld as South
Africa and Ireland. Expansion to a country begins with an invitation
from SERVOL to interested persons to visit a SERVOL project. If the
individuals decide that the project is applicable to their country, they
are invited to send a senior person to spend time (from 3 months to 1
year) to be trained as a teacher trainer and then return to the home
country to initiate the project.
4.
East Africa and South Asia: Capacity Building 
and Innovations in Early Child Development
The Aga Khan Foundation (AKF) is a private, nondenominational
development agency created under Swiss law in 1967. It operates in
fourteen countries through field offices located in Kenya, Uganda,

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
337
Tanzania, India, Bangladesh, Tajikistan, Pakistan, and Mozam-
bique. AKF focuses on four main areas: rural development; health;
education and enhancement of NGOs, organizations, and related
concerns including community participation; and women and the
environment.
AKF currently supports more than 100 projects and programs.
Twenty-ﬁve of these are related to education, approximately half to
the Young Children and the Family (YCF) program and half to the
School Improvement Program (SIP). The overall goals of these two
programs are to: (a) increase the quality of formal and nonformal ed-
ucational settings and of early childhood care and development
(ECCD) programs, and (b) increase access, completion, and learning
achievement rates for disadvantaged groups, especially girls, isolated
rural children, and poor urban children.
AKF is part of the wider Aga Khan Development Network, a group
of institutions interested in social and economic development and in
promoting and supporting culture. The foundation collaborates with
governments (e.g., Canada, United States, Switzerland), other donor
agencies (e.g., European Commission, World Bank), and foundations
(e.g., Ford Foundation, Bernard van Leer Foundation).
Over the past 15 years, AKF has helped to create and strengthen lo-
cal NGOs and selected government resource bases. Many of the
NGOs partner with local governments to improve the quality of basic
education. Others primarily help communities and community-
based organizations establish, manage, and ﬁnance their own ECD
activities or primary schools. This assistance usually occurs where al-
ternative education models facilitate increased access to education
for disadvantaged communities (e.g., rural areas, ethnic minorities)
or for girls.
Two AKF-supported projects are described below: the community
preschool program linked to the Madrasa Resource Centers (MRCs) in
East Africa, and the preschool and primary community schools proj-
ect in Sindh, Pakistan, led by Aga Khan Education Services, Pakistan
(AKES, P).

338
Simone Kirpal
Mission
The mission of AKF is to promote creative and effective solutions to
problems that impede social development in speciﬁc regions of the
developing world.
Cultural Context
The MRCs in Kenya, Uganda, and Zanzibar help disadvantaged ur-
ban, peri-urban, and rural Muslim communities establish communi-
ty-owned and community-managed preschools. The curricula and
overall ethos of the centers reﬂect each country’s national ECD
framework and/or curricula, language, and culture (e.g., the Swahili
culture on the coast of Kenya and the Zanzibar islands, the Luganda
culture in Uganda) and values and beliefs drawn from Islam.
The project in Sindh, Pakistan, Improving Pre- and Primary Educa-
tion (IPPS), operates in rural Sindh. The AKES,P team leading the 
project helps communities establish community-owned and commu-
nity-managed preschools and primary schools. The team helped 
develop a preschool curriculum that encourages the integral develop-
ment of children, drawing on their parents’ and communities’ cul-
tural backgrounds and values.
Methodology and Approach
Both the MRC and IPPS programs focus especially on: (a) ensuring
that girls constitute at least 50 percent of the total enrollment; (b) se-
lecting and training local women (who may not have completed
grade 10) to serve as school teachers and administrators; and (c) pro-
moting and ensuring that women are represented on management
committees. Many girls and women in the participating communi-
ties have limited opportunities outside the home. The directors of the
three MRCs and the director of IPPS are women.
The two programs adapt their similar approaches to their particu-
lar contexts. Both programs:
• Work closely with communities to build trust and partnership
and to encourage dialogue and full participation

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
339
• Provide intensive and regular training and mentoring for com-
munities to strengthen local capacity, develop leadership skills,
raise awareness, and mobilize the communities
• Promote development and use of low-cost teaching and learn-
ing materials
• Introduce activity-based learning and develop appropriate cur-
ricula
• Support local women and promote girls’ education
• Pursue ﬁnancial sustainability by strengthening the local com-
munities’ capacities to manage and ﬁnance their own schools.
Implementation
Various activities are undertaken in the MRC and IPPS programs 
to build trust and encourage dialogue; train, mentor, and provide
support; and monitor and assess progress. Key activities are de-
scribed below.
Initial Community Work and Establishment of Schools
To build trust and encourage dialogue, the MRC and IPPS teams con-
duct initial community awareness and mobilization activities for 3 to
12 months, holding discussions with community members on key
program components, including partners’ roles and responsibilities.
The IPPS teams conduct an initial survey of potential school-age chil-
dren. The MRC teams collaborate with community development ofﬁ-
cers, who lead the mobilization and train and support school man-
agement committees for 2 years.
The AKES,P and the MRCs sign a contract with interested commu-
nities outlining the terms and conditions of the partnership and re-
sponsibilities, and the communities open bank accounts for their
schools. The communities then ﬁnd suitable premises for the
schools. In the MRC program, existing madrasas (traditional Islamic
schools usually devoted exclusively to religious education) are used
when possible because they are usually vacant during the mornings;
otherwise, the communities build their own preschools. In the 
IPPS project, the communities rent buildings, obtain donations of

340
Simone Kirpal
buildings, or build new schools. The communities also identify local
women candidates to be trained by the project teams, and they elect
the management committee. In IPPS, local Community-Based Edu-
cation Societies (CBES), which include parents and community lead-
ers, are formed and registered. The MRCs work with their communi-
ties to register their preschools.
Training, Mentoring, and Support
The MRC and IPPS teams provide ongoing training, mentoring, and
support for trainees, who will serve as teachers and administrators in
communities and schools.
MRCs. The MRCs provide initial orientation training of 1 month to
introduce basic concepts of active learning, organization of appropri-
ate learning environments, and ways to develop low-cost classroom
materials. Thereafter, teachers receive in-school support once a week
for 78 weeks during the 1.5 years of the contract and then two or
three times a month for the duration. Teachers also meet weekly in
small groups at the MRCs throughout the 2 years for planning and
problem solving with MRC trainers.
IPPS. Teacher development consists of an initial 5–6 months of in-
tensive, holistic training provided in Karachi and focused on the
women trainees’ personal, moral, and professional development, as
trainees will have multiple roles on their return to the community (as
teachers, women, and extended family and community members).
Training emphasizes self-development, responsibility, mutual respect,
collegiality, and teamwork. The IPPS team provides additional in-ser-
vice training and biweekly follow-up support in schools throughout
the ﬁrst 2 years. Training also is provided to the MRC’s school man-
agement committees and the IPPS’ CBES on community mobiliza-
tion, fundraising, basic accounting skills, and school management
and planning. Most of this training occurs in the communities.
Monitoring and Assessment of Progress
Progress is monitored and assessed continually to assure quality, good
management, and ﬁnancial sustainability.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
341
MRCs. Trainers and community development ofﬁcers visit schools
weekly to work with teachers, management committees, and the
community. A Madrasa Evaluation Instrument (MEI) is completed by
MRC staff and shared with the school management communities
every 6 months. The results of this evaluation are discussed and used
to plan for the next 6 months. The MEI is adapted from the
High/Scope Program Implementation Plan and addresses the proj-
ects’ main components: quality of teaching and learning, adult-child
and child-child interactions, parent and community participation,
school management, and appropriate use of local cultural and reli-
gious values. The MEI is an important part of the criteria for the
school and community’s “graduation” from the program, with ex-
pected levels of achievement outlined.
IPPS. The IPPS team meets monthly with each CBES to provide
training and perform regular audits. IPPS field supervisors offer bi-
weekly support to teachers. In addition, three AKES,P board mem-
bers, IPPS professional staff, and all CBES chairpersons meet quar-
terly in workshops to improve management, administrative, and
fundraising skills and to share experiences and solve problems
across communities.
Evolution
The MRC and IPPS programs began separately and at different times,
but have inﬂuenced each other as they have developed.
MRCs
The MRC program began in Kenya in the mid-1980s to address com-
munities’ concerns about strengthening children’s understanding of
their local culture and religion and increasing their chances for access
to, and success in, formal education. A local, well-respected Muslim
woman, trained as a primary teacher, began working with a few com-
munities to develop the curriculum and approach. Over time, inter-
est grew and the AKF helped to establish the ﬁrst MRC in Mombasa,
Kenya, in 1986. AKF established the MRC in Zanzibar in 1990 and the
MRC in Uganda in 1993.

342
Simone Kirpal
In the mid-1990s, AKF staff undertook an internal review of 
the MRCs and their preschools, which numbered three in Uganda,
fifteen in Kenya, and about twenty in Zanzibar. The main issues
facing the program at that time included (a) strengthening the
MRCs’ capacities to develop, implement, and monitor the
preschool program on a larger scale; (b) addressing the financial
sustainability of the preschools and ensuring that they were com-
munity-owned and community-managed and that they provided
quality early learning experiences; and (c) achieving sustainability
for the MRCs.
By early 2000, the MRCs were working with more than 130 com-
munities across East Africa, each with its own preschool. The MRCs
have strengthened their organizational and technical capacity and
have improved their community skills. For the future, they are con-
sidering continued work with disadvantaged Muslim communities,
provision of selected training of trainers and short courses for
preschool teachers from a broader range of communities, and 
“piloting” new activities (e.g., working with parents and other 
caregivers).
IPPS
The IPPS project began in 1996 and currently involves twelve com-
munities that are establishing preschools and primary schools. The
schools begin with preschool classes and add on additional grades
each year as the children progress. During initial development, the
MRC program shared lessons with its IPPS colleagues in Pakistan.
Currently in its second phase, IPPS plans to expand to another six to
eight communities in rural Sindh. Additional work with mothers and
other caregivers, focusing on children under 3 and childrearing prac-
tices at home, is also planned. IPPS hopes to extend its effects by
mainstreaming its key lessons and approach to other NGOs working
with community schools around Sindh through training trainers
and, possibly, attaching these organizations’ staff to IPPS for certain
periods of time.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
343
Financial Structure
MRCs
The MRCs receive cofunding from AKF and one or more of the fol-
lowing: the Canadian International Development Agency, European
Commission, Ford Foundation, Bernard van Leer Foundation, gov-
ernment of Kenya, World Bank, and Rahimtullah Trust (a local phil-
anthropy). Each community receives the equivalent of US$1,000 as
an initial seed grant for learning and teaching materials and basic
school equipment (e.g., low shelves, mats, outside play equipment).
This money is also used as “top-up” funds for refurbishment and low-
cost construction of the building. In general, the seed grant is given
in small disbursements according to an agreed-upon plan and costs
estimated by the community.
To address the continuing vulnerability of the preschools, especial-
ly in poorer communities, the AKF and MRCs are piloting the use of
community-level mini-endowments pooled within countries and re-
gions. A portion of the returns (5 percent) on the investment would
be returned regularly as dividends to the communities to contribute
to (but not fully pay) the operating costs of their preschools (includ-
ing teachers’ salaries, a main cost). Communities are expected to con-
tinue to ensure that the mutually agreed-upon school fees are paid
(or subsidized from elsewhere) and to conduct other fundraising ac-
tivities to cover any deﬁcits or increase their endowment.
Each mini-endowment consists of a “graduation grant” of
US$2,500 given to schools that meet agreed-upon criteria for gradua-
tion, which include a quality learning and teaching environment,
regular and active participation of the school management commit-
tee, and regular payment of teachers’ salaries for the previous 6
months. Communities also can add funds to their endowment, and
up to US$2,500 would be matched by the program. With this match-
ing program, the community could accumulate an endowment fund
of US$7,500. As of April 2000, the average endowment capital per
graduated school was $4,701 in Kenya, $3,640 in Zanzibar, and
$2,932 in Uganda.

344
Simone Kirpal
An initial group of thirty-eight schools have “graduated” across
the three countries. AKF has held lengthy discussions with the com-
munities about types of investment mechanisms (e.g., mutual funds,
treasury bills, ﬁxed income accounts) and with local banks, MRCs,
and the national boards about management of the endowments.
During 2000, the thirty-eight schools will participate in a piloting of
the mini-endowment concept. This pilot effort will be monitored to
assess whether the endowment is an effective mechanism for en-
abling schools to become self-sustaining and to determine factors
that enable schools to use the endowment dividends effectively.
IPPS
The IPPS project is funded by AKF and the U.S. Agency for Interna-
tional Development (USAID). Since the beginning of the program,
AKES,P has tried to help build long-term sustainability of the com-
munity schools and to ensure the quality and relevance of the teach-
ing and learning process. Financially, the IPPS project has adopted a
similar approach to the MRCs’ mini-endowments. The goal for the
community schools is to become ﬁnancially self-sufﬁcient within 2
years. Approximately ten of the twelve schools initiated during the
ﬁrst 3–4 year phase are currently self-sustaining ﬁnancially. The fol-
lowing steps are taken to achieve self-sufﬁciency:
• Each IPPS project covers all operational funds for its schools, in-
cluding teachers’ salaries and operating expenses.
• During the ﬁrst 2 years, the CBESs collect fees from students and
additional donations from local sponsors, which are often used
to off-set fees for the poorest students. These funds are deposit-
ed into a “collection account” managed jointly by IPPS and the
respective CBES. IPPS does not release funds for teachers’
salaries until the monthly fees have been obtained, and the
CBES account only increases if the fees and donations collected
adequately cover the salaries and other operating expenses.
• Money deposited into the account is allowed to grow, in accor-
dance with banking regulations of Pakistan, for 2 years and

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
345
then the account becomes an investment fund invested on be-
half of the CBES. When the CBES achieves adequate local 
capacity to manage the securities, the money is transferred 
entirely to the CBES.
• On transfer of the funds, an account is opened for the CBES to
cover the schools’ operating expenses. For most CBESs, the fee
level is sufﬁcient to cover operating costs and they do not need
to draw on their investment funds.
• The IPPS team has developed alternative options to assist poorer
communities that have not been able to fully cover their
schools’ operating expenses. These CBESs are organizing
fundraising activities and seeking donations to cover student
costs (e.g., for girls from poorer households).
Principles of Success
The success of the MRC and IPPS programs can be attributed to the
following characteristics.
• High Levels of Trust. Both programs have built high levels of trust
with the participating communities. Staff listen and work with
the communities on their concerns and ideas for helping their
children. The roles and responsibilities of each partner are de-
ﬁned clearly.
• Community Mobilization and Organization. An intensive process of
mobilization and organization is incorporated within each pro-
gram. The process includes regular support and monitoring of
local management committees, especially during the ﬁrst 2–3
years, to continually reinforce community ownership and the
community’s ability to manage ECD activities.
• Spill-over Effects. Success with one community can help replicate
success and build trust with other communities that observe
their neighbors’ involvement and the positive effect of the pro-
grams on children’s learning experiences.
• Use and Development of Local Resources. The projects rely on the 
local material, ﬁnancial, and in-kind resources available to build

346
Simone Kirpal
ECD centers. Major investments to develop local human capac-
ity, focusing on women, are a priority.
• Quality Learning. The MRC and IPPS programs emphasize quality
learning that both builds on local cultural and religious values
and uses lessons and knowledge from other ECD efforts.
• Mentoring and Follow-up. Both programs provide continual, sys-
tematic mentoring and support. The teachers, community lead-
ers, and school management committees beneﬁt by implemen-
tation and absorption of ideas that are facilitated and shared
through large- and small-group training exercises and continual
in-school support.
• Flexibility. The programs are ﬂexible and able to address and 
incorporate needs and issues that emerge as the programs
evolve. For example, the MRCs introduced community develop-
ment ofﬁcers to strengthen community development efforts;
the MRCs established literacy classes for mothers and in-
laws; and IPPS organized nonformal classes for older, out-of-
school girls.
• Financial Sustainability. Sustainability over the long term is the
programs’ major goal. Both programs achieve sustainability of
schools by focusing on capacity building, testing and sharing
different strategies on a regular basis, and involving all partners
and stakeholders, including donors, from the beginning.
Outlook
Through the MRCs and IPPS project, the AKF is fostering demand for
ECD programs; strategies of sustainability; sharing of skills and
knowledge; selected research studies and evaluations; and network-
ing among institutions.
Increased Demand
The demand from other communities for community-owned schools
and teacher training programs for both programs continues to grow.
The MRC and IPPS teams have to assess whether this demand will
shorten the time needed to raise awareness and mobilize communi-

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
347
ties, and thus increase efﬁciency and reduce costs. They also need to
develop new strategies and training programs (e.g., short, “alterna-
tive” training courses for interested preschool teachers).
Sustaining Quality and Organizational Inputs
Innovative strategies are needed to sustain the programs after com-
pletion of the initial intervention. Communities that have successful-
ly completed the MRC program are developing graduate preschool
associations to provide continual support and to foster interaction
between schools and quality of learning and teaching. The MRCs also
are training lead teachers and local community mobilizers for each
school to assume the mentoring and leadership development roles
formerly provided by the MRCs. The IPPS is convening regular meet-
ings for head teachers and CBES members and is training locally
based supervisors to provide technical advice for small clusters of
schools.
Sharing of Skills and Knowledge
A continuing challenge for the programs is to creatively and realisti-
cally plan for disseminating the skills, knowledge, and lessons (e.g.,
through technical assistance, training, mentoring, or dissemination
of materials) to help others adapt or replicate their work. The IPPS
team does not extend the scale of its operations signiﬁcantly, but fo-
cuses on training teachers and trainers from other community-based
organizations instead. The MRCs are responding to other countries
(e.g., in West Africa) that are expressing interest in learning about
replicating and adapting the MRC program.
Research Studies and Evaluations
In-depth research and evaluation of the impact, effectiveness, and
costs of the MRC and IPPS programs are necessary for internal reﬂec-
tion, effective program implementation at the community level, and
growth. The studies are also essential to improve assessment and un-
derstanding of the effect of community-based ECD programs on chil-
dren, families, and the broad community.

348
Simone Kirpal
Capacity Building and Networking
Identifying ways to build and strengthen a variety of institutions and
to encourage networking among them is essential for achieving ac-
cess to quality and culturally appropriate and affordable ECD services
for poor children. Nongovernmental and community-based organi-
zations (e.g., women’s groups, religious groups, preschool commit-
tees) and the private and public sectors are all potential collaborators
and partners that need to be able to access expertise on technical is-
sues, organizational development, fundraising, and ﬁnancial man-
agement for long-term sustainability of ECD programs. Their efforts
need to be supported by governments, local and international
donors, foundations, and others.
5.
Central and Eastern Europe, the Former Soviet 
Union, Mongolia, Haiti, and South Africa: Step 
by Step—Early Childhood Education Reform
Step by Step is an education reform program for infants and children,
0–10 years, that introduces child-centered teaching methods and sup-
ports community and family involvement in preschools and primary
schools. The aim of the program is to engender democratic ideas and
principles within young children and their families. The methods
used encourage children to make choices, take responsibility for their
decisions, express their ideas with creativity, help each other, develop
critical thinking skills, and practice independent thinking. The pro-
gram promotes the rights of all children to a quality education, and
special teaching materials and training programs are designed to en-
hance equal access for children of ethnic minorities (e.g., Roma),
refugees, children with disabilities, and families living in poverty.
Step by Step offers an innovative and comprehensive approach to
institutional reform of early childhood education programs at all lev-
els, by training teachers and administrators at preschool and primary
school levels through ongoing professional development; training
faculties at universities and pedagogical institutes on the application
of new course content and interactive teaching methods; cooperating

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
349
with education and health ministries on educational content and
policies; establishing national associations for parents, teachers, and
faculties; and creating an international forum (the International Step
by Step Association, or ISSA) for parents, teachers, and faculties to
promote open society values in education.
The Open Society Institute (OSI), a private grant-making founda-
tion, launched the Step by Step program in 1994 to address the de-
cline in services for young children in regions affected by the eco-
nomic upheaval after the fall of communism. OSI seeks to promote
the development of open societies by supporting a range of programs
dealing with educational, social, and legal reform. Created by George
Soros, OSI forms part of the network of Soros foundations, a group of
autonomous NGOs operating in 30 countries around the world, in-
cluding the countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union, Burma, Haiti, South Africa, Guatemala, and the United
States. The foundations support initiatives in education; civil society;
independent media; Internet and e-mail communications; publish-
ing; human rights; arts and culture; and social, legal, and economic
reform.
Children’s Resources International (CRI), a nonproﬁt organization
based in Washington, D.C., serves as OSI’s partner and provides inter-
national technical assistance to Step by Step. CRI has developed the
program’s philosophy and core written materials, which include
methodologies, courses, and training programs for teachers and care-
givers of infants and toddlers and for preschools, early primary
grades, and institutions of higher education. CRI works with a net-
work of trainers to provide ongoing support to each country team.
The goals of all technical assistance to the program are to transfer 
expertise to each country and to enable country teams to continue
the program in the future using their own resources.
Mission
The mission of the Step by Step program is to create an educational
experience that promotes democratic thinking and action. The cul-
ture of democracy is taught and modeled day by day. By starting this

350
Simone Kirpal
process with the youngest citizens, the children, the principles of
open societies are instilled in the next generation. Child-centered
classrooms promote democratic principles and inspire life-long learn-
ers who are able to succeed in open societies (Hansen, Kaufmann,
and Saifer 1997).
Cultural Context
Step by Step emphasizes change and democratic transformation,
based on the experience of countries in transition, and addresses the
continuing challenge for all democracies to provide the kinds of edu-
cational experiences that ensure continuation of open and free soci-
eties. Step by Step’s child-centered philosophy is based on the work of
international theorists in early childhood education (Erikson, Piaget,
Vygotsky, Dewey) and is universally applicable when adapted to local
cultural circumstances.
The core program components are family and community partner-
ship, individualization of the learning process, active learning, self-
initiative, self-efﬁcacy and empowerment, shared control, freedom of
thought and speech, and respect for differences and similarities.
These components are especially relevant for the countries where the
program is being implemented initially (in Central and Eastern Eu-
rope and the former Soviet Union, Mongolia, Haiti, and South
Africa). These countries have strong traditions of teacher-centered ed-
ucation and are struggling to make the transition to democratic soci-
eties during a time of enthusiasm for educational reforms, tempered
by harsh realities. The realities include sharp economic declines re-
gionally; decreased social services (including early childhood pro-
grams); reduced state services for training teachers; professional isola-
tion from Western pedagogical trends; closing of preschool facilities,
due to lack of ﬁnancing; and reduced funding for the remaining
preschools, resulting in a reduction in national nutrition and health
programs, inadequate education materials, a crumbling infrastruc-
ture, and delays in paying staff salaries.
Step by Step has sought to build on the strength of previously ex-
isting systems by “opening up” their structures to community and

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
351
family involvement; developing ministry-approved retraining pro-
grams within established teacher training systems; and, initially,
making contributions to rebuild the preschool infrastructure. The
program has focused on developing, in each country, a professionally
based (rather than politically, state-based) NGO that can contribute
to a plurality of approaches in education and the development of civ-
il society.
Methodology and Approach
As described by OSI and CRI (1998), the Step by Step program:
• Is a program of teaching methods that need to be adapted local-
ly in each country to ﬁt with national educational standards
and needs
• Offers an alternative teaching approach to the ofﬁcial curricu-
lum, to give parents choices, but seeks ofﬁcial recognition and
support from the ministry of education
• Emphasizes long-term replicability, sustainability, and growth
by partnering with the ministry of education and institutions
that train and retrain teachers and caregivers
• Collaborates with existing publicly funded institutions (kinder-
gartens, preschools, primary schools, pedagogical institutes,
universities, training centers) to create long-lasting change and
systemic effect
• Is a child-centered model that emphasizes meeting the individ-
ual educational needs of each child in a classroom
• Builds on the principle that parents are the primary educators of
their children and should be invited to participate in the
schools
• Encourages community involvement from local government
and businesses
• Promotes equal opportunities, nondiscrimination, and inclu-
siveness to integrate into regular classrooms children from di-
verse backgrounds, ethnic minorities, and those with special
needs

352
Simone Kirpal
• Seeks to produce and purchase all educational furniture and 
materials in the region, wherever possible, to boost local
economies.
Implementation
Each country team has primary responsibility for adapting (translat-
ing, publishing) the core written training materials developed by CRI
and for reﬁning the implementation strategy to meet the country’s
speciﬁc needs and concerns. Step by Step follows a 5-year develop-
mental cycle in each country. In collaboration with an international
network of trainers, CRI, OSI, and ISSA support each country team by:
• Training core project members in child-centered methods, adult
training techniques, and educational reform
• Developing educational and training materials
• Providing in-country training and ongoing technical assistance
• Mentoring teams as they develop implementation strategies
and plans.
In each country, intensive methodology training is given initially
to a team of early childhood experts responsible for adapting the pro-
gram to the country’s context and needs. Model classrooms are im-
plemented in preschools and primary schools and then expanded to
new classrooms at low cost, relying on matching funds from commu-
nities. Training is also provided for faculties from higher education
institutions to ensure inclusion of child-centered methodologies in
professional training and retraining programs for teachers. In addi-
tion, the country team cooperates with the ministry of education to
introduce child-centered policies and programs and establishes an in-
dependent Step by Step NGO or association in the country. This orga-
nization:
• Provides ongoing professional development for early childhood
educators by offering training and sharing experience through
professional journals and conferences

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
353
• Monitors the quality of the Step by Step program in preschools,
primary schools, and teacher training programs
• Advocates greater parental involvement in education and devel-
opmentally appropriate education methods nationally
• Promotes child-centered methodologies to schools and commu-
nities
• Develops quality programs for marginalized groups, such as
Roma and other ethnic minorities and children with disabilities
• Develops standards and evaluates good practice in early child-
hood education as an independent, nongovernmental voice in
the educational community.
By the end of the 5-year developmental period, Step by Step hopes
to have established high-quality, self-sustaining training programs
that are ofﬁcially accredited by the ministry of education and are
available and affordable to all teachers and schools seeking to learn
child-centered methods. The program also aims to be ﬁnancially sus-
tainable and replicable within each country. (Sustainability refers to
the ability of participating schools to continue the Step by Step pro-
gram after OSI funding ends. Replicability refers to the ability of
preschools and primary schools to receive training and implement
the program without OSI funding.)
Evolution
George Soros established his ﬁrst foundation, the Open Society Fund,
in New York in 1979 and his ﬁrst Eastern European foundation in
Hungary in 1984. He now funds a network of foundations operating
in more than thirty countries throughout the world dedicated to
building and maintaining the infrastructure and institutions of an
open society.
The Step-by-Step program was initiated originally to address the
decline in services for young children in Central and Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union, caused by the economic upheaval after
the fall of communism. In its ﬁrst year in 1994, the program was es-
tablished in 200 preschool classrooms in ﬁfteen countries. In its sixth

354
Simone Kirpal
year of operation, the program trained 40,000 teachers annually in
twenty-eight countries and territories, serving more than 500,000
families and children in preschools and primary schools. The pro-
gram cooperates with more than 300 institutions that train and re-
train teachers to implement new practices.
Countries have joined the program at different times, and the
program is at different stages of development in the participating
countries and territories. Currently, these are: Albania, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Haiti, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kosovo,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Ukraine, Yugoslavia.
In early 1999, the program formally established ISSA, which is reg-
istered in the Netherlands as a nongovernmental membership orga-
nization. ISSA serves as an international Step by Step forum for na-
tional associations of teachers, parents, and faculties. Among its goals
and objectives, ISSA aims to promote the Step by Step program and
philosophy internationally; facilitate information sharing among
member organizations; provide opportunities for professional devel-
opment; encourage and disseminate research on child-centered learn-
ing; develop international initiatives in early childhood education in
partnership with interested organizations; and assist members in
fundraising and building partnerships.
Financial Support
OSI provides the initial investment for Step by Step in each partici-
pating country. To initiate ﬁnancial sustainability, the country team
undertakes a grassroots effort by approaching potential funding part-
ners after the ﬁrst year of the program to secure partnership funding
to support expansion of the preschool model classrooms. The pro-
gram provides a catalyst for cofunding by offering matching funds
for training and educational materials (to cover capital costs) for
preschools that expand their staff by funding additional salaries or
creating a volunteer program.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
355
The grassroots effort is targeted to local governments and par-
ents. The team promotes connections with local authorities and
communities by inviting them to training sessions and school festi-
vals and by keeping them informed and involved in the develop-
ment of the program. Despite severe constraints for financial sup-
port, local authorities have been able to sustain and replicate Step
by Step locally. Parents volunteer as classroom assistants, partici-
pate in fundraising to support schools, provide labor to renovate
classrooms and playgrounds or to make furniture, and donate
equipment or books. The program also encourages partnerships
with businesses and other foundations and international organiza-
tions, and cofunding and donations have been obtained in several
countries.
Principles of Success
The success of the Step by Step program can be attributed to the fol-
lowing characteristics.
• Private-Public Partnership. By collaborating with existing publicly
funded institutions, Step by Step creates long-lasting change
and long-term commitment among all its stakeholders.
• Culturally Appropriate Methods. Step by Step accounts for each
country’s cultural background by encouraging adaptation and
modiﬁcation of the teaching methods and methodology to
meet local needs, language, and educational standards.
• Child-centered Teaching. The program promotes a child-centered
approach and interactive learning method to meet the individ-
ual educational needs of each child in a classroom.
• Community and Parental Involvement. Step by Step encourages ex-
tensive involvement of communities and parents, and parents
are invited to participate actively in school activities.
• Financial Sustainability. Long-term replicability, sustainability, and
growth of the program are achieved in partnership with min-
istries of education and institutions that train and retrain teach-
ers and caregivers.

356
Simone Kirpal
• Nongovernmental Support. Step by Step supports the continuous
development of child-centered early childhood programs and
professionals and the development of civil societies by estab-
lishing, in each country, an independent, nonpolitical national
association or NGO that contributes to plurality in education.
Outlook
Step by Step builds effectively on its program evaluations and is striv-
ing for a new teaching approach that is socially inclusive and cultur-
ally and ﬁnancially sustainable.
Studies and Program Evaluation
Multiple evaluations, at national and international levels, have
shown that the same or even better educational results can be
achieved by using Step by Step’s child-centered teaching methods,
compared with traditional teacher-centered methods. National stud-
ies conducted in cooperation with pedagogical institutes, universi-
ties, and ministries have been essential in the acceptance of the pro-
gram’s preschool and primary school methodologies by the
ministries of education in the twenty-eight participating countries
and territories. Most interestingly, several studies have shown that
the Step by Step program supports children’s social and emotional
development more strongly than traditional programs and that the
participating children average higher scores on tests that measure
their cooperation, leadership, self-esteem, problem solving, and per-
severance.
An independent evaluation of the Step by Step preschool 
program in four countries (Bulgaria, Kyrgyzstan, Romania,
Ukraine) by USAID in 1999 confirmed that Step by Step supports
children’s democratic behaviors and values, as related to their mak-
ing choices, taking initiatives, valuing individual expression, and
contributing as members of a learning community. Classroom ob-
servations showed that these values are embodied in Step by Step
classrooms in staff-child interactions and the curriculum and phys-
ical environment.

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
357
Social Inclusion
There is strong evidence that child-centered approaches enable teach-
ers to respond more effectively to children’s individual needs. The
USAID evaluation suggests that the Step by Step program is particu-
larly beneﬁcial to children with low academic skills and to disadvan-
taged children from ethnic minorities. For example, data collected
over 3 years on Roma children who attended Step by Step preschools
in Yugoslavia show that, in comparison with Roma children who did
not attend the preschools, the children had a much higher proﬁ-
ciency level in Serbian, attended primary school more regularly, com-
pleted the ﬁrst grade (100 percent), and scored higher on math and
reading tests at the end of ﬁrst grade. Data also show that participa-
tion in Step by Step preschool more than doubles educational out-
comes for severely disadvantaged children, supporting the claim that
adequate preschool education is an important means of ensuring eq-
uity among children.
Step by Step is conducting a pilot project to assess the effect of us-
ing Step by Step methods to educate the large number of Roma chil-
dren placed in schools serving predominantly children who are men-
tally retarded. In the Czech Republic, for example, as many as 80
percent of Roma children are currently labeled “mentally deﬁcient”
and placed in these special schools. The aim of the pilot project is to
reintegrate Roma children from these schools by grade 3 or 4. Early
results conﬁrm that most of the Roma children are misdiagnosed as
having mental deﬁciencies, unnecessarily reducing their educational
potentials.
Special Education
Step by Step hopes to contribute to development of anti-biased
adult education programs, objective tests and procedures for child
assessments, and educational approaches to meet the specific needs
of these children to address this basic human rights issue in the re-
gion. Step by Step also is pursuing activities to include children
with special needs into regular preschools and primary schools,

358
Simone Kirpal
through teacher training projects and university courses that pre-
pare teachers.
Sustainability
Between 2003–05, the twenty-eight countries and territories initially
participating in Step by Step will become fully independent of OSI.
Initial studies in four countries indicate that the Step by Step NGOs
established in these countries have the capacity to continue all pro-
gram activities in the future without outside ﬁnancial assistance. The
responsibility for regional and international activities and coordina-
tion of programs in new countries is shifting to ISSA.
Note
The ﬁve case studies have been developed in close collaboration with
the respective projects. The author would like to thank, in particular,
the following individuals for providing valuable information, contri-
butions, and comments:
Carol Guy-James Barratt and Peter Hesse
Peter-Hesse Foundation
Römerstr. 1A
D–41564 Kaarst-Büttgen
Germany
Tel: 49-2131-756.830
Fax: 49-2131-756.831
website: http://www.solidarity.org
Alice Byangwa Mujunga
Mother-Child Day Care Center Services
P.O. Box 1663
Kampala
Uganda
Tel: 256-41-346.597
Fax: 256-41-345.293

Communities Can Make a Difference: Five Cases Across Continents
359
Ruth Montrichard
SERVOL Ltd.
91 Frederick Street
Port of Spain
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
West Indies
Tel: 1-868-623.7009 and 1-868-627.9360
Fax: 1-868-624.1619 and 1-868-622.1043
website: http://community.wow.net/servol
Kathy Bartlett
Aga Khan Foundation
1–3 Ave de la Paix
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: 41-22-909.7200
Fax: 41-22-909.7291
website: http://www.partnershipwalk.com/akf/index.htm
Elizabeth Lorant and Sarah Klaus
Open Society Institute
International Step by Step Association
400 West 59th Street
New York, NY 10019
U.S.A.
Tel: 1-212-547.6918
Fax: 1-212-548.4610
website: http://www.issa.nl; http://www.soros.org
References
Evans, J.L., R.G. Myers, and E.M. Ilfeld. 2000. Early Childhood
Counts. A Programming Guide on Early Childhood Care for
Development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

360
Simone Kirpal
Hansen, K.A., R.K. Kaufmann, and S. Saifer. 1997. Education and the
Culture of Democracy: Early Childhood Practice. Washington, D.C.:
Children’s Resources International, Inc., in Partnership with the
Open Society Institute.
Lokshin, M., and T.L. Tan. 2000. Different Countries–Similar
Problems: The Effect of Costs of Early Child Development
Programs on Household Behavior. Abstract. Preliminary Draft.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Myers, R. 1995. The Twelve Who Survive: Strengthening Programs of
Early Child Development in the Third World. 2nd ed. Ypsilanti,
Mich.: High/Scope Press.
OSI (The Open Society Institute) and CRI (Children’s Resources
International, Inc.). 1998. Step by Step: A Program for Children from
Birth to Ten Years and Their Families. 1998 Country Report.
Washington, D.C.
Rugh, A., and H. Bossert. 1998. Involving Communities. Participation in
the Delivery of Education Programs. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Agency
for International Development.
Young, M.E. 1996. Early Child Development: Investing in the Future.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Part V
Investing in the Future:
Action and Policy


Chapter 12
Narrowing the Gap 
for Poor Children
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
The reasons for investing in early child development are many. Per-
haps the most important is ethical, for so many children lack the es-
sential care needed to develop their full human potential. As noted
by Amartya Sen (1999), the core of human development is really a
question of choice and freedom—which millions of children in the
world today still do not have.
Gross underinvestment in children, and their mothers, especially
those in the poorest households and with the least education, is one
of the most potent “engines” driving the growing inequality within
and between nations. Investing in early childhood is essential for na-
tions and regions trying to eradicate mass poverty. Latin America is
only one example of a worldwide problem. The issues are the same
everywhere. This chapter addresses the underlying basis for the in-
creasing problem of inequality and ways to combat this problem
through action and policy.
Intergenerational Poverty
Two of the most dramatic concerns for the global community are the
growing number of children in poverty and the vicious circle of
poverty—reproduction of poverty and intergenerational poverty. 
In Latin America, for example, more than four out of ten children
363

364
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
under age 9 (or about 43 million children) live on less than US$2.00
per day. These children account for almost 10 percent of the total
population (500 million) in Latin America currently. Since 1980, the
number of children in poverty has increased by almost two-thirds
(from about 26 million) (IDB 1999).
Not only are many of the region’s children poor, however; they
also face multiple, difﬁcult obstacles related to poverty. Many have
not completed primary education, and most live in poverty that is
both material and educational. Many suffer from malnutrition, dis-
ease, abuse, and neglect, which begins during the critical period from
conception through early childhood and impairs their ability and ca-
pacity to learn.
In Chile, for example, a study of children’s psychomotor develop-
ment by age 18 months and thereafter showed that 40 percent of the
children from poor families were developmentally delayed by age 5,
50 percent were delayed in language development, 30 percent in vi-
sual and motor development, and 17 percent in gross motor develop-
ment (Seguel, Izquierdo, and Edwards 1992). Poor children, such as
these, are condemned unnecessarily to illiteracy, low earnings, and
few opportunities for a better life.
As adults, children of poverty pass their poverty on to their own
children. This “reproduction” of poverty, or intergenerational pover-
ty, is one of the major causes for the persistent poverty, income mal-
distribution, street children, and increased violence and crime
throughout Latin America and other world regions.
This tragic interlinkage develops as follows. Poor parents have
many children and larger families, but do not have the means or par-
enting skills to provide for them or meet their developmental needs.
Intellectually and emotionally stunted, the children are less able to
learn and often fail in school, repeating grades and eventually drop-
ping out. As unskilled youth with scarce market skills, most have to
work in poorly paid “dead-end” jobs and some engage in better-paid
illicit activities. When they have children, they replenish, and renew,
the vicious circle of poverty.

Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children
365
The new age of information technology will offer many opportu-
nities for Latin Americans born today, but the children of poverty
will be left even further behind, unable to effectively acquire the
skills needed to participate fully in modern life. Even more so than
previously, schooling will determine future job options and earn-
ings. Between 1980 and 1997, the earnings ratio of ofﬁce workers 
to manual laborers in Latin America increased 30 percent, from 1:3
to 1:7.
Children who do not complete secondary school are increasingly
disadvantaged. Those who are most vulnerable are children in pover-
ty, from indigenous social groups, living in urban shantytowns or
rural areas, and malnourished. Any one of these factors decreases
their chances of completing secondary school. And, the lives of many
of the 43 million children already in poverty in Latin America are af-
fected by more than one of these factors, which is often the case. The
overall impact for development in the region is, and will remain,
strongly negative until this poverty cycle can be broken.
Breaking the Cycle
Fortunately, the knowledge and the means exist for greatly improving
the lives and economic potential of poor children and families. Recent
research in Latin America and elsewhere suggests effective ways for
breaking the linkages in the cycle of poverty. Six methods are clear:
• Life education and counseling for older children and adoles-
cents, and quality reproductive health services for young
women
• Prenatal care and nutrition for mothers, and good nutrition and
health care for children in their early years
• Education and training in parenting skills
• Community-based education and training in safety, health, and
nutrition
• Childcare to keep children safe and to provide adequate stimu-
lation to foster development and readiness to learn

366
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
• Academic and psychological support for disadvantaged children
during the initial school years, to increase their chances of suc-
cess in school and society.
Communities and nations can break the cycle of poverty by inter-
vening in these ways in an urgent and decisive manner. The technical
and economic opportunities are available to confront the problem,
but tremendous political will and commitment are needed to solve
the problem. Government cannot act alone. The resources and tal-
ents of government must be matched by other sectors. By joining
hands and sharing responsibility, the civil society, private sector 
(including nongovernmental organizations), and government, sup-
ported by international agencies such as the World Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank (IDB), and other regional development
banks, can meet this great social challenge of the new millennium
and make a difference in many lives.
The IDB, for example, funds and supports many efforts through-
out the Americas to improve the lives of disadvantaged children and
youth. Some of these efforts are stand-alone projects, and more are
part of multifaceted antipoverty programs. The motivation for many
activities is the highly visible and troubling problem of street chil-
dren in large urban areas—a key link in the poverty cycle. In partner-
ship with the World Bank and other organizations, the IDB sponsors
seminars and other events to increase and disseminate relevant
knowledge and produces policy and program materials related to ear-
ly child development.
Yet, no institution in government, the private sector, or interna-
tional development can say today that it is doing enough. Inter-
national agencies such as the IDB, which would like to do much
more, are often constrained by the availability of subsidized funding
and the reluctance of some countries to borrow at prevailing terms
for child development programs.
Every dollar that is invested in poor children (e.g., in improving
childcare, training teachers, building schools, and supporting 
parents) is a dollar well spent, now and for the future. Even in the

Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children
367
United States, where there is broad consensus that investing in poor
and at-risk children early in their lives pays dividends, more can be
done. From a business perspective, investment in early child develop-
ment “works.” Building brainpower builds economic power, and
building healthy bodies builds healthy nations. The world cannot af-
ford to waste a single future worker.
Intervening Effectively
Even modest investments in community-based child development
programs that involve parents, schools, and local health organiza-
tions can have broad impact for society, by reducing the reproduc-
tion of poverty between generations and lessening related effects
(e.g., violence, abuse, criminal behavior, mental illness). Recent data
from the United States, for example, demonstrate the effectiveness
of prevention programs for children: the number of children who
are victims of abuse and neglect declined in this country for the
ﬁfth year in a row, and the incidence of maltreatment decreased to
12.9 cases per 1,000 children, the lowest rate in 10 years (United
States 2000).
Much more information about early child development is known
today than even a decade ago. And, every child, in every corner of
the globe, deserves to beneﬁt from this knowledge and from the
progress that has been made through programs such as Head Start.
Head Start
In the United States, some of the most important lessons about early
child development have come from the Head Start program, which
celebrated its thirty-ﬁfth anniversary in 2000. This government pro-
gram of comprehensive early intervention for low-income preschool
children, and their parents, enjoys remarkable political support. The
reason is simple: Head Start “works,” it is cost effective, and it bene-
ﬁts the country.
Head Start began as part of President Lyndon Johnson’s War on
Poverty and in response to literature and media coverage during the

368
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
early 1960s on the extent, and depth, of poverty (e.g., among mi-
grant workers) in the United States. In the face of America’s growing
wealth at this time, millions of low- and very-low-income families
were suffering alone and in the shadows, unprepared to help their
preschool children and passing on a life of poverty from one genera-
tion to the next. Child development experts in government and
academia soon recognized that poor children needed “a hand up”
very early in life. Waiting until a poor child entered kindergarten was
often too late, and the public schools were incapable of overcoming
the losses suffered by poor children in the ﬁrst years of life. The time
for making a national investment in poor children had arrived, and
Head Start was created.
Head Start was never intended to focus only on education, but,
rather, to help develop socially, emotionally, and physically healthy
children. A typical Head Start class has seventeen children, one
teacher, one assistant, and one other adult—usually a parent. At least
10 percent of the enrollment opportunities must be available to chil-
dren with disabilities. The curriculum is of high quality, comprehen-
sive, age-appropriate, and standard across the United States. Much at-
tention is given to cognition and language. But that is only the
beginning.
Head Start children also receive comprehensive health services, in-
cluding immunizations, physical and dental examinations, and nu-
trition support. They are helped to overcome their fears and they
learn to share, cooperate, listen, and take turns. They receive lunch
and a snack, and some children receive breakfast. The typical day is a
mixture of instruction, creative play inside and outside, and balanced
meals.
Head Start also focuses on building families. Parental involvement
and learning are extensive, and parents progress toward their own ed-
ucational, literacy, and employment goals by training and working in
Head Start.
Although funding and enrollment have increased dramatically
since 1965, Head Start maintains its core mission of developing the
whole child and enabling each child to reach his or her full potential.

Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children
369
Head Start has accomplished a great deal. Research on the program
shows that children leave Head Start with a wide range of speciﬁc
skills and knowledge, which they need to succeed in kindergarten.
The practical, common-sense achievements that they make lay the
groundwork for their future learning and emotional development.
Yet, improvements continue to be made in the program. During the
past 7 years, administrators have expanded Head Start, strengthened
parental involvement and learning, improved quality, and demanded
more accountability.
Currently, almost 900,000 children are enrolled in Head Start, and
another 45,000 are enrolled in Early Head Start, a complementary
program that was created to meet the special needs of children ages
0–3. Recently, Head Start received its largest budget increase ever, and
additional funding is being sought.
Although most countries do not have the resources to fund early
childhood education at this level, the investment is worth far more
than the cost, because every child who enters Head Start is one less
child that is on the road to poverty with no “off-ramp.” Enrollment
in Head Start will not break the cycle of intergenerational poverty for
every child, but it does increase the possibility of escaping poverty. As
noted earlier, more resources are better than less, and some are better
than none.
Lessons Learned
After 3.5 decades of experience with Head Start, six lessons have be-
come clear for maximizing investments in early child development.
These could be considered “six lessons for children to grow by.” They
are as follows.
1. The earlier intervention begins, the better. This lesson is perhaps the
most important. Research shows that development of the brain
in the early years is a pathway that affects physical and mental
health, learning, and behavior throughout the life cycle
(Carnegie Corporation of New York 1994; Karr-Morse and Wiley
1997; Keating and Hertzmann 1999; Shore 1997). The research

370
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
ﬁndings, which were presented at the United States’ White
House Conference on Early Childhood Development and Learn-
ing, in April 1997, and elsewhere, provided the impetus for ini-
tiating the Early Head Start program.
2. Quality counts. In a long-term study of poor children (Campbell
and Ramey 1994), one-half of the children were assigned to
high-quality day care from infancy to age 5, and the other half
received only nutritional supplements and visits from social
workers. The group assigned to the high-quality day care were
more successful later in life in almost every measurable way.
Money alone is never the answer, however. For this reason,
Head Start is imposing new performance standards for all its
centers and has allocated 25 percent of all new funding to sup-
port higher standards and investments in quality. The perfor-
mance standards are rigorous, clearly stated, and mandatory.
They are being used to evaluate all aspects of the Head Start pro-
gram, from children’s readiness to read and their social develop-
ment, to the effectiveness of program management. (Tarullo de-
scribes the performance standard initiative in an earlier chapter
in this volume.)
Excellence has to be the goal. Since 1995, 150 Head Start
grantees have been terminated or have relinquished their grants
for lack of quality. The program’s consistent demand for high
quality beneﬁts parents and children. Recently, Head Start re-
ceived the highest score in customer satisfaction of any govern-
ment agency or private company in the United States.
3. Quality early childhood education begins with training. The turnover
rate for Head Start staff is very low—less than 11 percent a year.
And, 80 percent of Head Start teachers have 5 or more years of
experience. A qualiﬁed and committed staff is one of the bene-
ﬁts of providing and supporting professional training. All Head
Start teachers are currently required to have a special child de-
velopment certiﬁcate. By 2002, the aim is to achieve a majority

Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children
371
of Head Start teachers with a 2- to 4-year degree in early child-
hood education. The government is helping to expand the ca-
pacity of colleges and universities to teach early childhood edu-
cation and to train childcare staff to work with infants and
toddlers. Head Start also is increasing staff salaries and investing
in the health and safety of its facilities.
4. Parents must be involved and accommodated. One of the reasons
that parents express such a high level of satisfaction with Head
Start is that Head Start “listens” to them. The program learns
from parents and encourages them to remain involved. This
emphasis has continued since the earliest days of the program
and is the key to its success. In fact, many Head Start parents be-
come Head Start teachers.
Keeping parents engaged and involved is not sufﬁcient, how-
ever. Programs also must accommodate their changing needs.
For example, when Head Start began, the number of women in
the work force and of single-parent families was far fewer than
today. As work patterns changed, Head Start had to change.
Currently, Head Start is expanding its hours, increasing the ﬂex-
ibility of its hours, taking early childhood education programs
into the workplace, and encouraging Head Start centers to part-
ner with quality programs that provide childcare after Head
Start and until parents return home from work.
Head Start also has learned the importance of keeping par-
ents connected to the communities where they live. Programs
must be culturally sensitive, involve community leaders, and
keep decisionmaking at the local level as much as possible.
5. Early childhood education must be integrated with other needs. Poor
children do not need one strategy. They need a comprehensive
strategy that extends beyond early childhood stimulation and
education. Integrated services, especially for infants and tod-
dlers, are a prerequisite for success. For example, in Head Start,
childhood immunizations were an early priority. Today, at least

372
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
90 percent of U.S. children receive the most critical immuniza-
tion doses by age 2. Immunizations save not only lives, but also
resources, by preventing disease before it strikes. This under-
standing is important even for countries that do not have uni-
versal health care coverage (e.g., the United States) or have only
limited resources to purchase and distribute vaccines.
For the same reason, the U.S. government is expanding 
access to health insurance for poor children. Three years ago,
the State Children’s Health Insurance Program was initiated
with the states to ensure that millions more children from low-
income working families have health insurance. Programs such
as Head Start and childcare centers are effective ways of identi-
fying children who are eligible for health insurance. Integrated
services help ensure that nurses talk to teachers, teachers talk 
to nutritionists, nutritionists talk to staff, and everyone talks to
parents.
6. Government should make early childhood education a national labora-
tory and catalyst for change. “If you build it, they will come” is a
now-famous phrase from a recent U.S. movie, Field of Dreams.
An adaptation of this phrase conveys an imperative for early
child development: Build it and change will come.
Head Start has been a national laboratory and catalyst for
change. Since its creation in 1965, Head Start has transformed
how people think about, educate, and care for young children
in the United States and how quality is measured in all child-
care settings. The Early Head Start program is doing the same for
infants and toddlers.
When investing in early childhood education, maintaining
an active research agenda is important. Because “one size never
ﬁts all,” continuing efforts are needed to determine which pro-
grams are effective for which children under which circum-
stances and to use this knowledge to build better programs, in-
tegrating the best research as quickly as possible.

Narrowing the Gap for Poor Children
373
Conclusion
The most important reason for investing in programs such as Head
Start or quality childcare is to “even up the odds” for poor children.
The economic beneﬁts are signiﬁcant, as noted by van der Gaag in
this volume.
Yet, there is also a profound moral purpose for investing in early
child development. This is a new millennium, a time of high techno-
logical achievement when almost no scientiﬁc advancement seems
impossible. But, millions of children on every continent are strug-
gling to survive. This “disconnect”—between two real, but inconsis-
tent, concepts—is unconscionable for the world today. The time has
come to connect, to narrow the gap for poor children, between what
can be done and what is being done.
Much has been learned about how to help very young children
grow to be smart and healthy. The important step, however, is the next
step—to engage families, communities, universities, religious and oth-
er organizations, as well as government, to invest in the ﬁrst and most
lasting hope of the new century, the world’s children. A 2-year-old in
the barrios of Peru, a baby crying for milk in Lagos, a little girl not yet
4 years old in the slums of Calcutta, and a 3-year-old in Head Start in
rural North Dakota—these children, all children, are the future.
Note
This chapter is derived from the authors’ keynote addresses at the
World Bank Conference on Investing in Our Children’s Future, held
April 10–11, 2000, at the World Bank, Washington, D.C.
References
Campbell, F.A., and C.T. Ramey. 1994. Effects of Early Intervention
on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-up Study of
Children from Low-Income Families. Child Development
65:684–98.

374
Enrique V. Iglesias and Donna E. Shalala
Carnegie Corporation of New York. 1994. Starting Points: Meeting the
Needs of Our Youngest Children. New York.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 1999. Breaking the Poverty
Cycle: Investing in Early Childhood. Washington, D.C.
[www.iadb.org/sds/soc]
Karr-Morse, R., and M.S. Wiley. 1997. Ghosts from the Nursery: Tracing
the Roots of Violence. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Keating, D.P., and C. Hertzman, eds., 1999. Developmental Health and
the Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational Dynamics.
New York: The Guilford Press.
Seguel, X., T. Izquierdo, and M. Edwards. 1992. Diagnostico Nacional
y Elaboración del Plan de Acción para el Decenio en el Area del
Desarrollo Infantil y Familiar. Santiago, Chile: United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
Sen, A.K. 1999. Investing in Early Childhood: Its Role in
Development. Keynote address presented at a seminar on
Breaking the Poverty Cycle: Investing in Early Childhood, Annual
Meeting of the Boards of Governors of the Inter-American
Development Bank and the Inter-American Investment
Corporation, Paris, France, March 14, 1999.
[www.iadb.org/sds/soc]
Shore, R. 1997. Rethinking the Brain — New Insights into Early
Development. Families and Work Institute. New York, N.Y.
United States. Department of Health and Human Services.
Administration on Children, Youth and Families. 2000. Child
Maltreatment 1998: Reports from the States to the National Child
Abuse and Neglect Data System. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Ofﬁce.

Chapter 13
The Political Challenge: 
Commitment and Cooperation
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
The final question for this volume, and perhaps the first question
in early child development, is: Why intervene in the lives of young
children? In the previous chapter, Iglesias and Shalala highlight 
the ethical and moral impetus for early child development (ECD)
programs to “narrow the gap” for poor children. Earlier, van der
Gaag connects early child development to human development
overall.
For children and families, the beneﬁts are clear, as communicated
throughout this volume. But, the beneﬁts also must be obvious to the
larger society and government because their support is essential for
maintaining and sustaining effective programs. To reap the full bene-
ﬁts of the many community-based efforts under way, programs must
be taken to scale nationwide. The ﬁnal challenge, then, is political—
to obtain the necessary commitment and cooperation, from all sec-
tors, to realize the full potential of early child development, national-
ly and globally.
This chapter considers the societal benefits and constraints to in-
vesting in early child development and the political challenge 
for doing so. Some factors, steps, and “rules” are suggested for in-
vesting in policies of action that would help bring ECD programs
to scale.
375

376
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
Transforming Society Through ECD
Much progress has been made over the past 15 years in bringing early
child development to the attention of society and government. Today,
nations (e.g., Brazil, Philippines, Namibia, Ghana) are adopting na-
tional plans for accelerating early child development, and multina-
tional organizations [e.g., the United Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the
World Bank) are promoting the well-being of children, women, and
vulnerable populations in development efforts that include ECD inter-
ventions. These efforts are complemented by, and in some cases, coor-
dinated with, the interests and actions of organizations in the private
sector [e.g., foundations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)]. In-
creasingly, early child development is viewed as the best proxy or con-
tributor to economic development and national development.
All these participants deserve to be congratulated for the transfor-
mations in society that they have stimulated and underwritten. Their
continued support and commitment can be the launching pad for
achieving even greater transformations over the next 15 years to ful-
ﬁll the hopes and expectations of many more children and their fam-
ilies. The long-term beneﬁts of investing in early child development
are extraordinary. The consequences of not investing or of neglecting
children are equally far-reaching—lifelong deprivation and deﬁcits
for many children and major cumulative losses for their families,
communities, and nations.
What are society’s aspirations for children, and what can ECD pro-
grams offer? From a global perspective, four aspirations would be that
children grow up to reach their full human potential and that they
live in a society where human rights are respected, democracy ﬂour-
ishes, and poverty is not an insurmountable barrier to human
progress. Investing in early child development signiﬁcantly helps to
achieve these hopes.
Human Potential
ECD programs are instrumental for achieving human potential—
through, for example, the lifelong effects of improved intrauterine

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
377
growth (resulting from better maternal health and nutrition), psy-
chosocial stimulation in early infancy, and preparedness for school.
These and other beneﬁts for enhancing the human potential are well
summarized by the other chapters in this volume.
Human Rights
Human rights are often equated with civil and political rights, free-
dom of speech, freedom of religion, and rule of law. But, human
rights also include social and economic rights. The Universal Declara-
tion on Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, as well as other human rights covenants, recognize the right to
life, survival, health, nutrition, education, and protection. A society
that honors these rights must begin with the rights of the youngest
children. The very essence of human rights is to protect the weak and
vulnerable from the tyranny of the strong and powerful.
Protecting the rights of children who cannot defend themselves,
to ensure their survival, growth, and development, is the obligation
of all adults and all countries that signed or ratiﬁed these human
rights instruments. In a very fundamental sense, human rights begin
with the rights of children, and a society that does not invest its re-
sources, to the maximum extent possible, for the survival, protection,
and development of children fails to honor its human rights obliga-
tions, especially those set forth in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
Participation
Because children do not vote and have no voice in society, some
might say they have no stake in democracy. But, the way children
are reared and the type of physical and psychosocial environments
they grow in have lifelong effects on the development of their val-
ues and personality traits. Nurturing children in an atmosphere of
mutual respect and compassion and inculcating them, from the ear-
liest stages of life, with the values of sharing and taking responsibil-
ity contribute to the creation of caring societies that espouse demo-
cratic values.

378
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
From an adult’s perspective, democracy requires that political and
civic leaders be responsive to the protection of rights of all their con-
stituents and that public resources be utilized in the most effective
manner to help their constituencies. Democratically oriented leaders
and electorates should ﬁnd that investing in children is the most en-
lightened and visionary public policy they can promote.
Reduction of Poverty
Poverty has many faces, which include malnutrition, childhood dis-
ease, lack of learning and play opportunities, and violence against
women and children. These and other facets of poverty undermine
the optimal development of young children and diminish their po-
tential for breaking out of the cycle of poverty. As suggested by Igle-
sias and Shalala in the preceding chapter, early child development is
the shortest route of breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty.
Children who are born healthy, fed well, stimulated in infancy,
protected from childhood illnesses, and nurtured in stimulating and
affectionate environments will grow up to become healthy adults, in-
volved parents, and productive citizens. Successful child develop-
ment results from adequate care at home facilitated by basic commu-
nity services and supportive national and international policies.
Women’s role is critical. Research shows that children survive and
thrive better in communities where women have dignity, access to re-
sources, and political inﬂuence. These elements are all essential for
reducing poverty and promoting early child development.
Constraints to Investment
For society, knowing the well-established beneﬁts of early child devel-
opment may not be sufﬁcient for making the decision to invest in
ECD programs and to support them fully. Policymakers may ask why
there is not more investment in these programs globally if investing
in early child development is so important. What are the constraints
to investing in ECD? Common constraints for society and govern-
ment are:

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
379
• Immediate costs versus long-term gains. The costs of intervening ear-
ly are immediate, but the investment is long term. Because the
observable beneﬁts do not accrue until long after a government
or administration has left ofﬁce, ECD programs tend not to be
popular among politicians, who desire more immediate recogni-
tion for their achievements. The beneﬁts of constructing a
school or clinic or distributing textbooks may not be obvious
for years, but they contribute over time to the building of social
capital and, hence, economic development.
• Difﬁculty delivering integrated services. Early interventions that ad-
dress integral needs of young children and families are difﬁcult
for society and government to deliver in a coherent and coordi-
nated manner. Government (and donor agencies) tend to be ori-
ented sectorally, and government departments or ministries
tend to be organized vertically. Because the needs of children
and families (e.g., health, education, social assistance) cross
these artiﬁcial partitions, they are not easily addressed within
the bureaucracies. Comprehensive development frameworks are
needed to integrate the vision of policymakers and to coordi-
nate action “on the ground.”
In addition, two barriers to good decisionmaking in global health
and development are:
• The distance between a decision and an effect
• The time between a decision and an effect.
The greater the distance, or the time, between a decision and an ef-
fect, the more difﬁcult it is to make good decisions. The most difﬁcult
decisions to make are those that involve both distance and time (e.g.,
decisions about nuclear or toxic wastes, which have incubation times
of hundreds of years and may be disposed of in other countries). De-
cisions to invest in positive early child development are similar, be-
cause society’s effects are realized over generations, even centuries,
and may be broadly dispersed.

380
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
Believing that society can change and that children’s future and
destiny can be improved is a ﬁrst step. Once a nation adopts this 
positive perspective, determining what can be changed and what
cannot be changed becomes easier to address. These decisions de-
pend on the science.
The Challenges
Conferences on early child development, such as those held by the
World Bank and other multinational organizations, are an important
step in publicizing the beneﬁts of early child development and over-
coming the constraints expressed by governments and policymakers.
These meetings enable researchers, administrators, and politicians to
share and interpret research ﬁndings, celebrate the creativity and in-
novation of ECD programs, better understand the role of healthy
child development in economic development, and appreciate the im-
portance of investing in early child development for both human
and global development.
The chapters in this volume, which emanate from one conference,
highlight four challenges for the ﬁeld of early child development:
• Promoting a balanced view of development that includes ECD
programs
• Making explicit the link between the needs of poor children
and families and the concerns of politicians
• Developing improved methods for measuring and evaluating
the effectiveness of programs
• Achieving sustainable, national programs.
One way to achieve sustainability is to change social norms.
Measles, for example, used to be an expected childhood disease, but
now a single case in developed countries is newsworthy and causes
the public to question the activities of the local health department.
The public relates to cause and effect. As Hawkins notes in his book
A Brief History of Time, the history of science is the gradual realiza-

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
381
tion that things do not happen in an arbitrary fashion (Hawkins
1988). Or, as noted in a New York subway booth and reported in the
New York Times, “Lots of people confuse bad management with des-
tiny” (Nemy 1999, sec. B, p. 2). The challenge now for early child
development is to create better destiny through better manage-
ment, to apply the science and invest in a better future for every
child in every country.
Cause and Effect
History tells us that everything that now exists has a past and that
everything that is done now will have ripples in the future. Knowl-
edge about the brain’s development—the windows of opportunity in
the early years, the effects of learning on later years—supports this
concept.
But, some effects are more permanent and some losses can never
be recouped. Society cannot, for example, reverse the retardation
caused by insufﬁcient iodine intake during a child’s ﬁrst months
and years, or return function to the legs of a child crippled by polio,
or eliminate a child’s trauma from experiencing war. Other causes,
such as toxins (e.g., alcohol, tobacco smoke) and abuse, also have
lifelong effects.
Recently, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Felliti and others 1998) published the first scientific study of the
health of adults who were abused as children. The study docu-
mented, for the first time, that smoking, drinking, drug use, de-
pression, suicide attempts, and overweight all were elevated in
adults who had experienced, during childhood, physical, psycho-
logical, or sexual abuse; a mother being beaten; or a family member
using drugs or going to jail. In 1962, Kempe coined the phrase “the
battered child syndrome” (Kempe and others 1962). The causes
may be both genetic and environmental. Influences in a child’s up-
bringing have a role in the mental health of the child and, later,
the adult. The battered child syndrome causes a battered adult syn-
drome, and an accumulation of battered adults causes a battered
society syndrome, which, in turn, continues to foster battered 

382
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
children. This intergenerational cycle complements, and enhances,
the effects of a cycle of poverty.
Inefﬁciencies
Many of the current approaches to social issues are inefﬁcient. For ex-
ample, mothers often bear children whom they may feed, nurture,
and love for 9 or more months, only to lose them then to measles—
this is inefﬁcient. If the child survives measles and continues on to
primary school but drops out in the early grades, or thrives in school
but then contracts an HIV infection and subsequently develops AIDS
in the early 20s—this, again, is inefﬁcient. Rearing children while be-
ing depressed and addicted because of being abused as a child also is
inefﬁcient. And, allowing children to be retarded because of pre-
ventable deﬁciencies in micronutrient intake is inefﬁcient.
Similarly, not providing health and educational beneﬁts to all chil-
dren is inefﬁcient, and building prisons to house troubled youth and
adults because society “saved” money by not supporting community
programs of health and education is inefﬁcient. These approaches are
not only inefﬁcient, however, they also have heartrending and soci-
ety-rending effects. Obviously, these inefﬁciencies are not rational
and do not contribute to acceptable societies.
Nevertheless, inefficiencies persist, partly because of human ten-
dencies to procrastinate, but also because of longstanding and un-
challenged social norms. Societies may verbalize the need for pre-
vention, but hesitate to take preventive action. For example, many
countries have historically placed greater value on treating lung
cancer, rather than helping people stop smoking. This emphasis is
only now beginning to change, with the support and action of
global organizations, including the World Health Organization
(WHO), the World Bank, and UNICEF. And, despite professed inter-
est in children and investments in Head Start, U.S. support for chil-
dren is far less than that for older persons. In his book The Virtues
of Aging, President Carter notes that for every US$12 spent on 
people over age 65, the U.S. Government spends only US$1 for
children and youth under age 18 (Carter 1998). These are only 

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
383
two examples of the mismatch between rhetoric and action on
prevention.
In the United States, a major change in perspective occurred when
the rhetoric of disease prevention was modiﬁed to include health
promotion. While disease prevention focuses on pathology and re-
ducing the extent of a problem (e.g., mortality and morbidity),
health promotion focuses on positive changes in scale. The philoso-
phy, objective, and expectations are different and, when communi-
cated to the public, can help change social norms and values.
Societies’ thinking about children has heretofore reﬂected the
pathological approach of waiting until a “disease” is evident before
reacting. Leadership is desperately needed, to ask questions such as
“what is good for the future?” and “what is good for the world?” Efﬁ-
cient, positive approaches must be promulgated and fostered, for the
vast majority of the public that government serves has not yet been
born and may be of different nationalities.
Policies for Action
The decision to invest in early child development must be matched
by efﬁcient and effective policies to stimulate ECD efforts. Whereas
the decision may appear to be noncontroversial, especially with re-
gard to narrowing the gap for poor children, the policies which allo-
cate, or reallocate, resources to health, education, and nutrition for
young children are not. Some individuals and groups may support
such policies, but many may not. Merely making “pro-poor” policies
to focus on more vulnerable segments of a society or improve condi-
tions in a particularly poor region does not guarantee that the poli-
cies will be adopted or implemented effectively. The political impli-
cations of a policy, including the support or opposition of key
stakeholders, often inﬂuence adoption of the policy.
Four Considerations
Policymakers who are, or will be, designing and implementing ECD
programs will need to address four factors: the stakeholders, or

384
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
“players,” in early child development; the relative power of each
stakeholder; the position of each stakeholder; and public perception.
• Players. The stakeholders include all individuals and groups who
will be affected by the change in policy and who may become
involved in inﬂuencing its outcome. The players may include
government ministries (e.g., health, ﬁnance, agriculture, educa-
tion) and local government; professional groups (e.g., physi-
cians, nurses, preschool teachers); business organizations; 
religious organizations; consumers of health and education ser-
vices (e.g., urban and rural, poor and middle-class individuals,
families, and communities); and international organizations
(e.g., the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, WHO,
donors). Each group and subgroup will understand and act on
the policies from a different perspective.
• Power. Poor people are often poorly organized and politically
weak, particularly in rural areas. Children, particularly in their
early years, do not have a representative association, and adults
are usually more inﬂuential, although not necessarily well orga-
nized. Additionally, power and inﬂuence are exercised differ-
ently depending on the political system and the traditions of a
country and culture.
• Position. The position taken by each stakeholder will reﬂect their
support of, or opposition to, the policy and the intensity of
their commitment. When multiple reforms are proposed, each
stakeholder may support some policies and oppose others. The
various positions taken serve as a basis for negotiation.
• Perception. The public’s perception and understanding of the is-
sue and the proposed policy may affect which groups become
mobilized and their positions on the policy.
For “pro-poor” policies, a coalition of stakeholders (both domestic
and international) needs to be developed to achieve sufﬁcient adop-
tion and implementation of the policies to sustain a positive change.
As Hsiao and others (2001) suggest, development of this coalition 

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
385
depends, in turn, on the skill and commitment of those who support
the policies, the nature of the proposed changes, and the overall
country context. Successful implementation of any policy depends
on the political skill of its advocates, and not simply political will.
This skill must be technically based.
Six Steps for Government
Government has an essential role to play in early child develop-
ment. By blending good politics (i.e., well-founded proposals) and
good techniques (i.e., political skill), government can stimulate
public support for ECD policies and programs which will strength-
en its position and power to implement the policies and programs
and foster cooperation and coordination with other stakeholders
and potential funders. Six effective steps for government action are
as follows:
1. Create a political constituency for children. Include the constituency
in a strategic communications plan, which would be a compo-
nent of the design of ECD programs. Build early child develop-
ment into a holistic, integrated, comprehensive development
framework designed to overcome the cycle of poverty and to
foster a balanced view of economic, ﬁnancial, human, gover-
nance, and institutional issues across government sectors. Hav-
ing a political constituency for ECD programs can strengthen
the power of the various stakeholders and change the public’s
perception of early child development.
2. Earmark public resources. This action will ensure the availability
of resources for ECD programs, protect the investment in chil-
dren in times of crisis, and guard against changing political in-
terests. Government should monitor children’s growth and de-
velopment as closely as, or more closely than, it monitors the
growth in gross domestic product. Examples of successful ECD
efforts that have been sustained by earmarked tax revenues in-
clude Colombia’s use of a 3 percent payroll tax to support sta-
ble ﬁnancing of day-care programs, even in times of ﬁnancial

386
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
adjustment or political upheaval. Earmarked revenues can
serve to create a strong power base for ECD.
3. Provide incentives for community support of ECD. Government
should encourage initiatives by small community groups, civil
society, and local government. The U.S. Head Start program is
one example of a federally funded effort founded on communi-
ty initiatives. By supporting such efforts, government can help
create community-based productive and small business sectors,
with new stakeholders, that can promote early child develop-
ment with one voice. Having a “voice” is the ﬁrst step toward
empowerment.
4. Create demanding consumers. Government can allow and even en-
courage private-sector providers (not-for-proﬁt and for-proﬁt)
of ECD programs. Government also can provide public subsi-
dies for poor families, to help them access ECD services and
make them effective consumers. These actions will further in-
crease the number of stakeholders who are interested in, and
supportive of, ECD programs.
5. Provide information on the choices available. Government has a role
in developing and disseminating information, standards, train-
ing materials, and program evaluations to enable consumers to
make informed choices about early child development and al-
ternative providers of ECD programs. Government can leverage
improvements in the quality of ECD programs based on this in-
formation and on pilot studies of funding alternatives. One al-
ternative, for example, is New Zealand’s mixed funding model
of block grants and subsidies. By enhancing public informa-
tion, government would foster transparency of ECD programs
and potentially enhance the public’s perception of these efforts.
6. Create new providers. Mothers can be effective ECD providers in
home-based programs, such as in Colombia and Bolivia. The
women receive training and minimum assistance, on credit, to
meet facility standards. They are “accredited” as eligible to pro-
vide day-care services. Such efforts enable providers to beneﬁt
from public subsidies while also participating in a competitive,

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
387
choice-based system of ECD programs. In addition, they beneﬁt
parents by increasing the number and type of care options to
choose from (e.g., based on convenience, proximity, ﬂexibility
of hours). By helping to create new providers locally, govern-
ment helps consolidate the players, power, position, and per-
ception of early child development, primarily at the local level.
By taking these six steps, government can achieve a “golden trian-
gle” of civil-society participation, market-driven mechanism, and a
clear role for government. Government also can launch the neces-
sary political action to foster sustainable ECD programs that can be
moved to scale. As noted by Papert (1980, p. 29), “What is happen-
ing now is an empirical question. What can happen is a technical
question, but what will happen is a political question, depending on
social choices.” Clearly, early child development is, ﬁrst and fore-
most, a political, or social, choice. It is no longer an empirical ques-
tion, but, rather, an issue for action.
Five Rules for Investing
Before committing a nation’s resources to early child development,
policymakers should have appropriate guidance from the ECD
community. This guidance should be evidence-based and timely.
Five general rules for investing in early child development are of-
fered below:
1. Invest early and invest wisely. Often, there are no second chances
for child development. Each child has only one opportunity, to
grow and develop, and this opportunity should not be squan-
dered.
2. Identify opportunities to contribute to early child development in every
development project. Children are everyone’s business and not
the exclusive concern of one department, ministry, or sector.
Every development project has a place for ECD initiatives. Early
child development is integral to human development, as well
described by van der Gaag earlier in this volume.

388
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
3. Ensure that all governments and donor agencies honor the 2020 com-
mitment, that all developing countries will allocate 20 percent of
their budgets for basic social services, and that all donors will
allocate 20 percent of their ofﬁcial development assistance for
these services. This commitment was made at several United
Nations conferences and is vital for early childcare and devel-
opment, a basic social service.
4. Empower women. The well-being of children is inextricably
linked to the well-being of women.
5. Make the commitment to children, beginning with early childcare
and development, the foundation for peace, democracy, and
human rights in families, communities, nations, and the
world.
The love and care for children, and the imperative to invest in 
early child development, can be the basis for uniting a divided
world.
Building a Global Coalition
“Build it and change will come,” is an imperative for early child de-
velopment introduced previously in this volume by Iglesias and Sha-
lala. The time is ripe now for building a global coalition for early
child development that will stimulate actions and policies for invest-
ing in the future. Similar to the remarkable Global Alliance for Vac-
cines and Immunization, which was recently organized and funded
by a generous gift from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the
coalition for early child development would combine good science
with good policies and involve all stakeholders, including local and
national groups, governmental agencies, multinational organiza-
tions, NGOs, foundations, religious groups, industry, and other pub-
lic- or private-sector interests.
A deliberate plan to build and fund a coalition would capture local
and community enthusiasm for early child development, the politi-
cal commitment to ECD programs that has already been made by
many countries, and the passion of donors who recognize the global

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
389
need for efforts targeted to children worldwide. The coalition would
represent a conscious decision to combine resources, experiences,
scientiﬁc ﬁndings, ingenuity, a sense of community, and new ap-
proaches to education for the beneﬁt of generations to come. Build-
ing a coalition will make change happen, including perhaps, the 
designation of ministers of child development.
Conclusion
More information is not needed to act now to support early child de-
velopment. If appropriate action is taken, future generations will
know and be grateful that politicians and economists, based on sci-
entists’ teachings, invested adequately in their children. The concept
of the “tipping point” applies. That is, there is a drop that causes the
glass to ﬁnally overﬂow, there is a moment when a friendship be-
comes permanent, there is a minute when a vaccine provides protec-
tion, and there is a day when the world ﬁnally “does right” by its
children.
For children to have the positive core elements that offer them a
successful life, they need parents who have a capacity to nurture,
good mental health, and a network of positive social support. These
parents are more likely to be found in societies that are committed to
parenthood, equity, economic stability, appropriate childcare, and
effective education. Yet, to raise a child takes more than a village—it
takes the whole world—and society and government need to identify
how to do a better job. Focusing on averages is no longer sufﬁcient;
the important measures now are standard deviations, and the chil-
dren and families represented by these deviations.
The ECD community is an assemblage of individuals with di-
verse interests, expertise, and talents who are bound together by a
shared goal to create a world that honors children by enhancing
their positive development. The next step is to build a coalition, an
alliance, that will promote, measure, and improve the well-being of
children, beginning in the early years. This is now the “tipping
point” for early child development, the day when the investment

390
Eduardo A. Doryan, Kul C. Gautam, and William H. Foege
in early childhood moves to a new stage, so that all children hence-
forth will beneﬁt and progress cannot be reversed.
The beliefs and commitments of others can serve to guide those
who continue the effort. As James P. Grant, former head of UNICEF,
said in his last speech to the United Nations’ General Assembly, “The
vital vulnerable years of childhood should be given a ﬁrst call on so-
cieties concerns and capacities….There will always be something
more immediate; there will never be anything more important. If we
believe that, lets organize to do it. Lets combine authority, resources,
and responsibility in a person in every country” (Grant 1994). Gandhi
observed that people often become what they believe themselves to
be, and children often become what their parents and society believe
them to be. And, Jonas Salk noted that evolution will be what we
want it to be.
The message is: if we can envision it, we can achieve it. Creating
the future starts with the ability to envision the future, and that day
is today.
Note
This chapter is derived from two presentations on “What Policymak-
ers Need to Know,” by Eduardo Doryan and Kul Gautam, and on
William Foege’s closing address, “The Political Economy of Investing
in Young Children’s Early Development,” at the World Bank Confer-
ence on Investing in Our Children’s Future, held April 10–11, 2000,
at the World Bank, Washington, D.C.
References
Carter, J. 1998. The Virtues of Aging. New York: Ballantine Books,
Random House.
Felitti, V.J., R.F. Anda, D.F. Nordenberg, D.F. Williamson, A.M. Spitz,
V. Edwards, M.P. Koss, and J.S. Marks. 1998. Relationship of
Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the

The Political Challenge: Commitment and Cooperation
391
Leading Causes of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood
Experiences (ACE) Study. American Journal of Preventive Medicine
14(4):245–58.
Grant, J.P. 1994. Child Rights: A Central Moral Imperative of Our
Time. Statement by the Executive Director of UNICEF to the
Third Committee of the 49th General Assembly of the United
Nations. New York, November 11.
Hawkins, S. 1988. A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam Books.
Hsiao, W., M. Roberts, P. Berman, and M. Reich. 2001. Political
Analysis and Political Strategies. In Getting Health Sector Reform
Right. Background paper for World Bank Institute ﬂagship course
on Health Reform and Sustainable Financing. Washington, D.C.:
World Bank.
Kempe, C.H., F.N. Silverman, B.F. Steele, W. Droegemueller, and H.K.
Silver. 1962. The Battered-Child Syndrome. Journal of the American
Medical Association 181:17–24.
Nemy, E. 1999. Metropolitan Diary. The New York Times, sec. B, p. 2,
May 3.
Papert, S. 1980. Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books, p. 29.


393
Authors
Eduardo A. Doryan, Ph.D.
Vice President and Head
Human Development Network
The World Bank
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Currently:
Special Representative to the United Nations,
New York 
for The World Bank
Ofﬁce of the Special Representative 
to the United Nations
New York, New York, U.S.A.
Judith L. Evans, Ed.D.
Director
Department of Programme Documentation 
and Communication
Bernard van Leer Foundation
The Hague, The Netherlands
William H. Foege, M.D., M.P.H.
Presidential Distinguished Professor
Rollins School of Public Health
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.
Kul C. Gautam, M.P.A.
Deputy Executive Director
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
New York, New York, U.S.A.

Enrique V. Iglesias, Ph.D.
President
Inter-American Development Bank
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Simone Kirpal, M.A.
Social Scientist
Early Child Development Team
Education Sector
Human Development Network
The World Bank
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Currently:
Staff
Institute of Technology and Education (ITB)
Bremen, Germany
John M. Love, Ph.D.
Senior Fellow
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Alicia L. Meckstroth, M.A.
Researcher
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.A.
J. Fraser Mustard, M.D., Ph.D.
Founding President
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research,
The Founders’ Network
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
394
Authors

Robert G. Myers, Ph.D.
Independent Consultant
Tlalcoligia, D.F., Mexico
Peter Z. Schochet, Ph.D.
Senior Economist
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Kerida Scott-McDonald, Ph.D.
Early Childhood Development Ofﬁcer
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),  Jamaica
Kingston, Jamaica, West Indies
Donna E. Shalala, Ph.D.
Secretary
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Currently:
President
University of Miami
Coral Gables, Florida, U.S.A.
Louisa B. Tarullo, Ed.D.
Senior Social Science Research Analyst
Administration on Children,Youth, and Families
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Washington, D.C., U.S.A. 
Jacques van der Gaag, Ph.D.
Dean
Faculty of Economics and Econometrics
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Authors
395

396
Authors
J. Douglas Willms, Ph.D.
Director
Canadian Research Institute for Social Policy
University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada
Mary Eming Young, M.D., Dr.P.H.
Lead Specialist 
Education Sector
Human Development Network
The World Bank
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.

397
Index 
A
Abecedarian (Carolina) project, U.S.
6, 40–42, 125–126, 141, 161
Abrinq Foundation for Children’s
Rights
284
Accountability
13, 219, 230, 273,
276, 289, 369
Administration on Children, Youth,
and Families, U.S.
219, 231
Advance Brazil Program
138
Advocacy
215, 248, 251, 284,
315–316, 324
Aga Khan Foundation (AKF)
xi, 14,
284, 295, 336–338, 341–344, 346,
359
Aga Khan University
116
Agueda Movement, Portugal
201
Animal studies
8, 24, 26, 28, 30,
32–35, 39, 43–44
Argentina
82, 91–93, 113
Assoçiação de Criança Familia e 
Desenvolvimento, Mozambique
199
Association for the Advancement of
the Ethiopian Family and Child, 
Israel
199
Atençao à Criança Program, Brazil
138–140
Attributable risk(s)
99–101, 107–109
B
Bangladesh
288, 337
Barriers to good decisionmaking
15,
379
Beneﬁt-cost analysis, beneﬁt:cost ratio
10, 17, 134–136
Beneﬁts and costs
132–135
Beneﬁts, of early child development.
See also Economic beneﬁts, Societal
beneﬁts
v, 1, 3, 6–9, 11, 15, 33,
42, 52, 60, 63–64, 67–68, 70–75,
77–78, 124, 132–135, 136, 140–
142, 161, 172, 277–278, 291, 299,
307–308, 311, 367, 370, 373
Bernard van Leer Foundation
xi, 
195, 202, 217, 235, 331, 332, 337,
343
Biological pathways
3, 4, 8, 24,
26–32, 34, 59
Bolivia
42, 82, 91–93, 113, 386
Brain development, function
4–5, 8,
18–19, 26, 31, 32–33, 36, 41, 46,
49, 54–55, 68, 76
Brain/hormone pathways
26–29
Brazil
6, 10, 82, 91–93, 95, 113, 116,
123–124, 129–142, 376
C
California
153, 168, 170, 277
Canada
x, xi, 8, 24, 44, 46–52, 59,
88, 118–121, 331, 337
Canadian Institute for Advanced 
Research (CIAR)
51, 54, 118, 120
Canadian International Development
Agency
343
Canadian Research Institute for Social
Policy
87, 121
Capacity building
14, 140, 214–215,
284, 298, 303–304, 306, 336, 346,
348
Caregivers
43, 50, 148, 154, 159,
173, 178–180, 186–187, 191–192,
196, 228, 234–236, 241–242,
245–246, 249–251, 253, 258, 267,
276, 294, 296, 299, 308, 318, 324,
342, 349, 351, 355
Caribbean
x, 121, 239, 290, 332–333,
336
Carolina project. See Abecedarian 
project

Case studies, community programs
13, 216, 293–294, 307–308, 358
Catalyst for change
15, 372
Center-based childcare
151–157, 172,
173–188
Central and Eastern Europe
14, 296,
348–350, 353
Childcare
10, 12, 15–16, 30, 55, 67,
73, 123, 136, 145, 258–259
Child-centered approach
14, 298,
356, 358
Childhood vulnerability
83, 87,
104–106, 108–109, 111
Children at risk. See also Vulnerable
children
84, 135, 367
Children’s Resources International
(CRI)
349, 351–352, 360
Child–staff ratio
10, 148, 151–152,
160, 164, 173, 191
Chile 
5, 82, 91–93, 95, 113, 121,
284, 290, 292, 364, 374
Christian Children’s Fund
xi, 287
Civil society(ies)
ix, xi, 85, 199, 349,
351, 356, 366, 386
Classroom dynamics
10, 147–148,
151–153, 160–161, 165
Classroom quality
226, 230, 172,
174, 176–183, 185, 187
Classroom structure
10, 147–148, 160
Cognitive development
19, 39, 47,
53, 63, 72–73, 125, 127–128, 142,
152–154, 158, 168, 173, 311, 323
Collective involvement
286–287
Colombia
82, 91–93, 113, 200, 210,
218, 276, 282–283, 286, 288, 384,
386
Community
10, 13–14, 51, 86,
88–89, 115–116, 121, 130, 137,
150, 162, 195, 197, 199–201, 205,
207, 209–210, 222–223, 234–238,
241–242, 244, 246–247, 249–253,
258, 262–263, 266–270, 274, 282,
284–286, 293–298, 300–307, 309,
312, 314, 316, 320, 322–324, 326,
328, 332–333, 337–348, 350–351,
353, 355–356, 359, 365, 367, 371,
375, 378, 382, 386
Community-based Family Education,
Philippines
200
Community-based (programs)
14, 51,
130, 199–200, 234, 236, 244, 246,
249–252, 268, 293, 306, 309, 314,
316, 323, 326, 328, 337, 340,
347–348, 365, 367, 375, 386
Community-based Rehabilitation 
Program, Jamaica. See also
Dedicated to the Development 
of the Disabled (3D) Organization,
Jamaica
234, 236–237
Community development
14, 197,
263, 306, 339, 341, 346
Community involvement
253, 296,
300–302, 307, 314, 351
Community mobilization
300, 307,
340, 345
Community ownership
14, 298,
300–302, 345
Community services
222, 223, 378
Community support
294, 305–306,
386
Companies, involvement in early
childhood development
139, 257,
260–261, 264, 280–283, 285–287,
329–330
Complementary approaches, 
programs, strategies
253, 263,
284, 304–305, 369
Comprehensive approaches, programs,
strategies
10, 74, 129, 137, 196,
253, 348, 367–368, 371, 379, 385
Consultative Group on Early Child-
hood Care and Development
xii,
195–197, 217–218
Continuity
10, 147–150, 210, 245
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC)
234, 252, 259, 377
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH)
27–31, 33–34, 38, 43
Costa Rica
82–83, 285
Cost-effectiveness
13, 68, 273–275
398
Index

Cuba
45, 82, 91–93, 94–95, 100,
112–113, 117, 268, 277, 379
Cultural sustainability
212, 214, 294,
302, 305, 317, 365–366, 378, 382,
385
Cycle of poverty. See also Intergenera-
tional poverty
v, 2, 12, 14, 233,
252, 365–367
D
Dedicated to the Development of the
Disabled (3D) Organization, 
Jamaica. See also Community-based
Rehabilitation Program, Jamaica
236–237, 239–242, 244–251
Deﬁnitions, early child development
257–259
Development and Peace, Canada
331
Development economics
9, 64–66
Dimensions of quality. See also 
Elements of quality, Quality
151–154, 157–158
Dominican Republic
82, 91–93, 113
E
Early childhood care and education
(ECCE)
291, 295, 297, 305–306,
328, 331–336
Early Development Index
51
Early Head Start program, U.S.
6, 14,
369–370, 372
East Africa
xi, 296, 336–337, 342
Economic beneﬁts. See also Beneﬁts
52, 197, 260, 373
Economic development
v, vi, 86,
304, 337, 376, 379–380
Economic productivity
197, 260, 321
Economic returns. See also Return(s) to
(on) investment
1, 251
Education for All
2, 81, 268, 278, 291
Education pathway
9, 63–64, 66–67,
72–74
Effective childcare and education
10,
145–193
Effectiveness Initiative
11, 195,
197–218
Effective programming
11, 195–218
Elements of quality. See also Dimen-
sions of quality, Quality 
12, 157,
162, 233–253
Embedded communications, model
209–213
Empowerment
199, 210, 241, 296,
300, 304, 323, 326, 328, 350, 386
Environmental effects
8, 35–38
Equality. See also Inequality
2, 9, 52,
63–64, 71–74, 85, 94, 138, 205,
305, 317
Equity
2, 13, 52, 260, 262, 278–279,
291, 296, 348–350, 353
Europe
x, 14, 261–262, 291, 296,
348–350, 353
European Commission
337, 343
Evaluation
1, 10–12, 17, 53, 123,
161–167, 196, 200, 217–218, 231,
246, 250–251, 268, 276, 278,
290–291, 312, 315–316, 322, 330,
341, 346–347, 356–357, 386
Examples of good practice
293, 298
Expenditures for early childhood edu-
cation, Brazil
131–132
Experimental designs
163–165
F
Family and Child Experiences Survey
(FACES), Head Start program, 
U.S.
11–12, 219, 224–231
Family background
88, 95, 104–105,
107–108, 110–111, 113, 117, 156,
163, 169, 178–180, 192
Family-based childcare
10, 157–161,
189–193
Family involvement
296, 348, 351
Family support
14, 16, 126, 139, 222,
235, 238–239, 249, 298–300
Features of a successful program. 
See also Principles of success
14,
298–308
Index
399

400
Index
Financial sustainability
14, 298,
302–303, 307, 339–340, 342, 346,
354–355
Financing, of early child development
136, 199, 261, 267–268, 272–274,
288, 291, 296, 313–314, 350, 385,
391
Flexibility, of programs
214, 238,
241–242, 248, 271, 346, 371, 387
Florida Child Care Quality Improve-
ment study
152, 169
Fogel, R.W.
3, 24–25, 65–66
Ford Foundation
82, 337, 343
Formal programs
12, 130, 136, 252
Former Soviet Union
14, 296,
349–350, 353
For-proﬁt organizations
130,
267–269, 284, 300, 386
Foundation support
14, 195, 198,
235, 283–284, 295, 297, 303, 305,
332, 336–337, 343–345, 349,
353–355, 376, 388
Future earning capacity
10, 124,
132–135
G
Gene-environment interactions
4, 8,
32, 33–34
Genetics
24, 35
German Development Service
313
Germany
19, 309, 313, 316, 331, 358
Ghana
376
Global coalition, for ECD initiatives
15, 17, 388–389
Goals for international development
2
Going to scale. See also Taking the 
programs to scale
315–316, 335,
375
Government, role and support. See
also National government, role of
14–15, 16–17, 46, 49, 51, 72, 130,
138, 198, 200, 207, 209, 215, 234–
236, 242, 246–248, 250–251, 260,
262–263, 265–268, 270, 272–273,
278, 281, 283, 285, 288–289, 295–
296, 300, 303, 306, 313, 317–318,
326, 330, 332–334, 337, 343, 351,
366–368, 369–373, 378–379,
382–390
Great Britain
24
Guatemala
286, 346
H
Haiti
xi, 14, 294, 296, 300, 308–316,
348–350, 354
Head Start program, U.S.
6, 14,
219–226, 229–331, 367–373, 386
Health and well-being
25, 85–86, 320
Health pathway
9, 64, 67–70, 72–74
Health status
68–69, 86, 320
Helvetas, Switzerland
331
High/Scope Study, U.S. See also Perry
Preschool Project (study), U.S.
41,
54, 60, 78, 142, 161, 172, 200,
290–291, 340, 360
Hippocampus
27–28, 31–33, 58
Historical evidence, for prosperity,
health, and child development
8,
24–26
Home-based program(s)
12–13, 197,
233, 235–236, 386
Home visiting models
234–253
Home visiting program(s)
233–253
Honduras
82, 91–93, 113, 201
Human development
ix, x, 9, 23, 25,
51–52, 56, 61, 63–78, 84, 116, 118,
142, 171, 290, 324–325, 363, 375,
387
Human potential
15, 363, 376–377
Hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)
pathway
4–5, 26, 27–29, 31,
33–34, 38, 43
I
Immune system, effects
26, 29, 34–35
Improving Pre- and Primary Education
(IPPS), Pakistan
14, 295–297,
302–304, 306, 338–348

India
x, 6, 18, 42, 199, 262, 337
Indicators of effectiveness
196
Individual involvement in ECD efforts
266–267, 271–274, 282, 287–290,
300–302
Inefﬁciencies, in society
382–383
Inequality. See also Equality
3, 10, 19,
61, 64, 75, 77–78, 86, 120–122, 363
Infant Health and Development 
Program (IHDP)
6, 125–128, 142
Initial Education Project, Mexico
6
In-kind assistance, contribution
248,
270, 285, 301–302, 307, 314, 345
Institute of Applied Economic 
Research (IPEA)
10, 18, 75, 132,
135, 140–141
Institutionalization
12, 238,
246–247, 251
Integrated approach, programs, 
services
63, 235, 295, 304, 316,
318, 326, 371, 379
Integrated Child Development Service
(ICDS), India
6, 18, 262
Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB)
xi, 18, 82, 197, 330, 334,
364, 366, 374
Inter-American Foundation
331–332
Intergenerational poverty
v, 14, 17,
252, 363–365, 369
International Adult Literacy Study
(IALS)
94, 116
International Monetary Fund
384
International Step by Step Association
(ISSA)
349, 359
Investing in early child development
v, 52, 363, 367, 373, 375–376, 378,
380, 387–388
Ireland
336
Israel
199
J
Jamaica, and government of
12, 39,
56, 76, 233–253
K
Kenya
14, 78, 199, 295, 336, 338,
340–342
Korea
43, 57
L
Laboratorio Latinoamericano de Eval-
uación de la Calidad de la Edu-
cación
82, 118
Language, development of. See also
Literacy, Verbal skills
3, 11, 31, 44,
51, 60, 82, 90–91 95–96, 100–101,
125, 153–155, 158–160, 168, 170–
171, 221, 224, 230, 236, 364, 368
Latin America
x, 9, 45, 81–122, 201,
214, 262, 277, 290, 363–365
Lessons from research
10, 145–193
Lessons learned, to maximize invest-
ments in ECD
7, 15, 369–373
Level playing ﬁeld
2, 16, 71
Lewis, W.A.
65
Literacy. See also Language, Verbal
skills
3–4, 19, 31, 44–50, 59, 61,
81, 85, 94, 116, 121, 124, 130, 139,
221, 223–224, 226, 240, 244, 250,
295, 304, 316–317, 320, 323–324,
329, 346, 364, 368
Longitudinal designs
151, 163–165,
182–185, 193
Longitudinal studies
3, 24, 35–36,
38–39, 251
M
Madrasa Resource Center (MRC),
Kenya, Uganda, Zanzibar
14, 199,
295–297, 302–304, 306, 337–348
Madres Guias, Honduras
201
Malnourished Children’s Program, 
Jamaica
234, 237–238, 240–247,
249–251
Mathematical ability (performance),
mathematics
3–4, 18, 41–42, 48,
54, 90, 92, 95, 97, 101, 104, 117
Index
401

Measuring the early opportunity gap
8, 9, 79–142
Mexico
6, 82, 91–93, 113, 125, 218,
272, 283
Microphilanthropy
287–288, 290
Mongolia
14, 296, 348, 350, 354
Montessori Preschool Project, Haiti
14, 294, 297, 300, 302–303, 305,
309–316
Moral purpose
373
Moral values
259
Mother-Child Day Care Center Ser-
vices (MCDCCS), Uganda
14,
294–295, 297, 299, 303–305,
316–324, 358
Mozambique
199, 337
N
Namibia
376
Narrowing the gap for poor children
7, 14, 363–374, 383
National Day Care Study, U.S.
151,
171
National Education Plan, Brazil
137–138
National government, role of. See also
Government, role and support
209, 252, 276, 321
National Institute for Educational 
Research, Brazil
116
National Longitudinal Survey of Chil-
dren and Youth, Canada
46–47
Netherlands
201, 331
New Zealand
386
Nonexperimental designs
163, 165
Nonformal program(s)
130, 136, 139,
200, 235, 295, 300, 306, 316,
323–324, 331, 333, 337, 346
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs)
v, ix, xi, 8, 13, 139, 200,
209, 260, 266–267, 270, 284, 288,
295, 316, 324, 351–352, 356, 366,
376
Not-for-proﬁt organizations
268–269,
284, 300, 386
O
Ontario
xi, 19, 46–52, 58, 77
Open Society Institute
349, 359–360
Organization for Economic Coopera-
tion and Development (OECD)
44, 59, 120–121
Orphanages, children in
43
Outcomes
3, 8–12, 25, 42–43, 45, 49,
68, 70, 72, 75, 78, 81–122, 125,
127, 141–142, 147, 149, 151–166,
168, 172–195, 197, 204, 206–207,
209, 216, 219, 222, 224, 226, 230,
233, 238, 265, 275–276, 300, 308,
316, 357
Outcome standard(s)
101–102
P
Pakistan
14, 116, 295, 337–338, 342,
344
Paraguay
82, 91–93, 113, 285
Parental involvement
14, 83, 99,
101–104, 106–109, 112–113, 252,
298–300, 307, 353, 355, 368, 371
Partners for Learning
125, 142
Partnerships
7, 10, 13, 17, 136, 138,
150, 247, 252, 284, 293–294,
297–298, 300, 305–306, 354–355
Pathways, to human development
9,
63–78
Perry Preschool Project (study), U.S.
See also High/Scope Study, U.S.
6,
60, 78, 125, 128–129, 142, 160, 172
Peru
82–83, 91–93, 200, 214, 373
Peter-Hesse Foundation
309, 312,
315, 358
Philanthropy(ies)
13, 266, 270, 282,
283–284, 287–288, 290, 343
Philippines
200, 214, 376
Plan International
287
Play materials
236, 238, 243–244,
250
Policies for action
383–389
Political challenge
15, 375–391
Portugal
201
402
Index

Poverty
v, vi, 1–2, 10, 12, 14–18, 35,
44, 54, 66, 73–75, 77, 84, 86, 124,
129, 139, 158, 233–234, 236, 244,
247, 252, 305, 317, 320, 322–323,
325–328, 348, 363–366, 368–369,
374, 376, 378, 382, 385
Pre-post design
11, 151–153,
163–165, 178, 186, 192
Preschool interventions, education, 
effects of
10, 124–129
Primer Estudio Internacional Compar-
ativo (PEIC)
9, 82–83, 89–90, 94,
99–102, 114–117
Principles of success. See also Features
of a successful program
314–315,
323, 334–335, 345–346, 355–356
Private sector, deﬁnitions and dimen-
sions
265–270
Private sector, role of
x-xi, 7–8,
13–14, 17, 49, 53, 110, 130, 138,
255, 257–292, 293, 296–297, 307,
315, 366, 376
Private citizens, involvement in early
child development
287–288
Private-public partnership. See also
Public-private partnership
13–14,
17, 293, 298, 305–307, 331, 355
Private versus public care and educa-
tion
13, 257, 272
Private voluntary organizations
(PVOs)
13, 266, 300
Privatization
262, 266–267, 269–270,
272, 288–291
Program efﬁcacy
260
Program of Indicators of Student
Achievement (PISA) study
95
Program performance measures, Head
Start program, U.S.
11, 219–225,
230–231
Programa No-formal de Educación Ini-
cial (PRONOEI), Peru
200
Proyecto de Mejoramiento Educativo,
de Salud y del Ambiente 
(PROMESA), Colombia
200,
209–210
Public-private partnership. See also 
Private-public partnership
7, 13,
136, 138
Q
Qualitative research tools, strategies
11, 195, 198, 204–217
Quality
3–5, 8, 10–13, 15–16, 19, 23,
25, 30, 43, 46, 48–52, 55, 61, 66,
81, 85–86, 94, 99, 106, 112, 117,
120–122, 136–138, 145–195, 205,
220, 222, 225–226, 229–231,
233–253, 263, 271, 273, 276–280,
289–290, 293–295, 300–301, 303,
305, 309, 313, 315–318, 321–322,
324–325, 328, 333, 335–337,
340–344, 346–348, 353, 363, 365,
368–373, 386 
Quality in Family Child Care and Rela-
tive Care study
158–159
R
Rahimtullah Trust
343
Relative risk(s)
100–101, 107–109
Research and evaluation
161–162,
166, 231, 347
Resources
v, vi, 2, 11, 13–15, 17, 57,
76–77, 82, 85, 88, 99, 103, 105,
107–108, 110–115, 117–121, 132,
138–139, 146, 159, 162, 201, 206,
217, 224, 229, 233, 244, 251, 253,
263–265, 267, 273–274, 280, 284,
290, 294, 299–303, 307–309, 314,
326, 335, 345, 349, 360, 366, 369,
372, 377–378, 383, 385, 387,
389–390
Return(s) to (on) investment, See also
Economic returns
77, 124–125,
129, 134–135
Right Start, U.S.
41–42
Roma children
357
Romania
43, 53, 59, 354, 356
Roving Caregivers Program (RCP), 
Jamaica
234–236, 239, 241–251
Index
403

Rural Family Support Organization
(RuFamSo), Jamaica
235, 249
S
Samenspel, Netherlands
201
Save the Children
xii, 199, 287, 331
School policy and practice
99,
105–107, 110–114, 118, 105
School proﬁles
83, 89–90, 95–99
School resources
99, 105–107,
110–114, 118
Schultz, T.W.
65
Scientiﬁc evidence, of links between
early child development and 
human development
3–5, 66–68
Self-Employed Women’s Association,
India
199
Self-regulation, of behavior
155–156,
176, 183
Sen, A.
63, 66, 78, 363, 374
Sensory pathways
26, 29–31
Serotonin
34, 54
Service Volunteered for All (SERVOL),
Trinidad and Tobago
x, xi, 14,
295, 297, 299, 302–306, 324–336,
358–359
Social capital
9, 12, 52, 64, 70–74,
76–78, 86, 119, 121, 234, 379
Social class
4, 36–39, 45–46, 85, 175
Social cohesion
73, 85–86, 120
Social competence
12, 70, 73,
169–170, 184–185, 220, 222
Social equity. See also Equity
260
Social policy
xi, 85–87, 89, 121
Social trust fund
282, 284, 290
Social values
73, 259
Societal (social) beneﬁts, effects. See
also Beneﬁts
2, 15, 67, 70–75,
259–261, 289, 367, 375–378,
381–383
Socioeconomic gradients
9, 18, 47,
54, 83–95, 114–115
Socioeconomic status (SES)
35–36,
39, 44–48, 55, 58, 82–84, 86–88,
94, 99, 120, 129, 149, 157, 159,
176, 179, 180, 186
Soros, George
xi, 349, 353, 359
South Africa
14, 296, 336, 348–350,
354
South Asia
336
Staff characteristics
10, 147–151, 153
Staff retention
238, 244, 250
Stages of (brain) development
29,
31–32
Stakeholders
15, 195, 198, 202,
205–208, 211, 214–215, 247–248,
252, 307, 346, 355, 382–386, 388
Standards for superior schooling
102–104
Standards of care
9, 81–122
State Children’s Health Insurance 
Program, U.S.
372
Step by Step program
14, 296–297,
302–304, 306, 348–360
Steroid receptors
27
Stress
3–5, 26, 34, 37, 43, 55–56, 58,
60, 65, 150, 162, 167–168, 178,
182, 188, 199, 232, 260, 327
Supports
10, 26, 36, 51, 134, 145,
149–151, 160, 166, 232, 238–239,
242, 247, 249, 252, 295, 298, 313,
319, 337, 348, 356, 366, 381
Sustainability. See also Cultural 
sustainability, Financial sustain-
ability
13–14, 210, 238, 242,
247–248, 251–252, 286, 297–298,
300, 302–303, 307, 312, 323, 331,
339–340, 342, 344, 346, 348, 351,
353–355, 359, 380
Sweden
38, 94, 283
Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (SIDA)
322
Syracuse Family Development Re-
search Program
161
T
Tajikistan
337
Taking the programs to scale. See also
Going to scale
7, 13–14, 246, 293
Tanzania
77, 337
Taxes, earmarked for social programs
252–253, 385
404
Index

Teacher-child interactions
147–149,
152, 160
Teacher’s qualiﬁcations
153
Teacher training. See also Training
15,
103, 105, 107–108, 294, 297, 305,
309, 313, 315, 333, 346, 351, 353,
358
Technology, role of
288, 324, 330,
365
Teenage Mothers Project, Jamaica
235, 249
Third International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMSS)
116
Tinbergen, Jan
64–65
Training
vii, 10, 12, 14–15, 67, 103,
105, 107–108, 112–113, 116, 130,
137, 147, 149–150, 153, 157,
159–160, 168, 181, 186, 188, 192,
196, 199–201, 206, 220, 223, 231,
235–237, 239–240, 243–246,
248–251, 266, 281, 284, 294–298,
302–305, 309, 311–312, 314–315,
317, 322, 324, 329, 331–335,
338–342, 346–335, 358, 365–366,
368, 370, 386
Trinidad and Tobago
xi, 14, 295,
324–325, 327–328, 330–336, 359
Tropical Medicine Research Institute
(TMRI), Jamaica
237–238, 243
Turkey
125, 201
2020 Commitment
388
U
Uganda
14, 199, 294–295, 303,
316–318, 321, 323–324, 336, 338,
341–343, 358
United Fund, U.S.
281
United Kingdom
25, 38–39, 55
United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF)
xi, 67–68, 76, 235, 245,
251, 259, 285–286, 291–292, 374,
376, 382, 390–391
United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP)
63, 313
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc,
and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO)
xi, 82, 90, 117–118,
121, 290–291, 322
United States
6, 10, 40–42, 44–45, 54,
120–121, 124, 145, 166, 219, 262,
268, 281, 283, 285, 331, 337, 349,
367–368, 370, 372, 374, 383
Universal Declaration on Human
Rights
377
University Hospital of the West Indies
237
U.S. Agency for International Develop-
ment (USAID)
xi, 344, 356–357,
360
U.S. National Education Goals Panel
221, 232
V
Venezuela, Républica Bolivariana de
82, 91–93, 113
Verbal skills. See also Language, 
Literacy
38, 44, 46
Vulnerable children. See also Children
at risk
9–10, 110–111, 121,
124–129, 298, 365
W
West Africa
347
White House Conference on Early
Childhood Development and
Learning, U.S.
370
Willingness to pay
135–136
Women’s multiple roles
238, 240,
249
World Bank
v, vii, ix–x, 1, 7, 10,
18–19, 42, 44, 52–53, 60–61, 68,
77–78, 82, 85, 116, 118, 130–132,
135, 140–142, 197, 292, 337,
343,359–360, 366, 372–373, 376,
380, 382, 384, 390–391
World Conference on Education for
All
81
Index
405

406
Index
World Health Organization (WHO)
xi, 67, 69, 78, 286, 382, 384
World Vision
xii, 287
Y
Year 2000 Evaluation of Education for
All
268, 278, 291
Z
Zanzibar
199, 295, 338, 341–343


C
THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC  20043 USA
Telephone: 202 477-1234
Facsimile: 202 477-6391
Internet: www.worldbank.org
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
C
hildren are our future. Investing in every child at an early age
is an investment in human and economic development for all.
Children born in poverty are far more likely to grow up stunted
in both body and mind. Science tells us that early child development is
critical and marks a child for life. Young children who are well nurtured do
better in school and can develop the skills to compete in a global economy. 
Recently, the World Bank hosted a conference to review the state of
knowledge on brain development, the link between early child develop-
ment (ECD) and human development, standards of care to improve chil-
dren’s educational outcomes, qualitative and quantitative measures of
effective programs, and elements of quality in ECD programs. The world’s
leading experts from nongovernmental, governmental, multilateral, and
bilateral organizations urged the public and private sectors to enhance
and coordinate activities and to formulate policies to advance the
development of all children and to “narrow the gap” for poor children.
This book contains essential resource information that includes descrip-
tions and case studies of successful ECD programs throughout the world.
Written in an accessible style, it is invaluable for all policymakers and
practitioners concerned about human development and education of
children worldwide.
15050
9 780821 350508
ISBN 0-8213-5050-1

