Beyond Binary:
Genderqueer as Critical Gender Kind
Robin Dembroﬀ(Yale University)
“When gender is a binary, it’s a battleﬁeld. When you
get rid of the binary, gender becomes a playground.”
— Kate Bornstein
We want to know what gender is. But metaphysical approaches to
this question solely have focused on the binary gender kinds men and
women. By overlooking those who identify outside of the binary–the
group I call ‘genderqueer’–we are left without tools for understand-
ing these new and quickly growing gender identiﬁcations. This meta-
physical gap in turn creates a conceptual lacuna that contributes to
systematic misunderstanding of genderqueer persons. In this paper,
I argue that to better understand genderqueer identities, we must
recognize a new type of gender kind: critical gender kinds, or kinds
whose members resist dominant gender ideology. After developing
a model of critical gender kinds, I suggest that genderqueer is best
modeled as one such kind. In particular, I propose that its mem-
bers are united by resisting ‘the binary assumption’, or the prevalent
assumption that they must comply with binary gender classiﬁcation.
1
Introduction
Dissatisfaction with strict binary gender systems is nothing new.Nor is the cre-
ation of language, modes of expression, and body modiﬁcations aimed at trans-
gressing this binary.
What is new, however, are widespread and legitimized
conversations surrounding this dissatisfaction.1 Just in the last ten years, web
searches for ‘genderqueer’ and ‘nonbinary’ have grown by a magnitude of at
least ten times.2 Merriam-Webster’s dictionary added both terms, the Asso-
ciated Press Stylebook embraces ‘they’ as a singular gender-neutral pronoun,
and highly visible popular publications such as Teen Vogue and The New York
Times have run articles exploring the concept of identifying outside the gender
1See, e.g., White et al (2018, 244) for empirical evidence supporting this claim.
2Data source: Google Trends (www.google.com/trends).
1

binary.3 This is not to mention that multiple US states now oﬀer nonbinary
gender markers on government identiﬁcation, with ever more municipalities and
states following suit.
Despite this public attention, nonbinary gender kinds have been an af-
terthought within philosophy of gender, and especially metaphysical discussions
of gender.4 The central phenomenon under consideration has been the binary
genders men and women.5 Narrowing the target phenomenon in this way has
generated two problems–one metaphysical and the other political.
First, by overlooking nonbinary identities, existing metaphysical approaches
to gender are insuﬃcient for capturing persons who reject (exclusive) catego-
rization as either men or women (see §3). This creates a gap of metaphysical
explanation and understanding. For example, what is the relationship between
gender neutral language and being nonbinary? Or between androgyny and being
nonbinary? What (if anything) uniﬁes the vast variety of nonbinary identiﬁca-
tions?
Is there anything more to being nonbinary than calling oneself by a
nonbinary label? These questions are metaphysically signiﬁcant, but the theo-
ries on oﬀer provide no answers.
Second, without the resources for understanding nonbinary gender identities,
we sustain a conceptual lacuna surrounding nonbinary persons. This lacuna
does not only reﬂect a gap in philosophical understanding: it contributes to
a hermeneutical injustice that arises from the failure to spread and charitably
analyze the concepts and practices underlying nonbinary classiﬁcations.6 In the
wake of this conceptual silence, misunderstandings (both blatant and subtle)
arise in droves – misunderstandings that undermine recognition and respect of
nonbinary persons.7
These two problems can be ameliorated by an account of genderqueer as
what I call a ‘critical gender kind’, or a kind whose members enact resistance
against dominant gender ideology.To be genderqueer, on my proposed model, is
to manifest resistance to the binary assumption, or the assumption that the
only possible genders are the exclusive and exhaustive kinds men and women,
3Merriam-Webster (2018), Sopelsa (2017), Papisova (2016), Greenberg (2017).
4See, e.g., Haslanger (2000), Jenkins (2016), ´Asta (2011), and Barnes (forthcoming). Even
discussions of gender that purport to be trans inclusive typically overlook the experiences
and concepts underlying genderqueer identity.See, e.g., Bettcher (2009, 2013), Jenkins (2016),
Brigg and George (manuscript), and McKitrick (2015). This is especially striking given that
29% of respondents to the 2015 United States Transgender Survey self-identiﬁed as ‘gen-
derqueer’. James, et al. (2016). Philosophy is not alone in this oversight. See Salamon (2010,
95) for a similar criticism of Women’s Studies.
5Though see Dembroﬀ& Wodak (2018) as an exception.
6Hermeneutical injustice, as deﬁned in Fricker (2007, 1), occurs “when a gap in collective
interpretive resources puts someone at an unfair disadvantage when it comes to making sense
of their social experiences.” More extended notions of hermeneutical injustice are explored in
Medina (2012) and Appiah (1994), which include cases (such as white ignorance) when a gap
in the collective interpretive resources regarding an oppressed group perpetuates the social
disadvantage of that group. I take it that the lacuna at issue concerning nonbinary kinds
manifests in both ways.
7Using Fraser’s (1998) account, this might be understood in terms of genderqueers’ access
to ‘participatory parity’, or the conditions needed to interact with others as peers in social
and political settings.
2

and to do so based on one’s self-perceived or claimed ontological position.8 I
unpack this proposal in §4.9
My model has many implications, and no doubt will inspire as many worries.
Like most philosophical theories, mine probably is wrong. But I believe it is
closer to the truth than analytic philosophers have come so far, if only because
we have had little to say about nonbinary identiﬁcations. What’s more, it is
clear that this theorizing is overdue: even empirical social research on trans iden-
tities frequently lumps together trans binary and genderqueer persons, making
it diﬃcult to use this data to explain why, for example, genderqueer persons
overall face heightened discrimination and psychological distress compared to
trans binary persons, and also diﬀer with respect to attitudes toward medical
interventions such as hormone therapy.10 If I am right–or even close to it–this
heterogeneity should come as no surprise, since genderqueer conjoins persons
who are extremely diverse with respect to such features.
2
Terminology & Methodology
‘Genderqueer’ was ﬁrst coined in the 1990’s by trans activist Riki Wilchins
in an attempt to describe those who were both queer with respect to their
sexuality and “the kind of gendertrash society rejected” with respect to their
gender intelligibility in public spaces.11 Since then, use has shifted away from
mere description and towards identity: in particular, it often functions as an
umbrella term for a range of gender identities outside of the binary.12 I will use
the term in keeping with this recent shift, but my primary concern is not with
articulating “the true meaning of ‘genderqueer’ ”, but rather with articulating
a gender phenomenon that has been ignored in analytic philosophy.
My analysis relies heavily on personal testimony from genderqueer persons.
This is not only because there is a scant amount of academic research about
genderqueer persons, but also because I share the familiar feminist commit-
ment to begin theorizing from the perspective of the marginalized. In what fol-
lows, I distinguish between two kinds of personal testimony. The ﬁrst concerns
genderqueer individuals’ intuitions about paradigm or uncontested examples of
genderqueer persons, as well as their personal motivations for not identifying
8I use the word ‘model’ very intentionally. Following Paul (2012), I endorse a method of
metaphysics focused on building theoretical models for certain purposes, rather constructing
(real) deﬁnitions.
9I am not interested in settling debates about ‘what gender is’. I suspect this question
must be split into many, more tractable questions. Insofar as my project is negative, it is
merely to show that the most common approaches to gender are inadequate for capturing
nonbinary gender kinds.
10See Rimes, et al., (2018), Galupo et al. (2018), 5, Bradford et a. (2018), 8, and Warren
et al. (2016). Following Heyes (2003), cf Stryker (1994), I use ‘trans’ to refer to the “multiple
forms of sex and gender crossing and mixing that are taken by their practitioners to be
signiﬁcant life projects.” I use ‘trans binary’ to prefer to persons who are trans but identify
exclusively within the male/female binary.
11Wilchins (2007), 80-81.
12Wilchins (2007), 80-81.
3

exclusively as a man or a woman. The second concerns these individuals’ views
about metaphysical questions concerning what, more generally, it means to be
genderqueer. I rely on the ﬁrst kind of testimony and not the second. Sub-
stantive metaphysical questions about genderqueer deserve careful analysis in
just the same way that women and men have been given careful metaphysical
analysis. In this, I follow Bettcher (2004) in relying on persons’ ﬁrst-person
authority over their own gender, while simultaneously allowing for substantive
disagreement about the conditions for kind membership. My central concern, in
other words, is not individuals’ experiences, but rather the larger concepts that
frame genderqueer identity – in particular, the concepts that structure com-
monality among the language, aesthetic expressions, values, and actions found
among those who (within contemporary western societies) identify as neither
solely male not female.
Finally, I am not concerned with how genderqueers are understood within
dominant contexts, which typically have no or a distorted understanding of
nonbinary persons. Rather, I focus exclusively on the features and extension of
genderqueer as they are understood and practiced within trans-friendly commu-
nities, and especially by genderqueers themselves. Here I again follow Bettcher
(2013, 234-5), who argues that assuming dominant gender meanings and con-
cepts is a “bad place” to start feminist theorizing, as it “eﬀectively yield[s]
political ground from the very beginning.” With Bettcher, I instead begin by
assuming the gender meanings and concepts within trans-friendly communities.
3
First Attempts
Within popular culture, most proposed deﬁnitions of genderqueer fall into one
of two camps. On one approach, someone is genderqueer because they have cer-
tain external features–typically, because they are androgynous, gender ﬂuid, or
otherwise violate gender norms. On another approach, someone is genderqueer
because of a particular internal feature–namely, self-identiﬁcation–leaving open
what, exactly, it might mean to ‘identify’ outside of the binary.
It is instructive to note that most available metaphysical analyses of gender
also take one of these two approaches.13 On externalist approaches, someone’s
gender is determined by social factors that are external to them: for example,
being perceived as androgynous or otherwise gender non-conforming. In con-
trast, internalist approaches focus on articulating more concretely what it means
to ‘identify’ with a particular gender. On these accounts, someone’s gender is
determined not by how they are perceived by others, but rather by whatever
internal features (e.g., self-understanding, dispositions) constitute their gender
identity.14
13I here focus on constructionist accounts of gender, setting aside biological essentialism.
Even if one is a biological essentialist, though, it is hopefully obvious that this approach
will not suﬃce to analyze genderqueer. While some intersex persons are genderqueer, being
intersex is neither suﬃcient nor necessary for being genderqueer. See, e.g. Weiss (2018).
14As Barnes (forthcoming) notes, while these are the main approaches, some theories fall
4

I argue that neither an externalist nor internalist approach will provide a
satisfactory account of genderqueer. Both misclassify paradigm cases of gen-
derqueer (and non-genderqueer) individuals. Examining closely why this is the
case is instructive. Not only will it clear the ground for my own proposal, but it
also provides an opportunity to examine these paradigm cases, as well as gen-
derqueer persons’ testimony concerning their own identities. Such testimony
illuminates not only why externalist and internalist approaches fall short, but
also why genderqueer is best understood as a political gender category.
3.1
An Externalist Approach
External theories of gender, sometimes also called social position theories–focus
on gender as a social structure that advantages or disadvantages individuals
according to the collectives norms, expectations, and stereotypes surrounding
the features that an individual is perceived to have. Externalist theories have
been proposed or defended by Haslanger (2000), Barnes (forthcoming), Witt
(2011), and ´Asta (2011), among others.15 There are many potential ways to
spell out what external social factors determine an individual’s gender. For my
purposes, the details of various externalist accounts is not centrally important.
What is important, rather, is to see a trend among all of them: namely, that
membership in a given gender kind is based by factors that are external to any
given individual–e.g., social roles, perception, or treatment.
In light of this, what would be the best externalist approach to genderqueer?
Whatever it is, it must highlight features that are external to genderqueer per-
sons, while also meeting two basic criteria for any successful account of gen-
derqueer: it must respect ﬁrst-person accounts about what it means to be gen-
derqueer, and it must capture paradigm cases of genderqueer as it exists within
trans-friendly communities. These two criteria are, of course, related, though it
would be possible to satisfy one without the other.
The most common–and, I think, plausible–externalist approach to genderqueer
focuses on someone’s perceived relation to gender norms and roles, and espe-
cially to masculine and feminist gender presentation. Indeed, a brief foray into
popular media might suggest that someone is genderqueer because they “do
things that are outside of the norm of their actual or perceived gender iden-
tity,” or because they “express a combination of masculinity and femininity,
or neither, in their gender expression.”16 A similar idea is echoed by popular
outside this taxonomy, such as Stoljar (2011), Briggs and George (manuscript), and Bach
(2012).
15Theodore Bach (2012) defends a view of gender on which genders are ‘natural kinds with
historical essences’–a view that is diﬃcult to place within the external/internalist taxonomy.
On Bach’s view, to be, e.g., a woman, is to molded by conscious and unconscious social
mechanisms into a reproduction of historical exemplars of women so as to perform the social
function corresponding to women.
On Bach’s view, then, someone might be a trans man
and yet–according to Bach’s analysis–be “construed as a woman” (260).
Moreover, given
that man and woman are the only kinds into which one can be socialized (within Western
cultures), all genderqueer persons (who have been socialized as either women or men) will not
be represented within Bach’s analysis.
16See Clements (2017) and the entry for “Genderqueer” on Wikipedia.
5

articles, books, and visual media that equivocate between or constantly asso-
ciate being nonbinary with androgyny or gender non-conformity.17 Admittedly,
this thinking is reinforced by the observation that many genderqueers ﬁt this
description: it is common for persons who identify outside the binary to adopt
an aesthetic that deﬁes gender expectations–often, one that is androgynous or
is ﬂuid between masculine and feminine elements.18 Add to this that other be-
haviors often associated with nonbinary persons also break gender norms, such
as using gender-neutral pronouns or refusing classiﬁcation as either ‘straight’ or
‘gay’.19 With these considerations, it might seem that the best way to analyze
genderqueer will be something like the following:
Genderqueer (externalist): A person is genderqueer in a context
iﬀ
(i) They are reliably perceived as attempting to not exclusively adopt
either a feminized or masculinized gender expression;
or:
(ii) Their body cannot be reliably coded in that context as either
male or female.20
In other words, on this proposal, someone is genderqueer in a context just in
case they either are perceived as transgressing binary norms of gender expression–
for example, by adopting a gender ﬂuid or agender aesthetic–or their body is
perceived as androgynous, where this is understood as one’s body being ‘un-
readable’ as male or female.
Despite the many merits of this approach, I think it fails both of the above
criteria for a successful account genderqueer, and we ultimately should reject it.
Seeing why, I think, also will show that any externalist approach will be dissat-
isfactory. While many genderqueers do meet the above proposed condition, two
further things are true. First, genderqueers often describe their androgyny or
rejection of traditional gender aesthetic norms as either the motivation for or
eﬀect of being genderqueer, but not as essential to being genderqueer. When
asked to describe their experience of being genderqueer, in fact, there is repeated
and explicit rejection of the idea that being genderqueer is based on their gender
presentation or indeed on others’ perceptions in any way. In their article “This
Is What Gender-Nonbinary People Look Like”, trans activist Meridith Talusan
17See, e.g., Dowling (2017), Ferguson (2017), Petrow (2016).
18See the Instagram hashtag “#thisiswhatnblookslike.”
19For more evidence on the connection between trans identiﬁcations and violating het-
eronormative gender expectations and roles, see Diamond and Butterworth (2008) and Green
(2004). See also Nagoshi, et al. (2012), in which participants took their sexual orientation to
be “dynamically related” to their gender identity, suggesting that being nonbinary often rules
out, for these persons, being either ‘straight’ or ‘gay’.
20These descriptions bear similarity to Elizabeth Barnes’s (forthcoming) description of the
‘gender outlier’ and ‘gender confounder’. Barnes, who is sympathetic to Sally Haslanger’s
(2012) picture on which gender is a hierarchical system that socially positions persons in
diﬀerent ways based on their perceived features, describes the gender outlier and confounder as
those who are systematically subordinated due to being perceived (respectively) as attempting
to switch between binary gender roles or as androgynous.
6

asked genderqueer persons to describe their experience of identifying outside
of the gender binary. While answers varied in their details, a common theme
emerged: being genderqueer is not based on being perceived in any particular
way. One interviewee, Rowan Keeney, put this quite bluntly:
My expression and my socialization falls on the femme side, but
being nonbinary is not about what is perceived of me. Nonbinary
is the liberation from the need to make myself smaller to ﬁt into
preconceived ideas of who and what I am.21
Keeney’s point is independently reiterated by other genderqueer persons,
who express that “there is no one way to be nonbinary”, that “name[s], pro-
nouns, and presentation does not deﬁne [a nonbinary individual’s] gender”, and
that genderqueers “have all types of gender presentations”, “identify as fem-
inine and masculine to diﬀerent degrees”, and “don’t need to look or act or
be a certain way to be nonbinary”.22 Susanna Weiss, a writer for Teen Vogue
who identiﬁes as both genderqueer and a woman, is particularly explicit on this
point:
Many people seem to believe you need an androgynous style to be
non-binary, creating the assumption that I and other non-binary
people who wear women’s clothes must be women... But you can’t
tell how someone identiﬁes based on what they look like.23
A theme clearly emerges from these statements: those who are genderqueer
reject the idea that their being genderqueer is explained by being perceived to
fall outside of binary gender roles, or as having an androgynous presentation.
Whatever it is to be genderqueer, then, seems that it cannot be captured in
terms of others’ perceptions.
Complimenting this point is the observation that the externalist approach
would produce the wrong extension. Many individuals who do not identify as
and would not be considered genderqueer either defy binary gender roles or
maintain androgyny.24 Butch lesbians, queens, cross-dressing men and women,
trans men and women who do not ‘blend’ as cisgender, and the variety of men
and women whose bodies and presentations are androgynous are but a few
examples of this. Lori Watson, examining shared experiences between gender
nonconforming persons, trans and not, vividly captures this point:
Trans women and I share an especially acute problem. [W]e both
want our gender to be seen as a way of being a woman...who doesn’t
have to oﬀer up her bona ﬁdes to the world anytime someone is
confused, perplexed or unsettled when they perceive our gender and
sex as incongruous or ambiguous.25
21Talusan (2017), emphasis added.
22Talusan (2017), Weiss (2018).
23Weiss (2018).
24For empirical discussion, see Bradford, et al. (2018).
25Watson (2015).
7

In short, genderqueers do not have a monopoly on being perceived as violat-
ing gender roles, much less on androgyny: plenty of non-genderqueer men and
women share in this experience.
We can add to this that, within genderqueer communities, being perceived
in either of these ways is not taken to be a requirement for being genderqueer.
Weiss, for example, notes that after they began identifying as genderqueer,
they did not change anything about their (feminine) gender expression. Two
of Weiss’s interviewees, Kelley Cantrell and Alaina Leary, articulated similar
experiences. Both were assigned female at birth and have feminine gender pre-
sentations, and thereby are perceived regularly as gender conforming women.
Nevertheless, both identify outside of the gender binary.26 Importantly, their
identities would not (in general) be taken as delusional or otherwise mistaken
in trans-friendly contexts: Weiss presents Cantrell and Leary as unquestionably
genderqueer, despite being routinely read as gender conforming women.27
While taking genderqueer as separable from any particular social percep-
tions may seem initially odd, it comes into better focus when we take seriously
that being genderqueer is not so much about rejecting femininity and masculin-
ity de re, but rather rejecting them as concepts that always are appropriate
for interpreting an individual’s behavior or aesthetic.28 That is, according to
genderqueer persons, being genderqueer need not be about refusing clothing, be-
haviors, speech, or roles that typically would be read as feminine, masculine, or
any combination of the two. Rather, it often concerns rejecting the binary at a
conceptual level – that is, rejecting the idea that their way of being in the world
should be understood via the binary concepts of ‘feminine’ and ‘masculine’.29
In an interview with The Washington Post, 18-year-old Kelsey Beckham, who
identiﬁes as nonbinary, states:
I don’t want to be a girl wearing boy’s clothes, nor do I want to
be a girl who presents as a boy. I just want to be a person who is
recognized as a person. That’s how I’m most comfortable. I’m just
a person wearing people clothes.30
The bold assertion of being ‘just a person wearing people clothes’ strikes as
the heart of any attempt to analyze genderqueer in terms of external percep-
tions. Genderqueers diﬀer widely with respect to their assigned sex, perceived
26Weiss (2018)
27A further, normative worry arises for taking genderqueer in terms of androgyny in par-
ticular: for many body sizes and shapes, androgyny is diﬃcult if not impossible to access.
Persons in this position would be simply barred from access to genderqueer.
28See, e.g. Weiss (2018) who writes that being gender, for them, mean “reject[ing] the whole
concept of gender.”
29For example, Weiss quotes Cantrell as saying “I wish that people wouldn’t automatically
use she/her pronouns just because of how I present... They need to stop gendering people’s
presentations.” As Naomi Scheman pointed out to me, the plea to end gendering based on
presentation is important, as it reveals a political stance that–intentionally or not–queers
everyone’s gender.
30Hesse (2014), my emphasis.
8

sex, and whether or not they function within traditionally masculinized or fem-
inized gender roles. If anything holds them in common with respect to gender
presentation, it is only a general rejection of being understood through a binary
lens.31
3.2
An Internalist Approach
If looking only to external features will not provide an adequate analysis of
genderqueer, what about looking to internal features? Perhaps an internalist
approach, or an approach on which being genderqueer is determined primarily
by one’s internal features, has more promise. In favor of this approach, it at least
appears to align nicely with what is by far the most common popular deﬁnition of
being genderqueer as ‘identifying as genderqueer’.32 If we assume ‘identiﬁcation’
is best understood as a wholly internal feature–i.e., a psychological state that
an individual can be in without any material manifestations–then an internalist
approach to genderqueer would be on the right track. I’ll propose in §4 that we
should prefer a diﬀerent, political model of genderqueer. But let’s examine the
merits of an internalist account.
The ﬁrst and most important question for an internalist approach to gen-
derqueer is what internal features we are referring to when we talk about ‘gender
identity’. Since the concept of gender identity–and in particular, genderqueer
identity–is used to determine the extension of genderqueer, it is crucial to under-
stand what genderqueer identity amount to. What’s more, as Jenkins (forthcom-
ing) points out, the most common ‘folk’ deﬁnition of gender identity–“a sense
of oneself as a man, woman, or some other gender”–does not appear promising.
Jenkins writes:
[M]any people who use the language of gender identity hold...the
view that gender terms such as ‘man’ and ‘woman’ ought to be
understood in terms of gender identity: [e.g.] to be a woman is to
identify as a woman (or, to have a female gender identity)... The
combination of this view with the folk deﬁnition of gender identity
gives rise to a circularity: someone who asks what it means to say
that a certain person ‘has a female gender identity’ will be told that
it means that that person has a sense of herself ‘as a woman’ – but
if the questioner then asks what a ‘woman’ is, they will be told that
a woman is ‘a person with a female gender identity’.
Jenkins’s point about ‘woman’ similarly applies to ‘genderqueer’. The com-
bination of two popular notions–that being genderqueer is identifying as gen-
derqueer, and identifying as genderqueer is being genderqueer–leaves us in a
31See also “Gender Can Be Both Liberating And Stiﬂing At The Same Time” (2018), in
which one interviewee comments, “Just because I put on lipstick doesn’t mean I am one thing
or the other, because someone decide a piece of paint ‘belonged’ to a gender.”
32The language of ‘gender identity’ as a determiner of one’s gender–and, in particular, of
being genderqueer, is standard within trans-friendly contexts. See Weiss (2018) and Talu-
san (2017), as well as genderqueer networking platforms such as http://genderqueer.me or
http://beyondthebinary.co.uk.
9

hopeless and unhelpful circularity. Whatever it means to ‘identify as genderqueer’–
if indeed this is the basis for being genderqueer, must be something some more
substantive.
Within analytic philosophy, two internalist proposals have emerged as to
what this more substantive notion of gender identity amounts to.33
At ﬁrst, a substantive internalism might seem to worryingly essentialize gen-
der by pointing to a mysterious, innate sense of one’s own gender that exists
independently of external social factors. But, in fact, philosophical accounts of
gender identity avoid this worry: gender identity, on these accounts, is internal,
but it is based on one’s internal or subjective way of relating to societies’ gender
norms, structures, and interpretive guides.34 One one approach, defended by
Jennifer McKitrick (2015), someone’s gender in a given context is determined
by their behavioral dispositions, along with how those behaviors–if manifested–
would be socially interpreted. In a given context, McKitrick argues, someone
who is disposed to behave in ways that others would take to be indicative of
a woman, has a woman’s gender identity (and so, is a woman) in that con-
text.35 Like McKitrick, Jenkins’s (2016, forthcoming) account of gender iden-
tity emphasizes an individual’s relationship to external gender norms. Jenkins
proposes a ‘norm relevance’ account, on which an individual’s gender identity
is determined by what norms that are associated with a particular gender they
experience as relevant to them.36 That is, for example, someone has a female
gender identity–and so is a woman–on this account if they experience norms
associated with women in their social context as relevant to them. Moreover,
norm relevance can take on a variety of forms. A female gender identity for one
person may amount to feeling like others should refer to her with feminine pro-
nouns and a certain name, whereas for someone else, it may amount to having
the sense that her physical features ought to be a certain way – e.g., ought to
include a vulva, and not a penis.37
Gender identities, on both approaches, have subjective and objective el-
ements: they are subjective insofar as they concern internal dispositions or
senses of norm relevance, but objective insofar as these dispositions or senses
must relate to norms or behaviors that are externally, socially associated with
a certain gender group.38
Both McKitrick’s and Jenkins’s approaches could
be applied to ‘genderqueer identity’. In fact, Jenkins explicitly proposes one
such application: someone is genderqueer iﬀthey do not consider the norms
33On Talia Bettcher’s (2009), (2013) view, a person’s gender is based on sincere self-
identiﬁcation, understood in terms of ‘living as’ the gender with which one identiﬁes, I will
not address this view in what follows because, while Bettcher’s view may be the best way
to understand binary gender identities, it runs into many of the same concerns I raise for
McKitrick’s (2015) and Jenkins’s (2016) accounts when applied to genderqueer.
34See, e.g., McKitrick (2015), 2580 for an explicit rejection of the essentialism worry.
35The precise formulation of this idea is as follows: “x is gender G iﬀx has (suﬃciently
many, suﬃciently strong) dispositions D1-Dn to behave in ways B1-Bn in situations S1-Sn,
and the relevant social group considers behaving in ways B1-Bn in situations S1-Sn to be G.”
McKitrick (2015), 2581.
36Jenkins (forthcoming).
37Jenkins (2016), 413.
38Jenkins (2016), 412.
10

socially associated with men, nor the norms socially associated with women,
to be relevant to them.39 To illustrate, Jenkins uses the example of a build-
ing that contains only men’s and women’s toilets. Someone who is nonbinary,
because they do not consider the norms governing social spaces for either men
nor women as relevant to them, may “have all toilets marked as uncomfortable
places fraught with stress and danger.”40
The ﬁrst thing to notice is that Jenkins’s norm relevancy approach to male
and female gender identity diﬀers dramatically from the approach to nonbinary
gender identity.
On this account, so long as someone considers some of the
female-coded (or male-coded) norms as relevant to them, they have a female (or
male) gender identity.41 After all, the number of men and women who take all
of the norms associated with men or women as relevant to them likely is few
and far between. But notice that this feature is taken to immediately constrain
the proposed deﬁnition of nonbinary (or, in my terms, genderqueer) identities:
according to Jenkins, it cannot simply be the case that nonbinary persons do
not take some or even most of the binary-coded norms as relevant to them.
Rather, they must take none of those norms as relevant to them. Here, the
deﬁnition begins to generate serious worries.
First, this proposal rules out the possibility of having a genderqueer iden-
tity as well as a male or female identity. But some persons who identify as
genderqueer also identify as women or men. Weiss (2018), for example, writes:
I personally identify as a non-binary woman... [T]o me, this identity
acknowledges both that I don’t have an innate identiﬁcation with
any gender and that I’ve been socialized as a woman. Having more
than one gender identity means diﬀerent things to others, though.42
Weiss is not alone.
In the same article, they interview 24-year-old Rey
Noble, who identiﬁes as non-binary and a woman. According to Noble, this is
to “acknowledge that she loves her female-coded body but doesn’t always feel
it accurately represents her.”43 Similarly, Laurie Penny, a UK based journalist,
articulates having distinct but compatible reasons for identifying as genderqueer
and as a women. “My identity is more complex than simply female or male,”
Penny writes, “but...I am a woman, politically because that’s how people see me
and that’s how the state treats me.”44 Weiss’s, Noble’s, and Penny’s testimonies
are in tune with empirical research on genderqueer identities: In Galupo, et al’s
39Jenkins uses the term ‘nonbinary’ rather than genderqueer, and more formally puts this
idea as follows: “S has a nonbinary gender identity iﬀS’s internal ‘map’ is neither formed
so as to guide someone marked as a woman through the social or material realities that are,
in that context, characteristic of women as a class nor formed to guide someone classed as a
man through the social or material realities that are, in that context, characteristic of men as
a class. Jenkins ((2016), 411, fn 40). See also Jenkins (forthcoming).
40Jenkins (forthcoming).
41Jenkins thinks that someone could have, for this reason, more than one gender identity
in a given context.
42Weiss (2018).
43Weiss (2018).
44Penny (2015).
11

(2018) study of genderqueer persons, many participants described their gender
in ways that include, but are not bound by only one of the binary options:
“My gender changes. Sometimes I am female, sometimes I am a boy,
sometimes I am both, and sometimes I am neither.” (genderﬂuid)
“Sometimes I feel like I am completely a man. Sometimes I feel like I
am mostly a man, with some woman/agender mixed in.” (demiguy)
“I can switch in between a variety of genders (man, woman, androg-
yne, agender, third gender, polygender, etc.) day by day.” (gender-
ﬂuid)45
In short, many persons who identify outside a single binary option also might
identify as a woman and/or man, in Jenkins’s sense.
For this reason, these
testimonies run counter to Jenkins’s proposal. This empirical research, then,
suggests that “[genderqueer] participants’ gender identity could not be discretely
conceptualized as ‘male’ ‘female’ ‘neither’ or ‘both’.”46 While Jenkins take the
‘neither’ approach, this way of thinking maintains binary gender options, and
does not align with data concerning how nonbinary individuals describe their
identities.47
But suppose explicit disavowal of being a man or woman is not necessary
for having a genderqueer identity, because such avowals are outside of the realm
of male- and female-coded norms. Even this weakened understanding of gen-
derqueer identity would be inadequate, for reasons that also appear in Penny’s
and Weiss’s recognition of how ‘socialization’ as a woman, and being seen as
a woman by the state and others impacts one’s ability to move through the
world. Genderqueers frequently maintain, if only out of necessity, a sense of
what binary-coded norms are relevant for them in spaces where there is no al-
ternative to these norms. Rejecting binary-coded norms altogether is simply
not an option when the social world is saturated in exclusive, binary divisions.
Public spaces, such as restrooms and locker rooms, legal institutions, social
clubs, language, and marketing, to name but a few, are heavily gendered, and
gendered not only according to the binary, but in a way that leaves someone
attempting to navigate these structure no choice but to ‘pick a side’. That is,
because all (or nearly all) genderqueer persons were socialized as either men or
women, and are perceived as men or women, only self-applying the norms of ‘a
person wearing people clothes’ is not possible. Genderqueers who wish to navi-
gate the world at all, much less safely, have no option but to see binary-norms
as more or less relevant to them.48
At this point, someone might protest that genderqueer identity is marked
by a feeling of discomfort or inauthenticity with (complying with) those norms.
45Galupo, et al. (2018), 12. Participants’ prefer gender labels are in parentheses.
46Galupo, et al. (2018), 18.
47Galupo, et al. (2018), 18.
48Andler (2017) raises similar worries for Jenkins’s account of gender identity.
12

But this dramatically over-generates: many non-genderqueer men or women
also feel discomfort and inauthenticity complying with the gender norms that
they are socially coerced to obey.49
Setting aside a norm-relevancy approach to genderqueer identity, then, what
about a dispositional approach? Why not think that being genderqueer is less
about what norms one’s consider relevant to oneself, but rather about what
one is internally disposed to do–e.g., use gender neutral pronouns, assert ‘I am
genderqueer’, and so on? Such an approach might amount to something along
the following lines:
S is genderqueer in a context C iﬀS is suﬃciently disposed to be-
have in C in ways that would (in trans-friendly contexts) mark S as
genderqueer.50
What might the behaviors be? On a one interpretation, the relevant behav-
iors for being genderqueer would be diﬀerent in content, but not in kind from
those for being men and women. That is, the behavioral dispositions relevant
to being genderqueer would include dispositions toward things like “modes of
dress, posture and mannerisms, productive and leisure time activities, styles of
communication and social interaction.”51 But, as we already saw in §3.1, no
such external behaviors decidedly mark someone as genderqueer.
Given this, the scope of relevant behaviors is signiﬁcantly constrained. In
fact, it seems that the only behaviors that would decidedly mark someone as
genderqueer in a trans-friendly context is them (sincerely) saying so.52 On this
account then, someone is genderqueer so long as they are suﬃciently disposed
to assert that they do not exclusively identify as a man or a woman: e.g., ‘I am
genderqueer’, ‘I am nonbinary’, ‘I am gender ﬂuid’.53
Here, two further worries arise. The ﬁrst concerns the manifestation condi-
tions for these dispositions. I suspect that much of the motivation for adopting
a dispositionalist account of genderqueer identity is gaining the ability to count
persons as genderqueer even when these dispositions are masked or counteracted
by social costs, such as the threat of bullying, discrimination, being ﬁred, as-
saulted, or simply misunderstood. Rather than seeing someone as genderqueer
49Recall that Jenkins (forthcoming) suggests that a nonbinary person would uniquely feel
that gender-marked toilets are “uncomfortable places fraught with stress and danger.” Notice
this would also be true for a gender non-conforming woman or man, an androgynous woman
or man, or perhaps even just a woman or man who dislikes being in gender-marked spaces.
50This proposal is an adaption from McKitrick (2016), who does not emphasize trans-
friendly contexts. This proposal would, for reasons that are hopefully clear, be even further
oﬀtarget: in dominant context, no behaviors would mark someone as genderqueer, because
this category is not recognized in those contexts.
51McKitrick (2016), 2581.
52Although not framed dispositionally, a similar proposal was suggested by Riki Wilchins
(2017), 101:
“With nonbinary people, it is the identifying act of saying one is ‘nonbi-
nary’...which is central to identity?”
53I don’t leave open that assertion occurs in many ways, including writing, sign-language,
etc. Many nonbinary youth depend on social media, such as Twitter, Facebook, or YouTube,
to communicate their gender identiﬁcation. See Singh (2013), 698.
13

only in contexts where they in fact say so, a dispositionalist approach would al-
low us to count as genderqueer anyone considers themself genderqueer, such that
they would–under certain conditions–assert that they are genderqueer. Someone
who is prevented from openly asserting a genderqueer identity due social costs,
then, can still be genderqueer.
Given this, the thought goes, we should privilege how that person would
be, were it less-or-not-at-all socially costly, to be genderqueer. From here, we
arrive at the idea that someone is genderqueer just in case, were the social
costs suﬃciently low, they would assert that they do not (or do not exclusively)
identify exclusively as a man or a woman. But what are these conditions? If
they are ones where some social costs remain, then it would seem to prevent
those with low risk tolerance from being genderqueer: some people who might be
willing to assert a genderqueer identity under no social costs might be unwilling
to do so even in the face of small or infrequent costs. So leaving any social costs
in the manifestation conditions means that only some people, but not others,
can have internalized genderqueer identity.
Suppose, then, the manifestation conditions are ones with no social costs.
First, it seems likely that, in such a scenario, many persons who currently and
comfortably identify exclusively within the binary might begin to assert other,
nonbinary identities.54
That is, if being nonbinary were completely socially
accepted, such that no diﬃculties or prejudices faced those resisting binary
categorization, why think that only those who under actual conditions do not
consider themselves nonbinary would continue to do so? Regardless of which
way we go, then, it seems this view gets the extension of genderqueer wrong even
by its own lights: it will either exclude anyone with a low risk tolerance with
respect to asserting a genderqueer identity, or extend the category to persons
who in fact take themselves to have (only) a binary identity, but might think
otherwise in lieu of social repercussions.
The second, and I think even more important worry for this dispositional
account is that it metaphysically trivializes being genderqueer. Regardless of
the manifestation conditions for a dispositional account, we’ve seen that the
most plausible behaviors that, when manifested, would be socially considered
determinative of being genderqueer are assertions that one is genderqueer. But,
in that case, being genderqueer amounts to nothing more than a linguistic con-
struction: there is nothing substantively diﬀerent between someone who is and
someone who is not genderqueer. The only diﬀerence is that one, but not the
other, is disposed to use certain terms to describe themself. On this disposi-
tional account, no diﬀerence other than this, is necessary (or suﬃcient) for being
genderqueer. It is hard to see, for this reason, what the content of such terms
might be, or what the diﬀerence between ‘sincere’ and ‘non-sincere’ assertion of
identity might amount to. Genderqueer seems reduced to an empty (or at least
opaque) label.
It may turn out, in the end, that genderqueer identity amounts to nothing
54The same point holds for the scenario with very low social costs, but is more obvious
when all costs are removed.
14

more than self-describing using certain terms. But if possible, we should–and I
think can–do better. To that end, I turn now to a new proposal: genderqueer
as a critical gender kind.
4
A New Approach: Critical Gender Kinds
What explains being genderqueer?
Is asserting one’s preferred gender label
suﬃcient? Is it necessary? Is gender non-conformity or androgyny suﬃcient,
even if not necessary? These questions are complicated by the fact that, as we’ve
seen, purely external factors are insuﬃcient for understanding genderqueer, and
appealing instead to gender identity only pushes us to ask what might constitute
a genderqueer identity. While it is tempting to think of this identity in terms
of wholly internal features, such as a sense of norm relevance or a disposition to
assert an identity claim, we’ve seen why these approaches fall short. So what
could the diﬀerence between genderqueer and non-genderqueer persons amount
to?
The solution, I suggest, lies in seeing genderqueer as designated not in terms
of external or internal features, but rather in terms of political features.
In
particular, I suggest that being genderqueer is based on manifesting a particular
kind of resistance to the assumption that one’s exclusive and exhaustive gender
options are being a man or being a woman. To be genderqueer, on this view,
is to resist the ideology that demands that one exclusively be either a man or
a woman, and do so based on one’s sense of one’s own gendered ontological
position.
What is the best way to understand a gender kind of this sort? I propose
that, to do so, we must recognize a new type of gender kind: critical gender
kinds.
Critical Gender Kinds: For some kind X, X is a critical gender
kind relative to a given society iﬀmembership in X is predicated on
manifesting personal resistance against the dominant gender ideol-
ogy in that society.55
Note that, on this deﬁnition, members of critical gender kinds not only exter-
nalize resistance to dominant gender ideology, but do so in a personal way–that
is, resistance motivated by personal reasons for opposing the dominant gender
ideology. Personal resistance is, on my view, a broad category that contains at
least two importantly distinct, but compatible modes of resistance: ideological
personal resistance and existential personal resistance. We can understand these
as follows:
Ideological Personal Resistance: To manifest ideological per-
sonal resistance to dominant gender ideology is to engage in behav-
ior that challenges that ideology, where this behavior stems from or
otherwise expresses one’s ideological commitments.
55Following Haslanger (manuscript), I here use ‘ideology’ to mark a nefarious system of
social meaning that guides practical life.
15

Existential Personal Resistance: To manifest existential per-
sonal resistance to dominant gender ideology is to engage in behav-
ior that challenges that ideology, where this behavior stems from or
otherwise expresses one’s own perceived or claimed gendered cate-
gorization (or lack thereof).
Ideological personal resistance is a common practice, shared among a va-
riety of activists, allies, and members of gender and sexual minority groups.
For example, whenever someone speaks out against sexist, transphobic, or het-
eronormative practices and does so from their ideological commitment to gender
or sexual equality, this person enacts ideological personal resistance to dominant
gender ideology. Attending take Back the Night marches or gay pride parades,
voting for politicians who support trans-rights, donating to organizations that
advocate for women’s reproductive rights, using gender-neutral pronouns, or
having a gender non-conforming aesthetic are just a few examples of resistant
behaviors that are open to everyone. Many engage in these behaviors not (or
not only) because of their own gendered position, but (also) because they have
values and beliefs that commit them to resist dominant assumptions, norms, and
practices concerning gender. These persons are, in my view, jointly engaged in
ideological personal resistance to dominant gender ideology.
More can and should be said about ideological personal resistance.
But
because my account of genderqueer relies on the notion of existential personal
resistance, I devote my attention to explicating this notion. Unlike its sibling,
existential personal resistance stems from one’s sensed or claimed place within
gender categories – typically, a position that is deviant given the practices,
norms, and structures that arise from and sustain dominant gender ideology.
To more sharply distinguish between these modes of resistance, suppose you
meet two persons who use the gender neutral pronouns ‘they/them’. One does
not consider themself nonbinary in any sense, but uses these pronouns because
they are committed to making English more hospitable for nonbinary persons.
The other uses these pronouns because they consider themself genderqueer, and
so take ‘she’ and ‘he’ to misdescribe their sensed or claimed gender. In this case,
it may be that both persons manifest ideological person-personal resistance to
the dominant gender assumption that everyone is either as a man or a woman.
But only the second person manifests existential personal resistance to this as-
sumption. And this is because the second, but not the ﬁrst, engages in resistant
behavior–i.e., their use of gender neutral pronouns–that stems from their sensed
or claimed ontological position as neither a woman nor a man. In line with this
example, I propose that the key mark of existential personal resistance is the
source of one’s resistant behaviors: namely, as stemming from or expressing
one’s own sensed or claimed gendered categorization.
The distinction between ideological and existential personal resistance helps
us articulate the diﬀerence between allies of and members of gender kinds such as
genderqueer, trans, androgyne, etc.: while both resist dominant gender ideology,
members of these kinds resist (at least in part) because they take themselves
to occupy a deviant ontological position. Who they take themselves to be is
16

itself incompatible with or otherwise does not conform to normative ontological
positions within dominant gender ideology.
Importantly, though, this is not
an internalistic notion of kind membership: while a sensed or claimed gender
categorization goes into critical gender kind membership, it is not suﬃcient
for kind membership.
Manifested resistance is also required.
Moreover, by
including ‘claimed’ alongside ‘sensed’, I am not attempting to capture gender
identity in Jenkins’s or McKitrick’s sense.
This ‘claiming’ can be based on
political (or perhaps religious) motivations, as well as based on an internal felt
sense of gender authenticity, relevance, or belonging.56
To be clear, critical gender kinds are not the only political gender kinds–i.e.,
the only gender kinds whose members stand in personal, reactive relationships
to dominant gender ideology. Everyone manifests some personal reactions–both
existential and ideological–to gender ideology.
When these reactions aﬃrms
dominant ideology, we can describe those who manifest them as belonging to
non-critical gender kinds:
Non-Critical Gender Kinds: For some kind X, X is a non-critical
gender kind relative to a given society iﬀmembership in X is predi-
cated on manifesting personal reenforcement of the dominant gender
ideology in that society.
As above, we can divide personal reenforcement into both ideological and
existential modes. Someone who considers themself a man and on this basis
enacts a hegemonic masculinity (relational to his class, race, etc.) manifests
existential personal reenforcement of the dominant assumption that men ought
to behave in stereotypically masculine ways. In contrast, someone who considers
themself a woman but supports men’s rights groups or uses slurs to describe gay
men, and does so on the basis of their beliefs about how men (and women) ought
to behave, manifests ideological, but not existential personal reenforcement of
this dominant assumption.
A single individual can belong to a variety of gender kinds. The critical/non-
critical distinction is not a further binary into which individuals can be exclu-
sively sorter. We all belong to a variety of political gender kinds–e.g., critical and
non-critical–as well as externalist and internalist gender kinds. My focus here
is on genderqueer as a particular, critical gender kind. But my account does not
preclude that genderqueer persons simultaneously belong to many more gender
kinds.
Of course, saying that genderqueer is a critical gender kind is nowhere near
the level of speciﬁcity needed to understand this kind. Even once we narrow our
scope to dominant Western contexts, we ﬁnd there are many possible critical
gender kinds, and they can be identiﬁed to various degrees of speciﬁcity, relative
to how ﬁne-grained one describes (an aspect of) the dominant gender ideology.57
56Thanks to Alicia Fowler for alerting me to the possibility of religious-based resistance to
the binary assumption.
57Some may not want to count these kinds as gender kinds: again, I am uninterested in
ﬁghting over ‘what gender is’ as if it must be one thing. It is plain that critical gender kinds
are an important part of the social landscape related to gender, and that is enough for me.
17

To draw this out, and begin to motivate thinking of genderqueer as a critical
gender kind, let’s consider the gender ideology that dominates in most Western
societies.
Very broadly speaking, a vast number of social groups resist this
ideology (often/always in a personal way): to name but a name, trans men,
trans women, abortion rights activists, butch dykes, drag queens, genderqueers,
stay-at-home dads, female powerlifters, tomboys, polyamorous persons and on
and on.
Many groups and individuals, and in many ways, resist normative,
gendered social expectations regarding their bodies, presentations, gender roles,
and other ways of being.
On one way of thinking about critical gender kinds, then, all of these various
and sundry groups might be classiﬁed together within one kind:
(Western) Gender Deﬁers: Someone is a (Western) gender deﬁer
just in case they enact personal resistance against the dominant
gender ideology in Western societies.
In at least two ways, this deﬁnition is not particularly illuminating. First,
how might one go about deciding who does or does not count as a gender
deﬁer without a more detailed analysis of what composes the dominant gender
ideology in question? Second, with respect to genderqueer, if genderqueers make
up but one piece of gender deﬁers, this does not illuminate what is unique to
genderqueer. It seems that, in order to give an analysis of genderqueer, we need
a better idea of what aspect of dominant gender ideology genderqueers resist, as
well as how they do so. All in all: more details are needed.
To this end, I propose a more (but still not very) ﬁne-grained, tripartite
picture of Western dominant gender ideology.58 On this picture, the ideology
can be thought of as having three distinct, but interconnected and mutually
reinforcing axes: the genital assumption, the binary assumption, and the so-
cial assumption.
While no one of these axes can be fully understood apart
from the others, for the sake of analysis we can somewhat artiﬁcially take each
individually:
58This picture diverges from, but was inspired by a description of ‘the postcolonial under-
standing of gender’ in Tan (manuscript).
18

The genital assumption: Someone’s gender is determined by their
natal anatomical reproductive features.
The binary assumption: The only possible genders are the bi-
nary, exclusive, and exhaustive kinds men and women.59
The social assumption:
Someone’s gender determines60 what
their social role ought to be.61
All three axes together establish an ideology that exclusively divides bodies
into two categories, and establishes a self-perpetuating hierarchy between them
with those sexed as males placed in a position of dominance over those sexed as
females.62 With this framework, we could spell out a variety of (non-exclusive!)
critical gender kinds that existentially or ideologically resist the genital and so-
cial assumptions. For example, anyone resisting the assumption that they belong
59The binary assumption builds normative social roles into men and women (perhaps in
addition to genital information). A genderqueer person does not reject the idea that they
must have, e.g., either a penis or a vagina: in rejecting the binary assumption, they are
rejecting the notion that they must exclusively belong to one of two kinds with normative
social roles.
60By this, I do not mean to imply that gender is assumed to ‘wholly determine’ one’s social
role, given that even within this ideology, people often assume that other, intersecting social
identities–such as race, class, and ability–also determine someone’s social role.
61Here I follow, but make a tripartite distinction within feminist theories on which gender
within Western contexts is “traditionally assumed to be based on a binary, mandatory system
that attributes social characteristics to sexed anatomy, with humans categorized from birth as
male vs female based on their external genitalia.” See Nagoshi, et al. (2012), 407, referencing
Hausman (2001).
62Though, of course, much more goes into the social assumptions for ‘females’ and ‘males’
than things that establish or perpetuate this hierarchy. Indeed, I do not mean to suggest that
(many aspects of) masculinity and femininity per se are problematic–an unfortunate sugges-
tion of previous versions of feminism–but rather that gendered social roles are problematic
when policed along the lines of binary, biological categories.
19

to the gender that they were assigned based on natal reproductive features–a
property I consider suﬃcient for being trans–manifests existential personal re-
sistance to the genital assumption. Similarly, anyone who considers themself a
butch lesbian, defying social expectations with respect to their presentation and
gender role, resists the social assumption.63
I propose that genderqueer is best understood as a critical gender kind that
resists the binary assumption. More speciﬁcally, I propose that its members
manifest existential personal resistance against the assumption that they must
belong to one of two (and only two!) gender kinds that do not overlap (discrete),
and where everyone fall into one of these two kinds (exhaustive). Moreover,
they do so on the basis of a sensed or claimed gender categorization that is
ontologically incompatible with this assumption. We can put this more formally
as follows:
Genderqueer: Genderqueer is a critical gender kind, such that its
members have a sensed or claimed gender categorization that con-
ﬂicts with the binary assumption, and on this basis enact resistance
against this assumption.64
On this proposed understanding of genderqueer, genderqueers externalize re-
sistance to the binary assumption, and do so in an existentially based, personal
way.65 Such resistance entails a disposition to interpretation of one’s resistant
behaviors as behaviors stemming from or otherwise expressing one’s ontological
position as in tension with this assumption. This point is important because
it demarcates genderqueer as a kind such that self-perception, and not external
interpretation, is central to membership. Without this feature of the account,
genderqueer would not exist in dominant contexts where the majority of people
lack awareness of gender possibilities outside the binary. In these contexts, no
particular presentation, use of language, and so on–short of explicit assertions
such as “I am not a man or a woman!”–would be interpreted as resisting the
binary assumption. Moreover, as we’ve seen in §3.1, no particular external fea-
tures make someone genderqueer. Androgyny, use of gender neutral pronouns,
etc. are features that not only are not universal among genderqueers, but also
63While various targets of resistance are compatible, in principle one might resist only one
axis. In fact, one way of interpreting the position of ‘radical feminists’ who discount trans
identities is that, while they resist the social assumption, they reenforce the genital and binary
assumptions.
64I do not mean to suggest that all genderqueers resist the binary assumption under this
theoretical guise. Most often, they intentionally reject the idea that they must be neatly and
permanently categorized as either a man or woman–that they must comply with the system
of gender classiﬁcation–and I suggest this amounts to resisting the binary assumption. This
rejection is still very much ideological resistance, even if not conceptualized that way. This is
the familiar feminist point that the ’personal is political’: even if a genderqueer person does
not conceptualize (e.g.) use of gender-neutral pronouns as ideological resistance, it is.
65As the binary assumption is stated, someone who moves between male and female identity,
but never rejects or accepts both simultaneously, is not in conﬂict with the binary assumption.
I am torn about this case: if one thinks that such a person does resist the binary assumption,
’inﬂexibility’ or ’permanence’ of one’s gender could be added to the binary assumption.
20

are shared by some person who are not genderqueer. No particular external
feature(s) are either necessary or suﬃcient to be genderqueer.
Nor do I think any internal feature–for example, a dislike of being gendered
within the binary, or an intention to resist the binary assumption–is suﬃcient.
Genderqueer, for better and worse, isn’t simply in the head. For one thing, this
would overextend genderqueer. No doubt, many people who would not consider
themselves (or be considered) genderqueer dislike being gendered within the
binary, but have resigned themselves to it or otherwise accepted it as part of
their lives. For another, this would remove the force of queer within genderqueer.
If being genderqueer were simply in the head, a world functioning smoothly
according to the binary assumption, with no one ever materially challenging
this binary, could very well be a world full of genderqueers. This, to me, seems
like a reductio: resistance to gender binary systems requires more than mere
thought. This point aligns with genderqueers’ description of being nonbinary as
a way of “reject[ing] such [binary] systems that lead to harmful stereotypes and
oppression” and “breaking down what it means to be a gendered person in the
world.”66 Neither resistance nor breaking down others’ assumptions can occur
merely within one’s own head.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, I am skeptical that any single mental
content accompanies sensing or claiming gender categorization outside of the
binary. Most obviously, the construction of binary gender kinds (men/women),
as well as the latitude individuals have within them and how individuals are
socialized into them, vary dramatically across intersections with other social
identities, such as race, class, and ability. For this reason as well, then, my
model intentionally leaves open that within the group of genderqueer persons,
one can (and I suspect will) ﬁnd a vast range of concepts about and attitudes
towards these binary kinds.67
What does matter, then? Genderqueer, I suggest, is found at the intersection
of external and internal features. In particular, it is an certain way of being in
the world–namely, enacting existential personal resistance to the practices and
structures that arise from and reinforce the binary assumption. This enacting
is multiply realizable: again, there is no one, much less one right way to be gen-
derqueer. Many forms of enactment are possible, so long as they are taken from
an existential stance. Some common ways will be familiar: using gender-neutral
pronouns (and other terms, like titles), cultivating gender non-conforming aes-
thetics, asserting one’s gender status, queering personal relationships, defying
sexual binaries, and what I’ll call ‘space switching’, or moving between male and
female gendered spaces. While, again, none of these features is unique to or re-
quired in order to be genderqueer, they are familiar tools that genderqueers use
to resist the idea that they themselves fall into one of two discrete, exhaustive
gender kinds. What they share–and what is, I think, a constraint on behaviors
that resist dominant gender ideology–is that they violate what Kate Bornstein
(1994) call the ‘gender rules’: the binary set of norms that are imposed and en-
66Taluson (2017).
67Thanks to Jorge Meneses for raising this point.
21

forced (via social practices and material structures) upon individuals according
to the sexed interpretation of their bodies.68 Violating these rules challenges
or deﬁes such practices and structures. As these practices and structures are
many, so too are the possible modes of resistance, which we again can expect to
vary widely across intersectional contexts and individuals. To name but a few:
1. Gender-neutral pronouns: Communicating that one uses gender neu-
tral pronouns (e.g., ze/zim/zis, they/them/theirs) rather than a gender
speciﬁc pronoun (e.g., he/him/his, she/her/hers).69
2. Gender non-conforming aesthetic: Gender presentations that violate
cultural gendered expectations (e.g., cross-dressing, androgyny).70
3. Gender status assertion: Articulating one own sense of gender kind
membership (e.g., ‘I am nonbinary’, ‘I am genderﬂuid’).
4. Queering personal relationships: Fluidity between or violation of tra-
ditional gender roles within personal relationships (e.g., taking on certain
traditional female parenting roles as well as male roles, gender play in
sexual relationships).71 72
5. Defying sexual binary: Identifying one’s sexuality outside of the ‘gay’,
‘straight’, or ‘bisexual’ taxonomy, which is based on a binary gender sys-
tem.73
68This approach, I think, nicely aligns with genderqueers persons shared sense of ignoring
and/or breaking gender rules. As one genderqueer person comments in “Gender Can Be Both
Liberating And Stiﬂing At The Same Time” (2018): “I’m what people would be if gender
rules didn’t really exist.”
69And similarly for other gender neutral language–e.g., ‘Mx.’ over ’Mr.’ or ’Ms.’, ‘parent’
over ‘mother’ or ‘father’, or using a chosen, gender ambiguous name over one’s birth name. The
importance of generating gender neutral language in the service of breaking down the binary
assumption cannot, I think, be understated, given the close relationship between language and
available concepts. See, e.g., Wittig (1992), 55: “We must produce a political transformation
of the key concepts, that is of the concepts which are strategic for us. For there is another
order of materiality, that of language, and language is worked upon from within by these
strategic concepts.”
70Transgressive gender aesthetics are a long standing tradition of queering gender. Marjorie
Garber (1992), for example, discusses transvestism as a way to not only create a crisis not
only for the gender binary, but for the stability of gender categorization altogether.
71Mo, a female-assigned genderqueer person describes this enactment of genderqueerness.
“My feelings about my gender are not dependent on [how I am perceived],” they say, “but
are more tied in to how I identify with people (men as much as women, and trans people of
all kinds) and how I relate to my family (as a husband and dad), etc.” Mo Interview (2018).
(Mo’s last name has been omitted to maintain anonymity.)
72Any queering of sexual relationships is typically met with the strongest negative reaction
from dominant culture.
According to Murray David (1983), this is because these gender
violations directly challenge others’ pervasive reliance on binary sexual norms to organize
their lives. Cited in Bornstein (1994), 72.
73Nagoshi, et al. (2012) provides qualitative empirical data concerning the close relationship
between gender and sexual identities. At one genderqueer participant, AJ, reported, “I identify
as queer as my sexual identity... I don’t really see that there really is a binary. So I wouldn’t
even say bisexual, because that’s still acknowledging that there’s a binary system.” (217).
For further empirical discussion, see Bradford, et al. (2018), p. 5. See also Dembroﬀ(2016)
for philosophical discussion on the relationship between gender and sexual identity.
22

6. Space switching: Fluidity between female and male coded spaces in
situations with no gender neutral alternative (e.g. using both men’s and
women’s bathrooms, moving between male and female friend groups).74
This list is by no means exhaustive of the many ways in which genderqueer
people manifest resistance to being held captive within the gender binary.75 My
purpose is not to provide an exhaustive list of ways to be genderqueer, but
rather to illustrate the multifarious nature of genderqueer. While some of these
enactments (e.g. assertion) will be easily interpretable by other persons, some
(e.g., gender non-conformity) will not. Moreover, genderqueers will not use the
same or perhaps any of these enactments at all times or spaces. Someone who
uses gender-neutral pronouns with friends may not do so at work. Someone who
will assert a genderqueer identity in explicitly trans-inclusive groups may not do
so outside of these groups. Genderqueers enact their identity in multitude ways
because being genderqueer is not about creating and obeying a new set of gender
norms: it is about throwing out gender norms. That is: genderqueer is not
about maintaining a grey, androgynous middle ground between ‘masculine’ and
‘feminine’, ‘man’ and ‘woman’, but rather resisting the command to accept these
binary concepts as the concepts by which one must be identiﬁed, labeled, and
evaluated. This point is further reinforced by qualitative empirical research on
genderqueer identities. Bradford et al (2018) notes that while models of gender
typically expected gender to be stable and predictable, “having the agency to
make decisions regarding one’s body and identity may be an integral component
of genderqueer identity development” – one that often results in a “process of
experimentation.”76
Here, two key upshots of the proposed view comes into focus. First, being
genderqueer is context sensitive.77 Because genderqueer, on my proposal, in-
cludes personal resistance to the binary assumption, it is largely constrained
to contexts where Western gender ideology is dominant.78 This is not to pre-
clude that there may be a closely related kind–one whose members challenge–
personally or not–the binary assumption. Such a category would unify gen-
derqueer with the variety of genders beyond male and female recognized in other
societies, such as Indonesia’s waria, Native American two-spirit, and Samoan
74Like all of the above, space switching is a way of breaking and also ﬂuidly navigating binary
gender rules.
“[Fluidity across gender rules generates] the ability to freely and knowingly
become one or many of a limitless number of gender for any length of time, at any rate of
change. Gender ﬂuidity recognises no borders or rules of gender.” (Bornstein (1994), 52.)
75For empirical data on the various strategies toward genderqueer expression, see Richard
et al. (2016).
76Bradford (2018), 8.
77As stated, the proposal also leaves open the possibility of being genderqueer to diﬀerent
degrees. While I’m open to this possibility, I will set it aside, as I think a framework that
pronounces who is more (or less) genderqueer would not be productive.
78With perhaps a few exceptions: it seems possible that an individual who is from a Western
context might travel to a context where the binary assumption is not part of the dominant
gender ideology, and yet retain their intentional resistance to that assumption. It also seems
possible that someone outside of a Western context might nevertheless have exposure to and
so adopt a genderqueer identity. I do not have strong views about these borderline cases.
23

fa’afaﬁne.79
Second, being genderqueer, on my proposal, requires that an individual
must–to some extent and in some context–manifest personal resistance to the bi-
nary assumption.80 No doubt, some will ﬁnd this result unpalatable, for reasons
discussed in §3.2. Many people prefer to think of being genderqueer as some-
thing that is wholly internal, such that someone could be entirely closeted and
remain genderqueer. This internalized approach is reiﬁed by common narratives
of ‘discovering’ or ‘realizing’ that one is genderqueer, as opposed to ‘choosing
to be’ or ‘becoming’ genderqueer. At the same time, these narratives are coun-
terbalanced by other, also common narratives such as, “I [ﬁnally] get to be who
I want to be,” or “I... try to get to a place where I can safely be myself.”81
One might worry that my account precludes those in hostile environments with
heavy costs of defying gender rules from being genderqueer.
In response, I ﬁrst want to emphasize that, on my proposal, manifesting
resistance is multiply realizable and not based on others’ reactions or inter-
pretations. There are myriad ways that someone could manifest resistance to
the gender binary without incurring heavy social costs, even in hostile envi-
ronments.
While pronoun pins, cultivating androgyny, or bare assertion are
all clear potential ways of resisting the binary assumption, nothing so loud is
required on my proposal, which emphasizes self-perception over others’ percep-
tions. As one agender person put this, “[S]ometimes when we dress ourselves,
or when we ﬁnd...moments of authenticity, they are acts of resistance even when
they’re small.”82 My proposal leaves these ‘small acts of resistance’ open to gen-
derqueer persons, and does not require social uptake of any given individual’s
acts of resistance.83
That said, it is at least possible that social costs could prevent someone from
enacting resistance to the binary in any way. Where I diverge, though, is in the
interpretation of this situation: the standard reading says that someone is ‘truly’
genderqueer, and unjustly prevented from self-expression. In contrast, I read the
situation as one in which someone is unjustly prevented from being genderqueer.
Referring to someone as a ‘closeted’ genderqueer–rather than someone who is
forced into binary classiﬁcation against their wishes–downplays both the power
of social forces over our access to social identities as well as how oppressive
79This feature of my proposal allows us to compare critical gender kinds in a given context
with gender kinds across contexts. This is important, as it gives us a framework for interpreting
common claims about the universality of nonbinary and trans identities. For example, if we
interpret ‘trans’, in such a claim, as anyone whose existence challenges the genital assumption,
then we can look for any time or society to identify such persons.
If we interpret it as
concerning existential personal resistance to the genital assumption, then our search will be
constrained to a contexts where this assumption is dominant.
80My proposal might, in this sense, be thought in the spirit of Butler’s (1997) ‘symbolic
interactionism’, or the idea that an individual’s gender is created an sustained through “re-
ﬂecting back images of the self as objects.” Hird (2012), 585.
81“Gender Can Be Both Liberating And Stiﬂing At The Same Time” (2018), Brehob (2018).
82“Gender Can Be Both Liberating And Stiﬂing At The Same Time” (2018)
83That said, given the political nature of this category, some degree of social uptake of its
members’ collective resistant actions does seem required for the category’s existence.
24

that power can be.84
Someone who is forced to follow all the gender rules
out of fear is, by my lights, prevented by an unjust social system from being
genderqueer–the cost of ideological resistance is untenable. This is not merely
a stiﬂing of self-expression, but a stiﬂing of self-realization: if genderqueer is
centrally about ideological resistance, oppressive social factors have the potential
to prevent its realization. In contexts where someone who wants to resist binary
classiﬁcation faces with untenable costs of doing so, the central injustice of is
not, I think, a lack of recognition. Rather, it is a lack of autonomy over one’s
gender classiﬁcation. Emily Brehob, who identiﬁes as intersex and nonbinary,
describes being caught in such a situation:
Now that I live in Texas, I ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to walk the line of
aﬃrming my identity to myself while remaining safe. I ﬁnd myself
reverting to the mean: growing my hair long, letting it slide when
people call me a woman... Is my identity even real if I don’t express
it?
...
There something incredibly powerful–revolutionary, even–
about challenging someone’s understanding of gender with your very
existence.85
Understanding genderqueer as a critical gender kind whose members man-
ifest existential resistance to the binary assumption helps us understand the
experiences of persons like Brehob.
Being genderqueer is not simply in the
head: it challenges dominant gender ideology ‘with one’s very existence’. To
understand this gender kind, we needed a new model–one that captures the in-
terplay between ideological resistance and gender identiﬁcation. I’ve proposed
one such model, and no doubt there are others. But if one thing is clear, it
is that if we are to understand this cultural revolution, we need new concepts,
new language, and new metaphysics. Armed with these tools, we can join Riki
Wilchins in wondering if we are “unconsciously and ﬁnally treading towards the
end of gender categories as we know them.”86 Either way, I agree with Wilchins:
“It will be fun ﬁnding out.”87 88
5
Bibliography
Aizura, A. (2006) “Of Borders and Homes:
The Imaginary Community of
(Trans)Sexual Citizenship” Inter-Asia Cultural Studies 7, no. 2 289-309.
84I do not suggest this point applies to woman and man, which might be best understood
as internalist kinds.
85Brehob (2018)
86Wilchins (2017), 102.
87Wilchins (2017), 102.
88Many thanks to Matt Andler, Elizabeth Barnes, Joanna Blake-Turner, Michael Della
Rocca, Brian Earp, Alicia Fowler, Daniel Greco, Austen Hall, Katharine Jenkins, Sam Lebens,
Moya Mapps, Laurie Paul, Naomi Scheman, Yuan Yuan, the students in my Fall 2018 Feminist
Philosophy course, and audiences at MIT, Minds of Our Own 2018, University of St. Andrews,
Tufts, University of Illinois at Chicago, Rutgers, Yale, and the University of Nottingham for
helpful feedback on earlier versions of this paper.
25

Aoki, R. (2010) “On living well and coming free.” In Gender Outlaws: The
next generation.
Eds.
Kate Bernstein and S. Bear Bergman.
Berkeley:
Seal Press.
Andler, M. (2017) “Gender Identity and Exclusion: A Reply to Jenkins.” Ethics
127 (4):883-895.
Appiah, A. (1994) “Race, Culture, Identity: Misunderstood Connections”. The
Tanner Lectures on Human Values.17:51-136.
Appiah, A. (November 9, 2016) “There is no such thing as western civilisation.”
The Guardian.
´Asta (Sveinsdott´ır) (2011) “The Metaphysics of Sex and Gender.” In Feminist
Metaphysics, ed. Charlotte Witt. Springer.
Bach, T. (2012) “Gender Is a Natural Kind with a Historical Essence.” Ethics
122(2), pp. 231-272.
Barnes, E. (forthcoming) “Gender and Gender Terms” Nous.
Bettcher, T. (2009) “Trans Identities and First-Person Authority.” In You’ve
Changed: Sex Reassignment and Personal Identity, ed. Laurie Shrage. Ox-
ford University Press.
Bettcher, T. (2013) “Trans Women and the Meaning of ‘Woman’.” In Philos-
ophy of Sex: Contemporary Readings, Sixth Edition. Eds. A. Soble, N.
Power & R. Halwani. Rowan & Littleﬁeld, pp. 233-250.
Bettcher, T. (2014) “Trapped in the Wrong Theory: Rethinking Trans Oppres-
sion and Resistance.” Signs 39(2): 383-406.
Bornstein, K. (2009) “Who You Calling A Tranny?” KateBornstein.Typepad.com
(Blog)
Bornstein, K. (1994) Gender Outlaw: on men, women, and the rest of us, Lon-
don: Routledge.
Bradford, N., Rider, G., Catalpa, J., Morrow, Q., Berg, D., Spencer, K., &
McGuire, J. (2018) “Creating gender: A thematic analysis of genderqueer
narratives.” International Journal of Transgenderism. DOI: 10.1080/15532739.2018.1474516.
Brehob, E. (June 25, 2018) “Are you Still Queer if People Can?t Always Perceive
Your Identity?” Slate.
Briggs, R. and George, B.R. (manuscript). “Science Fiction Double Feature:
Trans Liberation on Twin Earth.”
Butler, J. (1999) Gender Trouble. London: Routledge, 2nd edition.
Chan, Vincy. (September 7, 2017) “Muscle has no kind: a conversation with
genderqueer bodybuilder Siufung Law” Still Loud
Clements, C. (2017) “What is genderqueer?” Healthline
Cohen, C. (2005) “Punks, Bulldaggers, and Welfare Queens: The Radical Po-
tential of Queer Politics” In Black Queer Studies: A Critical Anthology,
ed. Patrick Johnson and Mae G. Henderson, 21?51. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Dembroﬀ, R. (2016) “What is Sexual Orientation?”
Philosopher’s Imprint
16(3): 1-27.
Dembroﬀ, R. and Wodak. D. (2018) “He/She/Ze/They” Ergo 5: 371-406.
Diamond, LM and Butterworth, M. (2008) “Questioning gender and sexual
identity: Dynamic links over time.” Sex Roles 59: 365?376.
26

Dowling, A. (February 24, 2017) “Meet TV’s First Non-Binary-Gender Char-
acter: Asia Kate Dillon of Showtime’s ’Billions’.” Hollywood Reporter.
Ferguson, S. (June 5, 2017) “The Importance of Non-Binary Models in the
Fashion Industry.” TeenVogue
Fernandez, N. (2010) “Transliteration” In Gender Outlaws: The next genera-
tion. Eds. Kate Bernstein and S. Bear Bergman. Berkeley: Seal Press.
Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality, Volume 1, London: Penguin.
Fraser, N. (1998). Social Justice in the Age of Identity Politics: Redistribution,
Recognition, and Participation. Tanner Lectures On Human Values, vol.
19, ed. G. Peterson, University of Utah Press, pp. 1-67.
Fricker, M. (2015) Epistemic Injustice. Oxford University Press.
Galupo, M., Pulice-Farrow, L., & Ramirez, J. (2018) “’Like a Constantly Flow-
ing River’: Gender Identity Flexibility among Non-binary Transgender In-
dividuals”. In Identity ﬂexibility during adulthood: Perspectives in adult
development. Sinnott, J. D. (Ed). Springer.
“Gender Can Be Both Liberating And Stiﬂing At The Same Time.” (June 26
2018) [video] Huﬃngton Post
“Genderqueer.”
(Accessed 6 June, 2018) Merriam-Webster.com.
Merriam-
Webster, n.d. Web.
“Genderqueer.” (Accessed 27 June, 2018) Wikipedia.com.
GenderTrender (Jan. 11, 2018) “Trans Teen Apologizes For Campaign Against
Lesbian Octogenarians” URL: https://gendertrender.wordpress.com/2018/01/11/trans-
teen-apologizes-for-campaign-against-lesbian-octogenarians/
Green, J. (2004) Becoming a Visible Man. 1st edn. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt
University Press.
Greenberg, Z. (Oct. 24, 2017) “When a student says, ‘I’m not a boy or a girl’.”
The New York Times.
Halperin, D. (1995) Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Haslanger, S. (manuscript) “Nonideal, Critical, Ameliorative, Realist Ontology:
Say What?”
Haslanger, S. (2012) “Gender and Race: (What) Are They? (What) Do We
Want Them To Be?” In Haslanger, ed., Resisting Reality: Social Construc-
tion and Social Critique, 221-247. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hesse, M. (Sept. 20, 2014) “When no gender ﬁts: A quest to be seen as just a
person.” The Washington Post.
Heyes, C. (2003) “Feminist Solidarity after Queer Theory: The Case of Trans-
gender?” Sign 48(4) 1093-1120.
Hinchy, J. (2014) “Obscenity, Moral Contagion and Masculinity: Hijras in Pub-
lic Space in Colonial North India.” Asian Studies Review 38(2): 274-294.
Hird, MJ. (2002) “For a sociology of transsexualism.” Sociology 36: 577?595.
hooks, b. (2008) Outlaw Culture, Resisting Representations, Reprint of (1994)
ed. New York: Routledge.
James, S. E., Herman, J. L., Rankin, S., Keisling, M., Mottet, L., & Anaﬁ, M.
(2016). “The Report of the 2015 US Transgender Survey.” Washington, DC.
27

Retrieved from http://www.transequality.org/sites/default/ﬁles/docs/USTSFull-
Report-FINAL.PDF.
Jenkins, K. (forthcoming) “Toward an Account of Gender Identity.” Ergo
Jenkins, K. (2016) “Amelioration and Inclusion: Gender Identity and the Con-
cept of Woman.” Ethics 126(2): 394-421.
Kean, Jessica & Bolton, Rillark. (October 25, 2015) “Explainer: what is gen-
derqueer?” The Conversation
Koyama, E. (2006) “Whose Feminism Is It Anyway? The Unspoken Racism
of the Trans Inclusion Debate.” In The Transgender Studies Reader, ed.
Sustan Stryker and Stephen Whittle, pp. 698-705. New York: Routledge.
Kusalik, T. (2010) “Identity, schmidentity” In Gender Outlaws: The next gen-
eration. Eds. Kate Bernstein and S. Bear Bergman. Berkeley: Seal Press.
Mamone, T. (Feb. 15, 2017) “9 Things Not to Say to a Non-Binary Person.”
Everyday Feminism.
McKitrick, J. (2015) “A Dispositional Account of Gender.” Philosophical Stud-
ies 172: 2575-2589.
Medina, J. (2012)“ Hermeneutical Injustice and Polyphonic Contextualism: So-
cial Silences and Shared Hermeneutical Responsibilities”. Social Epistemol-
ogy 26:(2): 201-220.
Mo Interview (2018). Email correspondence.
Moore, S. (November 4, 2015) “It’s good to be genderqueer but don’t forget the
sexual radicals who paved the way? The Guardian.
Nagoshi, J., Brzuzy, S., & Terrell, H. (2012) “Deconstructing the complex per-
ceptions of gender roles, gender identity, and sexual orientation among
transgender individuals.” Feminism & Psychology 22(4): 405-422.
Papisova, V. (Feb. 12, 2016) “Here’s what it means when you don’t identify as
a girl or a boy.” Teen Vogue.
Paul, L.A. (2012) “Metaphysics as modeling: the handmaiden’s tale.” Philo-
sophical Studies 160(1):1-29.
Penny, L. (October 31, 2015) “How to be a Genderqueer Feminist.” BuzzFeed
News.
Petrow, S. (May 9, 2016) “Don’t know what ‘genderqueer’ is? Meet someone
who identiﬁes that way.” The Washington Post
Richards, C., Bouman, W. P., Seal, L., Barker, M. J., Nieder, T. O., & Tsjoen,
G. (2016). “Non-binary or genderqueer genders.” International Review of
Psychiatry, 28(1), 95?102. doi:10.3109/09540261.2015.1106446
Rimes, K. A., Goodship, N., Ussher, G., Baker, D., & West, E. (2018). “Non-
binary and binary transgender youth: Comparison of mental health, self-
harm, suicidality, substance use and victimization experiences.” Interna-
tional Journal of Transgenderism, Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/
15532739.2017.1370627
Salamon, G. (2010) Assuming a Body: Transgender and Rhetorics of Material-
ity. New York: Columbia University Press.
Scheman, N. (1997) “Queering the Center by Centering the Queer: Reﬂections
on Transsexuals and Secular Jews.” In Meyers, ed., Feminists Rethink the
Self, 124-162. Boulder: Westview Press.
28

Scheman, N. (2016) “Looking Back on “Queering the Center””. TSQ: Trans-
gender Studies Quarterly 3(2): 212-219.
Serano, J. (2016) Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the
Scapegoating of Femininity (2nd ed.). Berkeley, California: Seal Press.
Singh, A. (2013) “Transgender Youth of Color and Resilience: Negotiating Op-
pression and Finding Support.” Sex Roles 68: 690?702.
Sopelsa, B. (March 27, 2017) “AP Stylebook embraces ‘they’ as singular, gender-
neutral pronoun.” NBC News.
Stoljar, N. (2011). “Diﬀerent Women. Gender and the Realism-Nominalism
Debate”. In Charlotte Witt (ed.), Feminist Metaphysics. Springer Verlag
27?46.
Stryker, S. (1994) “My Words to Victor Frankenstein Above the Village of
Chamounix: Performing Transgender Rage.” GLQ: Gay and Lesbian Quar-
terly 1: 237-54.
Talusan, M. (November 20, 2017) “This is What Gender-Nonbinary People Look
Like” Them.
Tan, X. (manuscript) “Does Transness Travel? Should it? And How?”
Warren, J., Smalley, K., & Barefoot, K. (2016) “Psychological well-being among
transgender and genderqueer individuals.” International Journal of Trans-
genderism 17(3-4): 114?123.
Watson, L. (2015) “What is a ‘woman’ anyway?” Logos Journal
Weiss, S. (Feb.
15, 2018) “9 Things People Get Wrong About Being Non-
Binary.” Teen Vogue
White, A., Moeller, J., Ivcevis, Z. & Brackett, M. (2018) “Gender Identity
and Sexual Identity Labels Used by U.S. High School Students: A Co-
Occurrence Network Analysis.” Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gen-
der Diversity 5(2): 243?252.
Whittle, S. (1996) “Gender Fucking or Fucking Gender? Current Cultural Con-
tribution to Theories of Gender Blending.” In Current Cultural Contribu-
tions to theories of Gender Blending, (eds) King, D. and Ekins R. London:
Routledge, pp 196-214.
Wilchins, R. (2017) Burn the Binary! Riverdale Avenue Books.
Wittig, M. (1992) “The Straight Mind” In Out There: Marginalization and
Contemporary Cultures, eds. R. Ferguson, M. Never, T. Minh-ha, C. West.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Zulch, M. (2015) “7 Things Genderqueer People Want You to Know.” Bustle
URL: https://www.bustle.com/articles/124009-7-things-genderqueer-people-
want-you-to-know
29

