 
 
History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950–1965: from irrelevance to relevance
Author(s): Martin Niss
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 63, No. 3 (May 2009), pp. 243-287
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134313
Accessed: 28-02-2023 12:48 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134313?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2009) 63:243-287
DOI 10.1007/S00407-008-0039-5
History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965:
from irrelevance to relevance
Martin Niss
Received: 27 October 2008 / Published online: 6 December 2008
© Springer- Verlag 2008
Abstract This is the second in a series of three papers that charts the history of
the Lenz-Ising model (commonly called just the Ising model in the physics litera-
ture) in considerable detail, from its invention in the early 1920s to its recognition
as an important tool in the study of phase transitions by the late 1960s. By focusing
on the development in physicists' perception of the model's ability to yield physical
insight - in contrast to the more technical perspective in previous historical accounts,
for example, Brush (Rev Modern Phys 39: 883-893, 1967) and Hoddeson et al.
(Out of the Crystal Maze. Chapters from the History of Solid-State Physics. Oxford
University Press, New York, pp. 489-6 1 6, 1 992) - the series aims to cover and explain
in depth why this model went from relative obscurity to a prominent position in modern
physics, and to examine the consequences of this change. In the present paper, which
is self-contained, I deal with the development from the early 1950s to the 1960s and
document that this period witnessed a major change in the perception of the model: In
the 1950s it was not in the cards that the model was to become a pivotal tool of theo-
retical physics in the following decade. In fact, I show, based upon recollections and
research papers, that many of the physicists in the 1950s interested in understanding
phase transitions saw the model as irrelevant for this endeavor because it oversim-
plifies the nature of the microscopic constituents of the physical systems exhibiting
phase transitions. However, one group, Cyril Domb's in London, held a more positive
view during this decade. To bring out the basis for their view, I analyze in detail their
motivation and work. In the last part of the paper I document that the model was seen
as much more physically relevant in the early 1 960s and examine the development that
Communicated by R. Stuewer.
M. Niss (El)
IMFUFA, NSM, Roskilde University, P. O. Box 260, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark
e-mail: maniss@ruc.dk
Ô Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

244 M. Niss
led to this change in perception. I argue that the main factor behind the change was
the realization of the surprising and striking agreement between aspects of the model,
notably its critical behavior, and empirical features of the physical phenomena.
1 Introduction
For his Inaugural Lecture at the University of Bristol, delivered on 28 January 1965,
the British solid-state theoretical physicist John Ziman chose to talk about the role
of (mathematical) models in theoretical physics. According to Ziman, mathematical
models are deliberate simplifications of the physical system being studied, but at the
same time they are indispensable tools in the theorist's quest for understanding the
system. Moreover,
the real art of the theoretical physicist may lie in his skill at devising models
that are mathematically soluble and that still contain the key to the behavior
of the system that he is studying. The justification of a model is not that it is
an approximate solution of the equations [describing the system by the laws of
nature]... but that it provides qualitative or semi-quantitative results that are in
agreement with observation. It provides explanation and insights, it can tell us
what is going on, even though it cannot be anything like as complicated as events
in the real world.1
Thus Ziman opted for criteria in the assessment of a model other than its relation
to the laws of nature, for instance, that it provides explanation and insight. He did
not clarify how to determine whether a model gives insight and explanation in this
popular lecture; indeed, that, at least to some extent, is for the individual physicist to
decide.
Ziman expressed the now widely held view that modeling is an important activity
in physics, and that it is often through models that physicists get a hold on the world.
If we wish to grasp how physics is done, we need to understand this activity and its
historical development. One approach that sheds light on this issue would be to explore
how physicists model a particular phenomenon over time; another approach would be
to follow the changes in physicists' dealings with a single model. In this paper, as in
the preceding and the following ones, I adopt the latter strategy: I chart the tumultuous
history of the so-called Lenz-Ising model2 from the time it was proposed in the early
1920s to when it did not have a very prominent place in physics in the late 1920s and
1930s to its widespread use after the mid-1960s.
The thousands of research papers on the Lenz-Ising model after World War II,
as well as its appearance in virtually every modern statistical-mechanics textbook,
attest to its great importance in modern physics. The model has found widespread
use in several areas, but it plays a particularly prominent role in the field of critical
1 Ziman (1965, p. 1189).
~ The model is called the Ising model by the great majority of physicists; others, such as Temperley (1956),
called it the Onsager-lsing model or the lsing-Onsager model, but following Brush (1967) as described in
Niss (2005), the addition of Lenz to the name is an appropriate recognition of Lenz's role as consequently
will be done here.
<ñ Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 245
phenomena, a specific type of phase transition.3 As Binney, Dowrick, Fisher, and
Newman declared in their textbook of 1992: "Far and away the most influential model
of a system capable of a phase transition is the ¡Lenz-]Ising model"4 However, the
Chinese- American theoretical physicist Chen Ning Yang noted that this was not always
the case:
Young physicists today may find it surprising, even unbelievable, that in the
1950's the [Lenz-]Ising model and similar problems were not deemed important
by most physicists. They were considered arcane exercises, narrowly interesting,
mathematically seducing, but of little real consequence.5
If we accept Yang's assessment, and I will show below that there are good reasons for
doing so, a fundamental change in the perception of the Lenz-Ising model seems to
have occurred. I will argue that it was not at all in the cards in the 1950s that this model
would become the predominant model of critical phenomena in the 1960s; indeed, the
majority of physicists viewed it as being incapable of giving insight into real physical
systems. (They found, however, that it could be used to show mathematically that sta-
tistical mechanics permits phase transitions.) Then, by the end of the 1960s, it became
a prominent model of critical phenomena, especially in what I will call the core areas
of critical phenomena, namely, the transition points of ferromagnetism, antiferromag-
netism,6 binary alloys, and the critical point of gas condensation. In short, the model
became relevant to physicists in their attempts to understand critical phenomena. What
happened? Why did the status of the Lenz-Ising model change? I will answer these
questions below.
The ubiquity of the Lenz-Ising model today merits an account of its history that
sheds light on the larger issue of modeling in physics. Indeed, as Yang suggested,
the acceptance of the Lenz-Ising model was part of a larger trend in which physicists
changed their view on a particular kind of problem since it is the prototype of a general
class of models. The view emerged that simple models are not only capable of, but are
crucial for yielding understanding of complex systems. I will trace the roots of this
idea here within the context of the Lenz-Ising model.
In my first paper (Niss 2005), I placed the proposal of the Lenz-Ising model within
a tradition of making statistical-mechanical models of magnetic materials based upon
the old quantum theory and charted the considerable changes in its status and per-
ception from 1920 to 1950.7 I showed that in the second half of the 1940s and early
3 Phase transitions are abrupt changes in the properties of a system as a result of changes in macroscopic
parameters (such as temperature), for instance, the boiling of water when it goes from a liquid phase to a
vapor phase.
4 Binnev et al. (1992, d. 55), emphasis in the original.
5 Yang (1995, p. 3).
6 While the spins of a fenromagnet tend to align parallelly below the Curie point, in an antiferromagnet
neighboring spins are antiparallel below the transition point, which is called the Neél point.
7 Michael E. Fisher called my attention to some unfortunate mistakes in Niss (2005) after its publica-
tion. First, on pp. 305-306 I used the expression "essential singularity" three times for singularities that
do not conform to the precise mathematical meaning of that term, so that term should be replaced sim-
ply by "singularity." Second, in footnote 177 on page 307, 1 said that Onsager's Ph.D. thesis of 1935 was
awarded in mathematics, but it actually was awarded in chemistry, and the reference to Longuet-Higgins and
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

246 M. Niss
1950s, it was not considered to be a good representation of magnets owing to its lack
of realism. In the present paper I pick up this thread in 1950 and examine the change
noted above. In a third paper I will examine the impact of its change in status for
understanding physical phenomena in the 1960s. I will show how it was used to gain
insight into critical phenomena and that the approach to modeling that grew out of its
use in the 1960s represented a radically different approach to modeling than did the
ones used in the 1950s. The earlier historical accounts of the Lenz-Ising model [by
Brush (1967) and Hoddeson et al. (1992)] focused mainly on its mathematical results
(although the latter did touch briefly on its physical aspects). My goal is to give a more
detailed account of its history and to focus on its evolution as a model by charting its
development in two of its aspects: (1) its degree of physical realism, that is, how faith-
fully physicists believed that it represented physical phenomena; and (2) the reasons
that physicists' investigated and used it. I concentrate on their perception of its ability
to represent particular physical phenomena, and not its technical development, which
earlier accounts covered well.
Since in the present study I aim to understand why the Lenz-Ising model became rel-
evant to understanding phase transitions, I will concentrate on physicists who regarded
these phenomena as a main rather than temporary focal point of their research. I thus
will exclude, on the one hand, physicists who focused on several phenomena in addi-
tion to phase transitions within a broader physical discipline, say magnetic phenomena
and, on the other hand, scientists who were interested in phase transitions but who were
members of other disciplines, for instance metallurgy or chemistry. Geographically I
restrict my study to Western physicists8 who approached phase transitions in general
and the Lenz-Ising model in particular somewhat differently than their colleagues in
the USSR and Japan,9 whose inclusion is beyond the scope of my study.
I first present physicists' perception of the Lenz-Ising model in the 1950s and in
the following sections discuss the change in their perception of it in the 1960s in the
four core areas of what came to be known as critical phenomena. I will argue that
while, by and large, physicists dismissed the model as a representation of ferromagne-
tism, antiferromagnetism, and gas condensation (in the lattice-gas model), they used
it to represent the order-disorder transition in binary alloys which, upon heating, go
from a disordered phase with little correlation between the atoms that occupy two
neighboring lattice sites to an ordered phase with a strong and long-range correlation
between the atoms that occupy alternating lattice sites. In fact, in this last of the four
core areas, the Lenz-Ising model was the preferred model. One group in particular,
Cyril Domb's at King's College London, held a different view of it than the majority
Footnote 7 continued
Fisher (1996) should be Longuet-Higgins and Fisher (1996). Third, on page 32 I stated that Peierls gave a
rigorous proof in 1936 that a two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model exhibits spontaneous magnetization, but
this argument is in fact flawed (as several authors pointed out and was later corrected, as noted in footnote
111 on page 294).
8 Among Western physicists, those mainly based in America and Britain dealt with the Lenz-Ising model
in the period under consideration.
9 The mathematical equivalent of the Lenz-Ising model, the lattice-gas model, was popular among some
Japanese physicists in the 1950s. I will take their work into account in the few cases in which Western
physicists treated it.
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1 950- 1 965 : from irrelevance to relevance 247
of theoretical physicists. Domb's group devoted a lot of effort to the Lenz-Ising model
in the 1950s, mainly as a model of ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism, which
I will examine in detail to contrast it to the dismissive attitude of others at the time.
1 then turn to the change in attitude that occurred in the 1960s, showing that it was not
due to a change in perception of the realism of the model, since it still was regarded
as physical unrealistic in three of the four core areas, but to a change in its empirical
status.
2 Models and their perception
In his 1965 lecture, John Ziman remarked on modeling by theoretical physicists:
The tasks of the theoretical physicist are set by the experimenters. Tell us,' they
ask, 'why we got this value for our measurement' or 'What answer shall we get
if we do such-and-such an experiment?' . . . [W]e may try to answer the tiresome
experimenter by saying, blandly: 'The following is the physical set-up of the
problem. It is governed by such-and-such laws of Nature. The answer you want
is therefore just the solution of the following equations.'10
The theorist's solution thus brings the system in question "out of the intuitive realm,
and under the rule of mathematics."11 The snag, however, is that it is only a solution
"in principle," because it is not possible to perform the calculations in practice -
the equations are too complex with several interlinked variables. Accordingly, the
theorist's job is not done by delivering a mathematical formulation; the real problem
is to reduce the equations to a form in which they can be solved. This requires the
introduction of drastic approximations to reduce the innumerable equations with their
interacting variables to a few simple ones that are soluble "in such a way, with such
care and skill, as not to lose the answer to our problem."12
There are two kinds of approximations, mathematical and physical, the latter being
ones in which the theorist "carries further the process of idealization that has already
been used in producing the mathematical formulation. That is, we deliberately drop
some features of the set-up - features that might well be important - in order to sim-
plify the equations."13 As an example, Ziman mentioned the idea of replacing the
boomerang shape of water molecules by hard spheres, a physical approximation that
results in a mathematical model, its essential property being
that it should be sufficiently simple for an exact solution to be found for the
equations describing its behavior. We do not guarantee that this solution is an
accurate prediction of the behavior of the original physical system that it was
designed to represent; we may have had to throw away too much cargo when we
lightened the ship to get it over the rocks. We may not even be able to show that
10 Ziman (1965, p. 1187).
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid, p. 1188.
13 Ibid, pp. 1188-1189.
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

248 M. Niss
the equations for the model are approximations to the equations that we wrote
down in our original mathematical formulation, for it may be extremely difficult
to estimate the errors that have arisen in the process of idealization.14
Ziman stressed here an important aspect of model building in physics, namely, the
peculiar relationship between the model and the original system: On the one hand,
the model should have some relation to the mathematical description of the system in
question; on the other hand, there is a degree of freedom in its design. The relationship
between the original mathematical description and physical model can be captured by
the notion of its realism. I use the term realism as used by physicists. Thus, by the
realism of a model I mean how well it is thought to represent the underlying equations
describing the system. By definition, a model is a simplified representation of a real
system because idealizations, abstractions, and approximations have been introduced
to permit mathematical manipulations, which means that the realism of a model may
have little to do with whether or not it agrees with experiment.
To Ziman's thoughts on mathematical modeling I add those of the British physicist
H. Neville V. Temperley, who worked on the theory of phase transitions in the 1950s
and published an influential textbook on the subject in 1956, in which he raised the
question of what constitutes a "physically acceptable theory." "In this field [of phase
transitions]," he declared, "it is not always good enough to find a plausible model
that can be made to agree numerically with the observed facts."15 He illustrated his
point by considering the attempts to compare the Lenz-Ising model with experiments.
This problem is "partly a philosophical one, some of the accepted criteria of a 'good'
or 'bad' scientific theory breaking down completely."16 If disagreement between a
theory or model and experiment is found, this signals danger, but in the field of phase
transitions there may be a number of plausible explanations for the cause of the dis-
agreement. Further, if we find that a theoretical curve passes through the experimental
points, it "is not quite the occasion for rejoicing that it is in other branches of phys-
ics."17 For example, the Lenz-Ising model (and the Weiss theory of magnetism) agree
fairly well with the experimental data for one physical quantity characterizing mag-
netic behavior, but the agreement is less satisfactory for another, equally important
physical quantity. The first agreement is thus "of almost no significance at all."18
The issue of a model's relation to experimental data can be captured by the notion
of empirical adequacy. The physicist-philosopher James T. Cushing defined empiri-
cal adequacy as consisting essentially "in getting the numbers right, in the sense of
having a formula or an algorithm that is capable of reproducing observed data."19 I
will extend Cushing's definition to include getting the qualitative features right, for
instance, getting equations that lead to behavior resembling a phase transition, but
not necessarily quantitatively right, for instance, the temperature at which a phase
14 Ibid., p. 1189.
15 Temperley (1956, p. vii).
16 /Wd., pp. 120-121.
17 Ibid., p. 121, emphasis in the original.
18 Ibid.
19 Cushing (1994, p. 10).
£i Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 249
transition takes place. Ziman gave an example: he noted that the interesting question
is not to calculate the precise temperature at which water boils, but to understand
why water boils at a definite temperature. The theorists adjust their expectation of
agreement to the level of theoretical and experimental uncertainties present: A reason-
able degree of agreement depends upon the nature of the phenomena and the theories
available for them.
To these notions of realism and empirical adequacy relating to the perception of
the model, I add its mathematical complexity. As Ziman noted above, a mathematical
model is born in the desire to tackle the mathematical problems involved in describing
the original physical system. Thus, if it is impossible to make mathematical progress
on a model, then the model is of no use to the working physicist. Theorists must obtain
new and worthwhile results, not just waste their efforts on intractable problems. To
be of interest, a model has to be within reach, mathematically speaking. Temperley
(1956) used this argument to justify simplified mathematical models, including the
Lenz-Ising model. In five instances it had been possible to determine the thermo-
dynamic properties of phase transitions from an assumed form of the intermolecular
interaction by a mathematically rigorous argument. Even though no real systems con-
forming to four of these five theories or models existed in 1956, they were still of
interest because they shed light on "what are likely to be the consequences of any
actual interaction."20
3 The general setting
To appreciate the history of the Lenz-Ising model in the 1950s and 1960s, I briefly
review its earlier history to place it within the community of researchers concerned
with phase transitions.
3.1 The phase transition community
Phase transitions caught the increased attention of physicists in the 1930s21 and were
the subject of diverse research in the late 1940s and 1950s.22 Experimental results on a
host of phase transitions appeared and theories ranged from purely thermodynamic and
phenomenological to exact and approximate results for particular models. According
to Hoddeson et al. ( 1 992), the focus gradually shifted from thermodynamic approaches
to conceptual and mathematical problems.23 The late 1940s "was a time searching for
mathematical techniques and formulations of the phase transition problem that would
make at least some aspects of it tractable."24 There also was an increased focus on
similarities between different transition points. As Temperley remarked, "the basic
20 Temperley (1956, p. 3).
21 Hoddeson et al. (1992).
22 Snapshots of this research are provided by the programs of three conferences, at Cornell in 1948, in
Florence in 1949, and in Paris in 1952.
23 Hoddeson et al. (1992, p. 576).
24 Ibid., p. 511.
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

250 M. Niss
resemblances between apparently unrelated types of transition have only come to
light gradually during the course of many years."25 Indeed, one of his main reasons
for writing his book was "to call attention to some of these resemblances and, at the
same time, to try to pin-point the individual peculiarities of each type of transition."26
Others added that the molecular mechanisms behind these various transitions were
known to be of great variety.27 There was widespread realization that the mathemat-
ical problems encountered when dealing with models of phase transitions were, in
the words of one protagonist, the British physicist Cyril Domb, "extremely formida-
ble."28 The trouble stemmed from the cooperativeness of phase transitions and the
strong interactions between individual microscopic systems, so that they could not be
treated as small perturbations.
Sociologically speaking, the phase-transition community was quite inhomoge-
neous. As Melville S. Green, chairman of a 1965 conference on phenomena in the
neighborhood of critical points that was held at the National Bureau of Standards,
in Washington, D.C. pointed out, these phenomena were being explored "by differ-
ent institutional groupings of scientists using different experimental techniques who
perhaps normally do not meet each other at scientific conferences."29 One of the
explicit purposes of the conference was to bring these scientists together to discuss
recent developments. Experimentalists as well as theorists were a diverse lot; the later
included mathematicians and chemists and physicists whose research ranged from
phase transitions to elementary-particles physics. In the United States, some of these
physicists even called themselves "the lunatic fringe," because of their marginal posi-
tion relative to those working in the mainstream areas of quantum electrodynamics
and nuclear physics.30
3.2 The Lenz-Ising model
The Lenz-Ising model was proposed by German physicist Wilhelm Lenz to his student
Ernst Ising in the early 1920s as a realistic representation of a ferromagnet,31 and a
few years later was reinterpreted in terms of the new quantum mechanics in which it
can be defined as "living" on a lattice (for example, a cubic lattice or face-centered
cubic lattice) with an electron spin that points up or down along a one-dimensional axis
at each lattice site, in contrast to the usual quantum-mechanical electron spin, which
25 Temperley (1956, p. vii).
26 Ibid.
27 See, for example, Tisza ( 1 95 1 ).
28 Domb (1960, p. 151).
29 Green and Sengers (1966, p. x).
30 Hoddeson et al. (1992, p. 573). The group included Willis Lamb, Onsager, Elliott Montroll,
C. N. Yang, T. D. Lee, Bruria Kaufman, Joaquín M. Luttinger, Mark Kac, and Arnold Siegert.
Hoddeson and her colleagues' claim that the scientists working on rigorous theories of phase transitions
was based almost entirely in the United States is not correct. As we shall see, there was a strong group in
Britain and ones in France and The Netherlands.
31 Lenz (1920) and Ising (1924, 1925); for the early history of the Lenz-Ising model, see Brush (1967)
and Niss (2005).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 25 1
can point in any direction in three spatial dimensions. Electron spin in the Lenz-Ising
model thus can be seen either as a distortion of the actual spin or as valid only for
anisotropic materials in which two dimensions of spin orientation are suppressed. A
second assumption was less controversial theoretically, although its significance for
its most important properties was disputed: Only nearest-neighbor spins in the lattice
interact energetically, with the interaction energy from two parallel or antiparallel
spins being -J or J . Depending upon the sign of 7, the Lenz-Ising model can be
seen as representing either a ferromagnet (positive J) or an antiferromagnet (nega-
tive /). Based upon these two assumptions, the formalism of statistical mechanics in
principle yields all of the physical properties of the Lenz-Ising model.
By the early 1950s, it was well known that the Lenz-Ising model is mathematically
equivalent to a model of a binary alloy (spin up corresponds to one of the two types of
atom in the alloy) and a model of a gas (the atoms or molecules of which are situated
at the lattice sites). Tsung-Dao Lee and Yang coined the name the lattice-gas model
for the latter model in 1952, but the model itself had been known for some time by
then.32 In this model each lattice site can be either vacant or occupied by one gas
atom (multiple occupancy is not allowed).33 By associating a negative energy with a
nearest-neighbor pair of atoms, and a zero energy with a vacant site- vacant site pair
and a one-atom- vacant-site pair, the model mimics the attraction between monatomic
gas atoms. Lee and Yang showed that this model is mathematically equivalent to the
magnetic Lenz-Ising model in the sense that there is an exact mapping of the partition
function of one model onto the other.34 By the 1950s, it was established that the same
mathematical structure covers four different physical systems and that their models
yield similar results. However, as we shall see, some of the models were perceived as
accurate, others less so.
In the 1 920s and 1 930s, most physicists took the view that the magnetic Lenz-Ising
model distorts the spin, which for a long time rendered it irrelevant to physically real
magnets. In the late 1930s and early 1950s, however, it gained renewed interest, but
now not as a model of ferromagnetism but as one of transition points in general because
it functioned as a proof by example that statistical mechanics can accommodate phase
transitions. Indeed, in 1944, the Norwegian- American chemist Lars Onsager showed
in a mathematical tour de force that the two-dimensional version of the model displays
a phase transition and that as the transition point, at a definite temperature T = TC, is
approached its specific heat tends to infinity logarithmically as (T - Tc) tends to zero.
Approximation methods were compared to Onsager's solution of the model to check
the validity of the former. From the time the model was devised and afterwards, a
major question was whether something corresponding to spontaneous magnetization
in real magnets is realized in the model. (Ferromagnets are said to be spontaneously
32 Lee and Yang were not the first to consider lattice-gas theories or to note their correspondence to the
Lenz-Ising model, but since they gave a systematic account of them and derived some new results, their
paper is usually cited as the origin of the lattice-gas model. See Brush (1967, p. 890), for some of the prior
work.
33 Lee and Yang (1 952).
34 This proof can be found in many textbooks on statistical mechanics, for example in Goldenfeld (1992,
pp. 74-79).
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

252 M. Niss
magnetized below a certain temperature, called the Curie temperature Tc, because
below it their magnetization remains nonzero as the applied magnetic field approaches
zero.) Onsager answered this question in the affirmative by giving, without proof, a
closed-form expression for the spontaneous magnetization of the two-dimensional
Lenz-Ising model during a conference at Cornell in 1948. Onsager mentioned his
expression again later that year at a conference in Florence where it was recorded and
published as a discussion remark.35 He did not publish a derivation of it; Yang did 4
years later.36 In general, physicists perceived the model as being too far removed from
real systems to be able to say anything about their behavior. Onsager himself felt that
the model was of interest because the mathematical methods available for examining
more realistic models were insufficient. The Lenz-Ising model, in short, was a toy
model, that is, its only role was to tell us something about the formalism of statistical
mechanics.
Prior to the 1950s, the Lenz-Ising model played an important negative role with
respect to the existing classical theories of phase transitions, comprising mean-field
and phenomenological theories.37 In a mean-field treatment of a system, it is assumed
that the spatially fluctuating forces acting on a unit of the system (for example, the
forces acting on particular electron spin by the other spins) may be replaced by a
constant mean field due to the rest of the system. Typical examples of mean-field
treatments are the Weiss theory of a ferromagnet38 and the Bragg- Williams and Bethe
theories of an alloy.39 The Russian theorist Lev Landau took a more unified view
of phase transitions and dealt with several transitions in his phenomenological the-
ory of 1937,40 the fundamental assumption of which is that it is possible to expand
the relevant thermodynamic potentials in a Taylor series in the neighborhood of the
transition point (which actually turned out to be incorrect). The mean-field and phe-
nomenological theories predict the same so-called critical exponents that characterize
the behavior of thermodynamic quantities, say the specific heat, near the transition
point,41 which is the basis for subsuming both under the heading of "classical theo-
ries," which are independent of the dimension of the system42 and where "classical"
here means "conventional" rather than nonquantum-mechanical.
Critical exponents first came to the fore in the 1960s, but they are a convenient
way to characterize the difference between the predictions of the two-dimensional
35 Onsager (1949). Onsager wrote that he and Bruna Kaufman had solved the problem.
36 Yang (1952). This story is told in Montroll et al. (1963).
37 At about the same time, Onsager's examination of the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model played a role
in the revision of Paul Ehrenfesťs classification of phase transitions of 1933. Onsager had found that its
specific heat has a logarithmic infinity, whereas Ehrenfest had recognized only phase transitions involving
jump discontinuities. This discrepancy, however, did not lead to a revision of it probably owing to the
model's lack of physical realism. See Jaeger (1998).
38 Niss (2005, pp. 274-275).
39 Ibid, p. 295.
40 Landau (1937).
41 More precisely, if a physical quantity has a power-law representation, the power is called the critical
exponent.
42 See, for example, Fisher (1965).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1 950- 1 965 : from irrelevance to relevance 253
Lenz-Ising model and those of their classical counterparts as I do in the table below,
which shows their values for various thermodynamic quantities whose results (most
of them exact) were available for the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model at an early
stage. Note that all of these values sharply contradict those obtained from the classical
theories,43 which in part for this reason gradually were discredited. For instance, On-
sager's finding of a logarithmic infinity in the specific heat explicitly prompted Lazslo
Tisza to revise Landau's theory.44 More importantly, Landau himself expressed doubt
about the validity of the fundamental assumptions in his thermodynamic approach to
phase transitions and thus about the adequacy of the classical theory in the 1958 edi-
tion of his and Evgeny M. Lifshitz's book on statistical physics.45 Landau implied in
several remarks in the book that he was aware of experimental results that revealed dis-
crepancies between his assumptions and the experimental critical singularities, even
though he cited no explicitly experimental papers.46 Theoretically, he and Lifshitz
admitted that his theory "turns out to be quite inapplicable to second-order phase tran-
sitions in two dimensions, i.e., in plane lattices."47 This problem, which is closely
related to the behavior of crystals with a pronounced layer structure, and to adsorbed
films, "has not yet been investigated in general, but one may draw conclusions from
the results of investigations of specific models of such lattices, first carried out by
Onsager (1944)." Concerning Landau's theory for a three-dimensional crystal, they
simply note that its results for the specific heat and spontaneous magnetization and
those of the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model differ, but they draw no conclusions
about the validity of the former from this difference (Table 1).
4 The Lenz-Ising model in the 1950s
According to Yang, as we have seen, the Lenz-Ising model did not seem important
to physicists in the 1950s. Yang claimed elsewhere as well that they regarded it only
as "a kind of interesting mathematical game, not to be taken seriously."48 Others also
43 The results, which were attributed to two-dimensional model, also disagreed with experimental data.
44 Tisza presented his results at the Cornell Conference in 1948 and published them in Tisza (1 95 1).
45 I am grateful to Michael E. Fisher for pointing out this change in Landau's thinking. My analysis of
Landau and Lifshitz (1958) is based upon Fisher's comments and upon the exposition in Nielsen and
Timmermann (2002).
46 This is clear in their discussions both of the fluid critical point and of Landau (1937) theory on phase
transitions. Concerning the former, they write that "there are reasons to suspect that in actual fact" (Landau
and Lifshitz 1958, p. 262) the assumption may be invalid, and they stress later that "the reliability of the
results of such an investigation remains until the nature of the singularities which thermodynamic quanti-
ties probably have at the critical point has been clarified." {ibid. pp. 264-265) Concerning the expansion of
Landau's theory, they wrote that a complete description of the nature of the behavior of the thermodynamic
potential at the transition point is extremely difficult and has not yet been done. "There are, however," they
continue, "grounds to suppose that its singularity is of higher order than that of the terms of the expansion
used in the following calculations." {ibid., p. 435) They mention in a footnote that the experimental curves
for the variation of the specific heat with temperature always show a sharp increase before the discontinuity
and a sharp drop immediately after it. While this is not incompatible with results of Landau's theory, this
difference raises doubt about its validity.
47 Landau and Lifshitz (1958, p. 438).
48 Yang (1983, p. 13). He had given a similar assessment in Yang (1972, p. 3)
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

254 M. Niss
Table 1 A comparison of the classical values (independent of dimension) and the exact results (except
otherwise stated) for the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model
Physical quantity Exponent classical Value for two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model
value (the references in parenthesis are to the first
publication in which the result appeared)8
Specific heat at constant a' 0 Finite 0 Logarithmic singularity (Onsager 1944)
magnetic field/volume jump
below Tc
Specific heat above Tc at a 0 Finite 0 Logarithmic singularity (Onsager 1944)
constant magnetic jump
field/volume
Spontaneous magnetization/ ß 1/2 1/8 (Onsager 1949)
shape of coexistence curve
Zero-field isothermal suscepti- y' 1 7/4 (series expansions) (Essam and Fisher 1963)
bility/compressibility
below Tc
Zero-field isothermal suscepti- y 1 7/4 (series expansions) (Domb and Sykes 1957a)
bility/compressibility
above Tc
Correlation length below Tc v' 1/2 1 (Kaufman and Onsager 1949)
Correlation length above Tc v 1/2 1 (Onsager 1944)
Critical-point decay of r' 0 1/4 (Kaufman and Onsager 1949; Fisher 1959)
correlation
Interfacial tension
a In some references, the results were obtained only for special cases of the quantity in question, not for
the general case
suggested that this attitude was widespread. Abraham Pais noted in 1958: "In 1952
Yang contracted the celebrated Ising disease, but unlike many of his fellow patients he
pulled through by being able to compute the spontaneous magnetization of the two-
dimensional lattice."49 Freeman Dyson was impressed by Yang's "virtuoso exercise in
the theory of Jacobian elliptic functions" and the "beautiful simplicity " of his result,
but found it to be of little physical significance:
After working through this astonishing display of mathematical fireworks,
I expressed some disappointment that Frank [Yang] had chosen such an unim-
portant problem on which to lavish his skill. I remarked, with the arrogance of
youth, that if Frank could ever do a beautiful job like this on a problem of major
importance, then he would really amount to something as a scientist.50
Cyril Domb, who was working in the Clarendon Laboratory at Oxford in 1949-1952,
recalled that the American physicist Elliott Montroll was "one of the few people in
the world interested in the Ising model at that time."51 He elaborated in an interview
49 Pais (1958, p. 299).
50 Dyson (1995, p. 131). Dyson continued by stating that Yang's work on non-Abelian gauge theory
2 years later revealed that Yang was a real scientist.
51 Domb (1990a), p. 15. Luttinger recalled in Schweber (1994) that he was one of the happy few. He
and Montroll organized a weekly seminar on the Ising model at Colombia University in the 1940s, whose
participants included Willis Lamb and Julius Ashkin, as well as graduate students.
Ô Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 255
with S. S. Schweber in 2002: "The Ising model was not very popular at the time [the
1950s]: It was the Heisenberg model that was considered interesting. The Onsager
solution was thought to be a mathematical curiosity."52
I take these recollections at face value, but we also know that beginning in the
late 1940s many physicists published numerous papers that dealt with the Lenz-Ising
model. To reconcile this with the conflicting recollections of Yang, Dyson, and Domb,
we must examine how the Lenz-Ising model was actually used by physicists in the
late 1940s and 1950s.
Most of these physicists dealt with technical issues raised by Onsager's solu-
tion.53 The set of exact results based upon the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model
was extended, most importantly by Onsager and his collaborator Bruna Kaufman,
who calculated the correlation between spins along rows in the lattice, but also by
Yang, as noted above, in his computations of the spontaneous magnetization, and
by others' generalizations of Onsager's results to other types of lattices. One gets
the feeling in reading their papers that most of these researchers, but not all,54 were
attracted to the mathematical aspects of the Lenz-Ising model rather than its phys-
ical applications. Particularly intriguing to them was that stating the mathematical
problem was simple, yet it was extremely difficult to solve. As we saw, Yang termed
the problem "mathematically seducing" and seems to have been motivated mainly
by the mathematical complexity of its solution. Indeed, Yang recalled that he began
to work on the spontaneous magnetization of the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model
after reading Kaufman and Onsager's paper,55 when he realized that it contained hith-
erto unacknowledged information that could be used to derive an expression for the
spontaneous magnetization. He did not seem to be driven by a desire to exploit its
physical relevance,56 for instance by putting the Lenz-Ising model into a physical
context. Yang, in short, seems to have been driven by its mathematical, not physical
aspects.
52 Available at http://authors .library.caltech.edu/5456/01 /hrst.mit.edu/hrs/renormalization/Domb/index.
htm (accessed February 1 8, 2008).
53 These can be classified as (1) attempts to generalize Onsager's solution to (a) three dimensions, zero
magnetic field and (b) two dimensions, but with an applied magnetic field; (2) generalizations of the two-
dimensional solution to other lattices; (3) attempts to find exact expressions for quantities of the two-
dimensional model not accessible through Onsager's solution, such as the magnetization and susceptibil-
ity; (4) exact solutions of the three-dimensional model for finite lattices; (5) finding solutions other than
Onsager's for the two-dimensional case that are either simpler or more promising for generalizations to
the three-dimensional case; and (6) development of approximate solutions to the three-dimensional model
either by approximating (a) the "mechanism" of the model or (b) the partition function based upon series
expansions.
54 In particular, Domb's group held another view. Moreover, the Hungarian-American physicist Laszlo
Tisza used the model in proposing a general theory of phase transitions (Tisza 1951): His main argument
against Ehrenfest's classification of phase transitions (see Jaeger 1998) was that it could not accommodate
the infinities of the Lenz-Ising model. In response, Tisza proposed a new, general theory that neither ruled
out Onsager's results nor used the Lenz-Ising model more constructively. He did not express an opinion as
to whether or not real systems behave like the Lenz-Ising model, so it seems that his theory does not shed
much light on his perception of the Lenz-Ising model's realism.
55 Yang testified that he had insurmountable difficulties in understanding Onsager's method until he con-
sulted Bruna Kaufman's simplified description of it in Kaufman and Onsager (1949).
56 Yang wrote about his drive:
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

256 M. Niss
Gregory Wannier, one of the protagonists in the 1930s and 1940s, expressed the
hope in 1945 that an analytic solution of the three-dimensional Lenz-Ising model was
imminent. Onsager himself is said to have sought a solution of it around 1956,57 but he,
as well as others, failed to do so,58 and in the 1 950s physicists gradually concluded that
a solution was not within reach. To even make progress on the two-dimensional model
was regarded as extremely difficult; consequently, interest in the model waned in the
second half of the 1950s. Nonetheless, the model was well known in the solid-state
community and probably beyond it, and the theoretical studies initiated by Onsager
continued in the 1950s. To gauge the attitude of physicists in the 1950s to the model
we must infer it from an analysis of their applications of it.
Of the phenomena that the Lenz-Ising model was thought to model at the time
of Onsager s solution in 1944, only the adsorption of a gas on a surface was a two-
dimensional phenomenon; the rest were intrinsically three-dimensional.59 The specific
heats for the three-dimensional as well as the two-dimensional model were thought
to have singularities, that is, to be nonanalytic in the functional-theoretical sense at
certain points but, as Wannier noted in 1945, not necessarily of the same nature:
"The logarithmic infinity of the specific heat, for instance, is probably due to the fact
that the model is two-dimensional. It is not likely to show up in three-dimensional
cases."60 Thus to Onsager and most of his contemporaries, it only made sense to make
a detailed comparison of Onsager's result on the specific heat with experimental data
on the adsorption of gas on a surface, which, however, was not done. When numeri-
cal results on the three-dimensional model gradually mounted in the latter part of the
1950s, thus making it possible to confront the model with experiments, for example on
ferromagnetism, only very few comparisons appeared, and these were of a qualitative
nature.61
The absence of comparisons was not due to a lack of experimental results; they
were available for most of the physical quantities of interest for the core areas,62
Footnote 56 continued
1 did not drop the Ising model. 1 kept thinking about it, and realized that Onsager and Kaufman had
obtained much more information than just the partition function, which was determined by the
largest eigenvalue of the transfer matrix. Their method in fact gave information about all eigen-
values and eigenvectors. Proceeding in this direction, I arrived in January, 195 1 , at the conclusion
that the spontaneous magnetization is dependent on an off-diagonal matrix element between the
nvo eigenvectors with the largest eigenvalues. It seemed to me that, with all the excess information
latent in the Onsager-Kaufman method, I should be able to evaluate the matrix element.
See Yang (1983), p. 12, emphasis in the original.
57 Lebowitz (1995). Joel E. Lebowitz was Onsager's postdoc in 1956-1957.
58 Among those working on the three-dimensional model were Wolfgang Pauli, Josef Jauch, Elliott Mon-
troll, John Maddox, R M. F. Houtappel, and Gordon Newell; see Hoddeson et al. (1992).
59 Two-dimensional ferromagnetic films might have been a candidate for a representation by the two-
dimensional Lenz-Ising model, but its study belongs to a later era.
60 Wannier (1945), p. 58.
61 A few quantitative confrontations also appeared, but as we shall see they were for exotic magnets with
a high degree of anisotropy.
tz Among these experimental results were as follows: For liquids, Rowlinson (1966), to a large extent,
relied on those that had been obtained from the 1930s to the mid-1950s on exponents for the coex-
istence curve, the isothermal compressibility curve above TCy and the relationship between pressure
Sy Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 257
but were used in comparisons with other, similar models.63 Immense difficulties
were involved in obtaining experimental results, because near a critical point even
small changes of temperature produce great changes in the physical quantities, so it
is essential to have a high degree of temperature control. Consequently, theorists
found the experimental results wanting. For example, at the Florence conference
in 1949 both Guggenheim and Onsager were unwilling to accept the experimen-
tal results for pure fluids near the critical point,64 and to remedy this situation a
host of such studies were carried out in the 1950s.65 Still, some experimental data,
of sufficient quality as seen in other contexts, was available to test the Lenz-Ising
model. In fact, theoretical developments on the Lenz-Ising model inspired exper-
imentalists to carry out a host of new studies of sufficient quality to test it accu-
rately. These began in the late 1950s66 and gained momentum in the early 1960s
after physicists had become more confident of its physical reality.67 Fairbank et al.
experiment of 1957 played a particularly important role, since they published data
showing that the specific heat of liquid helium is rather close to becoming loga-
rithmically infinite on both sides of the lambda point.68 Because liquid helium is
a three-dimensional quantum-mechanical system, this was not a direct test of the
two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model, but their experiment was still significant, since
it demonstrated that the logarithmic specific heat of Onsager in 1944 could occur in
nature.
In sum, rather than flatly contradict Yang's, Dyson's, and Domb's recollections that
the Lenz-Ising model was perceived by most physicists as physically irrelevant in the
1950s, the above modifies their recollections for the obvious reason that these research
papers demonstrate its relevance to some physicists. Still, since the model was rarely
Footnote 62 continued
and volume. He was, however, more critical of earlier measurements of the variation of the specific heat with
temperature, in which case he used the results of Bagatskii et al. (1961). For binary alloys, Moser (1936)
and Sykes and Wilkinson (1937) had measured the variation of the specific heat of brass; for ferromagnets,
Suchsmith and Pearce (1938) had determined the temperature variation of the susceptibility of nickel and
iron, Moser ( 1 936) and Sykes and Wilkinson ( 1 938) had provided data for the specific-heat curve of nickel,
and Potter (1934) and Sucksmith et al. (1953) had determined the temperature dependence of spontaneous
magnetization of iron, nickel, and nickel-copper, respectively.
63 Among those who confronted the experimental data described in the previous footnote with models
were: Hunt (1953), Under (1954), Temperley (1956), and Rushbrooke and Wood (1958).
64 Hoddeson et al. (1992, p. 578). A later example is that Essam and Fisher (1963), who complained that
the available experimental data could not be used for a quantitative comparison with theoretical results for
the susceptibility below Tc of the Lenz-Ising model.
65 Rowlinson(1966).
66 Fairbank et al. ( 1 957). According to Domb, their work was stimulated by Onsager's solution. Two of the
authors (Buckingham and Fairbank 1961), however, wrote, a few years later that another theoretical claim
sparked their investigation.
67 Domb (1 996).
In fact, the specific-heat exponent a for superfluid helium has been shown to be negative, so that the
specific heat is not precisely logarithmic. See Lipa et al. (1996).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

258 M. Niss
compared to experiments in this decade, Yang's, Dyson's, and Dyson's recollections
probably were fundamentally accurate.
4.1 Attitudes toward the Lenz-Ising model in the core areas in the 1950s
To get a clearer picture of the dismissal of the Lenz-Ising model in the 1950s, I now
look at it in its various guises in the core areas. The modern view is that the model
is a mathematical structure that can be interpreted as representing various physical
systems, for example, ferromagnets, alloys, and gases, but this view emerged in the
1960s; earlier, it always was a model of magnetism. However, to understand its roots
and physicists' perception of it in the 1950s, we must also examine the mathematical
equivalents of the model in areas other than magnetism.
In 1953, John H. Van Vleck, then perhaps the world's leading authority on mag-
netism, wrote that "the mechanism responsible for ferromagnetism is at present fairly
well understood in broad outline."69 That mechanism was the exchange force between
electrons that provide the coupling between the elementary magnets. Several models
exploited this mechanism, in particular Heisenberg's model, which since the 1930s
occupied a prominent position in the field of ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism.
In it the exchange is proportional to the scalar product of the vectors representing
the spins.70 The four most important models of magnetism that Van Vleck mentioned
did not include the Lenz-Ising model.71 In fact, 8 years earlier, he had declared that
the Lenz-Ising model "should not be identified too closely with the actual magnetic
behavior of the material simply because of the inadequacy and arbitrariness of the
model,"72 and he seems to have maintained that view. Other physicists also shared it.
Domb and Sykes (1957a) wrote that "the Ising interaction can only be regarded as a
valid approximation for substances exhibiting strong magnetic anisotropy."73 Dyson,
69 Van Vleck (1953, p. 221). "The accurate solution of the eigenvalue problems for a complicated solid
is, however, so complex that it is necessary to resort to some kind of simplifying model, for which at least
approximate calculations can be made." (ibid.)
70 In the quantum-mechanical Heisenberg model, the exchange forces are represented by the following
tenu in the Hamiltonian:
JSj ■ Sk = J(SfSXj + SfSyj + SfSZjh
where Sf , SJ , and Sf are noncommuting operators that represent the components of spin i (and similarly of
spin j). The spin of magnitude S can take on 25 + 1 orientations. Because of the noncommutative property
of the spin operators, the Heisenberg model is difficult to handle. To circumvent this difficulty, the model
may be simplified by replacing the term above with
Jo i -<Tj,
where or/ and cry are unit vectors that are allowed to assume all orientations in three-dimensional space.
This model can be considered, properly normalized, to be the limit as S tends to infinity of the quantum
mechanical Heisenberg model where the spins are allowed a continuum of orientations.
71 Not even the simple Heisenberg model was acceptable: "I think it can be regarded as agreed that the
simple Heisenberg theory is too crude, since the experimental values of the saturation magnetization show
clearly that there is not an integral number of spins per atom." See Van Vleck (1953, p. 221). Instead Van
Vleck preferred what he called the generalized Heisenberg model in which a nonintegral number of spins
per atom is allowed by considering excited states of atoms in the crystal lattice.
72 Van Vleck (1945, p. 34).
73 Domb and Sykes (1957a, p. 216).
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 259
in addition to his disinterest in Yang's work on the Lenz-Ising model, considered the
Heisenberg model to be more realistic than the Lenz-Ising model: "we may justifiably
claim that our model [the Heisenberg model] has considerably greater similarity than
the Ising model has to a real ferromagnet."74 This view was dominant in the 1950s.
One area of magnetism in which the Lenz-Ising model was perceived to be a real-
istic model was that of extremely anisotropic materials, as noted by Domb and Sykes
(1957a). The availability of pure rare-earth elements in the early 1950s "stimulated
the study of new magnetic materials,"75 and in the late 1950s materials were discov-
ered whose properties met the theoretical conditions for being "Ising-like," the most
important one being that they were anisotropic and thus could be represented by the
anisotropic interaction of the Lenz-Ising model.76 The first rare-earth compound to
be identified as "Ising-like" was dysprosium ethyl sulphate,77 whose connection to
the model was established by Cooke et al. (1959) in Oxford. They noted that this com-
pound exhibited an "unusually strong coupling between the ions arising from magnetic
dipole-dipole interaction"78 and that of other interactions is small, which meant that at
extremely low temperatures (about 0.1 K) the material "should closely resemble those
of a classical Ising model with known, dipolar forces between the ions."79 Their work
and that of others in the same group demonstrated that the Lenz-Ising model actually
could be identified closely with the magnetic behavior of some magnetic materials, in
contrast to Van Vleck's opposing view noted above. However, even though other Ising-
like materials were found, the most common ferromagnetic ones did not meet these
requirements, and since scientists working on phase transitions aimed to understand
"common" critical phenomena in common ferromagnets instead of in more exotic
ones, finding other "Ising-like" magnets did not fundamentally change the perception
of their relevance to the Lenz-Ising model.
In the area of gas condensation, the lattice-gas model occupied a position similar
to that of its mathematical equivalent in magnetism: The preferred model was one
advanced by Joseph E. Mayer,80 and by and large the lattice-gas model was not con-
sidered to be a realistic representation of gases, owing both to its discreteness and its
interaction mechanism.81 Concerning the former, Domb wrote in 1971 that: "Most the-
oreticians are apologetic about using a lattice model for a fluid," even though chemist
74 Dyson (1956, p. 1218).
75 Wolf (2000).
76 Ibid.
77 Ibid.
78 Cooke et al. (1959, p. 246).
79 Ibid.
80 Brush (1983, oo. 246-250).
81 The chemist Kirk wood ( 1 950) had shown that a lattice model of a fluid "can be justified rigorously if we
assume a hard core potential" (Domb 1971, p. 92), but his argument does not seem to have received much
attention from the physics community, perhaps because it was directed to chemists and was expressed in
the language of the free- volume theory of the liquid state, which was unfamiliar to most physicists.
£) Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

260 M. Niss
J.G. Kirkwood had rigorously justified this assumption in 1950.82 Concerning the lat-
ter, Michael E. Fisher wrote in 1964 that the lattice-gas model introduces "artificial
features," and that "one should not expect close numerical agreement in comparison
with real gases."83
Temperley included a chapter on evaporation and liquefaction in his textbook of
1956, in which he considered ñ'e types of possible liquid theories such as Mayer's
theory.84 He did discuss the lattice-gas model, but not as one of these five theories. Nor
did it play a constructive role in building a theory of liquids, but only a secondary role
(as did one of Temperley 's own models) as a means of shedding light on the validity of
certain assumptions in Mayer's theory. Temperley 's exclusion of the lattice-gas model
exemplifies the general lack of interest in it as a model of condensation;85 in particular,
the lattice-gas model was not compared to experiments in the 1950s.
The situation for the theory of alloys was different. After Bethe's work of 1935,86
the mathematical equivalent of the Lenz-Ising model was the favorite model of the
order-disorder transition in alloys. Even though some of its assumptions were con-
sidered to be crude, it was regarded as a quite realistic representation of the order-
disorder transition. Domb recalled that in the 1950s, the binary-alloy interpretation
of the Lenz-Ising model was "considered 'real'."87 Edward W. Elcock's textbook of
1956 on alloys reflected the prominent position that the Lenz-Ising model occupied.
In it Elcock thoroughly discussed the assumptions of the existing models of alloys, and
he argued that the Hamiltonian of an alloy can be split into two parts, one that depends
upon the geometric configuration of the ions in the crystal and one that does not. The
order-disorder transition is essentially a geometric phenomenon, so the second part,
which includes contribution from the electrons moving in the potential of the ions and
the vibrations of the ions, can be neglected.
In this kind of treatment we are considering here ... it is assumed that neglect
of such (possibly secondary) effects will not substantially affect the predictions
of the treatment, which it is hoped will lead to results sufficiently in agreement
with experiments to deepen our understanding of the phenomenon under inves-
tigation. It is also hoped that a careful examination of the differences between
the predictions of the treatment and the results of experiment may indicate the
importance of the approximations that have been made, and may suggest ways
82 Domb (1971, p. 92). Kirkwooďs argument (1950) was rarely used in the 1950s. A good illustration is
Hill (1956) in which both Kirkwood's paper and the lattice-gas are mentioned, but the former is not used
when the latter is introduced.
83 Fisher (1965, p. 27).
84 Brush (1983, pp. 246-250).
85 Domb recalled:
Of course, the model [the lattice-gas model] is crude, and 1 can well remember the scepticism with
which my own preliminary efforts in the late 1940s to use it as model of liquid-gas equilibrium
were greeted." See Domb (1996, p. 199).
As we shall see, however, Domb did not share the general view on these models.
86 Brush (1967) and Niss (2005).
87 Domb (1996), p. 199.
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 261
in which they can be improved. These expectations are, as will be seen later, in
the main justified.88
When Elcock added the further assumption that only nearest-neighbor interactions
should be considered, he got the mathematical equivalent of the Lenz-Ising model.
This, however, "can only be a quite crude approximation to the actual configura-
tion energy."89 Still, while the assumptions of the Lenz-Ising model may be crude,
they are noi fundamentally wrong, and when he compared the results he obtained
in a mean-field approximation,90 he found some discrepancies with experiments.
Some, he thought, would be resolved by an exact solution (that is, without approxima-
tions), while others would remain even then. Elcock thus tested the assumptions of the
Lenz-Ising model of an alloy by experiments and also the predictions of the model.
The Japanese physicists Muto and Takagi (1955) reached similar conclusions in
a review article (which was published in a Western journal and hence I include it),
writing that "the agreement between theory and experiment is good qualitatively but
far from good quantitatively."91 The Lenz-Ising model representing an alloy thus was
perceived as quite realistic, and even though experimental agreement lacked something
to be desired, it made sense to compare it with experiments. Nonetheless, most phys-
icists (as opposed to metallurgists) perceived the field of alloys as less fundamental
for insight into phase transitions than the fields of magnetism and condensation in the
1950s. Its theoretical success in this field thus could not counterbalance its theoretical
inadequacy in the other two fields.
To conclude my discussion of the Lenz-Ising models in the 1950s, I can illustrate
the position of most physicists then by examining their strategy toward understand-
ing physical phenomena. One strategy, which a modern physicist may find natural or
even self-evident, is to begin by examining the simplest model and then move on to
more realistic and complicated models. Brush regarded the early development of the
Lenz-Ising model as the reverse of this strategy:
In this way the natural order of development of theories of ferromagnetism was
inverted; the more sophisticated Heisenberg model was exploited first, and only
later did theoreticians return to investigate the properties of the simpler Lenz-
Ising model.92
Brush is correct in that in the 1950s this "unnatural" strategy was followed by the
majority of physicists, who chose to start with more realistic models such as the
88 Elcock (1956, pp. 81-82).
89 Ibid., p. 83.
90 The series-expansions method had not yet diffused into this area.
91 Muto and Takagi (1955, p. 245). They only compared the mean-field results for the model with
experiments; it did not occur to them that Onsager's solution had shown these approximations to give
qualitatively wrong results for the two-dimensional model, which meant that experiments confronted it
based upon approximations that were known by physicists (at least in the area of magnetism) to introduce
spurious effects. Ironically, the specific-heat experiments showed a discontinuity in this important quantity,
in contrast to Onsager's solution but in agreement with solutions obtained by approximate methods, so their
invalidity of the latter methods seems to have received no attention.
92 Brush (1967, p. 886).
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

262 M. Niss
Heisenberg model within magnetism. They were well aware of the Lenz-Ising model
and its ability to exhibit phase transitions, so their choice to investigate more sophis-
ticated models must have been a conscious one.
Other factors therefore are at play in the acceptance of a model, and my discus-
sion above of the four guises of the Lenz-Ising model can serve to characterize them.
The Lenz-Ising model was not used to represent magnets, because other models were
available that were in much better agreement with the fundamental theory of quantum
mechanics, which was seen as being capable of explaining ferromagnetism and anti-
ferromagnetism. That left little room for the Lenz-Ising model when physicists such
as Van Vleck strived for a high degree of correspondence between quantum theory
and particular model. The situation was similar for the description of gas, although
there was no disagreement with quantum theory, but the gas atoms or molecules were
restricted to lattice sites. The success of the alloy model can be explained because it
did not violate quantum theory and its assumptions could be justified theoretically.
These cases, in sum, show that a major factor in the acceptance or rejection of a
physical model in the 1950s was its realism - only realistic models were seen as
significant.
5 The motivation and work of Domb's group at King's College London
Cyril Domb's group at King's College London did find the Lenz-Ising model physi-
cally relevant in the 1950s. Indeed, a major part of Domb's research activities involved
an examination of the model in its various guises. He noted the extension of
Onsager's solution to planar lattices other than the square lattice and applied series
expansions to the two and three-dimensional model on a variety of lattices in the
presence or absence of an external magnetic field. He formed a research group that
focused largely on the Lenz-Ising model, and several of his students and cowork-
ers, especially Martin F. Sykes and Michael E. Fisher,93 helped to diffuse Domb's
views. Domb summarized their work during the 1950s in a 150-page review article
in I960;94 he stands out by the sheer volume of his work on the Lenz-Ising model;
no one else can compare to it. As we shall see, however, Domb's attitude toward the
Lenz-Ising model was more pioneering still. I explore below the reasons why Domb
studied it and the insights he and his group gained from it between 1949 and the
early 1960s, including their introduction of the crucially important series-expansion
method.
93 Ashrafi. Hall, and Schweber (n.d). They add A. J. Wakefield, David S. Gaunt, Geoffrey S. Joyce, and
Dennis Rapport to the list of Domb's students; one may also include Renfrey B. Potts of the eponymous
model and David M. Burley as well. Martin F. Sykes was a Ph.D. student of Domb in Oxford and joined his
group as an ICI fellow (postdoctoral associate). Fisher stayed at King's College after completing his Ph.D.
degree in 1957, first as a postdoctoral fellow in Domb's group, then as a lecturer, reader, and finally full
professor in 1965. Domb (2003) writes that according to Fisher, perhaps the most famous member of his
group, Domb's Inaugural Lecture was a major factor in awakening Fisher's interest in statistical mechanics
rather than in continuing his thesis work on analog computation.
94 Domb (1960).
Ô Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 263
5.1 Domb's motivation
As a high school student, Cyril Domb (b. 1920) wanted to pursue a career in mathe-
matics, and on the advice and recommendation of one of his teachers was admitted to
the University of Cambridge in 1938 and passed the Mathematical Tripos Examina-
tion in 194 1.95 He recalled that he "was examined in courses on relativity, quantum
mechanics and statistical mechanics, although I attended a variety of additional courses
on other topics in pure and applied mathematics."96 He spent the war years doing radar
research for the military and returned to Cambridge in 1946, pursuing graduate stud-
ies in the department of mathematics, which included theoretical physics. Inspired
by his war work, he worked on problems in geometrical probability and interacted
with mathematicians, but found that by the end of the 1940s his research interests had
gradually shifted to cooperative phenomena in physics, that is, phenomena that can
only be described properly by taking into account the cooperation between constitu-
tive units.97 He chose statistical mechanics as his research area, and the topic of his
Ph.D. thesis of 1949 was lattice models of cooperative phenomena, in particular the
Lenz-Ising model.98
Domb recalled that his shift toward statistical mechanics of lattice systems was
"sparked off" by a colloquium on a particular approximation99 and its applications. "I
realized that for one-dimensional systems I could solve the problem exactly, and this
led me naturally to the transfer matrix."100 I shall not be concerned with the techni-
calities of this matrix,101 but only note that it permits the solution of various physical
problems. His discovery of it led him to the literature, and Onsager's 1944 paper struck
him with "awe and admiration."102 He continued:
I set about formulating transfer matrices for a variety of problems, and I found
that they could all be reduced to a simple characteristic form with large numbers
of zeros, which I called duo-diagonal. At this period I hoped that it would be
95 Domb has written:
I never regretted my training as a mathematician. In theoretical physics we are usually pragmatic,
and far more concerned with deriving a practical solution to a problem than with establishing rigor-
ously that the solution is correct. But training in rigor enables one to decide with more confidence
when it can be ignored. See Domb (1990a, p. 2).
96 Domb (1990a, p. 2).
97 Domb (1990b).
98 Domb published the main results of his thesis in a letter to Nature and in two papers in the Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. He spent his subsequent career first at the Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford
(1949-1952) on a fellowship, then as a lecturer in the mathematics department at Cambridge (1952-1954),
and as Chair of Theoretical Physics at King's College London (1954-1981), after which he moved to
Bar-Ilan University, Israel.
99 This was the so-called Bethe approximation.
1 °° Domb ( 1 990a, p. 1 2). Domb's interview with Schweber is essentially identical here. See Domb interview
with Schweber (2002).
101 Hoddeson et al. (1992, pp. 528-529).
102 Domb (1990a, p. 12).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

264 M. Niss
possible to deal with these matrices exactly, and I consulted with [the British
mathematician] Philip Hall; but he was convinced that the problem was very dif-
ficult and had no practical suggestions to offer. I therefore developed perturbation
expansions for the two-dimensional Ising model in zero and non-zero field.103
Domb thus had a method, the transfer matrix, and he looked for problems to solve
using it, rather than looking for methods by which to solve problems.
Most of Domb's papers are very technical and mathematical, with an extremely
high equations-to-text ratio. Moreover, several of his papers seem to be on purely
mathematical problems, such as the transformation of physical problems into
standard mathematical forms, or the calculation of lattice constants in crystal sta-
tistics. That Domb himself considered his work to be very mathematical is seen in
his correspondence with Rudolf Peierls. In 1947, Domb sent a manuscript on "Order-
Disorder Statistics" through his thesis advisor Fred Hoyle to Peierls, who in 1936 had
provided one of the major results on the Lenz-Ising model.104 Domb followed up by
writing to Peierls that, "I realised that the approach is very mathematical, and that there
is therefore a danger of not concentrating on the physical [ly] important features."105
At any rate, Domb had a better grasp of mathematics and its potential use in physics
than many other theorists at the time.
Despite this undeniable mathematical orientation of Domb's work, I will argue
that Domb was motivated by physical phenomena, and that physical considerations
played a vital role in his choice of models. I began by examining his Inaugural Lecture
at King's College London in March 1955 where he remarks on how statistics can be
applied in various branches of science, mainly physics, but also chemistry, metallurgy,
and biology, which can be taken as the goal of his scientific program.
The theoretical chemist can give us a pretty good idea of what a molecule of
water is like, and of how two water molecules interact. If we could therefore
apply the statistical technique to an assembly consisting of a vast number of
water molecules we should be able to account for all the physical properties of
water; we should be able to show that at sufficiently low temperatures water con-
sists of a crystalline solid, that at 0°C. it melts into a liquid, and that at 100°C. it
vaporizes; we should be able to understand all the peculiarities of water, why the
solid is lighter than the liquid, and why the liquid has its maximum density at a
temperature of about 4°C, and what specific characteristic of the water molecule
gives rise to these almost unique properties. We should be able to predict the
properties of water or ice in regions of pressure and temperature so far inac-
cessible in the laboratory, but which may be of considerable astrophysical or
geophysical interest and importance.106
What is remarkable is the degree of generality Domb sought: Scientists should "account
for all the physical properties of water" and in particular should strive to understand
103 ibid, emphasis in the original.
104 Brush (1967) and Niss (2005).
105 Domb to Peierls, October 14, 1947, Bodleian Library, Oxford, C72, MS Eng. Mise, b 205.
106 Domb (1955, p. 403).
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 265
how its microscopic properties (the characteristics of the water molecule) lead to mac-
roscopic properties. More generally, Domb reveals his preoccupation with real phys-
ical phenomena, rather than with mathematical problems. His citing precise numbers
for the freezing and boiling points of water, however, should not be read as requir-
ing theoretical physicists to make highly accurate predictions; he seems to be content
either with more qualitative results or with reasonably accurate quantitative results,
thus recognizing that there are unavoidable theoretical uncertainties.
Domb looked at cooperative phenomena in a more unified way than most of his con-
temporaries, who focused on one phenomenon at a time. Already in his dissertation,
he dealt with cooperative phenomena in general, and in the resulting publications in
1949 he discussed binary solutions (the mixture of two liquids), ferromagnets, and
order-disorder in alloys, writing that it "is clarifying to consider the above problems
collectively...."107 These statistical-mechanical problems share, he noted in another
paper, that a classical, rather than a quantum-mechanical solution provides a satis-
factory approximation to them.108 As he told me in a letter of March 9, 2005, the
Lenz-Ising model "was very important to show that the same model could apply to
different physical phenomena." It was a perfect choice, because its various interpreta-
tions made it a model of all pertinent phenomena. Since Domb examined cooperative
phenomena in general, he therefore took a large step toward perceiving the Lenz-Ising
model as a unifying mathematical structure, rather than as several models that share
the same mathematical structure, although he gave a particular interpretation of it in
a particular case, say, as a ferromagnet.
Domb's acceptance of the Lenz-Ising model was a careful choice; he dismissed
other models on the grounds that they were too unrealistic. He found, for instance, the
so-called Potts model,109 which is a generalization of the Lenz-Ising model, "to be an
abstract mathematical exercise with little chance of physical application."110 Domb
shared his favorable view of the Lenz-Ising model with his contemporaries in some
of its nonmagnetic guises: "by far the most fruitful application of the Ising model is to
the problem of order-disorder transitions and adsorption for which the assumptions
regarding interactions between neighbours are fairly satisfactory."1 1 1 They also agreed
that it was not an exact representation of ferromagnets and antiferromagnets: "The
Ising model is," he wrote about its magnetic variant, "effectively classical in nature,
and corresponds to replacing the correct quantum-mechanical exchange interaction
or • a' by azo'z"x n With Jack E. Brooks, Domb went so far as stating "that the correct
107 Domb (1949c, p. 775). His contribution to the first major conference he attended was on the Lenz-Ising
model. See Domb (1952).
108 Domb (1949a), p. 36. The titles of this paper, "Order-Disorder Statistics. I." and another one, "On
Metastable Approximations in Co-operative Assemblies," (Domb and Sykes 1956) attest to their general-
ity while those of Domb and Sykes (1957a) and Domb and Sykes (1957b) explicitly refer to a particular
phenomenon, ferromagnetism.
109 Domb put forth this model, but it is now called the Potts model after his student who studied it in his
dissertation. See Domb (1974b).
110 Domb (1990b, pp. 35-36). Twenty years after its proposal the Potts model was "rediscovered." {Ibid)
1 ] x Brooks and Domb ( 1 95 1 , pp. 349-350).
112 /¿id, p. 349.
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

266 M. Niss
quantum-mechanical model of antiferromagnetism [the Heisenberg model] has been
discussed by Van Vleck,"1 13 so that was not just a realistic model or the best one avail-
able, but the correct one. In another paper, Domb declared that the Ising interaction
can only be seen as "a valid approximation for substances exhibiting strong magnetic
anisotropy."114 In the letter to me noted above, Domb explained why he investigated
the less realistic Lenz-Ising model instead of the more satisfactory Heisenberg model:
Every physicist concerned with magnetism told us that the Ising model had little
physical reality and the proper model to study was the Heisenberg model. But
we were concerned with critical behaviour, and it is vastly more difficult to get
any information [about that] for the Heisenberg model than for the Ising model.
Descriptions of cooperative phenomena faced grave mathematical difficulties, and
that mathematical problems justify a simplified model permeates all of Domb's work,
as in his above rejection of the Heisenberg model and acceptance of the Lenz-Ising
model. The same was true for gas condensation.115 Domb remarked in his Inaugural
Lecture that the application of statistical techniques should be to provide "informa-
tion of a powerful and enlightening character" in most branches of science, but "The
major obstacles in most instances are mathematical problems of a novel and complex
character for which no general method of solution has so far evolved."1 16 Cooperative
phenomena involved a mix of different approximation schemes, series expansions and
the like, which rarely made it possible to determine if they gave reliable information
about particular models.
Beginning in the middle 1950s, Domb gave more philosophical reasons why sim-
plified models are relevant in situations involving formidable mathematical problems.
He stated in his Inaugural Lecture that in Onsager's solution, "Nature has provided us
with an exact solution in a field in which we should not really have expected one; we
should be grateful and make the most use of it."117 Nevertheless, we are faced with
"a number of important problems with little hope of exact solutions, and a particular
exact solution corresponding to a simplified problem. The latter can then act as a guide
to the significant and important features which we have to look for in our more general
problems."118 Consider an analogy to theoretical chemistry:
113 Ibid., p. 350.
114 Domb and Sykes (1957a, p. 216).
1 15 Domb and Sykes (1957c), for instance, motivate their paper on the calculation of lattice constants
by appealing to the mathematical difficulties of Mayers theory of gas condensation, which "represented
a great step forward in the attempt of statistical mechanics to account for phase transitions" (Domb and
Sykes 1957c, p. 733). Despite its great merits - its ability to "account for condensation at sufficiently low
temperatures, and to indicate how a critical point arose in liquid-vapor equilibrium" - its mathematical
difficulties seem "very formidable" (ibid.). They continue: "With phase transitions arising from lattice
structures more progress is possible," and so the Lenz-Ising model - "a very crude model of liquid-vapor
equilibrium" - appears on the stage.
116 Domb (1955, p. 404).
117 Ibid., p. 412.
118 ibid.
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 267
There is little hope of solving the wave equation corresponding to any but the
simplest molecular systems; but one must use the simple exact solutions such
as those of the hydrogen molecular ion, and the hydrogen molecule, to teach us
something of the nature of the chemical bond, and to guide us towards the sort
of approximations which might be expected to give satisfactory results.119
Domb did not express that view in his research papers, but in his long review article
of 1960 he did motivate the use of "simplified models" by appealing to similar ideas
in liquids and crystals:
To facilitate calculations models have been introduced in which the molecular
interaction is simplified, but which, it is hoped, maintain the cooperative charac-
teristics of the original assembly; examples are the use of hard sphere molecules
in elucidating the properties of liquids, and the neglect of all but nearest neigh-
bour interactions in problems on crystal lattices.120
I shall discuss later how Domb's view actually played out in his work on the Lenz-
Ising model, but I first must examine the pioneering methods he developed to obtain
results for it.
5.2 Series expansions
The three-dimensional Lenz-Ising model resisted attacks to obtain an exact solution,
but in the late 1940s and 1950s this crucially important version was examined numer-
ically by applying series expansions. This meant that information about its behavior
near the critical point, that is, its temperature dependence at or near the transition
point, could be estimated. This method was problematic and the results were disputed,
as we shall see, but it did allow, as never before, a comparison of the critical behavior
of the three-dimensional model with experiments.
The application of series expansions to physical models went back to the 1930s,121
but Domb, in his doctoral thesis of 1949, was the first to advance the idea of correlating
their coefficients at low and high temperatures with critical behavior. Domb and his
group's approach, as well as that of Rushbrooke's group at the University of Newcas-
tle (who quickly followed in Domb's footsteps), distinguished themselves from the
earlier approaches by being more systematic and having a larger number of terms that,
furthermore, were exact.122
Their method, generally speaking, was to obtain a series from a perturbation expan-
sion, typically of the free energy. By postulating a general power-law singularity at the
119 ¡bid.
120 Domb (I960, p. 151).
121 Domb (1996, pp. 148-149). Kramers and Wannier, for instance, had assessed various closed-form
approximations in two papers in 1941, and Freeman Dyson had used series expansions in a work on the
Heisenberg model in 1956. As Domb noted: "For the Heisenberg model the density and low-temperature
expansions are related to the interaction of spin waves, a difficult problem first tackled effectively by Dyson
( 1956); but the number of terms he calculated are insufficient to throw any light on critical behaviour"; see
Domb (1996, p. 7).
122 Hoddeson et al. (1992).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

268 M. Niss
critical point, the series coefficients could be correlated with the critical behavior and
a value of the corresponding critical exponent (a, ßf X. . .), so that the corresponding
amplitude could be estimated. Even though there were a large number of terms in
the expansions, they were always finite, which presented a fundamental mathemati-
cal problem. As Domb wrote, "any second-year mathematics student knows that the
behavior of a finite number of terms in a series expansion of a function does not con-
tain enough information to determine the behavior of the function's singularities."123
In other words, the information was not established rigorously from a mathematical
point of view. When tested by application to the two-dimensional Lenz-Ising model,
and the results were compared to the exact values that had been obtained rigorously,
the agreement was satisfactory. This, as well as what was expected of the model phys-
ically, enabled one "to make confident predictions about the singularities of functions
from a finite number of terms of series expansions."124 Domb thus could declare in
1960:
For three-dimensional models, although exact solutions still seem far off, approx-
imate methods and series expansions have been developed to quite a high order
in recent years. It now seems possible to specify with confidence many of the
important thermodynamic properties of simple models, and hence, if there is
disagreement with experimental results, this must be due to the inadequacy of
the model and not to a particular approximation.125
Still, some had misgivings about whether this method could give correct results,126
while others did not find it worthwhile. As Domb wrote, "Some people have no enthu-
siasm for methods which are not exact and consider that detailed investigation of
higher order approximation terms is not the task of a theoretical physicist."127
These objections did not deter Domb and Rushbrooke and their groups from apply-
ing this method to models, mainly of ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, throughout
the 1950s. Domb and his co-workers were the only physicists who obtained results on
the critical behavior of the Lenz-Ising model. This involved enormous effort, because
not only every dimension, but also every type of lattice demanded a separate calcu-
lation, but it bore fruit: Within a few years after Domb finished his thesis in 1949,
123 Domb (1966, p. 29). He continued: "for example, even if the first 15 terms of an expansion are positive
and well-behaved, there is nothing to ensure that an effect which is small and unnoticed in the first few
terms will not dominate asymptotically."
124 Domb (1966, p. 29). For further details, see Domb (1996).
125 Domb (I960. d. 152).
126 Yang wrote: "I must admit that in the 1 950s I was extremely sceptical of such methods since it appeared
to me that to predict the singularity from the first few terms of a power series was hopeless. It turns out
that this method is today the most powerful one at our command and yields results, for example for the
transition temperature, with fantastic accuracy." See Yang (1972, p. 3).
127 Domb (1966), p. 29. He continued: "I am reminded of a conversation which I had with [Jacques] Yvon
about his own important contribution to this field .... He told me that he had developed the method, tried
it in lower order, and found that it gave the same result as other approximations. I asked if he had not
been interested to go to higher orders to see whether it gave any improvement. He replied: 'my task as a
theoretical physicist is to develop methods, and see that they work and are correct; I then hand [them] over
to engineers.'
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 269
this method was seen by most physicists as providing reliable information about the
critical behavior of a number of substances, their specific heats CL,, their spontaneous
magnetizations as a function of temperature, and their susceptibilities x = §77 (the
change in magnetization M of a substance in response to an external magnetic field
f/).128 I now turn to what Domb did with this information.
5.3 Domb's use of the Lenz-Ising model
Domb's overarching use of the Lenz-Ising model was of a technical nature examining
the validity of various approximation schemes, as I noted earlier, but as I argued, his
motivation was physical as he indicated in scattered remarks in his papers, suggesting
its importance throughout his work.
As Domb indicated in the quotation above, he broached the possibility of comparing
the model with experiments, which marked a change in his views. At the beginning
of the 1950s, he (and his graduate student Brooks) wrote that the lack of realism of
the Lenz-Ising model meant that, "Its results cannot therefore be directly compared
with experiment."129 He thus compared only its overall features with numerical data
on phase changes for the first time at a conference in Paris in 1952, where in discuss-
ing the similarities between the two-dimensional model on different lattices he noted
that Onsageťs logarithmic temperature dependence of its specific heat "differs con-
siderably"130 with experiments - its theoretical dependence has a large "tail" at high
temperatures that was not found in experiments.131 Domb neither cited the source of
these experiments,132 nor provided a graphical comparison of the discrepancy. In fact,
he mentioned it mainly to justify the examination of the three-dimensional variant of
the Lenz-Ising model: "It is of great interest ... to determine how these features are
modified when a more realistic three-dimensional model is used."133
Domb followed the same pattern in not confronting the model with experiments
in other papers (except for one, to which I will turn shortly). Instead, as in his Paris
paper, he concluded that the theoretical tail is smaller for three-dimensional models
128 Domb (1952, 1960), Domb and Sykes (1956, 1957a,b) and Burley (1960). The first two papers are by
and large identical in their physical contents (they have identical sentences about physical relevance and
quantities of interest); the difference is that the latter is based upon longer expansions. Burley, in his thesis
under Domb, applied the method in the latter to the low-temperature spontaneous magnetization for the
three-dimensional Lenz-Ising model on three lattices (simple cubic, body-centered cubic, and face-centered
cubic) and determined a curve for the spontaneous magnetization.
129 Brooks and Domb (1951, p. 349).
130 Domb (1952, p. 8).
131 Four years later, Domb and Sykes (1956) reached a similar conclusion translating the French text in
Domb (1952). In yet another four years Domb wrote: "The specific heat of the three-dimensional model
seems to remain infinite at the Curie point, but its detailed shape is appreciably different from the Onsager
curve in two dimensions. The 'tail' is far smaller, showing that most of entropy change of the assembly
takes place in the temperature region below the Curie point; this is in far better agreement with experimental
observations of specific heat anomalies." See Domb (1960, p. 286).
132 Domb probably considered it to be common knowledge, a possible source being C. Sykes and
H. Wilkinson's review of experiments on the specific heat of nickel. See Sykes and Wilkinson (1938).
133 Domb (1952, p. 192).
4y Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

270 M. Niss
on various lattices as compared to their two-dimensional counterparts, so that the
former "must lead to a specific heat curve in closer agreement with experimental
curves."134 In other cases, while he plotted theoretical curves for a particular quantity
in the model, he did not plot the corresponding experimental data, thus confronting the
model and experiment only qualitatively rather than quantitatively. He mainly offered
conclusions on the similarities and differences between the three-dimensional and the
two-dimensional models for different lattices.135
Domb did publish one paper with M. F. Sykes136 that included a section on the
relation between models and experiments. Its uncharacteristically general title was
"On the susceptibility of a ferromagnetic above the Curie point," that is it, concerned
the theoretical description of the susceptibility of ferromagnets without any reference
to models. Its subject, more precisely, was the improvement of the Curie-Weiss law,
which gives a linear dependence of susceptibility on temperature but is a mean-field
theory that neglects local fluctuations, while Domb and Sykes's theory takes them into
account. They compared Weiss and Forrer's experimental results of the late 1920s for
nickel with the Heisenberg model, high-temperature expansions of the Lenz-Ising
model, and generalized Lenz-Ising models (in which the spin points in one direction
as in the Lenz-Ising model, but can take on more than two values). The differences in
the susceptibility for these models "are small and are very much of the same magnitude
as those we might expect to be introduced by the physical approximations implicit in
the models."137 Consequently, Domb and Sykes compared only the (ordinary) Lenz-
Ising model to experimental data on the susceptibility for a zero magnetic field, finding
that the theoretical curve could be superimposed on the experimental curve with gen-
erally good agreement. "It is thus possible to account for the experimental results
assuming only short-range interatomic forces."138 They continued:
We would suggest that the formal statistical calculations applied rigorously to
a three-dimensional structure play a dominant part in determining the critical
behavior of the susceptibility, and it is because of this that even as simple an
interaction as that assumed by Ising gives a good account of the observed depar-
tures from the Curie- Weiss law.139
In other words, the inclusion of fluctuations was the important feature of the model,
not the particular choice of model.
The magnetic substance is significant because it was known that nickel did not have
the strong magnetic-anisotropic interaction that, as we saw above, Domb required of
a substance for the Lenz-Ising model to offer a valid approximation to it. His and
Sykes's conclusions referred to an isotropie substance in contrast to the substance
134 Ibid., p. 195.
135 "Thug we fincj agajn mat me dimension of a model is the major factor in determining the shape of the
spontaneous magnetization curve, the difference in crystal lattice leading only to a 'fine structure' variation."
See Domb (1960, p. 293).
136 Domb and Sykes (1957a).
137 Ibid., p. 227.
138 Ibid., p. 214.
139 Domb and Sykes (1957a, p. 228).
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1 950- 1 965 : from irrelevance to relevance 27 1
used in the confrontation of the model with experiments by Cooke et al. (1959). This
is important, because in the 1960s physicists became interested in ordinary isotropie
materials, so their paper actually was one of the first instances in which the Lenz-
Ising model was found to be empirically adequate for such substances. This could
have been an important step towards realizing the potential of the Lenz-Ising model,
but their paper did not receive much attention at the time, perhaps because the validity
of the Lenz-Ising model's nonclassical exponents was a controversial issue before the
application of the series expansion method to the more reasonable Heisenberg model
in the early 1960s also yielded nonclassical exponents, which agreed with experi-
ments.140
In any case, since Domb and Sykes's paper was the only one in which Domb and
his group, at that time, attempted to confront the Lenz-Ising model with experiments,
I conclude that Domb was not strongly interested in such confrontations, possibly
because he regarded the Lenz-Ising model as being too simplified to warrant them.
D. M. Burley, who published a paper on the spontaneous magnetization under Domb's
supervision, expressed this view.141 Domb himself, moreover, in his review article of
1960, was fundamentally concerned with examining the validity of various approxi-
mation methods rather than with confronting the Lenz-Ising model with experiments.
This is even more remarkable, since Domb concluded there that the method of series
expansions had reached a state where possible disagreements between the Lenz-Ising
model and experiments could be blamed on the model rather than the approxima-
tions.142
In his Inaugural Lecture Domb noted several instances in which the Lenz-Ising
model had been used to gain insight into real phenomena. He remarked, for example,
that long-range order, which is a "precisely defined quantity which can be measured
practically by means of X-ray diffraction,"143 appears in the Lenz-Ising model:
140 See page 67.
141 Burley, whose arguments may shed some light on Domb's attitude, did not confront his findings with
experimental results, writing that:
Since the Ising model treats spin as a classical property, quantitative agreement with experiment is
not to be expected, but despite the considerable idealization of the model good qualitative agree-
ment is obtained, the spontaneous magnetization curves going to zero at the critical temperature.
The importance of the quantum nature of spin is shown well by the better quantitative agreement
obtained at low temperatures from the spin wave treatment of the Heisenberg model [he here cites
Dyson (1956)]. See Burley (1960, p. 912).
The Lenz-Ising model is thus inadequate as regards a full description of real systems. He continued:
This work on the Ising model is important, nevertheless, on two counts. Firstly, the data obtained
give a valuable yardstick by which more physically realistic models and approximate methods,
used for the models, can be measured. Secondly, fig. 1 [a plot of the spontaneous magnetization as
a function of temperature] shows clearly that the dimensionality of the lattice is the most impor-
tant feature to be considered and that the coordination number of the lattice only affects the fine
structure of the curves.
This strong dependence on dimensionality thus might also be the case for more realistic models.
142 Domb (1960, p. 246). "We should then be in a better position to compare the results with experiment,
and to see whether a serious refinement of the model is needed to secure effective agreement."
143 Domb (1955, p. 414).
Ô Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

272 M. Niss
The existence of "long range order" in an assembly of this kind is rather remark-
able when we remember that only nearest neighbors interact; we may draw the
general physical conclusion that short range order forces are quite sufficient to
propagate order to any distance.144
Domb also used the Lenz-Ising model, interpreted as an order-disorder model, to
gain an understanding of melting. Long-range order, he explained, differentiates a
solid from a liquid: the former possesses it, the latter does not, so the melting point
marks the disappearance of long-range order. "If this interpretation is correct," he
continued, "we can understand why the melting point is so sharply defined; the model
Onsager solution shows that this sharpness arises immediately we pass beyond one
dimension to two or three dimensions."145 It also ruled out one phenomenon: "We
should also predict with reasonable confidence that there is no possibility of passing
continuously from the solid to fluid phase, since 'long range order' cannot disappear
continuously; hence we should not expect a solid-fluid critical point."146
Noteworthy also is that Domb made a significant discovery that sheds light on
the nature of phase transitions, namely, that the critical parameters in the Lenz-Ising
model depend significantly on dimensionality whereas the type of lattice is much less
significant. 147 Dimensionality therefore matters, in contrast to classical theories where
it does not, an idea that became important in the 1960s.148
Michael E. Fisher has noted that Domb understood early that simple models are
important for an understanding of complex systems,149 and as we saw above, he was
the first physicist who thought that the Lenz-Ising model could give insight into real
systems. He was occupied, as were his contemporaries, with the question of which
models are good. Domb and his contemporaries agreed that the Lenz-Ising model is
an unrealistic model of the physical phenomena he examined (except for binary alloys,
which was not central place to his concern); but unlike most of his contemporaries
Domb his group, as we have seen, put a substantial amount of effort into a numeri-
cal examination of the Lenz-Ising model. At the same time, he rarely confronted the
Lenz-Ising model with experiments.
6 From irrelevance to relevance
In the 1960s, the perception of physicists concerned with phase transitions changed
regarding the physical relevance of the Lenz-Ising model: A toy model capable of
showing the possibility of phase transitions became a model that revealed some of
the physics of real systems in the field of critical phenomena. This changed position
144 Ibid.
145 //?/</., p. 416.
146 Ibid. Similarly, the lattice-gas model "is very crude and needs refining before it could in any way
be regarded adequate, but it does enable us to understand, for example, how a critical point arises." Ibid,
pp. 416-417.
147 Domb formulated this idea already at the Paris conference. See Domb (1952).
148 Domb (1996)
149 Fisher (1996).
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History- of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 273
was reflected, for instance, in the papers delivered at the seminal conference on "Phe-
nomena in the neighborhood of critical points" at the National Bureau of Standards
in Washington, D.C., in April 1965. 15° While most emphasized experimental results,
five were major theoretical papers, in three of which the Lenz-Ising model played a
crucial role, in a fourth a model similar to the lattice-gas model was examined, and
in the fifth the Lenz-Ising model played no role. Then, in the 1970s, the Lenz-Ising
model occupied a prominent position in the theory of critical phenomena and phase
transitions, as evidenced by Eugene H. Stanley's widely used textbook Stanley (1971)
and by the multivolume series Pitase Transitions and Critical Phenomena,151 the first
volume of which was published in 1972. My concern here will be to examine why, in
the first half of the 1960s, the Lenz-Ising model became perceived as giving physical
insight into phase transitions.
Physicists devoted especial attention to a particular type of phase transition, a con-
tinuous phase transition, in the 1960s.152 For a substance undergoing such a transition
the first derivatives of the free energy (examples of which are magnetization, density,
and energy) are continuous, while higher-order derivatives (such as susceptibility,
compressibility, and specific heat) are divergent or discontinuous at a transition point.
The phase transition at the liquid-vapor critical point of water is the prototypical
continuous phase transition: As water is heated its liquid and vapor phases become
more and more similar in their properties until at the critical point all differences
disappear, and beyond it only one homogeneous phase exists. In the 1960s, a precise
definition of a continuous phase transition emerged as well as a unified approach to
the features shared by several systems exhibiting them. The umbrella term "critical
phenomena" was introduced for these shared features, which were found in a great
variety of physical systems, information on which accumulated both experimentally
and theoretically. Thus, beginning in 1961, more and more data were obtained on
the equilibrium properties of numerous magnetic materials, as old experiments were
revisited in light of new theoretical developments,153 and liquid-gas critical points
received renewed attention.154 Theoretically, the use of series expansions continued
and provided a host of numerical results on the critical behavior of the Lenz-Ising
model and, to a lesser extent, on that of the Heisenberg model.
6.1 Theoretical status of models in the 1960s
Michael E. Fisher delivered a series of lectures at the Summer Institute for Theoretical
Physics at the University of Colorado in Boulder in 1964,155 in which he discussed
150 Published as Green and Sengers (1966)
151 Domb and Melville S. Green edited the first six volumes; after Green's death in 1979, Joel E. Lebowitz
became Domb's coeditor.
152 Jaeger (1998) discusses the changes in both the perception and terminology of phase transitions in the
1960s.
153 Benedek(1966).
154 Domb (1996).
155 Published in the following year as Fisher (1965).
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

274 M. Niss
several models of critical phenomena. His treatment of these models, which included
the Lenz-Ising model and more realistic models, reveals that by and large he shared the
views that most physicists held on the realism of these models in the 1950s. Ranking
them according to their realism, he provided an account of his views in 1964.
Fisher divided the models into "simple" and "simpler," placing under the former
heading (a) the classical continuum gas; (b) the Heisenberg model for magnetism;
and (c) the Lenz-Ising model of binary alloys. He did not explicitly characterize what
he meant by a "simple model," but his examples imply that a simple model is based
upon assumptions that are not strictly true, and indeed introduce abstractions and
idealizations that are known to be incorrect but can be argued are not of crucial impor-
tance. For example, the assumption in the Heisenberg model of well-localized spins is
reasonable for insulating crystals, but not for good conductors. Fisher therefore char-
acterized simple models as being "fairly realistic" and as yielding a "fairly reliable
description."
Fisher's "simpler models" included the lattice-gas model and the magnetic
Lenz-Ising model. He introduced both as approximations to simple models and jus-
tified both by citing the mathematical problems involved in more realistic models.
The lattice-gas model, he wrote, has "some artificial features" and does not yield
the correct behavior for high densities, so good qualitative agreement with real gases
is not to be expected. However, that model "still contains the 'seeds of reality.'"156
Simplifying the Heisenberg model leads to the Lenz-Ising model; even though the
extreme anisotropy of the interaction of the latter model is an artificial feature of it,
this is most pronounced at low temperatures, while "our interests will be at high tem-
peratures close to the critical point where this deficiency can be expected to be less
significant...."157 Further, he used the discovery of "Ising-like" magnetic crystals158
to justify the model (although he discussed only a small fraction of such exotic mate-
rials). His descriptions of the magnetic Lenz-Ising and lattice-gas models makes it
clear that his "simpler models" embody at least one very problematic, if not incorrect
assumption, at least in some limit (for instance, at high densities) which makes them
"artificial" although they still can contain the "seeds of reality." Fisher's view of the
realism of the Lenz-Ising model in its various guises in 1964 thus was very close to
those of physicists in the 1940s and 1950s.
6.2 Series expansions
Domb's work especially with Sykes had made series expansions a respected tool for
the extraction of the critical properties of lattice models, and their use proliferated in
the 1960s, not least in the work of Domb and his group with new people and renewed
energy. Others too made important contributions, such as George A. Baker, Jr., at Los
Alamos Scientific Laboratory, who with John L. Gammel introduced the so-called
156 Ibid., p. 27.
157 Ibid., p. 28.
158 Such an Ising-like crystal is the antiferromagnet dysprosium aluminum garnet.
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1 950- 1 965 : from irrelevance to relevance 275
Padé approximants,159 which Domb called a "dramatic step forward,"160 because
they extended the set of singularities that could be studied by series expansions: Padé
approximants could handle series with alternating or irregular signs, thereby allowing
low-temperature expansions to be analyzed, bypassing severe difficulties encountered
by earlier approaches.161 In Domb's words: "In all subsequent work on estimating
critical behaviour from series expansions the Padé approximant has been a tool of
major importance."162 These developments provided the basis for obtaining accurate
and reliable information about lattice models.
6.3 The experimental situation
The Lenz-Ising model was confronted with experimental results in the 1960s,
foremost the lattice-gas model, and was found to have a measure of empirical jus-
tification. I trace some of the main events of this development below, relying mostly
on the published assessments of theoretical physicists on these exceedingly difficult
experiments on critical behavior.
Magnetism We have seen that Domb and Sykes's comparison in 1957 of the
Lenz-Ising model with susceptibility data for nickel was the first sign that it might
describe typically magnetic materials reasonably well, although the Heisenberg model
was generally more appropriate to use for isotropie ferromagnets such as iron and
nickel. Another sign came 3 years later, but in a paper that, like Domb and Sykes's,
was not widely cited in the published literature: W. K. Robinson and S. A. Friedberg
at the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh reported that measurements of
the specific heat of two paramagnetic salts, NiCh • 6H2O and C0CI2 • 6H2O, exhibit
antiferromagnetism.163 They concluded that the magnetic contribution to the specific
heats for both salts was consistent with a logarithmic singularity at the Néel point (the
transition point of an antiferromagnet), and they remarked that the two-dimensional
Lenz-Ising model was known to reveal a logarithmic singularity, so that this also
might be the case for the three-dimensional model, but, judging from contemporary
citations, their point seems to not have been widely appreciated at that time.164
Publications that did attract attention generally expressed negative views.
G. B. Benedek,165 for instance, considered experimental data gathered since 1961 and
159 Baker and Gammel ( 196 1 ) and Baker ( 1961 ).
160 Domb and Green (1974a, p. 360).
161 Ibid See also Domb (1996, pp. 165-166).
162 Domb and Green (1974a, p. 360).
1 63 Robinson and Friedberg ( 1 960). Skalyo and Friedberg ( 1 964) reported measurements on C0CI2 • 6H2O
with higher temperature resolution
164 In the three theoretical papers published before 1965 that discuss Robinson and Friedberg's results, the
first, Domb and Sykes (1962), did not mention the logarithmic singularity while the two others, Sykes and
Fisher (1962) and Fisher (1964b) did mentioned it. A similar story is the experimental results by Goiter
and co-workers (Lasheen et al. 1958) on the antiferromagnet MnCl2 • H2O, which was compared to the
Lenz-Ising model by Fisher and Sykes (1962).
165 Another examples was Gaunt et al. (1964), who calculated the value of the exponent for the depen-
dence of the magnetization on the magnetic field with a series expansion, finding it to be 1/(5.20 ± 0.15),
£i Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

276 M. Niss
concluded at the National Bureau of Standards conference 4 years later that "by and
large the experimental results indicate that the Ising model is inadequate to describe a
real ferromagnet," whereas the Heisenberg model "has been used successfully to cal-
culate the divergence of the susceptibility and the results are in very good agreement
with the experiment."166 Thus, "On the theoretical side, the clear need is a calculation
of the magnetization, the critical isotherm, the susceptibility below Tc and the specific
heat using the Heisenberg Hamiltonian."167 A consensus seems to have developed
that the Heisenberg model was superior to the Lenz-Ising model in its agreement with
experiments on typical isotropie ferromagnets.168
Superfluidi helium Another hint of agreement between the Lenz-Ising model and
experiment was that liquid helium showed an infinite singularity in the specific heat
at the transition point, the lambda point, where liquid helium becomes superfluid
helium. Lazio Tisza was the first to suggest in 1951 that the specific heat of liquid
helium becomes infinite rather than remaining finite,169 but this was far from accepted
by everyone.170 Tisza also observed that Onsager's solution yields a diverging sin-
gularity, but he did not ascribe too much significance to the logarithmic nature of
the specific heat because it arose in the ftvo-dimensional model.171 A decade later,
M. J. Buckingham of the University of Sydney and W. M. Fairbank of Stanford Uni-
versity, found the agreement more significant.172 They related their and F. Kellers's
experimental results of 1957173 to the "notoriously difficult"174 statistical theory of
cooperative phenomena and Onsager's solution:
Footnote 1 65 continued
which they compared to the value of 1/(4.22 ± 0.05) that Kouvel and Fisher (1964) found in an analysis of
experimental data for nickel. They attributed this discrepancy to the "extreme anisotropy of the Ising spin
interaction .../' See Gaunt et al. (1964, p. 715).
166 Benedek(1966),p.48.
167 Ibid., p. 48.
Concerning recent measurements of the initial susceptibility as a function of temperature carried out
by Noakes and Arroti on iron and iron-vanadium alloys and on the ferromagnetic salts O1K2CI • 2H2O and
Cu(NH4)2Cl2 • 2H2O, Kouvel and Fisher (1964) wrote that there is a "close correspondence between these
susceptibility results and the recent Heisenberg model calculations." (p. A 1626) Concerning earlier exper-
iments, they concluded that just above Tc the susceptibility results for nickel are in "excellent agreement"
with the Heisenberg model, but deviates from it at higher temperatures.
169 Buckingham and Fairbank (1961).
170 Buckingham and Fairbank (1961) wrote that as late as 1956 Blatt, Butler, and Schafroth suggested that
the specific heat has a maximum, not an infinite value.
171 In another comparison that was not much cited in the published literature, Atkins and Edwards in 1954
published experimental results on the coefficient of expansion for liquid helium in the vicinity of the lambda
point and found that below 7' the coefficient is logarithmic in Tx - T. As an aside, they noted that this is
"of particular interest because Onsager ... has discussed a two-dimensional model of a ferromagnetic and
has shown that the specific heat in the vicinity of the Curie point is Cp = A log(7V -T) + ß." See Atkins
and Edwards (1955, p. 1433).
172 Buckingham and Fairbank (1961).
Fairbank et al. (1957) published these results, but the experiments were done primarily by Kellers.
174 Buckingham and Fairbank (1961, p. 81).
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 277
It is a striking fact that the nature of the singularity with this exact solution is
of just the same form as that observed in the liquid helium transition. It may
well prove to be the case that this particular form is characteristic of cooperative
transitions, in spite of the fact that there are, in principle, many possibilities
available.175
Later, others too concluded that the Lenz-Ising model is empirically adequate,176 but
at the time Buckingham and Fairbank drew no definite conclusions regarding its ade-
quacy. Moreover, Fisher emphasized a huge theoretical problem: "The behaviour of
helium ... is presumably determined essentially by quantum mechanics and it is not
clear how far one should expect an analogy with the 'classical' critical points."177 His
view reflected a general feeling that liquid helium did not have much to say about
classical critical points, which seems to have contributed to the perception of the
inadequacy of the Lenz-Ising model in this area.
Gas-liquid transition Investigations of the critical points of xenon, argon, and
oxygen, which do not display this nonclassical deficiency, played a crucial role in
changing the perception of physicists toward the Lenz-Ising model. H. W. Habgood,
W. G. Schneider, and M. A. Weinberger were members of a group at the National
Research Council Laboratories in Ottawa, Canada, whose research program in the
1950s involved measuring a number of properties of xenon in the critical region.
I shall only discuss their determinations of the liquid-vapor coexistence curve and
the compressibility.178 They chose the monatomic gas xenon, because its critical
temperature is close to room temperature.179 Michael E. Fisher, in 1964, was the
first theoretical physicist to compare their results with the Lenz-Ising model (its
lattice-gas variant). His goal was to highlight the inadequacies of the classical the-
ories of the liquid-gas critical point, but he also compared numerical results for the
lattice-gas model to experiments on the singularities in the coexistence curve, the spe-
cific heat, and the compressibility. The shape of the coexistence curve, he wrote, may
"be studied theoretically for more-or-less idealized models of a fluid,"180 and because
the lattice-gas model is the "only model so far sufficiently tractable to yield signifi-
cant predictions in the critical region,"181 he compared that model with experimental
results.
175 ibid.
176 Actually, the specific heat is not precisely logarithmic. See footnote 68.
177 Fisher (1965, p. 95).
178 The other properties include density distributions in a vertical tube, and the velocity and absorption of
ultra-sound.
179 However, "[a] major problem in making accurate measurements near the critical point results from the
very high compressibility of the system which causes a partial compression of the medium under its own
weight." See Habgood and Schneider (1954, p. 98).
180 Fisher (1964b, p. 947).
181 Ibid.
^ Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

278 M. Niss
Weinberger and Schneider's "very careful study of xenon"182 confirmed
Guggenheim's result of 1945 that the difference between the density of the liquid
pi and gas pc is given by {pL - pg)/^Pc-A(' - T/Tcý as T-+ Tc, where pc
is the critical density and A a constant. In analyzing their data, Fisher found that
the exponent ß = 0.345 ± 0.015, which agreed reasonably well with the value
0.303 < ß < 0.318 garnered from the best available numerical results at that time183
for the three-dimensional lattice-gas model. He concluded that it is "remarkable, and
perhaps unexpected"184 that the simple lattice-gas model yielded such close agreement
with experiment on the coexistence curve, which "suggests that in the critical region
the lattice gas represents rather adequately the pertinent features of a real gas."185 This,
along with Fisher's and the Yangs's conclusions on the specific heat (see below), was
the first statement in the literature expressing the adequacy of the Lenz-Ising model.
Fisher pointed out an important lesson: "It appears that only the grosser features of the
model - in particular the dimensionality and the short range of the forces - are really
essential for obtaining a good description of critical behavior."186 Still, the model was
not perfect:
It seems probable, nonetheless, that the difference of about 0.025 between the
experimental and theoretical values of ß is a real discrepancy due, presumably, to
the more artificial aspects of the Ising Hamiltonian which, in particular, restricts
the molecules to the lattice positions. There remains the theoretical problem of
calculating ß for more realistic continuum models.187
Turning to the isothermal compressibility kj, which is given by
where A is a constant. In 1964, Fisher compared Habgood and Schneider's experi-
mental data of 1954 on xenon with the lattice-gas model using a value of 5/4 for the
exponent y . He concluded that the theoretical curve "is evidently quite consistent with
the experimental points near rc,"188 but he did not ascribe much significance to it:
Despite the "good fit" one should not be too impressed! If one looks more closely
at the data (especially near Tc, where the experiments are most difficult and the
errors introduced by the numerical differentiation involved in deriving kj from
the data), one finds they are somewhat irregular. One may, preferably, attempt
182 ibid.
183 Later work on the Lenz-Ising model leads to ß = 0.326 ± 0.001 (see Pelissetto and Vicari 2002, who
may be a bit too overoptimistic as to precision and accuracy) which has been generally accepted for some
years and agrees well with the best experiments.
184 Ibid., pp. 947-948.
185 Ibid, p. 947.
186 Ibid. As noted in footnote 185, later results showed a better agreement between the model and
experiments.
187 Ibid. pp. 947-948.
188 Ibid, p. 949.
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 279
to calculate a value of y directly from the data. Although one can conclude with
reasonable confidence that yXenon > 1.1, the results prove rather indeterminate
and one must conclude that more experimental data are needed. One may hope
that these will be forthcoming.189
Such precise measurements for argon and oxygen became available in the early 1960s
owing to the important work of A. V. Voronel' and his group at the Institute of Phys-
ical and Technological Measurements in Moscow.190 Bagatskii et al. concluded in
1962191 that the specific heat Cy of argon behaves like Cy = A± In 'T - Tc' in the
neighborhood of the critical point, where A+and A~ refer to its branches below and
above Tc. As we shall see,192 except for Fisher, their conclusion seems to have been
generally accepted.193
In 1964 Fisher and C. N. Yang and his brother Chen-Ping Yang compared the
Lenz-Ising model with VoroneF and his coworkers' experimental results. Fisher con-
cluded that the specific heat Cy below Tc over the range from 0.06 to 6% of Tc fit a
logarithmic function quite well, but above Tc a better fit was obtained by Cy(T) «
£|1 - (T/Tc)'~a + B, where a is a small, positive exponent less than 0.1. For the
lattice-gas model, the specific heat on both sides of the critical temperature seemed
to be best described by a power law with an exponent a = 0.20. In particular, the
specific heat series for the fee Ising lattice could be fit by
Cy(T)K 0.54811 -(T/Tc)'-i/5- 0.612 as T -> Tc.
Surprisingly, it [the specific heat curve for the three-dimensional Lenz-Ising
model] seems to give an excellent representation of the experimental data as
close to the critical point as they go, i.e., to within 1 part in 10,000 of Tc. (It
will be noticed, however, that the measured points do lie some 5-10% below the
theoretical curve in the range 0.4-1.5% above Tc.)m
For temperatures below Tc, the series expansions showed a singularity "probably not
much sharper"195 than logarithmic, so Fisher plotted a logarithmic specific-heat curve
as the experimental curve in the same graph and concluded that their slopes agreed
well, but that the magnitudes of the specific heat differed: "This discrepancy is well
189 Fisher (1965, p. 88); the original source, Fisher (1964b), is less pedagogical.
190 Fisher (1964a), p. A1599, wrote that even though it had been known "for some time" that the spe-
cific heat at constant volume in the neighborhood of the critical point shows anomalous behavior, "[f]urther
details of the critical behavior . . . have been revealed only in recent experiments by Voronel' and co-workers
on argon ... (and, more recently, on oxygen ...)."
191 Translated into English as Bagatskii et al. (1963).
192 Fisher (1964a). A few years later, Fisher wrote that Cy tends to infinity "in a roughly logarithmic
manner." See Fisher (1967, p. 626).
193 At least by Yang and Yang (1964) and Chase et al. (1964).
194 Fisher (1964a, p. A1603).
195 ¡bid.
£i Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

280 M. Niss
beyond the experimental and theoretical uncertainties and represents a real deficiency
of the model."196
Yang and Yang, by contrast, assumed that the specific heats of argon and oxygen are
logarithmic on both sides of Tc and concluded that "qualitatively the three-dimensional
lattice gas with nearest-neighbor interaction gives a fair description of the critical phe-
nomenon."197 Moldover and Little in 1965 declared more definitely that Voronel'
and his coworkers' experimental results were "precisely that to be expected for the
so-called 'lattice-gas' model of the liquid-gas transition."198 Further, "The measure-
ments on argon then indicate that for a real gas the specific heat behaves in manner
similar to that of a lattice gas."199
Discrepancies, however, also were found, the largest one being for the critical
isotherm, that is, the curve of pressure P as a function of volume V at constant
temperature Tc. Widom and Rice (1955) analyzed experimental data for xenon,
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen and found that all could be described by the expression
p - pc = A' V - VC'8~'V - Vc) at T = TCi with the exponent 8 « 4.2. Gaunt,
Fisher and Sykes, however, found that the Lenz-Ising model predicted a value of
8 = 5.20 ± 0.15,200 a rather large discrepancy.201 Such discrepancies, however, did
not detract from the general feeling that the Lenz-Ising model was in surprisingly good
agreement with experimental results, especially since nearly all competing theories
predicted the classical value 8 = 3. In light of the great mathematical difficulties in
modeling phase transitions, this lent some credence to the Lenz-Ising model.
6.4 Relevance in another respect
As described by Ashrafi, Hall and Schweber,202 the subdiscipline of mathematical
physics came to prominence after World War II with the appearance, for example, of
the Journal of Mathematical Physics in 1960. Mathematical rigor was brought to bear
on physical problems, one of whose foci was the foundations of statistical mechanics,
in particular its thermodynamic limit, where the number of particles becomes infinite,
which is prerequisite for a sharp phase transition. The editors of the first volume of
Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena of 1972 stated in their preface that:
In many branches of physics in which smoothness and continuity are to be
expected, questions of mathematical rigor are properly given secondary impor-
196 Ibid, p. A 1604. Fisher continued: "One might argue that the reason the lattice gas specific heat below
Tc is too small is also associated with the one-site character of the hard core since this probably leads to an
underestimate of the total possible entropy change."
197 Yang and Yang (1964, p. 304).
198 Moldover and Little (1965, p. 54).
199 Ibid., emphasis in the original.
200 Gaunt et al. (1964). Based upon a non-rigorous relationship between exponents, Widom (1964) previ-
ously derived for the three-dimensional lattice-gas model S = 5. He was unable to tell whether the discrep-
ancy between S - A 2 and S = 5 was due to the inadequacy of the lattice-gas model or to the relationship.
-U1 Ibid. They felt this discrepancy between the experimental result and the lattice-gas model "must be
attributed" to the "artificial 'rigidity' of a lattice gas with single-site hard cores."
202 Ashrafi, Hall, and Schweber (n.d.).
4y Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1 950- 1 965 : from irrelevance to relevance 28 1
tance. In the theory of phase transitions perhaps more than in any other branch of
physics questions of mathematical pathology lie very close to the fundamental
physics.203
Of the two broad kinds of systems, classes of models and specific models, for which
rigorous results are required, the Lenz-Ising model was of great use in the latter case
because of its simplicity. The Bible on rigorous results in statistical mechanics, Ruelle
(1969), has a chapter on the Lenz-Ising model and its properties.204
7 Factors behind the change from irrelevance to relevance
The change in the perception of the Lenz-Ising model in the 1960s was not caused
by a change in perception of its realism: It was still perceived as less realistic than
other models, such as the Heisenberg model. Nor was it caused by the mathematical
problems encountered in treating more realistic models; these fertilized the ground
for simple models, but they were encountered already in the 1950s, and by and large
only Domb and his group investigated simple models.
As noted earlier, C. N. Yang recalled that the attitude of physicists in the 1940s
and 1950s was that the Lenz-Ising model was irrelevant, but he then continued:
"This feeling disappeared during the 1960s when it became clear that the lattice
gas description of liquid gas transitions does capture much of the essential fea-
tures of the singularities."205 Thus, according to Yang, its empirical adequacy was
responsible for the change in its perception, which he ascribed solely to the liquid-
gas transition and not magnetism. We have seen that several physicists expressed
surprise that a model as simple as the Lenz-Ising model was in good agreement
with experimental results, so Yang's assertion regarding the lattice-gas model as an
important factor in changing the perception of the Lenz-Ising model seems to be
correct. Even though it did not at that time agree with measurements on physical
quantities (for instance, on the exponent in the expression for the critical isotherm),
nevertheless agreement with experiment was perceived as important.206 Although
there were formidable mathematical problems with the simple Lenz-Ising model,
experimental agreement with it played an important role in recognizing its signifi-
cance.
Stephen G. Brush has proposed another factor:
[The] Lenz-Ising model was not taken seriously for several decades because
it grossly oversimplified the nature of interatomic forces and did not seem to
correspond closely to any real system, with the possible exception of alloys and
binary mixtures. The situation changed dramatically in 1961. ..when George A.
203 Domb and Green (1972b, p. xi).
204 For more historical and philosophical oriented work, see Ashrafi, Hall and Schweber (n.d.), Krieger
(1996), and Geifert (2005).
205 Yang (1972, p. 3)
206 Later work on the models and experiments (see Pelissotto and Vicari 2002) brought lower estimates
for Ò and higher experimental estimates. At this stage there is no significant discrepancy.
4il Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

282 M. Niss
Baker, Jr., at the Los Angeles Scientific Laboratory . . . showed that a mathemat-
ical technique invented by the French mathematician Henri Padé in 1891 could
be used to determine the singularities at the critical point from known terms in
the series expansions for the Lenz-Ising model.207
Brush's argument thus seems to be that Padé approximants permitted the theoretical
determination of previously inaccessible critical behavior of the Lenz-Ising model,
which then could be compared with experiments, so that their absence impeded exper-
imental confirmation of it. I agree that Baker's method greatly enhanced the number
of theoretical results, but I disagree that it had a significant effect on the acceptance of
the Lenz-Ising model. Reliable data were available prior to Baker's method, but they
were not used to confront the Lenz-Ising model.
I also feel that the increased focus on similarities between different transition points
played little role in the change in perception of the Lenz-Ising model. Temperley noted
in 1956 that "the basic resemblances between apparently unrelated types of transition
have only come to light gradually during the course of many years,"208 so he intended
in his book "to call attention to some of these resemblances and, at the same time,
to try to pin-point the individual peculiarities of each type of transition."209 It was
recognized already in the 1930s that the Lenz-Ising model could represent several
different systems, which strengthened its theoretical status, but did not bring much
attention to it. This therefore did not play as important a role in the acceptance of
the model as did its agreement with experiments. Temperley himself illustrated this
point in his book by not describing the Lenz-Ising model as a general model of phase
transitions.
Since the Lenz-Ising model is well suited for computer simulations, we should
ask if they influenced the change in its perception as a physical model. According
to Brush (1964), F. J. Murray proposed a Monte Carlo algorithm for the Lenz-Ising
model in 1952, and others, notably Lloyd D. Fosdick,210 followed. The general view of
physicists at the time, however, seems to have been that computer simulations for the
Lenz-Ising model were too inaccurate to be useful (even though there was some con-
troversy here),211 and compared to series expansions, which gave much more precise
results, they played a minor role.
Temperley (1956) declared that the field of the phase transitions "raises, in acute
form, the question of what constitutes a 'physically acceptable theory'." "In this
field," he continued, "it is not always good enough to find a plausible model that
can be made to agree numerically with the observed facts."212 We have seen that
he gave examples of models for which empirical adequacy (as I defined it in my
207 Brush (1983, p. 253).
208 Temperiey (1956, p. vii). However, a few years earlier, Tisza (1951, p. 2), wrote about second-order
phase transitions that "these transitions reveal common thermodynamic features has been frequently rec-
ognized, although the underlying molecular mechanisms were of an unusual diversity."
209 Temperley (1956, p. vii).
210 Sauer (2001).
21 1 Sykes and Fisher (1962, pp. 920-921) and Domb (1996, p. 359).
212 Temperley (1956, p. vii).
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 283
introduction) was not a sufficient basis for their acceptance. Less than 10 years
later, the empirical adequacy of the Lenz-Ising model was sufficient to change its
status, thus opening up a new chapter in our understanding of critical phenomena.
How the model was used in this respect is the subject of the third paper in this
series.
Acknowledgments I thank Michael E. Fisher for his valuable comments on a draft of my paper and Roger
H. Stuewer for his careful editorial work on it.
References
Ashrafi, B., Hall, K., and Schweber, S. S. (n.d.): "The Solution to the Phase Transition Problem: 1965-1975"
(unpublished).
Atkins, K. R. and Edwards, M. H. (1955): "Coefficient of Expansion of Liquid Helium II" Physical Review
97, 1429-1434.
Bagatskii, M. I., Voronel', A. V., and Gusak, V. G (1963): "Measurement of the Specific Heat Cv of Argon
in the Immediate Vicinity of the Critical Point", Soviet Physics JETP-USSR 16, 517-518. For Russian
original, see (1962): ZJhymal Experimental 'noi i Teoretiche skoi Fiziki 43, 728
Baker, Jr., G. A. (1961): "Application of the Padé Approximant Method to the Investigation of Some
Magnetic Properties of the Ising Model," Physical Review 124, 768-774.
Baker, Jr., G. A. and Gammel, J. L. (1961): "The Padé Approximant," Journal of Mathematical Analysis
and Applications 2, 21-30.
Benedek, G. B. (1966): "Equilibrium Properties of Ferromagnets and Antiferromagnets in the Vicinity of
the Critical Point," in Green and Sengers (1966), pp. 42-48.
Binney, J. J, Dowrick, N. J., Fisher, A. J., and Newman, M. E. J. (1992): The Theory of Critical Phenomena,
Clarendon, Oxford.
Brooks, J. E. and Domb, C. (1951): "Order-Disorder Statistics. III. The Antiferromagnet and Order-
Disorder Transitions," Proceedings of the Royal Society [A] 207, 343-358.
Brush, S. G. (1964): "History of the Lenz-Ising Model," UCRL-7940, Lawrence Radiation Laboratory,
Livermore, California, June.
Brush, S. G. (1967): "History of the Lenz-Ising Model" Reviews of Modern Physics JV, 88J-8VJ.
Brush, S. G. (1983): Statistical Physics and the Atomic Theory of Matter, Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
Buckingham, M. J. and Fairbank, W. M. (1961): "The Nature of the Lambda Transition," Progress in Low
Temperature Physics 3, 80-1 13.
Burley, D. M. (1960): "Some Magnetic Properties of the Ising Model," Philosophical Magazine 5, 909-919.
Chase, C. E., Williamson, R. C, and Tisza, L. (1964): "Ultrasonic Propagation near tne Critical mm in
Helium," Physical Review 13, 467-469.
Cooke, A. H., Edmonds, D. T., McKim, F. R., and Wolf, W. P. (1959): "Magnetic Dipole Interactions in
Dysprosium Ethyl Sulphate. 1 . Susceptibility and Specific Heat between 20-Degrees-K and 1-Degrees-
K " Proceedings of the Royal Society [A] 252, 246-259.
Cushing, J. T. (1994): Quantum Mechanics: Historical Contingency and the Copenhagen Hegemony,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Domb, C. (1949a): "Order-Disorder Statistics. I. ," Proceedings of the Royal Society[A] 196, 36-50.
Domb, C. (1949b): "Order-Disorder Statistics. II. A Two-Dimensional Model," Proceedings of the Royal
Society[A] 199, 199-221.
Domb, C. (1949c): "Statistical Mechanics of Some Co-operative Phenomena" Nature 163, 775-776.
Domb, C. ( 1952), "L'influence de la structure du réseau sur l'anomalie de la chaleur spécifique du modele
ď Ising," in Changements de Phases, Comptes Rendus de la deuxième Réunion Annuelle tenue en
commun avec la Commission de Thermodynamique de l'Union Internationale de Physique, Société de
Chimie Physique, Presse Universitaires de France, Paris, pp. 8-1 8.
Domb, C. (1955): "Statistical Physics and its Problems," Science Progress 43, 402-417.
Domb, C. ( 1 960): "On the Theory of Cooperative Phenomena in Crystals," Advances in Physics 9, 149-295.
Domb, C. (1966): "Critical Properties of Lattice Models," in Green and Sengers (1966), pp. 29^1.
£l Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

284 M. Niss
Domb, C. ( 1 97 1 ): "The Curie Point," in E. G. D. Cohen, ed., Statistical Mechanics at the Turn of the Decade,
Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 81-128.
Domb, C. (1974a): "Ising Model," in Domb and Green (1974a), pp. 357-184.
Domb, C. (1974b): "Configurational Studies of the Potts Models," Journal of Physics A: Mathematical,
Nuclear and General 7, 1335-1348.
Domb, C. (1990a): "Some Reminiscences about My Early Career," Physica A 168, 1-21.
Domb, C. (1990b): "On Hammersley's Method for One-Dimensional Covering Problems," in
G. R. Grimmett and D. J. A. Welsh, eds., Disorder in Physical Systems: Essays in Honour of John
M. Hammersley on the occasion of his 70thBirthday, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 33-53.
Domb, C. (1996): The Critical Point, Taylor and Francis, London.
Domb, C. with Schweber, Silvan S. (2002): Interview, June 2002, History of Recent Science &
Technology, The Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology, MIT, Massachusetts,
available at (accessed February 18, 2008). http://authors.library.caltech.edu/5456/01/hrst.mit.edu/hrs/
renormalization/Domb/
Domb, C. (2003): "Some Observations on the Early History of Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics," Journal
of Statistical Physics 110, 475-496.
Domb, C. and Green, M. S., eds. (1972a): Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Academic Press,
London, New York, vol. 1.
Domb, C. and Green, M. S. (1972b): "Preface to Volume 1," in Domb and Green (1972a), pp. ix-xii.
Domb, C. and Green, M. S., eds. (1974a): Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Academic Press,
London, New York, vol. 3.
Domb, C. and Sykes, M. F. (1956): "On Metastable Approximations in Co-operative Assemblies," Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London [A] 235, 247-259.
Domb, C. and Sykes, M. F. (1957a): "On the Susceptibility of a Ferromagnetic above the Curie Point,"
Proceedings of the Royal Society o/London[A] 240, 214-228.
Domb, C. and Sykes, M. F. (1957b): "Specific Heat of a Ferromagnetic Substance above the Curie Point,"
Physical Review 1W, 1415-1416.
Domb, C. and Sykes, M. F. (1957c): "The Calculation of Lattice Constants in Crystal Statistics," Philo-
sophical Magazine 2, 733-749.
Domb, C. and Sykes, M. F. (1962): "Effect of Change of Spin on Critical Properties of Ising and Heisenberg
Models," Physical Review 128, 168-1 73.
Dyson, F. J. (1956): "General Theory of Spin-Wave Interactions," Physical Review 102, 1217-1230.
Dyson, F. J. (1995): "The Coulomb Fluid and the Fifth Painlevé Transcendent," in C. S. Liu and
S. -T Yau, eds., Chen Ning Yang: A Great Physicist of the Twentieth Century, International Press,
Boston, pp. 131-146.
Elcock, E. W. (1956): Order-Disorder Phenomena, Methuen, London.
Essam, J. W. and Fisher, M. E. (1963): "Padé Approximant Studies of the Lattice Gas and Ising Ferromagnet
below the Critical Point," Journal of Chemical Physics 38, 802-812.
Fairbank, W. M., Buckingham, M. J., and Kellers, F. (1957): "Specific Heat of Liquid He4 Near the Lambda
Point," in J. R. Dillinger, ed.. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Low-Temperature
Physics and Chemistry, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, pp. 50-52.
Fisher, M. E. (1959): "The Susceptibility of the Plane Ising Model," Physica 25, 521-524
Fisher, M. E. (1964a): "Specific Heat of a Gas near the Critical Point," Physical Review 136, A1599-A1604.
Fisher, M. E. (1964b): "Correlation Functions and the Critical Region of Simple Fluids," Journal of Math-
ematical Physics 5, 944-962.
Fisher, M. E. ( 1 965): "The Nature of Critical Points," in W. E. Brittin, ed., Lectures in Theoretical Physics
Vu C, University of Colorado Press, Boulder, pp. 1-159.
Fisher, M. E. (1967): "The Theory of Equilibrium Critical Phenomena," Reports in Progress in Physics 30,
615-730.
Fisher, M. E. (1996): "Foreword: About the Author and the Subject," Domb (1996). dd. xiii-xviii.
Fisher, M. E. and Sykes, M. F. (1962): "Antiferromagnetic Susceptibilities of the Simple Cubic and Body-
Centered Cubic Ising Lattices," Physics 28, 939-956
Gaunt, D. S., Fisher, M. E., Sykes, M. F., and Essam, J. W. (1964), "Critical Isotherm of a Ferromagnet and
of a Fluid," Physical Review Letters 13, 713-715.
Geifert, A. (2005): "Mathematical Rigor in Physics: Putting Exact Results in Their Place," Philosophy of
Science 72, 723-738.
4jü Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 285
Goldenfeld, N. (1992): Lectures on Pliase Transitions and the Renormalization Group, Perseus Books,
Reading, Massachusetts.
Green. M. S. (1966): "Introduction," in Green and Sengers (1966), pp. xi-xi.
Green, M. S. and Sengers, eds., J. V. (1966): Critical Phenomena. Proceedings of a Conference Held in
Washington, D. G, April 1965, National Bureau of Standards
Habgood, H. W. and Schneider, W. G. (1954): "PVT measurements in the Critical Region of Xenon/
Canadian Journal of Chemistry 32, 98-1 1 2.
Hill, T. S. (1956): Statistical Mecfianics, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Hoddeson, L., Schubert, H., Heims, S. J., and Baym, G. (1992): "Collective Phenomena," in L. Hodde-
son, E. Braun, J. Teichmann, and S. Weart, eds.,Out of the Crystal Maze. Chapters from the History of
Solid-State Physics, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 489-616.
Hunt, K. L. (1953): "Collective Electron Ferromagnetism: A Generalization of the Treatment and an Anal-
ysis of Experimental Results," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London [A] 32, 103-1 17.
lsing, E. (1924): "Beitrag zur Theorie des Ferro- und Paramagnetismus," Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Hamburg.
lsing, E. (1925): "Beitrag zur Theorie des Ferromagnetismus," Zeitschrift für Physik 31, 253-258.
Jaeger, G. (1998): "The Ehrenfest Classification of Phase Transitions: Introduction and Evolution," Archive
for History of Exact Sciences 53, 51-81.
Kaufman, B. (1949): "Crystal Statistics. II. Partition Function Evaluated by Spinor Analysis," Physical
Review 76, 1232-1243*
Kaufman, B. and Onsager, L. (1949): "Crystal Statistics. III. Short-Range Order in a Binary lsing Lattice"
Physical Review 76, 1244-1252.
Kirkwood, J. G. (1950) "Critique of the Free Volume Theory oí the Liquid btate, Journal of Chemical
Physics 18, 380-382.
Kouvel, J. S. and Fisher, M. E. (1964): "Detailed Magnetic Behavior of Nickel near its Curie Point," Physical
Review 136, A1626-A1632.
Krieger, M. H. (1996): Constitutions of Matter. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Landau, L. D. (1937): "Zur Theorie der Phasenumwandlungen, l." Physikalische Zeitschrift der
Sowjetunion 11, 26-47.
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. (1958): Statistical Physics. Pergamon, London.
Lasheen, M. A., Van den Broek, J. and Uorter , u J. (iy^8): ine magnetic àusceptiouiiy ana neiaxa-
tion of a MnCl2 • H2O Single Crystal in the Paramagnetic and Antiferromagnetic States," Physica 24,
1061-1075
Lebowitz, J. L (1995): "Lars Onsager November 27, 1903 - October 5, 1976: In Memoriam" Journal of
Statistical Physics 78, 1-3.
Lee, T. D. and Yang, C. N. (1952): "Statistical Theory of Equations of State and Phase Transitions. II.
Lattice Gas and lsing model," Physical Review 87, 410-419.
Lenz, W. (1920): "Beitrag zum Verständnis der magnetischen Erscheinungen in festen Köpern, Physika-
lische Zeitschrift 21, 613-615.
Linder, B. (1954): "Order-Disorder Phenomena," Journal of Chemical Physics 22, 970-973.
Lipa, J. A., Swanson, D. R., Nissen, J. A., Chui, T. C. P., and Israelsson, U. E. (1996): "Heat Capacity and
Thermal Relaxation of Bulk Helium very near the Lambda Point," Physical Review Letters 76, 944-947.
LonguetHiggins, H. C. and Fisher, M. E. (1996): "Lars Onsager: 27 November, 1903-5 October, 1976,
"in Hemmer, P. C, Holden, H. and Kjelstrup Ratkje, S., eds. (1996): The Collected Works of Lars
OnsagenWoňd Scientific, Singapore, pp. 9-34.
Moldover, M. R. and Little, W. A. (1965): "Specific Heat of He3 and He4 in the Neighborhood of their
Critical Points," Physical Review Letters 15, 54-56.
Montroil, E. W., Potts, R. B., and Ward, J. C. (1963): "Correlations and Spontaneous Magnetization of the
Two-Dimensional lsing Model," Journal of Mathematical Physics 4, 308-323.
Moser, H. (1936): "Messung der wahren spezifischen Wärme von Silber, Nickel, ^-Messing, Quartzkristall
und Quartzglas zwischen + 50 und 700° C nach verfeinerten Methode," Physikalische Zeitschrift 37,
737-753.
Muto, T. and Takagi, Y ( 1 955): "The Theory of Order-Disorder Transitions in Alloys " Solid State Physics
1, 194-284.
Nielsen, A. I. and Timmermann, S. (2002): En historisk unders0gelse of udviklingen of L. D. Landaus
teori for kontinuerte overgange. Unpublished report, Department of Mathematics and Physics, Roskilde
University, Roskilde, Denmark.
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

286 M. Niss
Niss, M. (2005), "History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1920-1950: From Ferromagnetic to Cooperative
Phenomena." Archive for History of Exact Science 59. 267-318.
Onsager, L. (1944): "Crystal Statistics. I. A Two-Dimensional Model with an Order-Disorder Transition,"
Physical Review 65, 117-149.
Onsager, L. (1949) discussion remark, Nuovo Cimento, Suppl. 6, 261
Pelissetto, A. & Vicari, E. (2002) "Critical Phenomena and Renormal ization-group Theory," Physics Reports
368, 549-727
Pais, A. (1958): "The Scientific Work of T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang," Nuclear Physics 5, 297-300.
Potter, H. H. (1934): "The magneto-caloric effect and other magnetic phenomena in iron," Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London [A] 146, 262-387.
Robinson, W. K. and Friedberg, S. A. (1960): "Specific Heats of NiCh • 6H2O and CoCb • 6H2O between
1 .4° and 20°K," Physical Review Letters 117, 402-408.
Rowlinson, J. S. (1966): "Critical States of Simple Fluids and Fluid Mixtures: a Review of the Experimental
Position," in Green and Sengers (1966), pp. 9-12.
Ruelle, D. (1969): Statistical Mechanics: Rigorous Results, Benjamin, New York.
Rushbrooke, G. S. and Wood, P. J. (1958): "On the Curie Points and High Temperature Susceptibilities of
Heisenberg Model Ferromagnetics," Molecular Physics 1, 257-283.
Sauer, T. (2001): "The Feynman Path Goes Monte Carlo," in W. Janke, A. Pelster, H-J. Scmidt, and
M. Bachmann, eds., Fluctuating Paths and Fields. Festschrift Dedicated to Hagen Kleinen on the Occa-
sion of His 60th Birtliday,Woñd Scientific, Singapore, New Jersey, London, Hong Kong, pp. 29-42.
Schweber, S. S. (1994): QED and the Men Who Made It, Princeton University, Princeton.
Skalyo, J. and Friedberg, S. A. (1964): "Heat Capacity of the Antiferromagnet CoCb • H2O near its Néel
Point," Physical Review Letters 13, 1 1 3-135.
Stanley, H. E. (1971): Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Oxford University Press,
New York, Oxford.
Sucksmith, W., Clark, C. A., Oliver, D. J., and Thompson, J. E. (1953): "Spontaneous Magnetization -
Techniques and Measurements," Reviews of Modern Physics 25, 34-41.
Suchsmith, W. and Pearce, R. R. (1938): "The Paramagnetism of the Ferromagnetic Elements," Proceedings
of the Royal Society ofLondon[A), 167, 189-204.
Sykes, M. F and Fisher, M. E. (1962): "Antiferromagnetic Susceptibility of Plane Square and Honeycomb
Ising Lattices," Physica 28, 919-938.
Sykes, C. and Wilkinson, H. (1937): "The Transformation in the Beta Brasses," Journal of the Institute of
Metals 61, 223-240
Sykes, C. and Wilkinson, H. (1938): "The Specific Heat of Nickel from 100 Degrees C. to 600 Degrees C,"
Proceedings of the Physical Society of London 50, 834-85 1.
Temperley, H. N. V (1956): Changes of State, Cleaver-Hume, London.
Tisza, L. (1951): "On the General Theory of Phase Transitions" in R. Smoluchowski, J. E. Mayer, and
W. A. Weyl, eds., Phase Transformations in Solids [Symposium held at Cornell University, 1948],
Wiley, New York, pp. 1-37.
Van Vleck, J. H. (1945): "A Survey of the Theory of Ferromagnetism," Reviews of Modern Physics 17,
27^7.
Van Vleck, J. H. (1953): "Models of Exchange Coupling in Ferromagnetic Media," Reviews of Modern
Physics 25, 220-228.
Wannier, G. H. (1945): "The Statistical Problem in Cooperative Phenomena," Reviews of Modem Physics
17, 50-60.
Widom, B. (1964): "Degree of the Critical Isotherm," Journal of Chemical Physics 41, 1633-1634.
Widom, B. and Rice, O. K. (1955): "Critical Isotherm and the Equation of Liquid- Vapor Systems," Journal
of Chemical Physics 23, 1250-1255.
Wolf, W. P. (2000): "The Ising Model and Real Magnetic Materials," Brazilian Journal of Physics 30,
794-810.
Yang, C. N. (1952): "The Spontaneous Magnetization of a Two-Dimension al Ising Model," Physical Review
85, 808-816.
Yang, C. N. (1972): "Introductory Note on Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena" in Domb and Green
(1972a), pp. 1-5.
Yang, C. N. (1983): "Commentary," in C. N. Yang, Selected Papers 1 945-1 980, Freeman, San Francisco,
pp. 1-82.
Yang, C. N. (1995): "Remarks about Some Developments in Statistical Mechanics " AAPPS Bulletin 5, 2-3.
£} Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

History of the Lenz-Ising Model 1950-1965: from irrelevance to relevance 287
Yang, C. N and Yang, C. P. (1964): "Critical Point in Liquid-Gas Transitions," Physical Review Letters 13,
303-305.
Ziman, J. M. (1965): "Mathematical Models and Physical Toys," Nature 206, 1 187-1192.
Ö Springer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 12:48:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

