(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019 
313 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Smart Age Detection for Social Media 
Using Deep Learning Techniques via Ear Shape 
Manal Alghieth1, Jawaher Alhuthail2, Kholod Aldhubiay3, Rotan Alshowaye4 
Information Technology, Qassim University, Qassim, Saudi Arabia 
 
 
Abstract—Over the recent years, there has been an immense 
attraction towards age detection due to its raised implementation 
in various sectors. Such as government regulations and rules, 
security control, and human computer interaction. Popular 
human features such as the face and fingerprints can be modified 
or changed with time. However, ear has a stable structure that 
does not change with time and have unique features that satisfies 
the requirements of a biometric trait. This research presents a 
detailed analysis extracting the features of the human ear only by 
applying Deep Learning techniques. In particular, Convolutional 
Neural Network (CNN) is applied on large datasets which have 
multiple layers to extract the features and classify them. The 
proposed methodology increased the number of the dataset by 
collecting more private children datasets, and consequently 
achieved high accuracy by 98.75% along with amending the 
architecture of the selected neural network compared to previous 
studies. This research can be benefited to control the contents of 
social media by detecting the age of group whether it is under 18 
or above 18. 
Keywords—Age detection; deep learning; ear features; CNN; 
control social media 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The rapid development of technology and science has 
benefited humanity in different fields. Simultaneously, there 
has been increasing interest in age estimation. 
Ear is rich in unique features and it is one of the most 
usable forms of authentication. Among various biometric 
traits, ear is a stable structure that does not change with age 
and satisfies the requirements of a biometric trait. This gives it 
an advantage compared with other popular human features 
such as the face and fingerprints, which can change with time 
or can be modified. Ear images can be analyzed using deep 
learning techniques to detect age of a person. 
The main idea of deep learning is that, a different type of 
data can be implemented into a machine to learn certain 
features which can lead to an excellent decision making for 
the classification. Deep Learning is considered as a new field 
of machine learning, it has achieved great results and high 
accuracy in various areas compared to human experts such as 
image classification which takes an input and predict a 
particular class, Object detection, Image retrieval, Semantic 
segmentation and Human pose estimation. Deep learning can 
be divided into four categories as shown in Fig. 1. The most 
appealing characteristic to use deep learning, the fact that it 
can be applied on large datasets, the increasing ability of 
processing, the more layers a network has the higher the level 
of features it will learn. One of the most powerful techniques 
in deep learning is neural networks that contains numerous 
amounts of neurons which offers answers to different kinds of 
problems. Neural network is a combination of algorithms that 
is applied in identifying various patterns, like numerical, 
images, audio, text or time series. The NN types are: 
Convolutional Neural Networks, Recursive Neural Networks, 
Unsupervised Pre-trained Networks and Recurrent Neural 
Networks [1]. 
The Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) is an 
outstanding deep learning algorithm. It consists of three 
layers: the convolutional layer, the pooling layer and the fully-
connected layers. It can be applied to large dataset like images 
and videos to extract features and classify it. CNN require 
much less preprocessing compared to other algorithms. Recent 
articles have proved that CNN is highly effective and already 
exceeded the accuracy of human experts [2]. 
Many techniques have been developed to authenticate and 
verify the identity of humans and age detection. 
For instance, Decision tree J48 classifier applied on 
FG_NET. It consists of three phases image preprocessing, data 
mining, estimation and evaluation [3]. 
Deep CNN model called VGG-Face. It contains 11 layers, 
eight convolutional layers and 3 fully connected layers that 
were applied on a database for face recognition task. It was 
modified and fine-tuned to perform age estimation on the 
Adience database [4]. 
Convolutional Neural Networks architectures were applied 
to classify ear appearance-based features. These architectures 
include AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet and SqueezeNet [5]. 
 
Fig. 1. Deep Learning Categories. 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019 
314 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Other techniques were applied on ear geometric features. 
Such as, Logistic regression provides a linear discrimination 
between different classes. Its objective is to minimize the 
logistic function. Random Forests is an ensemble machine 
learning algorithm and was used for classification as well as 
feature selection. It works with sub-trees that are learned on a 
part of the training data that uses different samples from 
training set instead of using all of them and the average result 
is calculated from different sub-trees. Support vector machine 
is a supervised machine learning algorithm which can be used 
for both classification and regression. It is based on the theory 
of statistical learning [5]. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
A few attempts have been done on detecting the age via 
the ear shape. For instance, a detailed analysis on identifying 
soft biometric traits, age and gender, from ear images was 
presented. In [5], it uses geometric features and appearance-
based features to illustrate the ear morphology. These features 
have been classified by employing four different methods: 
logistic regression, random forests, support vector machines, 
and neural networks. The gender classification resulted in 
accuracy of 94% and for the age classification achieved a 52% 
accuracy. Furthermore, the work in [6] focused on using 
profile face images and ear images as input to build a 
multimodal deep neural network for age and gender 
classification in order to enhance the accuracy. It trained their 
model on the UND-F, UND-J2, and FERET datasets for 
gender classification and on the FERET dataset for age 
classification. The experiment indicated that profile face 
images have numerous amounts of features that can support 
age and gender classification and merging profile face and ear 
image can reach great accuracies. Compared to the reported 
age classification accuracy in the previous work, the study has 
increased the accuracy by 9% for five class age group 
classification on FERET dataset and reached 60.97% of 
accuracy. 
To support the proposed methodology, studies about ear 
features have proved ear is a unique body part that can provide 
numerous information. M. Taura, L. Adamu, A. Gudaji, and 
M. Modibbo [7], discussed the possibility to determine age 
from ear shape by testing the correlation between age and ear 
length, width and index for both left and right sides. The study 
applied the regression equation for age detection. It proved the 
application of external ear morphometry that can serve as 
additional tool for age estimation of individuals. The human 
ear is stable and does not change over time and that have been 
presented. In [8],[9] and [10], it has been proven through 
studies that the shape of ear of the same person show some 
similarities but are not strictly symmetric. Ear verification can 
also be applied to differentiate between identical twins, due to 
its unique features; there are no two ears that have the same 
helix. 
On the other hand, face images can be used to detect age 
where in research [4], Z. Qawaqneh, A. A. Mallouh, and B. D. 
Barkana, proposed a model to detect age using deep CNN 
model called VGG-Face that was applied on a database for 
face recognition task. It was modified and fine-tuned to 
perform age estimation on the Audience database. A trained 
CNN model for face recognition was used in this research for 
age detection and resulted in great outcomes. This work 
proved that employing a pre-trained CNN on large data set can 
overcome over fitting issues. The proposed model achieved a 
higher accuracy by 9%. The work in [11] applied three 
methods on facial images to detect age: Feature Extraction , 
Hierarchical age estimation and Age Estimate Fusion. The 
research proved that using face image can be employed 
effectively in various areas to detect age. In [3], it discussed 
the potential of determining age from facial images using 
machine learning technique, and applied J48 classifier on 
FG_NET dataset. The experiment proved that the proposed 
system can give results with high precision and low time 
complexity, using decision tree J48 classifier resulted in high 
precision rate with low time taken on the FG_NET dataset 
with accuracy of 89.13 % and time taken is 0.023. 
Recently, there has been a growing interest in age 
estimation, due to its raised implementation in various sectors 
such as government regulations and rules, security control and 
human computer interaction. In spite of the advances in age 
estimation, it is still a challenge. There are two main problems 
in detecting the age by ear shape, lack of ear dataset collection 
and age classification accuracy. One of the previous studies 
[5] have reached 52% accuracy and they claim that it is 
because of the short number of datasets. Their theory states 
that the more datasets used the more accuracy they will get. 
Hence, this research will attempt to improve accuracy by 
using deep learning techniques. It requires a large dataset to 
give more accuracy and can also extract ear features by itself. 
There are several ways applied on ear features to detect the 
age, such as logistic regression, random forest, support vector 
machines and neural network. 
The popular human features such as face and fingerprints 
can be modified or changed with time. However, ear has 
unique features and it is a stable structure that does not change 
with time and satisfies the requirements of a biometric trait. 
Nowadays, users of social media can give false information 
without validation, hence users can explore any content 
available, whether it is age appropriate or not. This research 
contributes in controlling the content of the watched media 
depending on the user’s age via the ear shape only. 
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
This research proposes a system that detect the age by 
applying ear dataset into deep learning algorithms which will 
analyze the images and extract the features via multiple 
hidden layers of deep learning and classify them. The model 
was trained on AMI, AWE, and a Private Children dataset. 
The resulted classification will give the system the output 
needed which is the age group whether above 18 or under 18. 
The proposed model is shown in Fig. 2. 
The implementation begins with collecting ear images 
from different sources (This model used 3000 ear images 
which was divided into 80% for training and 20% for testing) 
and using csv files to handle the data. Importing the necessary 
python libraries for deep learning, load and process the data, 
then defining the architecture of CNN model and how to apply 
it. Fig. 3 shows the algorithm used in this research. 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019 
315 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
Fig. 2. Proposed Methodology Model. 
 
Fig. 3. Smart Age Detection Algorithm. 
The images were different in sizes and shape for that a 
preprocessing step was applied before the training and testing. 
Training the model using the training images set and their 
corresponding true labels, then it will pass the validation 
images to assure the performance of the model. Also, in this 
phase the number of epochs is defined. 
The architecture of the applied model includes deciding 
the number of hidden layers, number of neurons in each layer 
and what activation function embedded in each layer to 
convert an input signal to an output signal, to be use the output 
signal as an input in the next layer. For the 2D convolution 
layer it uses many filters in a single layer that learns ear 
features, the extracted features used as an input to the next 
layer. Following conv2D, a max pooling layer was performed 
to reduce the amount of pixels computation that needs to be 
done and sends the most important data to the next layer. The 
utilized hidden layers are Dropout (drops random unit of CNN 
model and to prevent overfitting) and Flattened (flattens all 
the features maps into a single column). Lastly, the fully 
connected layer (Dense layer) is the output layer that will 
classify the ear images either above 18 or under 18 years. This 
research contributes in applying two activation functions in 
different layers, ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) and Sigmoid 
were applied. ReLU activation function was embedded in each 
layer; except the output layer a Sigmoid activation function 
was performed to predict the probability as an output, which is 
excellent for the binary classification task. 
For testing, loading 20% of the testing images set with 
testing csv file without labels. Before making predictions, the 
model will preprocess these images using the same steps 
mentioned in the training phase. Then it will predict the age 
for these ears of human using the trained model. Finally, the 
model will classify the tested images either more than 18 or 
less than 18 years old. 
IV. RESULTS 
The major findings were classifying images to detect the 
age either above 18 or under 18 for social media and the 
exceptional accuracy of 98.75%. Table I shows the result 
related to previous studies and proven the higher accuracy that 
has been achieved in this research. 
TABLE. I. 
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND PREVIOUS STUDIES 
Title 
Dataset 
Overall Accuracy 
Method 
Year 
Age Group 
The Prediction of Old and Young Subjects 
from Iris Texture[12] 
100 Subjects 
64% 
Rando-mForest 
Algorit-hm 
2013 
Young: (22-25), 
Old: (35+) 
Deep Convolutional Neural Network for 
Age Estimation based on 
VGG-Face Model[4] 
Adience database 
59.9% 
Deep CNN 
2017 
0-2, 4-6, 8-13, 15-
20, 25-32, 38-43, 
48-53, 60+ 
Intelligent Age Estimation From Facial 
Images Using Machine Learning 
Techniques[3] 
FG_NET dataset 
89.13% 
Decisio-n tree J48 
classifie-r Algorit-hm 
2018 
Class1: (3-7,26-30), 
Class2: (8-25), 
Class3: (31-50) 
Age and Gender Classification from Ear 
Images[5] 
UND J ear Database 
52% 
Deep CNN 
2018 
18-28, 29-38, 39-
48, 49-58, 59-68+ 
Multimodal Age and Gender Classification 
Using Ear and Profile Face Images[6] 
FERET 
60.97% 
Deep CNN 
2019 
18-28, 29-38, 39-
48, 49-58, 59-68+ 
Smart Age Detection For Social Media 
Using Deep Learning Techniques via Ear 
Shape 
(The proposed method) 
AMI, AWE & Private 
Children datasets 
98.75% 
Deep CNN 
2019 
Above 18 
& 
Under 18 
 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019 
316 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
V. DISCUSSION 
CNN is one of deep learning architectures and it was 
applied in this research to classify the ear images. The lack of 
classified dataset limited the research from identifying age in 
different kinds of groups such as child, teenagers, adult or 
elderly. However, above 18 or under 18 age group can be 
extremely useful in applying this to the social media and the 
most important thing is to identify adults or young generation, 
that can allow controlling the appropriate watched content. In 
the future utilizing the medical aspect can help in improving 
the extraction of more features and producing better accuracy 
result for different group of ages. This research used the shape 
of ear only that contains unique features and the chosen 
architecture succeeded and resulted in a great accuracy. A 
collaboration with biologist could be made to perform a better 
accuracy based on the features of the ear itself. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
This research proposed a model to identify human age 
either above 18 or under 18 based on ear shape only by using 
deep CNN model. It applied most appropriate activation 
function to make the model more accurate. This study 
contributed in applying two activation functions, ReLU which 
was embedded in each layer except the output layer and 
Sigmoid activation function was performed to predict the 
probability as an output. 
The proposed model reached an exceptional accuracy of 
98.75%. Due to the high accuracy of detecting the age groups, 
this research can be applied in social media platforms to 
authenticate user’s information. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Guo, Y. Liu, A. Oerlemans, S. Lao, S. Wu, and M. S. Lew, “Deep 
learning for visual understanding: A review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 187, 
pp. 27–48, 2016. 
[2] J. Gu et al., “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” Pattern 
Recognit., vol. 77, pp. 354–377, 2018. 
[3] A. R. Abbas, “Intelligent Age Estimation From Facial Images Using 
Machine Learning Techniques,” Iraqi J. Sci., vol. 59, no. 2A, 2018. 
[4] Z. Qawaqneh, A. A. Mallouh, and B. D. Barkana, “Deep Convolutional 
Neural Network for Age Estimation based on VGG-Face Model,” no. 1, 
2017. 
[5] D. Yaman, F. I. Eyiokur, N. Sezgin, and H. K. Ekenel, “Age and gender 
classification from ear images,” IWBF 2018 - Proc. 2018 6th Int. Work. 
Biometrics Forensics, pp. 1–7, 2018. 
[6] D. Yaman and F. I. Eyiokur, “Multimodal Age and Gender 
Classification Using Ear and Profile Face Images.” 
[7] M. Taura, L. Adamu, A. Gudaji, and M. Modibbo, “Application of 
external ear morphometry in age prediction: a pilot study,” Int. J. Res. 
Med. Sci., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 1775–1779, 2015. 
[8] S. Dodge, J. Mounsef, and L. Karam, “Unconstrained ear recognition 
using deep neural networks,” IET Biometrics, 2018. 
[9] A. Sabet, K. Kamal, A. Ghany, and H. Elmahdy, “Human Ear 
Recognition Using Geometrical Features Extraction,” Procedia - 
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 65, no. Iccmit, pp. 529–537, 2015. 
[10] I. Omara, F. Li, H. Zhang, and W. Zuo, “A novel geometric feature 
extraction method for ear recognition,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 65, pp. 
127–135, 2016. 
[11] S. E. Padme and P. S. Desai, “Estimation of Age from Face Images,” 
Int. J. Sci. Res., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1927–1931, 2016. 
[12] A. Sgroi, K. W. Bowyer, and P. J. Flynn, “The prediction of old and 
young subjects from iris texture,” Proc. - 2013 Int. Conf. Biometrics, 
ICB 2013, pp. 1–5, 2013. 
 

