NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
Chapter 20.  
Peridynamics 
D. Littlewood 
Sandia National Laboratories, US 
 
 
Abstract 
  
Peridynamics, a nonlocal extension of continuum mechanics, is a natural 
framework for capturing constitutive response and modelling pervasive material 
failure and fracture. Unlike classical approaches incorporating partial derivatives, 
the peridynamic governing equations utilise integral expressions that remain valid 
in the presence of discontinuities such as cracks. The mathematical theory of 
peridynamics unifies the mechanics of continuous media, cracks, and discrete 
particles. The result is a consistent framework for capturing a wide range of 
constitutive responses, including inelasticity, in combination with robust material 
failure laws. Peridynamics has been implemented in a number of computational 
simulation codes, including the open source code Peridigm and the 
Sierra/SolidMechanics analysis code at Sandia National Laboratories. 
Introduction to peridynamic theory 
Peridynamics is a nonlocal extension of continuum mechanics [1-3]. In contrast to the 
classical approach, the balance of linear momentum is formulated as an integral equation 
that remains valid in the presence of material discontinuities such as cracks. In 
peridynamics, a material point x interacts directly with all neighbouring material points x’ 
within a finite distance, δ, termed the horizon. The vectors connecting the point x to its 
neighbours x’ are referred to as bonds. 
The peridynamic balance of linear momentum at time t for the point x in the body B 
is given by: 
  
(1) 
320 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
where ρ is the material density, u denotes displacement, and b is an external body 
force. The force density at point x due to direct interactions with neighbours x’ is given by 
the term Lu (x, t). Here, T[x, t] denotes the peridynamic force state for point x at time t, 
described below, and dVx’ is the volume associated with neighbour x’. Peridynamics is an 
extension of continuum mechanics in that the classical (local) equations are recovered in 
the limit as the horizon approaches zero, assuming the deformation field is sufficiently 
smooth [4]. 
One approach to discretising Equation 1 is the mesh-free approach of Silling and 
Askari [5]. Under this approach, the strong form of the balance of linear momentum is 
solved numerically by dividing the body B into a finite number of cells, each tracked using 
a single node located at its centre. The integral expression in Equation 1 is replaced by a 
summation, yielding the discrete equation: 
 
 
(2) 
where N is the number of cells in the neighborhood of x, xt  is the position of the 
node centred in cell i, and ∆Vx’i is the volume of cell i.  
Equation 2 requires evaluation of the pairwise forces T[x, t] (x’ − x) and  T’ [xt , t] (x – 
x’ ), where the force states T[x,t] and T’[x’,t] are, in general, functions of the deformations 
of all nodes within the neighbourhoods of x and x’, respectively. A constitutive model is a 
relation that determines the force state T[x, t] in terms of the deformation state in the 
neighbourhood of x and possibly other variables as well. Constitutive models for 
peridynamics generally fall into one of three categories: bond-based material models, 
state-based material models, and non-ordinary state-based material models (e.g., classical 
material models adapted for use within a peridynamic framework). 
Bond-based material models 
Bond-based material models are constitutive laws in which the pairwise force acting 
between material points x and x’ is purely a function of their relative displacements [1,6]. 
In addition, this pairwise force always acts along the direction of the bond connecting x 
and x’. Bond-based material models have the advantages of being computationally 
inexpensive and robust, making them a good choice for large-deformation simulations 
involving pervasive material failure. The most significant disadvantage of bond-based 
constitutive laws is their restriction to relatively simple two-point interactions. A notable 
consequence is the restriction of Poisson’s ratio to one quarter. 
An example of a bond-based material model is the microelastic model proposed by 
Silling [1]. The magnitude of a force state for the microelastic material model is 
determined as: 
  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
 
321 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
where k is the bulk modulus, δ is the peridynamic horizon, and s is the bond stretch, 
defined as: 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
Here, x is the length of the bond (x’ – x) in the undeformed configuration, and y is the 
bond length in the current configuration. The net force acting on a material point x is the 
sum of the pairwise forces between x and each of its neighbors x’, where the magnitude of 
each pairwise interaction is computed by Equation 3 and the direction is given by the 
bond connecting x and x’. 
State-based material models 
State-based material models are those in which the pairwise force between material 
points x and x’ is a function of the deformations of all the material points within the 
neighborhoods of x and x’, and possibly other variables as well [2,7]. State-based 
constitutive laws are significantly more general than bond-based constitutive laws. This 
allows for the modelling of highly complex material response, but may result in greater 
computational expense. 
The linear peridynamic solid material model is one example of a state-based 
constitutive law [2]. It is an ordinary material model, meaning that the action of the force 
state at x on the bond (x’ − x) is directed along the bond: 
  
 
 
(5) 
where the magnitude is given by t, and M[x, t] (x’ − x) is the unit vector pointing from 
the deformed position of x to the deformed position of x’ . 
The magnitude, t, in a linear peridynamic solid is given by: 
 
 
 
(6) 
where the p is the peridynamic pressure, θ is the peridynamic dilatation, m is the 
weighted volume at x, ω is the value of the influence function between cells x and x’, x is 
the length of the bond (x’ − x) in the undeformed configuration, ed is the deviatoric part 
of the extension e, and µ and k are material constants (the shear modulus and bulk 
modulus, respectively). 
Non-ordinary state-based material models 
A means for adapting classical material models for use with peridynamics was developed 
by Silling, et al. [2]. The approach is based on the evaluation of an approximate 
deformation gradient, 𝐹𝐹ത, at x: 
  
 
 
(7) 
322 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
F 
where K is the shape tensor, defined as: 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
Here, X denotes a vector directed from x to x’ in the reference configuration, Y 
denotes a vector directed from x to x’ in the deformed configuration, ω is the value of the 
influence function between cells x and x’, and ∆Vx is the volume of cell x. T operator ⊗ 
denotes a dyadic product. The approximate deformation gradient, as defined in Equation 7, 
allows for the computation of a strain measure or, alternatively, a strain increment, that can be 
passed to a classical (local) material model. The classical material model is expected to return 
stress which is then transformed into pairwise forces as follows: 
 
 
 
(9) 
where σ is the Piola stress. 
Constitutive models developed specifically for peridynamics are generally more robust 
than classical constitutive models that have been adapted for use within peridynamics, 
particularly in analyses involving extreme deformation and pervasive fracture. In addition, 
zero-energy modes are possible in the calculation of the approximate deformation 
gradient  𝐹𝐹ത. Zero-energy modes may result in nonphysical motion of cells within a 
simulation, typically manifesting as rapid oscillations. The suppression of zero-energy 
modes is possible through a penalty approach analogous to hourglass control in classical 
finite element analysis [8,9]. 
Modelling fracture 
Peridynamics includes a natural mechanism for modelling fracture through the breaking 
of peridynamic bonds. In an undamaged material, bonds connect a given cell x to each 
cell x’ within its neighbourhood in the reference configuration. A damage law dictates the 
conditions under which individual bonds are broken. Material discontinuities, such as 
cracks, form as a result of the accumulation of broken bonds. 
The critical stretch damage model is one example of a peridynamic bond failure law [5]. 
The critical stretch model assigns a damage value of zero (unbroken) or one (broken) as a 
function of the maximum stretch obtained by a bond and a critical stretch material 
parameter, scrit. The damage value, φ, is given by the: 
 
 
 
 (10) 
where smax is the maximum stretch, 
 
    
 
 
 
(11) 
323 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
Here, ymax is the maximum distance between the bonded cells x  and x achieved over 
the duration of the simulation, and x is the distances between x and x’ in the reference 
configuration. The use of the maximum distance, ymax, ensures that the breaking of bonds 
is irreversible.  
Example applications 
Peridynamics has been implemented in a number of computational simulation codes, 
including the open-source code Peridigm and the Sierra/SolidMechanics analysis code at 
Sandia National Laboratories [10,11]. The following example simulations, carried out in 
Sierra/SolidMechanics, demonstrate the modelling capabilities of peridynamics. The first 
is a calibration simulation carried out under quasi-static loading conditions. The second is 
a transient dynamics simulation involving pervasive material failure. 
Simulation of a tensile test for model calibration 
The calibration of a peridynamic constitutive model against experimental data from a standard 
tensile test is illustrated in Figure 1. The simulation was carried out using a classical elastic-
plastic material model with piece-wise linear hardening adapted for peridynamics via the non-
ordinary state-based approach. The specimen material is annealed 304 L stainless steel. 
Experimental data was provided by Brad Boyce [12]. 
The peridynamic model was successful in reproducing both the measured force-strain 
response and the observed necking behaviour. Engineering strain, measured with a half-
inch strain gauge located at the specimen centre, recorded strains in excess of 80%, 
demonstrating the ability of peridynamics to model large-deformation plasticity. 
 
Figure 1. Tensile test simulation 
 
(a) Visualization of tensile test simulation 
(b) Calibration curve 
 
Brittle failure of an elastic disk resulting from impact 
Peridynamics is particularly well suited for the modelling of pervasive material damage [5,13]. 
Figure 2 illustrates peridynamics as a means to simulate dynamic fracture resulting from 
the impact of an elastic sphere with a brittle disk. The disk was modelled using the linear 
peridynamic solid material model. The projectile was modelled as linear elastic using 
324 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
classical finite elements. Interaction of the sphere and disk was achieved using the 
Sierra/SolidMechanics contact algorithm. 
 
Figure 2. Simulation of fragmenting disk 
 
 
(a) Disk prior to impact 
(b) Fracture process 
 
Application of peridynamics to nuclear fuels 
The cracking of nuclear fuel has direct, and often profound, impact on thermal 
conductivity and the release of fission products. The importance of capturing crack 
growth and fuel pellet fragmentation motivates the use of peridynamics, primarily because 
evolving material discontinuities are handled naturally within the peridynamic framework. 
Multi-scale and multi-physics peridynamic modelling are active areas of research. Recent 
applications of peridynamics to thermal-mechanical analyses, for example, provide an 
approach for capturing the swelling and subsequent cracking of fuel pellets due to high-
thermal gradients through a straightforward inclusion of thermal strains in the 
peridynamic model. It is currently unknown, however, to what extent existing 
peridynamic models would need to be specialised to provide models of sufficient detail 
and accuracy to inform nuclear fuel fabrication and use. While significant research 
remains to be done, the inherent ability of peridynamics to model crack growth suggests a 
viable modelling strategy for nuclear fuels. 
Conclusions and future challenges 
Peridynamics is a consistent mathematical theory for modelling the initiation and 
propagation of cracks. There is significant potential to apply peridynamics to the 
modelling of nuclear fuels, in particular to the evolution of cracks in fuel pellets. 
Peridynamic modelling of nuclear fuels, however, will require the resolution of several 
open questions. The selection and calibration of peridynamic constitutive models and 
bond-failure laws for modelling specific fuel materials must be addressed. In addition, 
while peridynamics has been applied to thermal-mechanical phenomena and to coupled 
mechanics-diffusion scenarios, the application of peridynamics within the multi-physics 
environments affecting nuclear fuels remains an open area of research. 
325 
 

NEA/NSC/R(2015)5 
Acknowledgements 
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-programme laboratory managed and operated by 
Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the 
US Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract 
DE-AC04-94AL85000.  SAND 2013-1128P. 
References 
[1] 
Silling, S.A. (2000), “Reformulation of elasticity theory for discontinuities and long-
range forces”, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 48(1):175-209. 
[2] 
Silling, S., M. Epton, O. Weckner, J. Xu, E. Askari (2007), “Peridynamic states and 
constitutive modeling”, Journal of Elasticity, 88(2):151-184. 
[3] 
Silling, S.A., R.B. Lehoucq (2010), “Peridynamic theory of solid mechanics”, 
Advances in Applied Mechanics, 44:73-168. 
[4] 
Silling, S.A., R.B. Lehoucq (2008), “Convergence of peridynamics to classical 
elasticity theory”, Journal of Elasticity, 93(1):13-37. 
[5] 
Silling, S.A., E. Askari (2005), “A meshfree method based on the peridynamic model 
of solid mechanics”, Computers and Structures, 83(17-18):1526-1535. 
[6] 
Macek, R.W., S.A. Silling (2007), “Peridynamics via finite element analysis”, Finite 
Elements in Analysis and Design, 43:1169-1178. 
[7] 
Mitchell, J.A. (2011), A Nonlocal, Ordinary, State-based Plasticity Model for Peridynamics, 
SAND Report 2011-7597, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM and 
Livermore, US. 
[8] 
SIERRA Solid Mechanics team (2011), Sierra/Solid Mechanics 4.22 User’s Guide, 
SAND Report 2011-7597, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM and 
Livermore, US. 
[9] 
Littlewood, D.J. et al. (2012), “Peridynamic simulation of damage evolution for 
structural health monitoring”, Proceedings of the ASME 2012 International Mechanical 
Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE), Houston, Texas, US. 
[10] Peridigm. https://software.sandia.gov/trac/peridigm/. 
[11] Sandia Advanced Simulation and Computing (ASC). http://www.sandia.gov/asc/.  
[12] Boyce, B.L. (2012), Personal correspondence. 
[13] Littlewood, D. (2010), “Simulation of dynamic fracture using peridynamics, finite 
element modeling, and contact”, Proceedings of the ASME 2010 International Mechanical 
Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE), Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 
 
326 
 

