
GENE AVATARS
THE NEO-DARWININAN
THEORY OF EVOLUTION
Pierre-Henri Gouyon
Jean-Pierre Henry
Jacques Arnould
Translated by Tiiu Ojasoo
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS 
NEW YORK, BOSTON, DORDRECHT, LONDON, MOSCOW

eBook ISBN:        0-306-47570-7
Print ISBN:
0-306-46616-3
©2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers
New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow
Print ©2002 Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Visit Kluwer Online at:  
http://kluweronline.com
and Kluwer's eBookstore at:
http://ebooks.kluweronline.com
New York

PREFACE
France holds a rather unusual position in the field of evolutionary biology.
Whereas French naturalists from Buffon, Cuvier and Lamarck onwards made
great discoveries in centuries past, French biologists missed the turning when
it came to genetics. Until the 1970s, most French biologists were convinced
that genetics was not as interesting as developmental science (some "rare
species", for example R. Chandebois, still hold this view). For them, the
general principles of heredity resided in the cytoplasm rather than in the
genome. This was not, however, as great an obstacle as one might have
thought. For example, it did not prevent Malécot from being one of the most
outstanding theoreticians of population genetics, L’Héritier and Teissier from
inventing population cages for Drosophila, or Monod and Jacob from
discovering messenger RNA or, for that matter, from conceiving major works
such as “Chance and Necessity” or “Evolutionary tinkering”. In fact, it might
even have been an advantage because, in France, the centralized vision of
heredity rooted in Mendelian genetics was strongly tempered by the
importance traditional biology conferred to the cytoplasm. Not unsurprisingly,
therefore, it was in France that a mechanism whereby the cytoplasm regulates
genetic information was discovered. It was in France also that the genetics of
non-Mendelian elements like mitochondria and the ecological genetics of
nucleo-cytoplasmic interactions (e.g. male-sterility, see Chapter 4) were
developed.
Until the 1980s, evolutionary genetics was chiefly the preserve of Great
Britain and the USA. These countries published all the scientific journals in
the field (Evolution, American Naturalist, Heredity, Genetics...). Continental
Europe, however, built up enough strength to found a European Society of
v

vi
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Evolutionary Biology and edit a society journal (“Journal of Evolutionary
Biology”) which, with time, has acquired a good reputation and substantial
impact. The first editor, of American origin, worked in Basel (Switzerland);
the second was the first author of this book (the editorial office is now based
in the Netherlands). A major reason for creating the journal was to
counterbalance the dominance of Anglo-American culture in the field. Not
that our colleagues were unfriendly. On the contrary, they helped us a lot in
developing evolutionary genetics in France. We are deeply indebted to
scientists like Bob Allard, Janis Antonovics, Herbert Baker, Arthur Cain,
Deborah Charlesworth, Theodosius Dobzhansky, Chris Gliddon, John
Harper and Ledyard Stebbins - among many others - for their advice and
collaboration. The trouble was that not enough account was taken of the
“cultural” differences between “Anglo-Americans” and Europeans in a field
of study - evolution - with such close links to ethics and politics. (We shall
not discuss the ambiguity of the position of Great Britain which belongs to
both worlds).
Evolutionary biology tells us that isolation, by preventing a group of
individuals from being drowned in the average mass, can foster novelty.
Protection from mainstream genetic and evolutionary thinking has certainly
helped French biologists retain their strong interest in development. In
France, it was obvious - maybe too obvious - that a synthetic theory of
evolution had to take ontogeny and non-Mendelian genetics into account
long before Gould and Lewontin made such a claim. The original French
edition of this book was written in order to acquaint the French reader with
the theory of evolution. To the English-speaking reader its interest lies not in
any new theory but in the rather unfamiliar emphasis.
The authors’ interest in evolutionary genetics was awakened by Georges
Valdeyron's course on population genetics at the “Institut National
Agronomique” in Paris. This book is dedicated to him. The French edition
benefited from the ideas of Anne Atlan, Denis Couvet and Isabelle Olivieri
and was improved by suggestions from Beatrice Albert, Irène Till-Bottraud,
and many others. The authors are also grateful to John Maynard Smith and
Andy Dobson for their judicious comments.
Pierre-Henri Gouyon
Professor at Paris-Sud University
Lecturer at Ecole Polytechnique
Consulting Professor at INAPG
Director of UPRESA 8079

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
The Biologist's Dream
1
5
7
CHAPTER 1
Waiting for Darwin
From pre-Socratic myths to the transformism of  Lamarck
1. Before evolutionism: Metamorphosis, fixism, spontaneous
generation
2. The concept of evolution. A French discovery
17
31
45
45
56
60
68
81
81
98
3. Lamarck, founding father of transformism
CHAPTER 2
The Darwinian paradigm
1.
2.
3.
4.
The Darwinian revolution
The origins of genetics: A story about peas
Biometricians versus geneticists
Eugenics and Lysenkoism
CHAPTER 3
Population genetics and ecological genetics
1.
2.
3.
4.
Population genetics
Heyday and decline of ecological genetics
Gene polymorphism
Neutral theory and the molecular clock of evolution
111
124
vii

viii
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
CHAPTER 4
The key to genes
135
136
141
143
149
151
152
155
156
160
165
165
175
180
199
200
204
221
221
223
226
228
231
234
243
245
245
247
248
248
249
250
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Male opposition
Individual, where are you?
What is life? Erwin Schrödinger's "essentialist" answer
An update on information
Genetic information
Genetic information and avatars
Individuals: Gene inventions for gene reproduction
Selection levels
Rules governing the evolution of information
CHAPTER 5
Conflict and cooperation
1.
2.
3.
The genome, an array of compartments in constant conflict
Let's play!
The splendour and woes of sociobiology
CHAPTER 6
Eros and Thanatos revisited
1.
2.
Death at our heels?
What use is sex?
CHAPTER 7
What can be done, what can't be done
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
A visit to St. Mark's
Brachiopod architecture or "Seilacher's triangle"
Constraints and biological evolution
Was life wonderful in the Cambrian?
Struggle for life and a royal race
Finalism revisited
CONCLUSION
From an ideal to a tinkered world
MATHEMATICAL APPENDICES
MA1.
MA2.
MA3.
MA4.
MA5.
MA6.
Evolutionary pressures
Inbreeding coefficient
Lethal mutations
Genetic load
Fixation of neutral alleles
Game theory

Contents
ix
GLOSSARY
255
263
269
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

GENE AVATARS
THE NEO-DARWINIAN
THEORY OF EVOLUTION

Introduction
THE BIOLOGIST'S DREAM
In the 4th century Saint Augustine wrote: "What then is time? If no one
asks me, I know; but if I am asked and wish to explain, I do not know." 1
Augustine's query about time seems to apply also to life. Can any biologist
claim to know the ultimate definition of life? If he did, he might be offered
an honorary chair on the National Ethics Committee but it is more likely that
he would be in real danger of taking himself for yet another Faust or
successor to Dr. Frankenstein. Would he not have acquired the knowledge
and thus the power held by the gods? Would he not have become God?
These epistemological and metaphysical issues have not stopped
biologists from pursuing their quest to understand living things, nor
prevented the deep changes that have occurred during the last two centuries
in a field of biology - reproduction and heredity - that has always fascinated
mankind. We are far from Montaigne's outcry (Essays, Book II):
What kind of monster is the drop of seed from which we are produced
and that encapsulates the impressions not only of bodily form but also of
the thoughts and inclinations of our fathers? Where does this drop of
water harbour these infinite forms? and how does it pass on those
similarities that progress in so bold and disordered a fashion that the
great-grandson looks like his great-grandfather, the nephew like his
uncle?
Jean Rostand (1894-1977), a French biologist and prolific author,
considered this passage by Montaigne exceptional on many counts. It asks
how not only physical characters are passed on but also mental traits. It
conveys the process' capricious nature and the onlooker's feeling of surprise
1

2
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
and alarm. It is a milestone we can use to judge how far our understanding
has progressed over the last four centuries. Modern science has unveiled
many of the secrets of reproduction and provided answers (albeit
rudimentary ones) to the questions: "Why are we - living beings, human
beings - here?", "Why are we born to die?", "Is there a reason to life?" It has
also provided tools for modifying human inheritance, i.e. the genome. Part of
the biologist's dream is embodied in the techniques of genetic engineering.
Some of our contemporaries fear this dream will turn into a nightmare.
Where will biological science and techniques take us? Might they not reach
down to the very foundations of life and shatter them? The spectres of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki still haunt many minds, imparting virulence to the
claims of ecologists and increasing fear of all that is undertaken in genetic
engineering. There are Ethics Committees everywhere, in hospitals, research
departments, government institutions, and international organisations.
Ethical issues are being introduced into the syllabuses of schools,
universities and polytechnics. Our intention is not to discredit these
initiatives; all efforts to make research-workers, practitioners, and citizens
more conscious of - and responsible for - their individual and collective
behaviour are welcome. But the risk is that science will no longer be seen as
a provider of benefits but as a sterile, expensive, and dangerous activity.
This book does not address the ethical aspects of modern genetic and
biological techniques but describes the contemporary biologist's insight into
life. It defends the evolutionist and especially neo-Darwinian paradigm.
Charles Darwin's work was a radical turning-point in the history of biology;
its quality and importance to biology cannot be called into question. In the
words of John Maynard Smith, "ever since Darwin, the theory of evolution
has been the main unifying idea in biology".2 We use the word paradigm in
the sense defined by the physicist and historian of science, Thomas Kuhn, in
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.3 A concept becomes a paradigm if
the work that introduces the concept (in this case, the virtually mythical The
Origin of Species) is so exceptional that it draws a cohesive group of
researchers away from rival modes of scientific activity and provides them
with all sorts of new problems to resolve.
Will the neo-Darwinian paradigm one day meet with the fate of historical
monuments condemned to ruin or restored so conservatively that all later
transformation is impossible? Certainly not. This paradigm embraces all past
and present research activities which help "throw some light on the origin of
species - that mystery of mysteries -" as Darwin called it.4 The advances in
genetics and ecological sciences 5 over the last few decades have already had
a strong influence on the evolutionist viewpoint and brought about changes
even though many questions still need to be answered. It is intellectually
dishonest, therefore, to mistake current scientific controversy and debate for

Introduction-The Biologist's Dream
3
a radical attack of the neo-Darwinian paradigm and to propose, even impose,
a "new paradigm" which is most often unscientific and whose problem
posing and solving modes are hardly any different.
Within the neo-Darwinian paradigm, the issue of what is life has a tone
and expression of its own. On what entities, how, and at what integration
levels does natural selection act? Why do we speak of the "selfish gene" and
what does this mean? What is a living being? These questions are answered
in Chapter 4 but, to understand the answers, we have to put them into their
historical and epistemological context (see Chapters 1 to 3). The historical
roots of current biological concepts run very deep; the connotations and
implications of these concepts are often variable, as we shall illustrate when
discussing what is a gene. To forget this is to leave the door open to
misunderstanding, ignorance, and even injustice as these scientific
discoveries have weighty social implications. The first applications of
genetics were endeavours to improve the human species. Eugenics is, so to
speak, the "atomic mushroom" of modern biology.
Once the concepts are explained and put into context, we shall find that
they raise questions which prompt a reappraisal of living things. What are
the relationships among elements of the genome, members of a population or
society, and species of a community? What is the reason for sexual
reproduction, for death? Chapters 5 and 6 will tell us how the neo-Darwinian
paradigm tackles these issues by drawing upon evolutionary genetics.
The last chapter addresses the aspects of current evolutionary biology we
consider most fundamental. There is no doubt that contingency - history's
imprint on the living world (what happens does not depend upon a necessity
that transcends history but upon all that precedes) - and constraints, whether
anatomical, physiological or other, are involved in the processes at the origin
of living beings and mankind. Many controversies oppose evolutionary
biologists in this area simply because there are major obstacles to our further
understanding of the living world. These obstacles prevent the ultimate
dream of the biologist - foretelling the past - from coming true.6
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Augustine, Confessions, Book XI, Chapter 14. ("Quid est ergo tempus? Si nemo ex me
quaerat, scio; si quarenti explicare velim, nescio"). André Pichot makes the analogy to
life in Histoire de la Notion de Vie, 1993, Gallimard, Paris.
Maynard-Smith, J., 1989, Evolutionary Genetics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. V.
Kuhn, T.S., 1970 (first published in 1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
edition, enlarged), The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 10.
Darwin, C., 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, John Murray, London.
In 1886, Ernest Haeckel called the science of the relations between living beings and the
world that surrounds them "ecology". Ecology is thus not confined to just the "functional"
dimension of biological processes and of the relationships these processes establish

4
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
6.
among living or inert elements of the biosphere. It also takes the historical dimension into
account, especially of the evolution of living beings and of the groups (populations,
species) they form.
In other words, providing a full explanation of how one biological form in the past gave
way to another, before this passage is illustrated by the discovery of fossils.

Chapter 1
"WAITING FOR DARWIN"
From pre-Socratic myths to the transformism of Lamarck
Just by looking at plants or animals grow, we are prompted into asking
intriguing questions about the fate and history of living things. These
questions arise from the prodigious unity and harmony of biological
processes and also from the human mind's difficulty, even inability, to grasp
all the underlying mechanisms. They voice at least three concerns. The first
is about the origin of self and mankind (a wise man in the Bible says: "There
are three things which I cannot understand, and a fourth which I know not -
the tracks of an eagle in its flying - the footsteps of a serpent on a rock - the
marks of a ship crossing the sea - and the ways of a man in youth" 1). The
second is about daily rations (in Antiquity, it was widely believed that, on
poor soil, wheat could change into barley just as barley could change into
oats), and the third about the future.
Philosophical and religious views on the origin of the world
When considering the origin of the world from a philosophical and
religious standpoint, we have to distinguish between procession,
emanation, transformation, and creation. Procession takes place when
an immutable character is transferred in its entirety to several beings
without any substance being divided. Emanation occurs when a being
derives from its own substance a similar or analogous substance with
a separate existence, or when a being produces within itself a new
manner of being that is both distinct (independent) and indistinct (self-
supported). Transformation occurs when an external agent intervenes
and changes the state of a being. Finally, there is creation when God
confers existence, without himself, to a substantiality that did not pre-
exist.
5

6
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
All cultures have their own folklore about the origins and metamorphoses
of living things as this tale from a 17th century French botany book:
There is a tree admittedly not common in France but often found in
Scotland. Leaves fall from this tree. On one side, they strike water and
turn into fish; on the other, they strike the ground and turn into birds.2
Just like myths, these imaginary tales try to explain the origin and
meaning of the world and how it came to look the way it does. They have
given way to philosophical and scientific theories in all the cultures where
these theories have developed and taken a hold. However, representations of
the world in both mythological or scientific discourse have always embraced
the idea of evolution even though this idea may have taken very different
forms and held different positions in time and place.

"Waiting for Darwin"
7
1.
BEFORE EVOLUTIONISM: METAMORPHOSIS,
FIXISM, SPONTANEOUS GENERATION
Evolutionism before Socrates
The cosmogonies of Chinese and Indian culture are without doubt
"evolutionist".3 They speak of a world that arose from a single, simple
source, and then differentiated. In general, most myths involving primitive
elements have a common scheme. Starting from earth, water, air, fire, or
some other initial state, Nature gradually acquires new properties, sometimes
at the expense of earlier equilibria. However, Nature is only outwardly or
partially renewed since her initial unity remains implicit and may even
become more apparent.
An analogous view was held by pre-Socratic thinkers and even
predominated in their, alas fragmentary, works. These gradually set aside
most mythical elements. Nature was seen as a living being, an organism
driven by a life force, a force that leads to generation and development and
that transforms the organism itself. For example, Anaximandrus (610-547
BC) and Anaximenus (ca 550-480 BC) claimed that living beings were born
through spontaneous generation by the action of the sun on a humid starting
material. According to Anaximandrus,
The first animals were born through humidity and were encased by a
thorny skin. As time went by, they crept up onto the bank; their casing
unlocked and shed, they quickly went on to live a new way of life.
Generation is obviously spontaneous when we watch with a child's eyes
the emergence of flies and maggots. Anaximandrus saw spontaneous
generation not only in the simplest beings but also in plants and higher
animals. He allied to it the idea of metamorphosis as when an insect passes
from the larval stage to adulthood (thereby drawing an interesting parallel
between phylogeny and ontogeny, between the beginnings of mankind and
the beginnings of an individual).
Firstly, man was born from living beings of a different kind because,
unlike animals who start to hunt early, he needs prolonged care during
early childhood. If he had started off in this state, he would not have
survived. Thus, man first took shape in creatures that resembled fish and
stayed there like an embryo until maturity. The creatures then burst open,
and men and women able to care for themselves came forth.4
Once spontaneous generation and metamorphosis had been brought
together, it became possible to imagine how human forms had evolved over

8
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
time and to explain how extravagant freak forms had emerged in Nature.
Most pre-Socratic thinking on life rested on the notions of randomness,
chance, and accidental encounters, as well as on the notions of need - even
foresight -, planning, and goal. This is not unlike the "modern" evolutionist
concept of the living world which sees finality no longer as a purpose at
work within evolution but as an unavoidable feature of the structures created
by natural selection (see J. Monod's view of "teleonomy" in Chapter 7).
Empedocles also espoused the idea of spontaneous generation. At the
beginning, separate pieces emerged directly from the wet earth and clay:
single limbs, heads without horns, faces without foreheads, arms without
shoulders, and eyes without a face. These pieces then assembled randomly,
in all possible combinations, to form all kinds of monsters: bulls with human
heads, men with bulls' heads, two-faced animals, creatures with countless
hands, and so on. Some pieces remained unattached. This free assembly
phase was the era of friendship and was followed by the era of hate and
sexuality. Disharmonious fauna disappeared, and animals were no longer
born directly from the earth but were generated. Thus, Empedocles
envisaged a succession of fauna in which defective combinations were
eliminated; the hallmark of life was true unity and affinity among beings.
For Democritus (ca 460-370 BC), the founder of atomist theory, Nature
was formed by the haphazard motion of atoms in a vacuum. The human
being is the fruit of chance (there is no finality). He creeps out of the water
and silt "like a small worm". Democritus extended his view of Nature to
society and culture. This was an echo of the golden age of many traditions
or, on the contrary, of the time when mankind mastered no technique nor art
and led a precarious life. He thought that language might have evolved from
sounds that were no more elaborate than the cries of animals, but that were
more effective.
The idea of a creative chance, also present in Epicurus' philosophy (341-
270 BC), was taken up by Lucretius (95-53 BC). He too saw the earth as the
begetter of all living things. "It was not by a golden cable, he wrote, that
living beings descended down to earth from the sky." The earth first gave
birth to grasses and small trees, then to many animal species. Of the
monsters that thus came to be, only those that could move about, feed
themselves, and reproduce, survived. Finality in the organism is accidental;
in other words, "we do not have eyes to see, we see because we have eyes".
Lucretius was the first to introduce the notion of a struggle for life among
living beings.
All those whom you see breathe the air that sustains them have relied on
either stealth, vigilance, or agility to defend and protect their species
right from its beginnings… Lions prevail through courage, foxes by
subterfuge, deer by flight..... Domestic animals were protected by man....

"Waiting for Darwin"
9
But the creatures that nature has not endowed with self-sufficiency or
qualities of use to us, or any reason for being fed and protected by us,
were exposed as food for others, encumbered by the fettles that fate had
forged for them, and perished to the last by Nature's command.
All these thinkers not only recognised that chance and monstrosities exist
in the living world but also endowed chance with a kind of procreative
power. This is contrary to the thinking of Plato and Aristotle for whom
monstrosities were just exceptions to a world order.
Greek essentialism. Creationism in the Christian tradition
Plato (428-348 BC) and Aristotle (384-322 BC) inaugurated the era of
essentialism. In the Timea, one of Plato's richest dialogues, the demigod
created the Universe with the help of the model provided by the world of
Ideas. All forms of life thus created are imperfect copies of these types or
essences which alone are genuine, unchanging, and perfect. All of Nature is
taken to be a living being 5 composed of other, different kinds of living
beings. First, there are the gods, created directly by the demigod, then aerial,
aquatic and terrestrial animals. The human male is the most accomplished
terrestrial being whereas other animals are just degraded forms (including
woman!). Plato does not mention plants.
The work of the demigod according to Plato
Thus far and until the birth of time the created universe was made
in the likeness of the original, but inasmuch as all animals were not
yet comprehended therein, it was still unlike. What remained, the
creator then proceeded to fashion after the nature of the pattern. Now
as in the ideal animal the mind perceives ideas or species of a certain
nature and number, he thought that this created animal ought to have
species of a like nature and number. There are four such; one of them
is the heavenly race of the gods; another, the race of birds whose way
is in the air; the third, the watery species; and the fourth, the
pedestrian and land creatures. Of the heavenly and divine, he created
the greater part out of fire, that they might be the brightest of all
things and fairest to behold, and he fashioned them after the likeness
of the universe in the figure of a circle […]
All these the creator first set in order, and out of them he
constructed the universe, which was a single animal comprehending
in itself all other animals, mortal and immortal. Now of the divine, he
himself was the creator, but the creation of the mortal he committed to
his offspring.6

10
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Plato's view of the world is said to be essentialist because it is founded on
an array of types or essences. It can be the basis of a taxonomy; types can be
classified because they are quite distinct and do not change over time. We
are reminded of the current method of authenticating a new species by
depositing its type in a museum.
Aristotle was more interested in the hierarchy of living beings. He did not
speak of "Life" as such, but of the "Living". He admitted that his typology
was imperfect and not easy to use because many intermediate forms
smudged the boundaries. However, his universe was also eternal and fixed,
as was the nature of each of its components. He rejected the idea of passage
from one species to another or of the emergence of complex forms from
simpler ones. Motion was an essential feature of living things but was only
an expression of their power and could not induce any real change in cosmic
order.
The fixity of the world according to Aristotle
… for any living thing that has reached its normal development and
which is unmutilated, and whose mode of generation is not
spontaneous, the most natural act is the production of another like
itself, an animal producing an animal, a plant a plant, in order that,
as far as its nature allows, it may partake in the eternal and divine.
That is the goal towards which all things strive, that for the sake of
which they do whatsoever their nature renders possible. The phrase
'for the sake of which' is ambiguous; it may mean either (a) the end to
achieve which, or (b) the being in whose interest, the act is done.
Since then no living thing is able to partake in what is eternal and
divine by uninterrupted continuance (for nothing perishable can for
ever remain one and the same), it tries to achieve that end in the only
way possible to it, and success is possible in varying degrees; so it
remains not indeed as the self-same individual but continues its
existence in something like itself - not numerically but specifically
one.7
Both Plato and Aristotle, despite their diverging views on the origin of
the world, defended its unchanging character and rejected any idea of
evolutionism. Their legacy - that the world has a hierarchy that is fixed - can
be reconciled fairly readily with the faith in a "God-the-Creator" professed
by followers of the Jewish and Christian religions in the Western world.
Both these religions consider that, in the very beginning, God created a
complete world from nothing (ex nihilo). Creationists claim that all the types
within the created world existed, either explicitly or potentially, right from
the beginning. Christian thinking, even though it defends the idea that there

"Waiting for Darwin"
11
is a history and that time flows irreversibly, is essentialist. Mankind has the
key role of co-creator responsible for maintaining order and for ensuring that
history unfolds satisfactorily within creation. It is not hard to see why, within
such a tradition, all attempts to consider evolution were doomed to failure.
What is meant by "creationism"?
Creationism can refer to the Christian tradition; we speak of God
the creator. It can also refer to the Jewish and Islamic traditions. Since
the mid-19th century, however, its use has been restricted to the
fundamentalist movements which contest the theories of Darwin and
his followers and which defend the idea that the world is not the result
of the slow workings of natural forces such as selection, adaptation, or
chance, but the work entirely of God, as recounted by Moses, through
divine revelation, in the first chapters of the book of Genesis.8
Religion does not, however, reject all kinds of variability. In his
commentary to the first chapter of the Book of Genesis, Augustine reflects
on how different life forms appeared in turn. His thinking is based on the
Stoics' doctrine of seminal reasons. Vital energy, albeit one and infinite, is
present in an infinite number of confined bodies as seeds that slowly give
shape to matter. The origin of life forms can thus be explained by a
generation model. An entirely formed living being pre-exists in the seed.
This view prefigures pre-formationist ideas (see below). Through Plotinus,
Augustine introduces some of its aspects into the Christian tradition and
considers the history of creation as a gradual unfolding of a divine plan.
In the 13th century, Thomas Aquinas saw the world of living organisms
as a ladder reaching from the simplest to the most elaborate forms of life. He
borrowed the idea from Aristotle's Ladder of Nature. In fact, during early
Christianity and in the Middle Ages, Western thinkers probably believed less
in biological fixity than did their predecessors. They were convinced that
man could be changed into a were-wolf just as vile metal could be converted
into gold. All these opinions hinged around a belief in spontaneous
generation.
Was the fixity of species the price to pay to do away with
spontaneous generation?
The idea that some living beings might arise spontaneously actually
derives from errors in observation. The (presumed) origin of barnacle geese
is a picturesque example of such an error. Barnacle geese are maritime geese
which migrate by night and show up suddenly on the coast of Western
Europe. To the people of the Middle Ages, their sudden arrival was

12
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
explained by the fact that they were born from flotsam. They came upon the
idea by observing the barnacle, a cirripedia crustacean. The planktonic larva,
nauplius, clings to floating wood at sea and undergoes metamorphosis into a
pedunculated organism. Its main body valves let protrude feathery brachia
and its foot looks like the flexible neck of a goose. Popular science needed
no other proof for the spontaneous generation of barnacle geese!
The idea that complex organisms such as vertebrates might be generated
spontaneously lost much support with time; this was not the case for lower
life forms. Until the 17th century it was commonly believed that flies were
generated by urine or by rotting meat. In 1668, Francesco Redi, poet,
antiquary, physician and naturalist, performed the first experiments that
contradicted this belief. Redi placed samples of snakes, fish, and veal in
closed and open jars. He chose veal probably not because he had a liking for
this meat but because, according to popular belief, veal was especially prone
to engendering flies. However, it was not Redi's choice of material that
makes his work noteworthy but his excellent idea of including experimental
controls. He wrote to his fellow-members of the Accamedia del Cimento:
All our efforts must focus on the experiments, on the creation of
standards of measurement and on the elaboration of exact research
methods.9
The result was unmistakable. The samples in the open jars, but not those
in the closed jars, were ridden with maggots. Redi concluded:
The flesh of dead animals cannot engender worms unless the eggs of the
living be deposited therein.10
Notwithstanding, it took nearly two centuries for the theory of
spontaneous generation to be definitively rejected as an explanation for
living organisms.
In 1748, John Needham repeated Redi's experiment with more care and
precision. His results were completely at variance with Redi's as were his
intentions. Needham prepared a meat broth and checked under the
microscope that it contained no organisms before placing it in a sealed jar.
When the jar was opened a few days later, it swarmed with thousands of
organisms. Was this, at last, proof of spontaneous generation?
The abbot Spallanzani (1729-1799) replicated the experiment arguing
that the creatures observed were so small that their eggs (or spores) must
have been smaller still and must have escaped Needham's attention.
Spallanzani first demonstrated that the "little animals" could appear in an air-
tight vial containing relatively little air. He then filled vases with various
infusions, sealed them over a flame, and plunged them in boiling water for
an hour. No "little animal" appeared, at least whilst the vials stayed closed.

"Waiting for Darwin"
13
The results of his first experiment excluded the action of heat as a rarefier of
air but did the outcome of his second experiment really demonstrate that the
proliferation Needham observed was due to pre-existing germs? Some
onlookers claimed that the air, once heated, could not support the life that
was supposed to have appeared spontaneously.
It was still a topical debate in the middle of the 19th century when the
Paris Academy of Sciences decided to offer a prize to the person who would
settle it once and for all. In 1859, a French scientist, Felix Pouchet, published
a 700-page opus in which he set out to demonstrate that the theory of
spontaneous generation was sound. He not only reviewed the most advanced
ideas but also substantiated his overview with many experimental facts. His
demonstration was short-lived. The controversy was settled in 1862 when
Louis Pasteur provided undisputed proof for large quantities of microscopic
germs in the ambient air and also on the hands, apparatus and utensils of
those who perform experiments. There could be no question of spontaneous
generation; it was a matter of contamination of culture broths.
Microorganisms are the agents of putrefaction and not the products of the
death and decay of organic matter.
Why have we discussed the belief in spontaneous generation at such
length? Simply because it was instrumental in delaying acceptance of the
idea of evolution in biology. As long as common belief accepted the
likelihood of spontaneous generation and metamorphosis, there was no room
for evolution, for the idea that different organic forms can be linked by
means of generation. To dismiss belief in spontaneous generation and
species interconversion and claim that species are fixed would have meant
having to address the issue of species constancy over historical time and
over generations. When we look back, we realise that this fixist phase was,
of course, necessary in order to broach the idea of the evolution of life later
on. Redi bears testimony to this turning point in the history of ideas on life
when he writes:
I shall express my belief that the Earth, after having brought forth the
first plants and the first animals by order of the Supreme and Omnipotent
Creator, has never since produced any kind of plants or animals, either
perfect or imperfect; and everything which it has been known to produce
in past or present times came solely from […] the seeds of the plants or
animals themselves; by their own means, they thus preserve their
species.11
And yet, it does go round…
There is a touch of irony to the echoes that resound through history.

14
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
1633: Galileo had to retract before the tribunal of the Inquisition. Legend
has it that he whispered to himself: "And yet, it does go round!".
1668: Redi provided the first proof against spontaneous generation and in
favour of the fixity of species.
1742: Linnaeus asked himself: "And if, after all they [species] change?"
Carl Linné, alias Linnaeus (1707-1778), championed the idea of the fixity
of species. His outlook on species was essentialist and close to a Platonist's
view of the world. If there is an ideal type for each species, then
deformations, imperfections, monstrosities are just variations of no
importance. Linnaeus' view of what we now call biodiversity was thus based
exclusively on variations among species with no concern for within-species
variation. (It is a view that some of our contemporaries still hold on the
wealth and variety of the living world.)
The fixity of species according to Linnaeus in 1737
All species reckon the origin of their stock in the first instance
from the veritable hand of the Almighty Creator: for the author of
nature, when He created species, imposed on his Creations an eternal
law of reproduction and multiplication within the limits of their
proper kinds. He did indeed in many instances allow them the power
of sporting in their outward appearance, but never that of passing
from one species to another. Hence to-day there are two kinds of
difference between plants: one a true difference, 
the diversity
produced by the all-wise hand of the Almighty, but the other, variation
in the outside shell, the Work of nature in a sportive mood. Let a
garden be sown with a thousand different seeds, let to these be given
the incessant care of the Gardener in producing abnormal forms, and
in a few years it will contain six thousand varieties, which the
common herd of Botanists calls species. And so I distinguish the
species of the almighty Creator which are true from the abnormal
varieties of the gardener: the former I reckon of the highest
importance because of their author, the latter I reject because of their
authors. The former persist and have persisted from the beginning
of the world, the latter, being monstrosities, can boast of but a brief
life.12
Linnaeus thus dismissed all concessions to 
variability involving
spontaneous generation. Species were not the product of a blind process
prone to accidents but they reproduced a type fixed by "God". By defending
the fixity of species, Linnaeus was able to elaborate a genuine system of
classification, the one that made him famous. In 1735 he published the first
edition of Systema naturae, sive regna tria naturae, systematice proposita

"Waiting for Darwin"
15
per classes, ordines, genera et species, a 14-page in-folio that was to have
14 editions, the last comprising 10 volumes. This work heralded the reign of
natural history, and the era of world expeditions to find and collect flowers,
birds, animals, butterflies and shells. No species was to escape the notice of
the flourishing trade in specimens! The intense activity in taxonomy and the
vogue for natural history study-rooms were the consecration of Linnaeus'
doctrine.
And yet, might species not undergo change? In the 18th century, the first
serious doubts about fixism were raised even though it had helped much in
furthering understanding of the living world. Linnaeus might well make a
distinction between diversity of divine origin and diversity due to a
gardener's whims, there was nevertheless the troublesome point that
horticulturists and breeders could derive new forms.
In 1742, a student brought Linnaeus a strange, monstrous plant which he
baptised Peloria (from the Greek pelorios, prodigious, monstrous). Its
general habit, stem, leaves, roots, and fragrance, as well as the colour of its
flowers, were similar to those of common toadflax (Linaria vulgaris Miller)
but the flowers were of a completely different shape. Linaria had just a
single spur at the base of the corolla; Peloria had five. Why? Linnaeus
suggested that new species were generated by hybridisation, and one of his
students summed up his hopes as follows:
It would be the delight of our century to have discovered phenomena that
were not only unknown to our forebears but that are hardly to be
believed.13
In 1762, Linnaeus, still rather puzzled, suggested that God had created
genera and that species had appeared afterwards. Even later on, he accredited
the idea that all species of the same genus were originally varieties of a main
species which had multiplied through hybrid generations.
For a long time I have suspected, but I dare not put forward the
hypothesis, that all species belonging to the same genus originally
formed a single species which diversified by hybridisation. There is no
doubt that this is one of the issues of the future and that many
experiments will be set up to convert this hypothesis into an axiom
establishing that species are the work of time.14
The Peloria was not an isolated example. In 1715, about 50 years before
Linnaeus' time, Jean Marchant, head of the nurseries of the King's Gardens
(Jardins du Roy), discovered two "species" of Mercurialis annua L. These
had leaves that were more or less lacinate and that were very different from
those of the common dented variety of the plant. Having succeeded in
multiplying these two kinds of Mercurialis from seed, he was quite sure that

16
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
he had witnessed the birth of new forms and, four years later, wrote to the
Paris Academy of Sciences:
One could therefore imagine that, once the Almighty had created
individual plants as models for each genus […], these models, when they
became established, produced varieties; those varieties that remained
constant and permanent became species. In time and in the same fashion,
these species gave rise to other products that were different. He added:
Every day, art, culture and especially chance, that is to say unknown
circumstances, generate novelties among peculiar flowers such as
anemones and buttercups, and botanists consider these novelties as mere
varieties that do not warrant modifying the species. But why should
Nature be incapable of producing novelties that would warrant
modifying the species?15
His conclusion was more daring than that of Linnaeus for whom
hybridisation phenomena were at the origin of new species.
In a similar vein, in 1766, the horticulturist Antoine-Nicolas Duchesne
observed the appearance of a unifoliate
strawberry plant which he
reproduced from seed and sent to several colleagues.16 The leaves of this
plant had a single leaflet instead of the usual three, and this character was
fixed and transmissible. In the words of Duchesne, the existence of varieties
"will, of course, always be evidence contradicting the opinion that species
are unalterable." It occurred to him that the various strawberry plant
varieties might be affiliated and arise from the same primitive form. He
therefore decided to trace their genealogy, pointing out that:
The genealogical order is the only one indicated by nature, the only one
that fully satisfies the intellect. All others are arbitrary and
meaningless.17
Was this the end of the reign of fixism and essentialism? No, not yet,
even though the close of the 18th century did witness the emergence of the
idea of evolution without a return to pre-Socratic myths (no doubt because of
the criticisms waged against spontaneous generation). This revival of an old
idea was due less to the doubts that befell Linnaeus than to the hypotheses
formulated by Marchant and Duchesne.

2. 
THE CONCEPT OF EVOLUTION. A FRENCH
DISCOVERY
Modern philosophers and evolution
It would be a mistake to believe that the idea of evolution took modern
thinking by storm. It was an idea that gained recognition gradually, based as
it was on the observations and hypotheses of scholars and on philosophical
and theological questioning.
Our modern era has seen the birth of a new cosmogony; it calls upon the
laws of mechanics to uphold theories about how the universe came into
existence, and has replaced cyclical time by the linear time of physics.
Abiding by the Judaic and Christian traditions, Descartes, Kant and Laplace
introduced the notion of history into the philosophy of nature and erased the
last remaining traces of the pre-Socratic view of perpetual recurrence. In
addition, two currents of thinking, the doctrines of continuity and
nominalism, brought indirect support to the development of evolutionist
ideas. In different ways they both ran counter to the essentialist view of life
inherited from Plato and Aristotle.
Understanding life in the continuity mode means finding similarities
among living creatures and building links by homology or analogy. In other
words, the discontinuity that the doctrine of perfect types perceives among
different forms does not exist. In Criticism of Judgment (1790), Kant noted
that, because we can make an analogy among the forms of various
organisms, we assume that there is a common type from which all these
forms are descended. According to the principle of continuity which he
analysed in Criticism of Pure Reason (1781), the necessary transitions
cannot be jumps (saltus) but must be just very small variations. He added,
however, that this continuity in forms was still only an idea that needed to be
put to the test.
Nominalist thinking questioned the very existence of essences and only
recognised the existence of individuals. General terms were thus only signs
referring to singular entities.
"Waiting for Darwin"
17

18
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Anatomists were also studying generation phenomena at this point in
time. They belonged to two schools. The preformationists claimed that the
female egg (or, for some, the spermatozoa) encased a miniature adult with
"preformed" parts and organs (consequently, the egg also contained the
embryo of the next generation, etc.)18 On the other hand, the partisans of
epigenesis believed that the embryo was made up of elements of crude
matter which gradually organised themselves. The relationship between
these two schools of thought and earlier views is rather complex. The
preformationist hypothesis with its ready-made descendants did not accept
variations due to chance. Epigenesis was a restitution of the essentialist view
because an invariable specific form somehow mysteriously "told" matter
how to make the embryo; variations were just in-process blunders.
Fossils : From the lusus naturae to the archives of the earth
The term "fossil" first appeared in the French language in 1556. Its Latin
root is the verb fodere, to dig, whence fossilis, "extracted from the earth".19
Fossils were already known in Antiquity though there was no clear
understanding about their origin.
According to Herodotes (ca 484-420 BC), petrified shells were
mentioned by Egyptian priests who attributed their origin to the sea and
concluded that the land of Egypt had once lain beneath the sea. The
geographer Strabo (ca 58 BC - 21~25 AD) noted that such shells were
sometimes found around the Mediterranean two to three thousand stadia
inland, as in Armenia or Phrygia. Wasn't this proof that these areas had
previously been occupied by the sea? Plutarch (ca 50-125 AD) added that, in
Egypt, there were shells up mountains and down mines. Ovid (43 BC - 17/18
AD) wrote:
I have seen the ocean where before there was firm land; I have seen land
spring from water and, far from the coast, the earth is covered with sea-
shells.20
On the other hand, when Xenophanes of Colophon, at the close of the 6th
century BC, found the petrified remains of fish in Malta, Sicily, and Paros,
he concluded that the silt that had once covered the surface of the earth had
borne life. Finally, to Plinus (23-79 AD) fossils were just stones produced by
lightning or curiosities of nature (in Lathi, lusus naturae); nature takes
delight in making mere pebbles look like shells, leaves or fish!
This opinion was long-lived but, at the end of the 15th century, Leonardo
da Vinci (1452-1519) expressed doubts as to whether "figurative stones"
were born on hill tops under the influence of stars:

"Waiting for Darwin"
19
I wonder where they are now, the stars that once created shells of
different ages and aspect on hillsides?21
At about the same time, in 1517, Frascator claimed that fossils were the
remains of animals that had once been alive. At the end of the 16th century,
Bernard Palissy (ca 1510-1589/1590), already famous for having invented
ceramics, set up a physics and natural history study-room in Paris. He
thought that the fossil-rich layers were due to the sedimentation and
petrification of fishes and shells in ancient seas but rejected outright the
explanation put forward by his contemporaries - naturalists and theologians -
who saw in these petrified remains the sign of the Great Flood described in
the Bible. The diluvian theory had a long-lasting influence on the
interpretation of fossils and the perception of the Earth's history, showing
how difficult it is to imagine an ancient world different from ours. Thus,
when F. Plater discovered the fossilised bones of an elephant near Lucerne in
1641, he concluded that they were the remains of the skeleton of a very tall
man.
Collecting fossils was a great 18th century hobby, as witnessed by two
works of rather unequal merit, Telliamed and History of the Earth. Telliamed
is the anagram of the name of the author, Benoît de Maillet (1656-1738) who
was Consul of France in Egypt, then Inspector of the commercial ports of
Barbary and of the Levant. In his book, Maillet claimed that all terrestrial
animals derive from fish. To him, all the land of our planet had emerged
from the sea. When the sea fell back, only aquatic animals were left on firm
land; only those that underwent transformation survived.
The origin of animals in the Telliamed
If we now turn to the issue of the origin of animals, I notice that
there is no creature that walks, flies or creeps for which there is not a
similar or approaching species in the sea; its passage from the one
element to the other is possible, probable, and even supported by
many examples.
I think, Sir, the Philosopher continued, that I have given proof
enough for a system where terrestrial animals derive from marine
animals, where they are formed naturally in the sea from water-borne
seeds whether these seeds are eternal or created (since you accept
creation). It is thus easy to understand how all living, feeling and
vegetative things can be generated on an Earth undergoing re-
population or not yet populated.22
Voltaire showed a lively interest in the works of contemporary biologists
but chiefly to criticise them and make scathing remarks. He never missed an

20
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
opportunity to mock de Maillet, for instance in The Singularities of Nature
(1768), The Systems (1772) or the Dialogues of Evhémère (1777). In The
Man of Forty Ecus (1768), he took issue with those "who created the
universe with their pen, as God had done with the Word."
One of the first persons who offered himself to my worship was a
descendant of Thales, called Telliamed, who told me that mountains and
men were produced by the waters of the sea. At first, there were
handsome seamen who later became amphibious. Their beautiful forked
tails changed into thighs and legs. I was still permeated by Ovid's
Metamorphoses and by a book demonstrating that the human race was
the bastard of a race of baboons. I much preferred being a descendant of
a fish than a monkey.23
But the character in Voltaire's book ends up by having doubts about the
importance of the actions of the sea:
But, incredulous Sir, what comment have you to make about the petrified
oysters found on the summit of the Alps?
- I shall answer, Sir creator, that I have seen neither petrified oysters nor
vessel anchors at the top of mount Cenis. I shall answer what has already
been said, that oyster shells (which petrify easily) have been found at
very large distances from the sea, just as Roman medals have been
unearthed at a hundred leagues from Rome. And I prefer to believe that
pilgrims of Saint-James have left a few shells near Saint-Maurice than to
imagine that the sea made Mount Saint-Bernard.
There follows a long diatribe about experiments on spontaneous
generation.
The History of the Earth by Georges Louis Leclerc, count of Buffon
(1707-1788), is a much more important landmark in the history of biology
than is the Telliamed. (The first part was published in 1744.) It is part of
Buffon's gigantic Natural History, an opus of 44 volumes with hundreds of
hand-coloured plates which took 55 years to complete. The work reflects the
18th century scientific and encyclopaedic ambition, partly inherited from
Linnaeus, to put all knowledge on nature into some kind of order. The
writings of Buffon, who at the time was Keeper of the King's Garden (which
was later to become the Natural History Museum), were quite daring. Buffon
thought that all planets were initially part of the same celestial body of which
the sun was the central core. Earth's matter had been detached from the sun
by the collision of a passing comet. On cooling, the earth blistered and gave
rise to mountain chains, and the atmosphere condensed into a single ocean.
Fossils and sedimentary rocks date from this time. As the waters receded,

"Waiting for Darwin"
21
continents emerged and the reign of plants and of the great terrestrial
animals began. The earth was still tepid; tropical animals probably still
inhabited areas which are now temperate or cold. Finally, today's species
emerged and, among them, the human species. Buffon even suggested that
man and monkey might belong to the same family and have a common
ancestry. He went as far as to say that the monkey was a degenerate human.
Buffon's book lays the foundations of the theory of actual causes. Nature
is seen as a set of causal relationships. The changes undergone by the earth's
surface result from constant and gradual physical forces that are still
operating today and that are therefore in no way exceptional. This theory
will be developed later by Charles Lyell in Principles of Geology (1830) but,
at the time, it provoked strong reactions as reported by the Marquess of
Argenson:
Sire Buffon's head is in a spin from the worry caused by his book's
success. The devout are furious and want it to be burnt by the
executioner. Verily, he contradicts the Bible in all points.24
On the 15th January 1751, the Theology Faculty of the Sorbonne (whose
judgement was backed by Voltaire, albeit an atheist) condemned 16
statements by Buffon and demanded that he withdraw them. Buffon obliged.
In the next volume of Natural History, he wrote:
I declare that I had no intention of contradicting the Scriptures, that I
believe most firmly all that is stated therein about the Creation […] I
retract everything in my book about the Earth's formation and, in
general, all that may be contrary to the narrative of Moses.25
A highly controversial issue was the estimated age of the Earth. In 1650,
archbishop Ussher had put the Earth's origin at 4004 years B.C. In 1744, in
Theory of the Earth, Buffon proposed that this date be pushed back by about
74,000 years. Was his retraction genuine, at least on this point? Hardly so,
because his unpublished notes give ages greater than 500,000 years. He
confided to Hérault de Séchelles:
The people need a religion [....]. When the Sorbonne took quarrel with
me, I gave it all the satisfaction it asked. This is mere tomfoolery; men
are so stupid that this satisfies them.26
Despite Buffon's quarrels with the Sorbonne, his reputation as a
dilettante, and his grand airs (he liked to say that there were only five truly
great men: Newton, Bacon, Leibniz, Montesquieu … and himself), his view
of the time-scale of the Earth's history was a real eye-opener to
contemporary intellectual and cultural society.

22
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
How Buffon calculated the age of the Earth
According to Buffon's hypothesis, the Earth was born because a
comet hit the Sun at an oblique angle and smashed away about one
part in 650. The liquid mass then divided into several rapidly rotating
spheres. The resultant centrifugal force ejected part of the matter of
the protoplanets and is at the origin of the satellites of our Solar
System's planets.
Buffon performed a series of experiments on the cooling times of
iron balls of different size. He extrapolated his results to calculate
"with Newton, how long it would take for a sphere of the size of the
Earth to cool".27 He found that it would take 42,964 years and 211
days before such a sphere could be touched without scorching, and
96,670 years and 132 days to reach the present temperature. But the
Earth is not only made of iron, and Buffon repeated his cooling
experiments with other constituents. Finally, discarding all but "glass,
clay, hard sandstone, marble and ferrous materials", he obtained the
following results: 2,095 years to consolidate, 33,911 years before
touching, and 74,047 years to reach the present temperature or rather
74,832 years if due account is taken of the Sun's heat whilst the Earth
cools.
However, after examining sedimentary deposits on the Normandy
coast, Buffon decided that his cooling period was too short and looked
for hidden causes that might delay cooling. "He tested various
hypotheses which yielded increasing ages, from 700,000 to 800,000
years for the primitive ocean to stabilise and one million years for the
present age of the Earth. Then, respectively, two and three million
years, which multiplies by 40 the action of the hidden causes. This
coefficient was no doubt too small, and the Earth should be assigned
an age of at least ten million years".28
However, in Epochs of Nature (1779), he will publish the estimate
of 75,000 years in order, as he said, not to plunge his readers into "the
dark depths of time". "It is true that the further we extend time, the
nearer we shall be to the truth and to Nature's use of time.
Nevertheless, we must shorten it as much as possible so that it is in
keeping with the limited power of our intellect".28
The precursors of transformism
With hindsight, it seems that several conditions had to be met for the
breach made by Buffon to open up onto genuine evolutionism:
People's minds had to be emancipated from the traditions of the bible and
the hold of theologians. Buffon was a good example indeed! In

"Waiting for Darwin"
23
particular, the use of words such as Creator, Supreme Being had to be
abandoned for the simpler use of the word Nature.
One had to recognise how old is the World in order to explain the
discovery of the remains of extinct species and the transformation indices
of the Earth.
One had also to accept that present species could change beyond the
limits set by fixism, even if fixism was a most valuable framework for
the naturalist. All life, like mankind, is part of history, a history where
forms that are separate today may have been linked in times past.
Strictly speaking, Charles Bonnet (1720-1793), a naturalist from Geneva,
was not a precursor of transformism. We mention him because he introduced
the word evolution to denote the process of the growth of an individual from
seed. Bonnet, in fact, belonged to the preformationist school.29 At the time,
the notion of a novel structure emerging from a primitive one was as difficult
to accept as was the idea of transformism or evolution.
The doctrine of preformation
Jan Swammerdam (1637-1680) was the originator of the doctrine
of preformation. This doctrine rejects procreation since parents cannot
create a being that is already perfectly formed. God initially created
the seeds of all subsequent offspring; they are nested inside each
other. The beginning of genital life is just the "awakening" of a seed
(whether from the father or mother) which sets out on the road of
"evolution", growth and development from its initial numb state. All
those who believed that living beings come from an egg, or that the
embryo is either partly or totally preformed in the little animal that is
the sperm, espoused this doctrine. Marcello Malpighi (1628-1694)
thought that there was a pre-existent seed (which in his study was the
unfertilised egg of the chicken) but which, however, harboured only
part of the individual. As pointed out by Bernardin de Saint Pierre in
1797, this doctrine was more of a political and social ideology rather
than a genuine scientific conviction: "It is upon this opinion, so often
refuted by experiment, that the aristocracy founds its prerogatives. It
is supported by the subtle reasoning of our schools, which flatter all
tyrannies. They say that all men, from fathers to sons, were present in
the first man, like a pile of goblets.” 30
Although Bonnet was not an ardent defender of species variability, he
apparently did not reject the idea. He compared the growth of the individual
with the history of the species. He wrote of the chicken embryo:
The phases through which we see it pass enable us to assess the
upheavals that organised bodies have had to undergo to reach their

24
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
latest form [and help us] imagine the new forms that animals will adopt
in their future state.31
Bonnet even predicted that man will improve so much that he will
become an angel and depart from an Earth no longer suited to this new
status!
The work of Pierre Moreau de Maupertuis (1698-1759), in particular
Physical Venus (1754), is a cornerstone in the history of transformism and
evolutionism. Maupertuis not only thought transmutation and diversification
of species possible but tried to explain them by processes from embryology.
He was especially interested in heredity. Having seen a "white negro"
(albino), he concluded that being white was merely a hereditary trait. It was
just like polydactily or like other features he had encountered in the breeding
of poultry and dogs. His intuition was astonishing. For example, he guessed
that heredity results from pairs of what he called "molecules" from the father
and mother. These have affinity for each other and combine in the foetus.
Sometimes, this process goes awry and produces an unexpected being which
may be at the origin of a new species. He wrote:
Could we not thus explain how just two individuals have given rise to a
multiplicity of highly dissimilar species? They would initially have arisen
from fortuitous productions in which the elementary parts were less
orderly than in the father and mother animals. Each erroneous step
would have led to a new species; the infinitely diverse animals we see
today would have resulted from such repeated errors.32
The philosopher Denis Diderot (1713-1784) was not quite of the same
opinion as either Bonnet or Maupertuis but he also subscribed to evolutionist
metaphysics, whilst adding a kind of dynamic materialism. He vindicated the
unity of nature in the organic world; he adopted Buffon's idea of a chain of
beings and thus implicitly criticised Linnean nomenclature. He introduced,
however, a dynamic dimension allowing for the existence of a unique act in
nature or of a prototype of all beings. Diderot unfolded these ideas in
Interpretation of Nature and in D'Alembert's Dream. In these works, he
focused on the consequences of use and non-use.
Diderot's interpretation of nature
Surprise often arises because we assume there are several
prodigies when there is only one; because we imagine that in nature
there are as many specific actions as there are phenomena, whereas
nature may have produced but a single action. It would even seem that
if nature had had to produce several actions, their results would have
been kept isolated; that there would have been collections of
phenomena that are independent of each other; and that the general

"Waiting for Darwin "
25
chain resting on a philosophy of continuity would be broken in several
places. The absolute independence of a single event is incompatible
with the idea of a whole; and without the notion of a whole, there can
be no philosophy.
It seems as if nature has taken pleasure in making variations on a
single mechanism in an infinite variety of ways. It abandons a given
mode of production only once it has multiplied individuals in all
manner of ways. When we observe the animal kingdom and note that,
amongst four-legged animals, there is not one that does not have
functions and parts - especially inner parts - that are totally similar to
those of another four-legged animal, then we have to believe that
there was a first animal, a prototype for all animals, in which nature
has but lengthened, shortened, transformed, multiplied, and abolished
certain organs.33
Doctor Bordeu. - Organs produce needs and, conversely, needs
produce organs.
Mademoiselle de Lespinasse. - Doctor, are you delirious?
Bordeu. - Why not? I have seen two stumps become two arms.
Mademoiselle de Lespinasse. - You're lying.
Bordeu. - It's true; but instead of two missing arms, I have seen
two shoulder blades lengthen, move like claws, and become two
stumps.
Mademoiselle de Lespinasse. - What folly!
Bordeu. - It's fact. Imagine a series of armless generations -
imagine continuous efforts - and you will see the two sides of a small
claw extend themselves, further and further, cross over in the back,
come round to the front - maybe become digitated at their extremity,
and recreate arms and hands. The original conformation worsens or
improves through need and habitual use. We walk so little, work so
little, and we think so much that I have not lost hope that man will end
up by being just a head.
Mademoiselle de Lespinasse. - A head! A mere head; I trust that
unrestrained politeness... You are giving me quite ridiculous ideas.34
Yet again, scientific and philosophical ideas evolved in line. "Time-
scaling" of the chain of life, a feature of 18th century thinking, led to the
notion of gradual progress. Henceforth, it was accepted that the rungs of
life's ladder had appeared one after another, the lower forms first; there was
no absolute limit to improvement. This train of thought was also applied to
human societies, to their cultural, political, legal, and religious foundations.
But might the idea that the world evolves not shake these foundations? What

26
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
status has a mankind known to be related to apes? Of course, the intellectual
and moral authorities of the time refused to ask such radical questions but
these issues nevertheless infiltrated people's minds.
The similarities among organs studied by Buffon and Daubenton
strengthened the idea of a teleological scheme of life. The emergence and
arrangement of shapes and processes were determined by a plan that was to
be fulfilled, or a goal that had to be met. Jean-Baptiste Robinet (1735-1820)
and Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) thought that man might be the end
product of a prototype that was present in all living beings and that had
undergone gradual improvement.
J.G. Herder's view of man
If we may hazard a guess about the deep mystery as to where
creation took place, we could consider the human genus as the great
confluent of inferior organic forces that merged to form mankind. But
what happened next? Man has brought God’s image with him and
benefited from the most delicate organisation that the earth could
offer; must he turn round and revert to a trunk, plant ,or elephant? Or
has the wheel of creation stopped with him?... Let us look back and
examine how, behind us, everything seems to have matured in order to
make man, and how all that is new in man is the first bud and seed of
what he must be and for what he is destined.35
According to Herder, an "active force" or a divine power had produced a
dynamic hierarchy of forms in which mankind had its place but this view did
not exclude the spontaneous generation of species nor a series of creations.
Its rationale was not so much transformism as a kind of naturalist
romanticism which, under the influence of the Stoic tradition, took account
of the passing of time.
Admittedly, these theories, whether they were scientific or philosophical,
were still imprecise and lacked convincing arguments. Voltaire, as we have
seen, had no trouble in ridiculing them. He lampooned Maupertuis in Doctor
Akakia's Life Story (1752-1753) by mingling medicine, embryogenesis, and
the origin of the soul... with an excavation project which reaches the centre
of the earth!
We suggest that the next time the young author [of the Venus Physique]
is in the throes of the act of procreation with his wife (if he has one), he
should no longer think that the child is formed in the uterus by attraction;
and we urge him, if he commits the sin of the flesh, not to envy the fate of
the love-making snail or that of the toad, and to imitate less the style of
Fontenelle once maturity will have shaped his own.36

"Waiting for Darwin "
27
In the natural sciences, the chief adversary of transformists was the
eminent paleontologist Georges Cuvier (1769-1832) who doggedly defended
fixism in biology and promoted catastrophism in geology. Nicknamed the
"dictator of biology", Cuvier was above all the founder of modern
comparative zoology. He earned this title not because he adduced new facts
but because he introduced a new way of observing living organisms.
According to Cuvier, the organs of an animal are functionally interrelated.
Thus, a carnivore must have claws and teeth but also good eyes, a system
able to digest meat, and quick reflexes. Vicq d'Azyr had already postulated a
theory of correlations but Cuvier turned it into a foundation for a
classification system. He applied it to the study of fossils, especially those
found around Paris, in order to reconstruct the forms of past creatures.
By throwing a bridge between his two fields of work (classifying living
creatures and reconstructing animals from fossils), Cuvier was able to revise
the prevailing linear and hierarchical view of life's ladder which compared
creatures of different degrees of perfection. He proposed instead that the
animal kingdom be divided into four groups ("embranchements") for valid
comparisons within each group: Vertebrata, Mollusca, Articulata, and
Radiata.
Cuvier's explanation for the existence of fossils of extinct species was
catastrophism. Sudden, violent catastrophes had destroyed the species whose
fossilised remains we now find, leaving room for new fauna; a series of
"creations" and "catastrophes" explained the appearance and disappearance
of highly diverse forms of life. This thesis neither brought into question the
dogma of the fixity of species, nor called for the existence of intermediate
forms. Alcide D'Orbigny (1802-1857), a disciple of Cuvier, imagined that as
many as 27 catastrophes had taken place! Such lack of moderation in
combating the idea of evolution prepared the ground for a genuine
evolutionary theory. The theory arose despite the intellectual dictatorship
and renown of Cuvier and thanks to the fight put up by his colleague
Lamarck at the Natural History Museum. Cuvier, however, cannot be
dismissed without mentioning the famous controversy that opposed him in
the early 1830s to Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1792-1844).
When, in 1795, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire invited Cuvier to Paris and
obtained him a position at the Natural History Museum, he little suspected
that this man would become a fearsome rival. Although Geoffroy did do
some observational work, chiefly during the scientific expedition organised
by Bonaparte in Egypt, he was above all attracted by the world of ideas. He
proposed three principles for deciphering the living world: unity of organic
composition ("unity of plan") (nature has created all living things according
to a unique plan with many variations), connections (organs with a common
embryologic origin may display different forms and functions depending

28
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
upon the organism), organ balance ("No normal or pathological organ ever
thrives exceptionally without another organ of the same or related system
suffering accordingly", 1822).
One reason for the controversy that opposed the two men was the
"crocodile affair". Cuvier had begun studying the fossils of crocodiles found
near Caen and Honfleur in France. (They were, in fact, gavials, fine-jawed
crocodiles that are nowadays found in India). Geoffroy, in a report criticising
Cuvier's analysis of the fossils, upheld the thesis of the evolution of species,
claiming that there had not been a series of creations in life but a continuity.
The full title of his report is noteworthy: Research into the organisation of
Gavials. On the subject of their natural affinities which result in the need for
another generic distribution, Gavialis, Teleosaurus and Steneosaurus; and
on the question whether gavials (Gavialis), now found in the eastern parts of
Asia, are descended, by an uninterrupted lineage, from antidiluvian Gavials,
either the fossil Gavials called Caen crocodiles (Teleosaurus) or the fossil
Gavials of Le Havre and Honfleur (Steneosaurus) (1825).

"Waiting for Darwin"
29
Up to this time, Geoffroy had not believed in Lamarck's statements on
transformism. To him, the controversy surrounding the crocodile business
was a eye-opener even though he subscribed, for the most part, to a view of
evolution that was largely inherited from embryology, one that was limited
to the unfolding of a pre-established plan.
The debate focused on whether there was a single plan for the entire
animal kingdom. Could the plan, which seemed acceptable for Mammals
and even Vertebrates, be extended to Insects and Molluscs? In 1830, during
a sitting of the Academy of Sciences, Cuvier challenged Geoffroy's
hypothesis and tried to make out that his examples were mere analogies, like
those already observed by Aristotle. But Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire put up a
fight and presented a paper entitled: On the theory of analogies, to establish
its novelty as a doctrine and its practical use as a tool. The "quarrel of
analogies" had begun.
What does the word analogy mean in biology?
Analogy denotes a functional similarity in structures of different
origin. We thus speak of the analogy between the wing of an insect
and of a bird. Analogy is opposed to homology. Structures are
homologous if their build is based on the same morphogenetic model,
whether they fulfil the same function or not. Thus the front limbs of
the shrew-mouse, mole, horse, bat and man are identical in structure,
bone for bone, but their function varies from searching to running,
from flying to typing on a computer keyboard!
Despite the clear-cut difference in the definitions of the two terms,
the distinction has never really been upheld because species changes
over time concern both form and function. Richard Owen, the English
paleontologist who coined the term homology in 1843 used it to
denote the same organ in different animals with all possible variations
in form and function. "The existence of homologies, concludes Charles
Devillers, 
is 
an 
unavoidable 
consequence 
of evolutionary
transformation." 37 The use of the terms is nevertheless ambiguous as
it is never easy to account for the structure and function of living
things. The controversy between Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and Cuvier is
an illustration. If Geoffroy had analysed the notions of analogy and
homology in greater depth (he used the latter notion in 1825 but Owen
consecrated the use of the term), he may not have made the mistake of
relating the cuticle of insects to the vertebra of vertebrates.

30
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Much was written in the wake of the quarrel because, as pointed out by
Hervé Le Guyader, it was no easy task to apportion right and wrong:
Was Cuvier right in challenging Geoffrey about the existence of a unique
organisation plan? Yes, without any doubt. Insects such as "dermo-
vertebrates" and the diaphragm of the squid are frightening suggestions.
Was Geoffroy right in postulating a unique plan? Yes, without any doubt
but not in the way he did! Thus Geoffroy was right in being wrong and
Cuvier was wrong in being right!38
When Cuvier claimed that there were four basic organisation plans, he
was not defending fixism but simply rejecting a universal analogy that he did
not think was founded on fact. And when Geoffroy thought that all beings
were part of a unique plan, he was not embracing transformism but simply
using the old concept of life's ladder, versions of which had been used, even
abused, by 18th century naturalists.
There is much to learn from such a controversy as Goethe was among the
first to point out. His analysis of the arguments of both protagonists showed
that most of the terms they used had double meanings. However, as H. Le
Guyader rightly concludes, "was it not this ambiguity that permitted the
development of Cuvier's and Geoffroy's ideas?"

''Waiting for Darwin"
31
3.
LAMARCK, FOUNDING FATHER OF THE
THEORY OF TRANSFORMISM
Of the three authors whom we like to think are at the origin of modern
biology, Lamarck is, without doubt, the one whom history has treated
least well. The works of Claude Bernard and Charles Darwin may have
been somewhat debased, often in the name of scientism, but Lamarck has
been almost slandered and used as a foil by scientists and philosophers
holding all kinds of opinions.39
There are many reasons why such disrepute should have fallen upon the
shoulders of Jean-Baptiste de Monet, Chevalier de Lamarck (1744-1829),
adds the historian of science André Pichot. An obvious one is the timing of
his major work, Zoological Philosophy, which was published in 1809 when
he was already 65 years old. Lamarck had been tutor to Buffon's son and
was, first and foremost, a man of the 18th century, of the Enlightenment,
who professed a materialistic philosophy and revolutionary political ideas.
However, this line of thinking had been disavowed by the Empire and the
Restoration. The beginning of the 19th century set a kind of spiritualism
against 18th century materialism, so much so that Lamarck was subsequently
taxed with transcendentalism, an opinion which positivist scientific thinking,
however, rejects later on. One must also mention that Cuvier dominated the
biology of the time, holding the chair of Vertebrates at the Museum, whereas
Lamarck obtained that of Insects and Worms in 1793. Lastly, Lamarck's
papers in physics, chemistry, pneumatic theory, the matter of fire and sound,
or hydrogeology were worthless and behind the times. He was against
modern chemistry, against Lavoisier, defended phlogiston theory and
published Meteorological Directories that made predictions which did little
to enhance his reputation.
Phlogiston theory
The term "phlogistique" appeared in the French language in 1747
and was used in chemistry in the second half of the 18th century. It
denotes the fluid presumed to be present in all bodies and which,
when leaving a body, results in its combustion. Fire was in fact
considered to be one of the materials, or principles, that compose
bodies. Phlogiston theory dominated for 50 years. It was finally
refuted by Lavoisier.
The transformist ideas that Lamarck developed in his fifties and
expressed in his Opening Addresses of Year VIII (1800), Year X (1802),
Year XI (1803) and in 1806 - and chiefly in Zoological Philosophy - were

32
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of  Evolution
not really novel. We have already mentioned several of his precursors
(Buffon, Bonnet, Robinet). However, Lamarck's work was not a mere
compendium of ideas but a coherent, systematic entity that makes him the
true founding father of transformism.
The order of nature
The origin of Lamarck's transformist
ideas probably lies in his
classification work, mainly on Invertebrates. Classification was not an easy
task because it depended on defining the notion of species and establishing
which forms in systematics belonged to the same or different groups.
Lamarck began his career as a botanist. He knew that the artificial
boundaries of plant systematics were often violated, plant forms being highly
variable and sensitive to culture conditions. This led him to defend a
nominalist view of systematics units:
We can rest assured that, among its productions, nature has not created
classes, orders, families, genera, or constant species, but only individuals
that succeed each other and that look like those that produced them.40
Lamarck revived the idea of continuity among living beings that had
been contested because of the gaps. These gaps were now being filled by the
discoveries of naturalists. The picture was getting clearer and clearer even
though taxonomists were not yet out of a job:
Fortunately for the practice of the art we need to introduce into our
classifications, there are so many races of animals and plants that are
still unknown to us - and so many that will probably remain unknown to
us because of the obstacles that are the places they inhabit and other
circumstances - that the gaps which arise, whether in a series of animals
or plants, will for a long time still and perhaps for ever provide us with
the means of setting up most of the lines of division.41
Lamarck's nominalistic approach thus does not lead to rejection of all
natural order but replaces the old order founded on resemblance by a new
order founded on the genealogy of species. We could summarise the history
of systematics by this transition from a criterion of resemblance to one of
affiliation.42
Genealogy, mutability and increasing complexity of species
according to Lamarck
The belief is now fully justified that nature has established an
order among her productions within each kingdom of living bodies. It
is the order in which each of these bodies was originally formed [...].

"Waiting for Darwin"
33
This order, as we shall get to know it, will replace the systematic or
artificial classifications that we have been forced to create in order to
arrange conveniently the different natural bodies that we have
observed.43
Of Species and of the meaning we should attach to this word. It is
untrue that species are as old as nature, and that they have all existed
as long as each other. But it is true that species were formed one after
another, that they exhibit only relative constancy, and that they are
only temporarily unchanging.44
In her workings, nature began, and still begins every day, by
fashioning the simplest of organised bodies and [...] it is only these
bodies that she fashions directly, that is to say the rudiments of
organisation covered by the term spontaneous generation [...].
Because each body part's ability to grow is an early manifestation of
life, it gave rise to different modes of multiplication and regeneration
of individuals; improvements in the way the parts are organised, and
in the shape and variety of the parts, have thus been preserved.45
As species succeed each other with time, Lamarck asked whether it was
right to classify forms from the most to the least accomplished, that is from
mammals to infusoria. It was the practice to give preference to that which
appealed, pleased or interested, to go from the best to the least known. But
Lamarck thought this direction was contrary "to the very order of nature".
Nature starts off with the most imperfect animals and those with the simplest
organisation and ends up with the most accomplished because, having made
them one after another, "she must have started with the simplest, and only in
the end produced those with the most composite organisation". Lamarck
thus acknowledges complexity as a criterion but applies it within a historical
framework. The degree of complexity of an organisation is an index of time
elapsed. The title and summary of the sixth chapter of the first part of
Zoological Philosophy summarise this idea of a dual - synchronic and
diachronic - sequence:
Degradation and simplification of the organisation from one end of the
animal chain to the other, starting from the most composite and moving
toward the simplest. It is a positive fact that when following, as is
customary, the animal chain from the most perfect to the most imperfect,
one observes increased degradation and simplification in organisation.
Consequently, when moving along the animal ladder in the opposite
direction, in nature's order, one will find increasing composition in the
organisation of animals, a composition that will have a delicate and
regular progression as long as the circumstances of habitat, lifestyle,
etc... have not induced various kinds of abnormalities.46

34
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
According to Lamarck's conception of natural order, primitive and
evolved species must co-exist. All species undergo a gradual transformation
process, but they have reached different stages of this process. The simplest
beings are being renewed continuously. We should therefore find in nature
today all organisational stages with the corresponding species. How then
does one explain the existence of fossils of lost species? Shouldn't we be
surprised "if amongst the many fossils we find in all the dry areas of the
Earth, and that offer us the debris of so many animals that once existed,
there 
are 
so few for which 
we 
recognise 
living analogues?"47
"Paradoxically, notes Pichot, fossils, which we usually consider to be
paleontological evidence for evolution, are impediments in Lamarck's
transformist
thesis".48 If these species have disappeared from nature,
Lamarck finally concludes, it is not because they were eradicated by the first
human beings but because they have been modified into other close forms
under the influence of environmental changes which induce "changes in
needs, habits and lifestyle". These changes, which supplement the process of
increasing complexity that always leads to the appearance of the same types,
yield a wide variety of forms:
These irregular variations in the improvement and degradation of non-
essential organs occur because these organs, more than any others, are
subject to the influence of external circumstances; these circumstances
also induce similar variations in the form and state of the most external
parts, and give rise to a diversity of species that is so great and so
singularly ordered that instead of being able to arrange them in a
unique, simple and linear series, according to a regular, graduated scale,
these same species often form, around the masses to which they belong,
lateral branches whose extremities are truly isolated points.
Lamarck's transformist explanation for "lost species" clearly contradicts
Cuvier's catastrophe theory which he saw as an ad hoc argument to fit the
situation. His hypothesis is based, on the contrary, on a slow and gradual
action of nature which he considers to be more probable.
But why are we to assume a universal catastrophe without any proof
when just a better understanding of the way nature proceeds can account
for the observations which we make on all of its aspects?
If we consider, on the one hand, that whatever nature does, it does not do
abruptly, and that it acts everywhere slowly and in stages, and, on the
other hand, that the specific or local causes of disorders, upheavals,
shifts, etc - though subject to the laws and progress of nature - can
account for everything that we observe on the surface of the earth, then

"Waiting for Darwin"
35
we shall realise that it is quite unnecessary to assume that a universal
catastrophe came to upset and destroy a large part of nature's own
works.49
Lamarck's linear view of life was not accepted by several biologists of
the beginning of the 19th century. We have already mentioned Georges
Cuvier, but we should also mention Karl Ernst von Baer (1792-1876) and
Louis Agassiz (1807-1873). Like most naturalists of the time, they classified
animals into distinct basic types50 which could in no way have arisen by
gradual evolution of a unique prototype. Exploiting his observations in
embryology (those on the chicken are known best), von Baer rejected the
Meckel-Serres law, or law of embryologic parallelism, which stated that,
during their development, higher-order animals reproduce the structures of
lower-order animals. According to von Baer, the individual develops within
limits that are set for each type; the type of organisation determines the mode
of development. This meant that embryology could be of decisive help to
comparative anatomy, and that both evolutionism and progressism were
rejected. (As a result, these two notions were all the more readily confused
later on).
At this time, the tree of life, a sequel to the chain of being, offered a new
paradigm for biology. It took Cuvier and von Baer's criticisms into account
without however rejecting evolutionism. If all animals are not derived from a
single chain of life, there was no need to imagine a unity of plan.
The principles of transformism
An extract from the Natural History of Animals without Vertebrae will
illustrate Lamarck's understanding of nature's slow and gradual workings
over time:
Nature's plan of action with respect to the production of animals is clear
from the prime and predominant cause that confers animal life the ability
to gradually compose and improve its organisation, not only its overall
organisation, but each specific organ system, as and when they are
established. This plan - this gradually composed organisation - has been
carried out, by this prime cause, in existing animals.
But an external, accidental, and therefore variable cause, has here and
there cut across the execution of this plan without destroying it, as Ishall
prove. This cause has, in effect, given rise to genuine gaps in the series,
to finite branches that shoot off from various points and alter its
simplicity, or even to abnormalities that we observe in the specific organ
systems of these organisations.51

36
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Lamarck did not provide a clear explanation for the hereditary process
underlying the trend toward increasing complexity.52 He only mentioned the
trend to offset it against the circumstances that will upset its linearity, induce
species to diversify, and disturb natural order. Natural order is only
established incompletely, and only by means of the opposition it encounters.
Lamarck based his model on two laws, the modification of the organ by
modification of needs and habits and the inheritance of acquired characters:
First law. In any animal that has not reached the end of its development,
a more frequent and sustained use of any organ gradually strengthens,
develops and enlarges that organ, and confers it a power proportional to
the period of use, whereas the constant disuse of any organ imperceptibly
weakens it, leads to its deterioration, gradually decreases its functional
capacity, and ends up in its disappearance.
Second law. Everything that nature has helped individuals acquire or
lose through the influence of the conditions to which their race has long
been exposed and, hence, through the influence of the predominant use
or permanent disuse of an organ, is conserved by the new individuals
that are engendered provided that the acquired changes are common to
both sexes, or at least to the genitors of these new individuals.53
The examples Lamarck gave to illustrate his first law are famous. The
giraffe has an extremely long neck because it munches the leaves of trees,
ducks' palms come from the increased space between digits, snakes' feet
have regressed because snakes have the habit of crawling.54 Why did
Lamarck insist so much on needs rather than on organs? Probably because
he wished to dissociate himself from any statement on the divine creation of
beings (with or without the intervention of catastrophes) even if, in both his
mind and that of Erasmus Darwin, grandfather to Charles Darwin,
transformism and deism were not really mutually exclusive. When God
created the Universe, He incorporated evolution as a specific means of
accomplishing His project for the living world and did not resort to miracles.
Even if Lamarck used arguments that were quasi-scientific whereas Erasmus
Darwin held a more schematic, even poetic, reasoning, both scientists really
wanted to propose a genuine "philosophy of nature" rather than just
biological hypotheses.55
Erasmus Darwin
Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802) was an eminent supporter of the
industrial revolution in 18th century England. He founded the Lunar
Society which fostered the exchange of scientific, technical and
cultural information. He was a fierce opponent of slavery, defended

"Waiting for Darwin"
37
the French revolution and democracy, and kept company with
Benjamin Franklin and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. His most important
work is the two-volume Zoonomia: Or The Laws of Organic Life
(1794-1796), a treatise in medicine that addresses innate and acquired
behaviour as well as evolutionism. The great variety of forms in
nature (his book is as rich in observations as are the works of his
famous grandson) would be due to a triad of needs (sex, food, safety)
that transform living beings over generations. Like Buffon and
Needham, Erasmus Darwin believed in the spontaneous generation of
lower organisms which subsequently undergo improvements. He was,
nevertheless, struck by the great difference between the state of
inorganic and organic matter. Reproved by the Anglican canon
William Paley, author of Natural Theology or Evidences of the
Existence and Attributes of the Deity Collected from the Appearances
of Nature (1802), Zoonomia was condemned by the Sacred
Congregation of the Index of the Catholic church.
The hypothesis that acquired characters are inherited is customarily
linked with Lamarckism but this calls for several comments. First, Lamarck
himself did not use the expression simply because, as Pichot notes:
there was no clear opposition between what was innate and what was
acquired. It was known that an individual received certain characters at
birth and acquired others but the distinction went no further. Once these
inherited and acquired characters were "mixed" in an individual, they
were no longer separate, and the transmission to the offspring concerned
as much the one as the other.56
More broadly, are not all characters more or less acquired? The phrase -
transmitting the results of training to future generations - is more in keeping
with Lamarck's thinking. But the idea was not exclusively his. At the time, it
was so widely accepted that he saw no point in discussing it in Zoological
Philosophy. Aristotle had already mentioned it,57 Darwin will propose an
explanatory model, and it will not be abandoned (for ever?) until the end of
the 19th century and the work of August Weismann. Thus we do not owe the
law of acquired characters to Lamarck even if he did give it more emphasis
than his contemporaries did and, in so doing, made it a major limitation of
his transformist theory.
From Quadrumana to Bimana?
Linnaeus had introduced man into his classification, thus linking him to
animals and in particular to apes. The church as well as scientists such as

38
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Buffon had opposed this move, calling chiefly upon the fundamental
separation between body and soul which confers human beings with a
special status. Lamarck went further than Linnaeus because, according to his
transformist hypothesis, man descends from the ape. He chose his statements
with care, used the conditional ("if", "let us now suppose"), but whom was
he fooling?
From ape to man (Lamarck)
If man were distinguished from animals by his organisation only, it
would be easy to show that the organisational characters we use to
form a separate family with its varieties are all the products of past
changes in his actions and of the habits he has acquired and that have
become specific to the individuals of his species.
Indeed, if a race of quadrumana, especially the most perfect one,
were to lose, by force of circumstance or for some other reason, the
habit of climbing trees and grasping branches with its hands in order
to cling to them; and if the individuals of this race were forced over a
series of generations to use their feet just for walking and stopped
using their hands as feet; there is no doubt, according to the
observations 
described in 
the previous 
chapter, 
that these
quadrumana would at length have become bimana and that their big
toes would have ceased parting from their other toes as their feet
would be used for walking only.
Moreover, if the individuals of which I speak, driven by a need to
dominate and to see both far and wide, were to endeavour to stand
upright and adopted this stance for generations, there is no doubt
either that their feet would imperceptibly acquire a shape suitable for
standing erect, that their legs would acquire calves, and that these
animals would only be able to walk with difficulty on both hands and
feet.
Finally, if these individuals were to stop using their jaws as
weapons with which to bite, tear or grasp, or as nippers to cut and
feed on grass, and if they were to use them just to chew, there is no
doubt either that their  facial angle would open, that their snout would
become shorter and shorter and finally disappear, leaving their
incisors vertical.
Let us now suppose that a race of quadrumana, say the most
accomplished, acquired through unchanging habits among all its
individuals the conformation that I have just described, and the
faculty of standing and walking upright, and that it ended up gaining
supremacy over other animal races, we can then easily conceive:

"Waiting for Darwin"
39
1. That this race, having subdued other races thanks to its highly
advanced faculties, would take possession of all the sites on the
earth's surface that were suited to it;
That it would drive out any other eminent races able to dispute
the goods of the earth, and force them to take refuge in sites it did not
occupy;
That it would hinder the multiplication of neighbouring races
and relegate them to woods and other deserted sites, thereby arresting
the development of their faculties toward perfection; whereas being
able itself to spread everywhere, to multiply without hindrance, and to
live in numerous hordes, it would create successively new needs which
stimulated its own activity and gradually improved its skills and
faculties;
Finally, that this predominant race, having acquired absolute
supremacy over all others, would manage to establish a difference,
and set a considerable distance, between itself and the most
accomplished animals.
The most consummate race of quadramana could thus have
become dominant; have changed its habits as a result of the absolute
ascendancy it exercised over others, and of its new wants; have
undergone gradual changes in its organisation and acquired many
new faculties; have kept the most accomplished of the other races in
check in the state they had reached; and have wrought very striking
differences between these races and itself. 58
2.
3.
4.
In The Origin of Species Charles Darwin did not dare go as far as
Lamarck but he will make up for it in The Descent of Man. Lamarck
deserves this long citation as a homage because, once we turn to the
Darwinian paradigm, he will have to fall into oblivion. French culture,
however, has perpetuated his memory. To illustrate how Lamarck has left his
mark, we only need to refer to Emile Zola's work. Zola's naturalism and his
curiosity about heredity is plain to see as soon as we read the preface to the
first volume of Les Rougon-Macquart (1871):
I want to explain how a family, a small group of people, behave in
society, how they prosper and give rise to ten, twenty individuals who, at
first sight, seem so different but, on analysis, are found to be closely
linked to each other. Like gravity, heredity has its laws.
I shall try to find the thread that leads mathematically from one man to
the next, and then follow it. When I will have gathered all the threads
together and will hold a social group in my hands, I shall show how the
group goes about its business and the role it plays during an important

40
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
period in history. I shall make it struggle in all its complexity, I shall
analyse the will of each member and the overall thrust of the whole [...]
In my mind, this work, which will be made up of several episodes, is the
natural and social history of a family during the Second Empire. The
scientific title of the first episode (The Fortune of the Rougons) is The
Origins.59
In Le Doctor Pascal (1892), which summarises and concludes his work,
Zola published the family tree of the Rougon-Macquart. The tree is a field of
observation for the doctor, a student of heredity
who had but one belief; he believed in life. Life was the only divine
manifestation. Life was God, the great driving force, the soul of the
universe. And life had no other instrument but heredity; heredity made
the world, so that if we could understand and capture heredity in order to
do with it according to our will, then we would have made the world as
we wished it to be.60
The hereditarism, that leads Pascal-Zola toadmit that there are people in
the community who are a danger to their descendants, is counterbalanced by
his conviction that life itself holds a regenerative seed and that the
environment can modify the nature of individuals. Clotilde Rougon, Pascal's
niece, his assistant and lover, expresses this conviction when, in the last
pages of Les Rougon-Macquart, she contemplates the family tree:
Clotilde had taken an involuntary glance at the family tree which lay
spread out before her. The threat was there, so many crimes, so much
mud, amidst so many tears and so much good and suffering! Such an
extraordinary mixture of the best and the worst, a short-version of
mankind with all its failures and struggles! Would it not have been better
if a thunderbolt had wiped out this desecrated and miserable ants-nest?
After so many terrible Rougons and so many abominable Macquarts, yet
another was being born. Bravely defying eternity, life had no fear of
creating one more. It continued its work and propagated according to its
laws, indifferent to all hypotheses, forever toiling along its infinite path.61
Her thoughts then wandered to the deep gratitude she felt towards Pascal
for having made her what she was. When, long ago when she was still a
small child, he had taken her away from her horrible surroundings, he
had surely acted out of the goodness of his heart. No doubt, he had also
been eager to test how she would grow in an environment of truth and
tenderness. It was something he always had in mind, an old theory he
would have wanted to try out on a large scale: how the environment can

"Waiting for Darwin"
41
provide culture, even cure, how it can improve and save the human
being, both in the physical and moral sense.62
These lines are tinged with an experimental Lamarckism found in many
other passages by Zola, including in Germinal. Germinal can be taken as a
parable in which an outsider helps regenerate a group. It is a kind of plea for
more human compassion, altruism, care for the ill and infirm, and the social
struggle against biological inequality.
This insight is not lacking in Charles Darwin's writings, in particular in
The Descent of Man, published in 1871, but for Zola and his French
contemporaries Darwin was first and foremost the man of the biological
struggle, the emblem of the protagonists of Money.
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Book of Proverbs, Chapter 30, Verses 18-19.
Duret C., 1605, L'Histoire Admirable des Plantes et Herbes Esmerveillables et
Miraculeuses en Nature..., Buon, Paris.
The use of this adjective may seem an anachronism. We shall nevertheless use it to denote
either the emergence, generation, growth or transformation of living things as understood
by the "Ancients". As soon as chronology permits, its use will be confined to the ideas at
the origin of the movement spurred by Darwin's work.
This view of the origin of mankind explained Anaxagoras' refusal to eat fish which he
took to be his ancestor.
We also encounter this idea in James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis (see, for example,
Lovelock J. E., 1988, The Ages of Gaia. A Biography of our Living Earth, Oxford
University Press) which considers the Earth and biosphere as a superorganism (called
Gaia). Even if the analogy may be of heuristic value, neo-Darwinians are hostile to the
idea. To a neo-Darwinian, an organism is the product of natural selection which acts
repeatedly on heritable variations. The Earth, however, does not multiply and give rise to
several exemplars on which selection might act. Because selection occurs at the organ
level, the organism contains organs whose prime function is to make it function! On the
contrary, Gaia can only be a collection of items, each selected for its own benefit and for
that of the species to which it belongs.
Plato, 360 BCE, Timea, 39e-40a and 69b-c. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. Internet
Classics.
Aristotle, 30 BCE, On the Soul, II, 3, 415a-b. Translated by J.A. Smith. Internet Classics.
Arnould, J., 1996, Les Créationnistes, Bref n° 52, Cerf/Fides, Paris.
He also composed a poem, in grand baroque style, Bacchus in Tuscany (translated into
English by Leigh Hunt in 1825): "Dearest, if one's vital tide/ Ran not with the grape's
beside/ What would life be (short of Cupid)? Much too short, and far too stupid."
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., 1963, The Science of Life. A Picture History of Biology. Thames
& Hudson, London, p. 111.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R, ibid., p. 113.
Linnaeus, C., 1737, Critica Botanica (English translation by Sir Arthur Hort, published by
Ray Society in 1938, Bernard Quaritch Ltd, London).
Linnaeus, C., 1787 (originally published in 1744), Dissertatio botanica de Peloria. In:
Amoenitates Academicae, 3rd edn, Vol. 1, J.J. Plam, Erlangae, p. 68.
Linnaeus, C., 1789 (originally published in 1762), Fundamentum Fructificationis. In:
Amoenitates Academicae, 
edn, Vol. 6, J.J. Plam, Erlangae, p. 296.

42
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
Marchant, J., 1719, Observations sur la Nature des Plantes, Mémoire de 1'Académie
Royale des Sciences, quoted by Guyénot, E., 1957, Les Sciences de la Vie aux XVIIè et
XVIIIè siècles. L'Idée d'Evolution. Series: Bibliothèque de Synthèse Historique.
L'Evolution de 1'Humanité, Albin Michel, Paris, p. 375.
Duchesne, A.N., 1766, Histoire Naturelle des Fraisiers.
Quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 377.
See insert below: "The doctrine of preformation".
The word fossil began to be used to denote something, or someone, old-fashioned only
from the beginning of the 19th century onwards.
Quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 340.
Quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 341.
de Maillet, B., 1984, Telliamed ou Entretiens d'un Philosophe Indien avec un
Missionnaire Français sur la Diminution de la Mer. Series: Corpus des Oeuvres de
Philosophie en Langue Française, Fayard, Paris, pp. 248 and 304.
Voltaire, 1829, L'Homme aux Quarante Ecus, VI, in: Oeuvres, Vol. 34, Lefèvre, Paris, p.
43. Elsewhere, he wrote: "Despite the great passion we have nowadays for family trees,
there are few people who believe they descend from a turbot or cod."
Marquis d'Argenson, 1749, quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 356.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., The Science of Life, p. 78.
de Séchelles, H., Voyage à Montbard, quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 357.
Quoted by Roger, J., 1989, Buffon. Un Philosophe au Jardin du Roi, Fayard, Paris, p.
537.
Roger, J., ibid., pp. 540-541.
Rostand, J., 1966, Un Grand Biologiste. Charles Bonnet, Expérimentateur et Théoricien,
Palais de la Découverte, Paris.
Quoted by Fischer, J. L., 1991, La Naissance de la Vie. Une Anthologie, Series: Agora.
Les Classiques, Press Pocket, Paris, p. 15.
Quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 385.
de Maupertuis, P., 1756, Essai de Cosmologie, quoted by Guyénot, E., ibid., p. 391. The
reference to "elementary parts [that] had not kept the order they had in the father and
mother animals" might presage the notion of homology introduced later by Cuvier and
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire.
Diderot, 1971 (originally published in 1753), De l'Interprétation de la Nature, Editions
sociales n° XI and XII, Paris, pp. 45-46.
Diderot, 1962 (originally published in 1830), Le Rêve de d'Alembert, Editions sociales,
Paris, pp. 42-43. See De l'Interprétation de la Nature, n° L.
Herder, J.G., Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit, cited from Altner, G.,
1983, Le tournant évolutionniste, Concilium 186, 46.
Voltaire, 1830, Histoire du Docteur Akakia, in: Oeuvres, Vol. 39, Lefèvre, Paris, pp. 483-
484. On the subject of attraction, Voltaire went on to say: "We let God create men in the
way He sees fit without ever interfering; and each person is free not to believe that, in the
uterus, the right toe attracts the left toe and the hand places itself at the end of the arm by
attraction" (ibid., p. 497). His reference to snails is probably a reference to the
comparison Maupertuis made in Venus Physique between the mating behaviour of snails
and the sado-masochistic practices that "people who were cold from age, or whose senses
were blunted, sometimes used [...] to arouse desire".
Devillers, C., 1996, Homologie/Analogic, in: Dictionnaire du Darwinisme et de
l'Evolution, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Le Guyader, H., 1996, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire/Cuvier, in: Dictionnaire du Darwinisme et
de l'Evolution, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, p. 1879.
Pichot, A., 1993, Histoire de la Notion de Vie, Series: Tel, Gallimard, Paris, p. 579.
Lamarck, J.-B., 1994 (originally published in 1809), Philosophie Zoologique ou
Exposition des considérations relatives à l'histoire naturelle des animaux; à la diversité

"Waiting for Darwin"
43
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
de leur organisation et des facultés qu'ils en obtiennent; aux causes physiques qui
maintiennent en eux la vie et donnent lieu aux mouvements qu'ils exécutent; enfin, à celles
qui produisent, les unes le sentiment, et les autres l'intelligence de ceux qui en sont doués,
Flammarion, Paris, I, 1, pp. 82-83.
Lamarck, ibid., I, 1, p. 86.
Cladism is most advanced in this respect because it takes a monophyletic set of species
(or individuals) only as a unit of systematics.
Lamarck, ibid., I, 1, p. 80.
Subheading of the third chapter of the first part of the Philosophie Zoologique.
Lamarck, ibid., I, 3, pp. 107-108.
Lamarck, ibid., Chapter I, p. 8 (table of contents): De l'Ordre naturel des Animaux et de
la disposition qu'il faut donner a leur distribution générale pour la rendre conforme à
l'ordre même de la nature. (Of the natural order of animals and of the way in which they
should be classified in order that this classification be in line with the order of nature).
Lamarck, ibid., Chapter I, 3, p. 116: Des espèces dites perdues.
Pichot, A., ibid., p. 654.
Lamarck, ibid., I, 3, p. 117.
Into four types: peripheral or radial (Infusoria, Medusa), longitudinal (segmented
animals), massive or mollusc-like (Molluscs, Rotifers ...), vertebrate.
Lamarck, 1815-1822, Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Vertèbres.
Lamarck refers to the motion of fluids and to a kind of autocatalytic increase in this
motion both in the individual and in successive generations.
Lamarck, ibid., I, 7, pp. 216-217.
The following passages which,
doubtless, did little to enhance the prestige of
transformism will illustrate what Lamarck really meant by "change through use": "More
than any other vertebrates, [birds] live up in the air in which they continually rise and
which they traverse in all directions; the habit they have of filling their lungs with air to
increase volume and become lighter has meant that this organ adheres to the sides of the
breast, and that the air within, which is rarefied by the surrounding heat, can pierce the
lung and its envelopes and penetrate nearly all body parts, from the big bones which are
hollow to the quills of big feathers." "Indeed, in birds, the air that penetrates the roots of
hairs changes the base into a quill and forces these hairs to divide into feathers."
(Philosophie Zoologique, pp. 148-149). "When they are angry as is frequently the case in
males, their strained inner feeling sends fluids preferentially toward this part of the head;
horny matter is secreted in some, bony matter mixed with horny matter in others; these
give rise to solid protuberances: This is how the horns and antlers, which arm the heads
of most of these animals, came to be." (Philosophie Zoologique, p. 256)
For Pietro Omodeo (see article on Erasmus Darwin, in: Dictionnaire du Darwinisme et de
l'Evolution, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 1996), "the fact that both authors
[Lamarck and Erasmus Darwin] had unusually well-matched ideas is doubtless due to a
similar cultural background and to coinciding personality traits. Both had a wide range
of interests ranging from meteorology to physics and chemistry, and were wont to ask
themselves many questions on all kinds of subjects."
Pichot, A., ibid., p. 680.
"From deformed parents come deformed children, lame from lame and blind from blind,
and, speaking generally, children often inherit anything that is peculiar in their parents
and are born with similar marks, such as pimples or scars. [...] Such cases, however, are
few; for the children of cripples are mostly sound, and there is no hard and fast rule
regarding them." (Aristotle, 350 BCE, The History of Animals, VII, 585, translated by
D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson.)
Lamarck, ibid., I, 8, pp. 298-300.

44
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
59.
60.
61.
62.
Zola, E., 1969 (originally published in 1871) Préface des Rougon-Macquart. Histoire
Naturelle et Sociale d'une Famille sous le Second Empire, Series: L'Intégrale, Vol. I,
Seuil, Paris, p. 57.
Zola, E., 1970 (originally published in 1893) Le Docteur Pascal, Series: L'Intégrale, Vol.
VI, Seuil, Paris, p. 518.
Zola, E., ibid., pp. 654-655.
Zola, E., ibid., p. 650.

Chapter 2
THE DARWINIAN PARADIGM
1.
THE DARWINIAN REVOLUTION
Is there a Darwinian myth? When Karl Popper criticised Darwin's theory
on the grounds that it could not be put to the test of non-falsifiability, he
backed the idea that, like Marxism or psychoanalysis, Darwinism is a
modern myth devoid of scientific rationality. Michael Denton, an Australian
molecular biologist, adds:
Ultimately the Darwinian theory of evolution is no more nor less than the
great cosmogenic myths of the twentieth century. Like the Genesis based
cosmology which it replaced, and like the creation myths of ancient man,
it satisfies the same deep psychological need for an all embracing
explanation for the origin of the world which has motivated all the
cosmogenic myth makers of the past, from the shamans of primitive
peoples to the ideologues of the medieval church.l
Denton uses the word myth in a reductive, even disparaging, way. To
him, the theory of evolution, which claims to have changed our view of the
world, is mere conjecture and conceals unavowed motives; it is just a fable.
Although Neo-Darwinians have answered the criticisms raised in his book
Evolution: a Theory in Crisis, Denton still maintains that:
the "mystery of mysteries" - the origin of new beings on earth - is still
largely as enigmatic as when Darwin set sail on the Beagle.2
45

46
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
He continues to challenge the idea that the Darwinian paradigm has any
scientific substance. In our view, his attitude is rather extreme.
Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn
In Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959), the Viennese philosopher
Karl Popper put forward the epistemological criterion of "refutability"
(or "falsifiability") whereby a theory is said to be scientific if, from its
general terms, we can draw a term that describes at least one empirical
test that may refute it. For quite some time Popper criticised the
classical theory of natural selection (formulated in 1944, in The
Poverty of Historicism). The two propositions to which this theory is
often reduced (the one who has survived is the fittest, the fittest is the
one who has survived) are, he said, circular arguments constituting a
simple irrefutable case of tautology. In 1972, in Objective Knowledge,
taking a less adamant view, he conceded that:
Darwin's theory of natural selection showed that it is in principle
possible to reduce teleology to causation by explaining, in purely
physical terms, the existence of design and purpose in the world.3
He concluded:
Darwin showed that we are all completely free to use teleological
explanation in biology - even those of us who happen to believe that
all explanation ought to be causal.
Why did Popper make such an about-turn? He would explain later
that, in the meantime, he had learnt about the synthetic theory of
evolution with which he agreed. However, Dominique Lecourt notes
that:
this rallying cry was expressed in words that did not present the
theory as a "scientific" theory according to the meaning Popper gave
to the word "science", but as a doctrine with the characteristics of
"metaphysical research programmes", words that parodied (and
criticised) those of his dissident disciple Imre Lakatos.4
The epistemologist Thomas Kuhn denoted "paradigms" those
scientific achievements with the two following features:
Their achievement was sufficiently unprecedented to attract an
enduring group of adherents away from competing modes of scientific
activity. Simultaneously, it was sufficiently open-ended to leave all
sorts of problems for the redefined group of practitioners to resolve.5
The examples he gave were the Physics of Aristotle, Almagest of
Ptolemeus, Principia and Optiks of Newton, Electricity of Franklin,
Chemistry of Lavoisier and Geology of Lyell.

The Darwinian Paradigm
47
1835: A story about finches
In 1835, an English ship, The Beagle, made a stop-over at the Galapagos
Islands, an archipelago in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of South America.
During the halt, a young naturalist, Charles Darwin (1809-1882) collected
many specimens of birds, mainly mocking-birds and finches and, on his
return to England, in October 1836, gave them to the ornithologist John
Gould to be examined. Gould identified three distinct species of mocking-
birds and thirteen species of finches. Why did Darwin seek his expert
opinion?
The similarities and differences among the birds had intrigued Darwin.
The feathers and colours of the mocking-birds were so similar that, at first,
he thought the birds belonged to the same species. Was he to conclude that
the distinction between species and varieties was somewhat arbitrary? What
would then become of the dogma of the fixity of species?
The finches (later to be known as the famous "Darwin finches") differed
chiefly in the shape of their beak and in their habits. Some lived at ground
level and ate mostly seeds; others lived in trees and fed off insects. There
were also differences in their geographic distribution. Vice-Governor
Lawson told Darwin that they came from different islands and that the
natives had no difficulty in telling them apart. Darwin admitted:
It never occurred to me that the production of islands only a few miles
apart, and places under the same physical conditions, would be
dissimilar.6
Darwin added an extra piece of information to the observations he made
on the Galapagos Islands. "His" finches were very similar to those in South
America. He therefore speculated that a few birds of a single species had
migrated to the archipelago where they had then diversified. His island
observations thus supported his belief in transformism and his intuition that
one species can give rise to another. As we have seen, this idea was not
really novel. Lamarck and Charles' grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, had
already mentioned it at the beginning of the 19th century.7
Just like Lamarck, Darwin noted how well the structure and performance
of the organs of living beings match their way of life; how well they are
adapted to it. In The Origin of Species, he even acknowledged:
It is, however, difficult to decide, and immaterial for us, whether habits
generally change first and structure afterwards; or whether slight
modifications of structure lead to changed habits; both probably often
occurring almost simultaneously.8

48
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
He gave the following example that could well have come from
Lamarck's work:
In North America the black bear was seen by Hearne swimming for hours
with widely open mouth, thus catching, almost like a whale, insects in the
water.8
Unlike Lamarck, however, Darwin explained the gradation between so
many species, varieties, and even individuals by natural selection. This
principle will become the mainstay of the theories belonging to the
Darwinian paradigm, defined by Jean Gayon as follows:
Any view that considers evolution as a gradual change in species which
arises chiefly by a process of natural selection acting upon a variation
within populations is "Darwinian".9
The Darwinian theory of the origin of species
We tend to forget that Darwin did not mention "evolution" in The Origin
of Species. The term was already in use but by contemporary embryologists
who were not that interested in the origin of species. It referred to the
doctrine of preformation (see Chapter 1, how the word evolution was
introduced by Charles Bonnet) and had the opposite meaning to the one
Darwin was to give it.
There is nothing more remote from the idea that new species pre-exist in old
species, from which they would just need to evolve (=unfold) with time, than
Darwin's doctrine.10
Like Lamarck, Darwin spoke initially of transmutation, then of
transformation of species. He innovated, however, by inverting the
traditional relationship between individual and species. For Darwin, species
were not types to which individuals had to conform as closely as possible if
they were not to be considered monstrosities. On the contrary, he thought
that individuals changed as a result of natural selection and ended up by
modifying the species. The very notion of a species thus lost clarity:
Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between
species and sub-species - that is, the forms which in the opinion of some
naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at, the rank of species:
or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or between lesser
varieties and individual differences. These differences blend into each other
by an insensible series; and a series impresses the mind with the idea of an
actual passage.11

The Darwinian Paradigm
49
Darwinian theory is based on the following facts and principles:
There is a considerable and apparently inexhaustible variability within
species due to often very slight individual differences. This variability,
which Darwin noted but could not explain, is either discontinuous or
continuous. (Darwin took continuous variability to be the more important of
the two for evolution). Darwin was convinced that:
the most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of
cases of variability, even in important parts of structure [...]. It should be
remembered that systematists are far from being pleased at finding
variability in important characters …12
Darwin's view of biodiversity clashed with Linnaeus' ideas because the
emphasis was no longer on the specificity of variations between individuals
but within individuals.
If the emergence of living beings follows a geometric progression, then
there are more creatures than natural resources can support. Because of
competition, only a few will survive. Darwin was forced to introduce the
idea of a struggle for life inspired by Malthus' thinking:
Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there
must in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with
another of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or
with the physical conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied
with manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in
this case there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential
restraint from marriage.13
Survivors display favourable
individual differences. Nature, like
breeders, sorts out living beings and selects on the basis of their natural
variability. Darwin wrote:
This preservation of favourable individual differences and variations,
and the destruction of those which are injurious, I have called Natural
Selection, or the Survival of the Fittest. […] it implies only the
preservation of such variations as arise and are beneficial to the being
under its conditions of life.14
Selected organisms pass their advantage on to their descendants, thus
modifying the original "type" slightly. When this process is repeated over
thousands, even millions, of generations, it creates new species.
Thus the small differences distinguishing varieties of the same species,
steadily tend to increase, till they equal the greater differences between
species of the same genus, or even of distinct genera.14

50
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The idea of natural selection was brewing towards the middle of the 19th
century even though it had not yet been given a name. This is clear from a
letter Darwin received in 1858 from a young colleague, Alfred Russel
Wallace (1823-1913). Wallace was a professional collector who had spent
several years in the Brazilian forests. He was a self-taught naturalist and had
published in 1855 an article On the law which has regulated the introduction
of new species. In it, he had tried to solve a problem left unanswered in
Charles Lyell's Principles of Geology (1832). Under what conditions does a
new species emerge? Wallace stated that there were wide variations within a
species and noted the importance of bio-geographic conditions. He wrote as
follows to Darwin from an island not far off from the Spice Islands:
There is no limit of variability to a species, as formerly supposed. Useful
variations will tend to increase; useless or hurtful variations to
diminish…15
However, Wallace could not answer Lyell's question. He observed
affinities among successive species and thought that each species is born in
geographic and geological coincidence with a related, pre-existing species
but did not know how. After reading the letter, Darwin wrote to his friend
Lyell:
Wallace […] has today sent me the enclosed […] Your words have come
true with a vengeance - that I should be forestalled […] I never saw a
more striking coincidence; if Wallace had my MS sketch written in 1842,
he could not have made a better short abstract!16
This episode in Darwin's life has fascinated historians of science and
psychologists alike. Why did Darwin take such a long time to publish his
conclusions? Did he have scientific reservations or did he fear conflict with
an establishment ready for a fight? What should we make of the terms on
which he was with Wallace and of the advice offered by his entourage in this
quarrel about priority of claim and scientific paternity? We shall not delve
into the details but just recall the main historic facts: Two notes (that of
Wallace and of Darwin) were read at the Linnean Society of London on the
1st July 1858; The Origin of Species was written at lightning speed and
finished on the 1st October 1859; the 1250 copies of the first edition were
sold on the very day they were published, the 24th November of the same
year. This series of events was followed by rebuttals, debates and verbal
jousts in which "Darwin's bulldog", Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895),
was a high-profile figure.
Two points need to be emphasised at this stage.
1. There were differences in Wallace's and Darwin's hypotheses on the
modification of natural species. As Jean Gayon points out in the first chapter

The Darwinian Paradigm
51
of his study Darwin and after Darwin, although both hypotheses were put
forward in 1858, they were hardly equivalent. Wallace stressed competition
among varieties (or races). Advantaged varieties expand at the expense of
other varieties which they end up by eliminating. Darwin did not deny this
but explained the modification of species by the accumulation of individual
inherited differences.
Besides, Wallace did not accept a model inspired by domestic breeding.
He criticised both Darwin's method and concept. Darwin, on the other hand,
maintained that data on domestic animals were a relevant foundation for his
hypothesis.
The detour via domestic breeding was not an artifice to put across his
ideas. It was essential from the point of view of method. Without it, the
subtle collusion between variation, heredity and change that is a feature
of Darwin's selection hypothesis would have been mere speculation
devoid of empirical content.17
To defend his hypothesis, Darwin unhesitatingly took advantage of all
observations gathered over more than 20 years in five fields: palaeontology
(fossils, the historical archives of life), bio-geography (the distribution of
species over the surface of the Earth, explained by descent accompanied by
change), systematics (a hierarchical rank-order of species produced by
descent, and not by a divine plan or by man's imagination), morphology (the
existence of homologies in shape in living things) and embryology
(embryogenesis which holds the traces of the sequence in which species
have evolved).
2. How to interpret natural selection has posed, and still poses, problems.
Darwin was already aware of this when he wrote:
It has been said that I speak of natural selection as an active power or
Deity; but who objects to an author speaking of the attraction of gravity
as ruling the movements of the planets? Every one knows what is meant
and is implied by such metaphorical expressions; and they are almost
necessary for brevity. So again it is difficult to avoid personifying the
word Nature; but I mean by Nature, only the aggregate action and
product of many natural laws, and by laws the sequence of events as
ascertained by us. With a little familiarity such superficial objections will
be forgotten.18
The most serious objections to Darwin's theses
When The Origin of Species was published, Lord Kelvin (William
Thomson, 1824-1907) was one of the greatest scientists in Britain. A

52
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
profoundly religious man, he attacked the chronological aspects of Darwin's
theory. If we are to believe Darwin, he said, the geological deposits of the
Tertiary era date back 300 million years but if we estimate the total life-span
of our star from the rate at which the sun's energy is dissipated, it is shorter
than this, just a few million years. (Kelvin mistakenly took the sun to be an
incandescent molten mass, neglecting thermonuclear reactions which were
unknown at the time.) Since the sun's age could not be greater than its
lifespan, Kelvin concluded that our star, and therefore the Earth, was young.
Kelvin also attacked the work of geologists, especially in The Doctrine of
Uniformity in Geology Briefly Refuted (1865). According to uniformitarian
theory which was latent in Buffon's work before being developed by Lyell,
the earth's crust was formed by gradual natural processes and not by
cataclysmic events. Darwin, by considering that descendants are modified
through variations and natural selection, was in fact applying this geologic
concept to life. He was thus directly concerned by Kelvin's criticism of
uniformitarianism. He took it for a strong blow and in 1871 wrote to
Wallace:
I have not as yet been able to digest the fundamental notion of the
shortened age of the sun and earth.18
He suggested that evolution might have occurred over a shorter time-
span and, risking self-contradiction, that higher-order organisms might
evolve faster than lower-order organisms. Taken to task, Wallace suggested
that originally the earth's orbit might have been less eccentric and thus
induced changes in some parameters and biological rhythms. Whatever the
explanation, the "odious spectre" of Kelvin's thesis was to haunt Darwin
until his dying day.
The Scot Fleeming Jenkin (1833-1885) made an even more serious
objection. In 1867, in an article in the North British Review (which was more
like a satire than a genuine scientific article), he asked Darwin two
fundamental questions:
1. Is hereditary variation continuous or discontinuous? Is continuous
variability inherited or are there isolated variations?
2. What is the mode of hereditary transmission? Does the new trait
predominate (this would ensure the success of the selective process) or, as
current opinion had it and as Darwin himself believed, were the children
intermediate between both parents? If so, interbreeding would eliminate the
new trait immediately. For this not to happen, the trait would have to emerge
in many - even most - individuals at once. But what then becomes of the
hypothesis of random variations on which the theory of natural selection is
based? Does this not imply an internal, non-random variation force?

The Darwinian Paradigm
53
Darwin admitted that Jenkin's questions were the most apt he had ever
been asked. Yet again, he will try to answer, and fail. Jenkin's questions will
in fact only be answered with the development of biometrics and population
genetics. Highlighted by J. Gayon, this Darwinian dilemma reveals a major
ambiguity in his work:
Darwinian natural selection is, first of all, a principle whereby variations
that have appeared in an isolated manner in individuals gradually
accumulate[…]. But Darwin also presents natural selection as acting on
a variation that is minus a bit or plus a bit, in other words, on a
continuous variation. In this instance, the variation is widespread, and
selection must then be seen as a model for shifting the average
character.19
To escape from this dilemma, Darwin put forward a hypothesis called
pangenesis. Reproductive elements do not engender new individuals, but all
cells - the units of the whole body - do. They emit gemmules that aggregate
in the reproductive elements so that, when the time is ripe, they can form
cells similar to the original ceils. Thus,
if the varying individual did not actually transmit to its offspring its
newly-acquired character, it would undoubtedly transmit to them, as long
as the existing conditions remained the same, a still stronger tendency to
vary in the same manner.20 Had Darwin forsaken his hypothesis of
natural selection acting on random variations? He ended up by admitting:
There must be some efficient cause for each slight individual difference,
as well as for more strongly marked variations which occasionally arise;
and if the unknown cause were to act persistently, it is almost certain that
all the individuals of the species would be similarly modified.21
In fact, neither Darwin nor Jenkin had the means to answer this question.
There were thus two escape routes: either to consider that selection acts
according to a continuous spectrum, i.e. a Gaussian distribution - this view
sprung directly from Darwin's work - or to forget heredity by blending and
apply natural selection to discrete entities instead. This will be the path that a
monk who loved peas will follow ... but beforehand we must mention a great
19th century theoretician of biology, August Weisman.
Was August Weisman the father of neo-Darwinism?
It has become the custom to call the synthetic theory of evolution
proposed by Theodosius Dobzhansky, Ernst Mayr, George Simpson and
others in the 1930-40s "neo-Darwinism". According to George Simpson, the

54
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
explicit reference to Darwin is due to the importance that the synthetic
theory confers to natural selection; the prefix "neo" distinguishes the theory
from Darwin's own theory in that the neo-Darwinian paradigm takes
Mendel's laws into account.
However, a claim had already been lain on the expression neo-
Darwinism in the 19th century by the German biologist August F.L.
Weisman (1834-1914). His claim was typical of the squabbles of the time
when biological circles fought over who was Darwinian and who was not.
Weisman, who uncompromisingly defended selectionism and refuted all
other mechanisms, considered himself to be Darwin's sole successor. So did
his contemporary, G.J. Romanes, who placed the theories of Lamarck and
natural selection on a par. We shall not take sides but focus on how
Weisman became a fierce adversary of the theory of acquired inheritance
and came to be seen as the person who refuted it.
By background and training Weisman belonged to a group of researchers
who believed in reductionism; disciplines such as cytology or embryology
required knowledge of physical chemistry. After practising medicine and
presenting a thesis on the metamorphosis of insects, Weisman announced his
adherence to Darwinism during his inaugural lesson at the University of
Freiburg-in-Bresgau (Über die Berechtigung der Darwin'schen Theorie).
However, in his early work he had betrayed no qualms about the inheritance
of acquired characters. It is only between 1881 and 1883 when studying
maximum life-span as a specific trait subject to natural selection that he
convinced himself that there was no way of transmitting the results of
training to future generations.22 How could "life-span" be acquired and
passed on directly? The hereditary determinant cause must precede the
effect. At the same time, Weisman introduced the idea of an immortal cell
line, the germ cells (germen), where a succession of cells leads to the
gametes. It is this cell line that transmits traits from one generation to the
next "through" somatic lines (soma = all the non-sexual body cells).
Gustav Jaeger (1878) and Moritz Nussbaum (1880) had already had the
idea of a continuous germ line but Weisman was the first to use it as a basis
for an evolutionary theory of heredity. He asked himself what was the source
of the variations on which natural selection acts and thought it might be
sexual reproduction. In 1886, he gave a conference entitled: "Sexual
reproduction and its relevance to the theory of natural selection" ("Die
Bedeutung der sexuellen Fortpflanzung für die Selektions-Theorie".)
In 1887, in the wake of Oscar Hertwig's work on fertilisation, Weisman
suggested that germinative plasma might be found in the filaments of

The Darwinian Paradigm
55
dividing cells. Hertwig was professor of anatomy at Berlin and the first, in
1875, to observe the fusion of two nuclei in a fertilised egg. Hertwig
formulated the general idea that fertilisation consists mainly in the fusion of
two cell nuclei, one of maternal origin (that of the ovule) and the other of
paternal origin (that of the spermatozoa). At the end of the 1870s, Eduard
Strasburger described the clonal division (mitosis) of plant cells and noted
the presence of easily stained particles in the daughter cells. Walter
Flemming (who extended these observations to the animal kingdom) called
their substance chromatin before Wilhelm Waldeyer, in 1888, finally called
them chromosomes. Pierre-Joseph van Beneden established that the nuclei
of ovules and spermatozoa contain the same number of chromosomes
whereas the nuclei of the cells that give birth to them contain twice as many.
In 1887 Theodor Boveri confirmed this discovery and generalised it as the
law of chromatic reduction. When sex cells divide (meiosis), they only
receive a single set of parent chromosomes; a double set is formed in the
fertilised egg. At the time Weisman wrote:
The brilliant research on the process of fertilisation which was initiated
by Auerbach and Bütschli and pursued by Hertwig, Fol and Strasburger
right up until the work of van Beneden - not to mention many other
distinguished names that belong to this list - as well as the theoretical
considerations put forward by Pflüger, Nägeli and myself lead to at least
one firm result. This result is the existence of a hereditary substance,
namely, a physical vehicle for hereditary trends, which is contained in
the nucleus of the germ cell, in that part of the nuclear filament which at
times has the shape of handles or short rods (chromosomes).23
Weisman went on fighting the idea of the inheritance of acquired
characters. In 1988, for example, he criticised "the would-be botanical proof
for inheritance of acquired characters". Four years later, he proposed a
modified and much more complex theory of the germinal line whereby the
germinative plasma is composed of "biophores" which are structures that can
grow and reproduce by division. All biophores taken together determine the
characteristics of a cell. Weisman spoke of a "determinant". In multicellular
creatures, several determinants are needed and are combined into an "ide".
Several ides make up an "idante" which, according to Weisman, was
equivalent to a chromosome.
Weisman's contribution to modern biology and to the theories of
evolution was far from negligible. He combated the idea of the inheritance of
acquired characters and introduced a fundamental distinction between soma
and germen.

56
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
2.
THE ORIGINS OF GENETICS: A STORY ABOUT
PEAS
Against this
backdrop, biologists turned toward acquiring an
understanding of the mechanisms of inheritance. Gregor Mendel's
unpretentious experiments in botany were to provide a first insight.
The 18th century had witnessed a series of experiments on the
hybridisation of plants by Joseph Gottlieb Kölreuter, William Herbert,
Christian Konrad Sprengel, Thomas Andrew Knight, and others. These were
pursued into the 19th century. In France, in 1825, Augustin Sageret made
crosses of the so-called "cantaloup" and "chaté" varieties of melons, which
have different grooves and netting. He studied the combination of these two
characters in hybrids. Apparently, at about the same time (probably before
1829), the Swiss pharmacist J.A. Colladon recorded observations on the
interbreeding of grey and white mice. However, all this research was not
really to take off until two botanists, Naudin and Mendel, published their
studies in 1865 although Mendel's results were to remain poorly understood
until the end of the 19th century.
Charles Naudin (1815-1899), who worked at the Botanical Gardens
(Jardin des Plantes) in Paris, was interested in defining species. His early
opinion on the matter belonged to a kind of limited transformism. In
"Philosophical Considerations on Species and Variety" ("Considérations
Philosophiques sur l'Espèce et la Variété"), he wrote:
We do not believe that, when nature created species, it acted in a way
any different from the way we act to create varieties; in plain words, we
have transposed nature's process into our practice. What is this process?
It is to attune each member with the whole by assigning to it the function
it must carry out in the general organism of nature, a function that is its
raison d'être.
He who selects decides which individuals deviate from a specific type,
weeds them out, and, after many generations, obtains a fixed variety, that is
an artificial species. From 1856 onwards, Naudin carried out interspecific
hybridisations and tried to obtain new stable forms but in vain. He then put
forward several hypotheses later to be formulated with greater precision by
Mendel. Among them were the uniformity of first-generation hybrids
(already noted by Cotton Mather in 1716), the identity of reciprocal crosses,
the return to parental types and the heterogeneity of generations from the
second cross onwards. Finally, he postulated that the two specific essences in
pollen and in the ovules of hybrids are separate. William Bateson will call
this the purity of the gametes; pollen and ovule are either of the paternal or

The Darwinian Paradigm
57
maternal type. In spite of all these advances in knowledge, the mechanism of
inheritance will not be formulated for the first time in the Botanical Gardens
of Paris but in the experimental vegetable patch of a Moravian monastery.
If things had gone as expected, the young Johann Mendel (1822-1884)
should have become a peasant like his father. Bound by duty to the lord of
the manor, he would have cultivated the chalky soil of Northern Moravia.
However, the schoolteacher and the priest of his native village convinced his
parents to let him pursue his studies and so, at the age of 21, Mendel entered
the monastery of Saint-Thomas of the Augustines of Brünn (now Brno).
He was given the name of Gregor and began to study theology but also
physics,24 zoology, botany and palaeontology. He went to the University of
Vienna from 1851 to 1853 and was back in Brünn in 1856 but without
having obtained his civil service teaching diploma. Until his election as head
of the monastery in 1868, he taught at the town's state college and looked
after an experimental garden created by an abbot of the monastery in 1830. It
was in this 7 m by 35 m plot that he tended a "medley of forms". He
cultivated 27 000 pea plants belonging to 34 varieties and examined 12 000
plants and their 300 000 seeds; a truly laborious undertaking.
In 1862, Mendel co-founded the Natural History Society of Brünn (the
Naturforschender Verein) where on February 8 and March 8, 1865, he
presented his results on the hybridisation of peas, later published in the
Society's Transactions. The paper was sent to several European biologists in
Berlin, Vienna, and London (it was sent to the Royal Society and the Linnean
Society) as well as to biologists in America. It was a kind of treatise on the
transmission of characters in true-breeding lines (which he called species)
and in hybrids. Whereas the characters of true-breeding lines are preserved
from one generation to the next, in hybrids, characters that were united in the
first-generation are separate in the descendants; there is a return to the types
of the original line. In stating his laws on variability in the descent of
hybrids, Mendel was in fact making explicit the empirical rules that farmers
had used for thousands of years to select species by successive crosses. He
also postulated that transmitted characters are determined by factors present
in the sex cells which ensure fertilisation.
It now seems certain that Darwin was informed of Mendel's work by the
German botanist Heinrich Hoffmann.25 However, it was not until 1900 that
Mendel's results were reproduced by three botanists working independently.
What was the reason for this lack of interest leading to oblivion? Was
Mendel the unknown genius or accursed scholar some authors have
portrayed? This portrayal is a caricature even if it does hold an element of
truth. Mendel was certainly misunderstood by his colleagues; he did not seek
to impress his results upon them at all costs. Maybe, his "mistake" was to
have stepped out of the 19th century with a hypothesis-based deductive

58
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
method and reductionist views without entering the 20th century since he
was unaware of the existence of chromosomes.
Mendel's approach to experimental method is one of the novelties of his
work. Instead of interpreting the results of crosses in an inductive manner as
hybrid producers do, he saw cross-breeding as an experimental tool for
confirming or refuting a predefined theoretical model. His work was
probably trying to test the hypothesis of the fixity of species. Cross-breeding
should induce no change in the type inherited from the parents. Mendel did
not know about mutations and his genetics was thus incompatible with
evolutionism. It is therefore hardly surprising that researchers like Darwin
took no interest in his work.
Mendel cultivated two varieties of peas with few but marked differences:
giant or dwarf peas, green or yellow, smooth or wrinkled. Each seed was
sown separately as were the hybrids obtained by manual hybridisation. He
used contemporary pre-statistical methods based on the law of large numbers
but not sampling theory. He did not trace the individual lines of descent but
calculated the ratios applicable to the transmitted characters. These ratios are
correctly formulated in the limerick about a young woman who had an affair
with a coloured man:
The results of her sins
Was quadruplets, not twins -
One black and one white and two khaki.26
Mendel wanted to break away from the vague vocabulary hybrid
producers used to describe relationships among descendants of hybrid lines.
In particular, he wanted to clarify the concept of inheritance in hybridisation.
Tradition has it that Mendel formulated several laws; we usually speak of
three: "the law of the uniformity of the first generation", "the law of
segregation" (or "the law of the purity of the gametes") and the "law of the
independence in the segregation of characters" (or the "law of independent
assortment"). It will be later discovered that there are exceptions to this last
law. First, genes close to each other on a chromosome do not segregate
independently; they are said to be linked. Second, because genes co-operate
in the making of organs and organisms and in their function, their
independence is relative. Moreover, the ratios expected from the second law
are not always correct. There can be segregation distortion (see Chapter 5)
or gene conversion of one of the alleles during meiosis in the hybrid, so that
the two parent characters no longer have the same frequency in the offspring.
Mendel's three laws are closely linked with his 1865 paper entitled
"Research on Hybrid Plants" ("Versuche über Pflanzen-Hybriden").
However, the didactic way in which they are traditionally presented does
not reflect Mendel's ambition. Mendel was not looking for laws but for a

The Darwinian Paradigm
59
single law, specifically a general law on the formation and development
of hybrids.27
The notion of development is essential. Each hybrid with a given
character has offspring that are distributed precisely. Mendel tried to predict
the proportions in which this character was distributed over several
generations using a mathematical law for series expansion.
How Mendel crossed peas
Mendel performed his experiments on autogamous varieties of the
edible pea (species: Pisum sativum) that were well fixed (and that he
therefore called species). He first sought to find true-breeding lines by
methodically harvesting the seeds from each self-fertilised plant over
several generations. He then crossed these pure lines by artificial
pollination. In this way, he was able to pair varieties with specific
differences (round x wrinkled; yellow albumen x green albumen;
white flowers x coloured flowers; simply inflated pods x constricted
pods; axile flowers x terminal flowers; short stems x long stems).
For each pair, he obtained uniform first-generation (F1) offspring
that reproduced one of the two parental forms. He then let natural self-
fertilisation work for the next few generations (F2, F3, F4). For the F2
generation, he repeatedly obtained a three-quarter of plants of the type
present in F1 and one quarter of the type concealed in F1. It is here
that he introduced the notion of dominance. He called the type that
was present in F1 dominant (D) and the type that was concealed
recessive (r).
Mendel then self-fertilised the F2 plants to obtain the F3
generation. A third of the dominant-type F2 plants produced
exclusively D plants whereas the remaining two-thirds produced
three-quarters of D plants and one quarter of r plants. The recessive-
type F2 plants gave r plants only.
Mendel used gamete purity to explain his results. In a hybrid, for a
given character, each reproductive cell retains and passes on to the
next generation just one of the two characters that are united in the
hybrid. This has an important conclusion:
The product of the association of two gametes with a similar trait
is totally devoid of the hybrid character of the parent. It is as if the
individuals A that arise from the hybrid Aa were freed from the weight
of their ancestry.28
Mendel also made crosses involving
other characters and
concluded that each pair of characters is inherited according to the
same laws, as if it were alone involved.

60
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Whether Mendel formulated just one law or several does not really
matter; the important point is that he made a decisive conceptual
contribution to biology. He was the first to consider the inherited characters
of an organism as entities that are transmitted independently of one another
and that are influenced neither by hybridisation nor by the environment. In
other words, living beings are a mosaic of characters each of which is
inherited independently. Mendel's view thus clearly opposed the theory of
inheritance by blending. This is probably the main reason why he was
rejected by the scientific community of his time, in particular by Carl Nägeli.
In a letter to Nägeli, Mendel stresses his hypothesis. At each generation,
the two parent characters appear separate and unchanged, and there is
nothing to indicate that the one has taken anything at all from the other.29
Whereas Nägeli wrote in 1865:
In general, the characters of the parent forms are passed on so that both
influences are found in each hybrid individual. It is not true that a
character can be passed on in an unchanged form by one of the parents,
and another character in an unchanged form by the other parent. On the
contrary, there is interpenetration of parental characters and a fusion of
the two characters.29
These two passages illustrate clearly Nägeli's disagreement with Mendel.
He suggested that Mendel cultivate other plants such as Hieracium.
Unfortunately, this plant, in which he was an expert, presents several
disadvantages. Its flowers are so small that it is difficult to fertilise manually
and the hybrid forms behave "aberrantly" because - and this was not known
at the time - the plant can reproduce by parthenogenesis. Mendel was thus
unable to reproduce his results on peas.
The Mendelian legend is the counterpoint to the Darwinian myth.
Whether the reported facts are true or not, this legend signposts the entry
into a new era in the history of biology, the era of genetics.
3.
BIOMETRICIANS VERSUS GENETICISTS
Darwin's and Mendel's followers could not ignore each other for long.
Their first clash occurred on a rather singular stage. The Darwinians had
gathered under the banner of a new discipline, biometrics, and "everything
leads us to believe that the controversy between biometricians and
Mendelians was essentially an English
affair".30 This seemingly local
quarrel is a highly interesting event in the history of evolutionary theory.
What was the issue at stake?

The Darwinian Paradigm
61
The question that baffled the last two decades of the 19th century and,
especially, the first two of the 20th century was whether the Mendelian
model of discontinuous inheritance could be reconciled with the
biometricians' Darwinian view of evolution? Many researchers believed
these two approaches to life to be incompatible. To reconcile them would be
a crucial step toward a unified vision of life. The task will befall to
population genetics but, beforehand, let us examine the two conflicting
views.
Galton and Pearson: The founders of biometrics
Biometrics is the statistical study of variations in a group (or population)
of individuals of the same species. A Belgian physicist and statistician,
Adolphe Quetelet, was at its origin. Quetelet recorded the variations in
height of a group of human subjects and depicted these variations as a
frequency polygon (Anthropométrie (1871)). We still use this graphical
representation when studying the statistics of characters present in
homogeneous populations of many animals or plants. However, the true
founder of biometrics was a young cousin of Charles Darwin, Francis Galton
(1822-1911). Attracted by Darwin's theory and particularly interested in the
transmission of variations, Galton developed a tool - mathematics - that had
been little used in biology until then. Galton published Typical Laws of
Heredity (1877), Family Likeness in Stature (1886) and Natural Inheritance
(1889) and founded the English school of biometrics for the application of
statistical methods to the study of living things. Although he did show some
interest in the size of peas, he was particularly drawn to the study of the
human species even though this was poor study material for biologists,
experimental and directed interbreeding being out of the question.
Notwithstanding, Galton began systematic research work on twins at the end
of the 19th century.
In 1869, he published Hereditary Genius: An Enquiry into its Laws and
Consequences. In this work, he used for the first time the bell-shaped normal
distribution curve to describe what he called the "law of deviation from an
average".31 He chose these words because of the "trait" under study, namely,
human genius. Is not a man a genius because of the deviation from the
average rather than because of genius itself? Galton tried to use the bell-
shaped curve to prove that the variations he measured were inherited but his
measurements of human genius were rather imprecise and incongruous. In
the mid-1870s, he therefore turned to the study of sweet peas and published
his results in 1877 in a work - Typical Laws of Heredity - describing
reversion. Reversion is the tendency offspring have to look like their
forebears. In his investigation of the size of pea seeds, Galton observed that

62
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
larger-than-average individuals, when crossed, have offspring of a size
closer to the average. This publication was the first attempt to present natural
selection in statistical terms.
In 1884, at the international exhibition on medicine at the Science
Museum in South Kensington, Galton offered to give visitors their
anthropometric measurements for the sum of three shillings; 9337 people
accepted the offer. He used the funds to set up an anthropometry laboratory
for the collection and treatment of such measurements. In 1885, he published
Regression towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature from which Figure 2.1
is drawn. He showed yet again that the mean filial regression towards
mediocrity is directly proportional to the parental deviation. From these
results on human stature, he could generalise what he had initially called
reversion and henceforth denoted regression.32 (The word is still used in
statistics; we refer to a regression line).
A comment on regression
Galton's mistake was that, from the second generation onwards, he
no longer considered individuals (or, better still, an individual) but the
mean of the offspring; this mean relayes to a set of individuals with
very different characteristics. The problem will not be solved until
about twenty years later by the work of Wilhelm Johannsen (see
below).
A fundamental idea arising from Galton's work on sweet-peas was
that the individual inherits not only from his parents, but also from his
ancestors. Galton spoke of ancestral heredity and introduced the idea,

The Darwinian Paradigm
63
contrary to the Darwinian view, that heredity is a force acting from a
distance. Why should this idea upset the theory of natural selection?
Because if we accept regression - a return to an average ancestral type
- any gradual transformation of populations by selection and
transmission of variations in continuous
characters, from one
generation to the next, becomes illusory. In other words, Galton's
hypothesis implies that the mean of a population cannot be shifted
without abrupt jumps from one stable state to another. (Nowadays,
this is called saltationism).
Galton was indeed a strange man. He set the foundations for a new
science - biometrics - but ended up promoting saltationism after
having been an early supporter of the theory of natural selection.
These were the two lines of thought that clashed violently in England
at the beginning of the 20th century.
Biometrics may have not developed as it did if it had not received the
support of Karl Pearson (1857-1936), a mathematician at University College
London, who was invited to take an interest in biology by his colleague, the
zoologist Walter Weldon (1860-1905). Pearson pursued Galton's work and
applied mathematics to the study of variation and heredity. He devised
several statistical methods of which the best known are the chi-square test -
applicable to the overall quadratic deviation - and the coefficient of
correlation. What were these tests for? The title of one of Pearson's articles
tells us: "On the criterion that a given system of deviations from the
probable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that it can be
reasonably supposed to have arisen from random sampling".33 Pearson will
attempt to derive several laws: "ancestral heredity" (a legacy from Galton)
states that each individual is a combination of all his ancestors and
"monotypia" that each of us is born with undifferentiated organs. All his
work is in statistical terms.
Pearson was an eager advocate of natural selection and of gradual and
continuous evolution, unlike Galton who was willing to accept that species
could appear by a single variation or a sudden jump. If Galton is taken to be
the "historical" founding-father of biometrics, then it might not be absurd to
consider Pearson its "scientific" founder. It was Pearson who founded the
journal Biometrika in 1901.
The philosophical and ideological undercurrents of their work prompt
two questions. First, what were their links with the eugenics school of
thought at the end of the 19th and 20th centuries (we shall come to this in the
next part of this chapter); second, how were they in conflict with the
partisans of Mendelism. Pearson's approach can be said to be phenomenalist
because he wanted to found a science that was based purely on the results of

64
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
observations and the mathematical correlations among these observations. In
other words, he preferred laws to theories. This epistemological outlook
ensured the early success of biometrics but, at the turn of the 20th century,
Pearson's approach encountered resistance from the University of Cambridge
where another element of the evolutionist paradigm was dawning:
Mendelian genetics.
Bateson and mutationism
At the end of the 19th century, the sudden, discontinuous variations that
Darwin had called "sports" or "single variations", and that had been the bone
of contention in his conflict with Jenkin, were confirmed by several authors
including a Cambridge zoologist, William Bateson (1861-1926). Bateson
was a follower of Galton and, like him, supported the idea of discontinuous
variations. In 1894 he published Materials for the Study of Variation Treated
with Special Regard to Discontinuity in the Origin of Species. Bateson
thought that new living forms appeared through a discontinuous process, by
a jump or series of jumps. In order to conserve changes, heredity must also
operate in a discontinuous, non-blending manner. This was Mendel's idea
thirty years earlier; it was "rediscovered" by three botanists in 1900.
Since 1886, the Dutch botanist Hugo de Vries (1848-1935) had been
working on a cultivated plant from America, Oenothera lamarckiana, in
which he had observed sudden, discontinuous variations. He drew analogies
between his data and observations on other plants and animals,34 and
published an important two-volume (1901 and 1903) opus, Die
Mutationstheorie. He called the sudden, hereditary variations which he
considered to be at the origin of speciation, mutations. We now know that
many of the variations that de Vries called mutations were in fact
chromosome recombinations. Because of the special chromosome
conformation of Oenothera lamarckiana, these recombinations produce
stable forms. What we call mutations today were too few in number for him
to observe in his work-samples. This should not deter us, however, from
considering de Vries' work as a turning point. Forty years after Mendel had
shown that the parent type was conserved from one generation to the next
and had seen this as a confirmation of fixism, the science of genetics (name
given by Bateson in 1906 to this new science of heredity) introduced the idea
of mutation.
As mentioned above, if we think that mutations are important in the
evolutionary process, then we embrace a view of heredity that precludes
blending. In 1900, de Vries and two botanist colleagues, the German Carl E.
Correns and the Austrian Erich von Tschermak, discovered, simultaneously

The Darwinian Paradigm
65
but independently, the principles governing the hybridisation of plants that
had already been established by Mendel. William Bateson followed by
others, including Lucien Cuénot in France, extended these principles to
animals. They became known as Mendel's laws and, ever since, we speak of
Mendelian characters and call the science of cross-breeding Mendelism.
Once the notion of mutation had been integrated into Mendel's laws,
transformism and genetics became compatible. However, this led Bateson
and the first geneticists to reject Darwinism and natural selection. For them,
the transformation of species was due to mutations and not to natural
selection.
Goldschmidt's "hopeful monster
The idea that species can be transformed through mutation is
present in the "hopeful monster" concept proposed by Richard B.
Goldschmidt. In 1940, in The Material Basis of Evolution,
Goldschmidt postulated that two kinds of genetic events might play a
role in evolution: macromutations that have a substantial effect on the
phenotype and systemic mutations that lead to an in-depth change in
the genotype. In both cases, the new phenotypes are so different from
the standard model of the species that they can be called monstrous.
Most of these monsters have no future but Goldschmidt postulated
that some survive and initiate an entirely new lineage. Nowadays, this
phenomenon is thought to be extremely rare although not impossible.
Goldschmidt's view has fired the imagination of non-scientific circles
in Western culture. Our science-fiction is alive with "mutants", some
said to guarantee the future (or salvation) of the species.
The debate turns nasty
The two camps, Cambridge and London, showed no pity toward each
other. Weldon and Pearson attacked Mendelism criticising its ad hoc
character (to explain how traits vary, we need only assume an appropriate
series of Mendelian factors); the Mendelians stressed how poor was the
biology behind the mathematics. However,
as usual, the generals hated each other much more than the soldiers did,
the soldiers being in the event the young researchers who were working
under the guidance of Bateson and Pearson and who were not as
temperamental intellectually as their elders. But, because of the clout of
the leaders such as Pearson, Weldon and Bateson, the outside world
could only come to the conclusion that Mendelism and biometrics were
totally incompatible.35

66
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
In his critical appraisal of biometrics, the Danish botanist Wilhelm
Johanssen (1857-1927) was the first to use the term gene. He also introduced
the terms genotype and phenotype. Genotype denotes the entire gamut of
gene forms (or alleles) that occupy the chromosome locus (or loci) under
study in an individual; phenotype denotes the expression of the genotype in a
given environment. In one of his studies, Johanssen examined how the
weights of seeds vary in a population of beans, Phaseolus vulgaris (see Fig.
2.2). Johanssen took 19 beans from a bag; their weights were distributed at
the two ends of the range. He established a pure line from each bean and
noted that selection had no effect on the mean weight of the seeds. The mean
weight in each line was constant whether he selected the smallest or largest
seed at each generation. It was clear that Johanssen's conclusion refuted the
biometricians' thesis; natural selection did not work for continuous
characters,
the action of selection cannot go beyond known limits - it must stop when
the population, or, in practice, the isolation of the most strongly
divergent  pure line is complete.36
The full explanation for this will only become clear much later. The bean
is autogamous, and consequently selection does not operate within a family.
Variations in characters are due to growth factors and environmental effects
but not to genetic variations. The initial selection (the choice of 19 beans)
only worked because Johanssen's beans were genetically different.
Pearson did not miss the chance to criticise Johanssen's work. In an
article published in 1904 that was meant to refute Mendel's theory, he used
the theory to explain continuous variations and the correlations that are
observed between parents and offspring for this kind of variation. In his
reductio ad absurdum, Pearson supposed that continuous variations were
under the control of several genes, each character being completely
dominant. This could explain both the normal distribution and the correlation
between parents and offspring but the predicted correlation was 1/3 and not
1/2 as observed. Pearson's demonstration led to the widespread belief that
Mendelism was refuted definitively but in 1909, he admitted that his
reasoning had flaws. Different levels of dominance and different proportions
of alleles in the population could account for the observed variations. The
rift between Cambridge and London, Mendelism and Darwinism,
mutationism and biometrics was still wide open.

The Darwinian Paradigm
67
The work of the American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan (1866-1945),
which followed on from de Vries' research on heredity and chromosome
theory, did not bridge the gap. Morgan was nominated professor of biology
at the University of Columbia in 1904. He chose to study the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, that can be bred in thousands, millions of
exemplars. At first, Morgan tried to demonstrate that mutations were sudden
variations due to the environment. He subjected flies to traumatic physical
conditions and to chemical agents but induced virtually no mutations, and

68
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
these had no adaptive value. The emergence of a mutant male with white
eyes prompted him to make countless crosses with normal flies. His
conclusions were similar to Mendel's and he converted to Mendelism. Using
the "giant chromosomes" of the fruit fly's salivary glands which are easy to
observe with a microscope and which have characteristic bands, he
established chromosome maps. Morgan did not only prove the physical
reality of hereditary factors but also localised them! The chromosome theory
of inheritance was thus established definitively. Together with his
collaborators, Calvin Bridges, Alfred Henry Sturtevant and Hermann Joseph
Müller, he published The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity in 1915, The
Physical Basis of Heredity in 1919, and The Theory of the Gene in 1926. He
also studied chromosome crossing-over whereby parts of homologous
chromosomes are exchanged.
Morgan and the geneticists continued to fight the Darwinians. They
argued that the function of natural selection was not to be creative but to
eliminate or maintain discontinuous variations which were the real source of
evolution. Consequently, useless or harmless new characters could appear
and be maintained in populations, in the absence of selective pressures.
Differences in species could thus concern characters of minor importance
that apparently do not derive from an adaptative process.
As explained in the next chapter, the two approaches will be reconciled
in the neo-Darwinian melting-pot, chiefly thanks to population genetics.
However, before broaching the neo-Darwinian paradigm - which is the basis
of current models of evolution - we have to mention two socio-political
avatars that this new outlook on life brought with it, or had inflicted upon it.
These avatars were influenced by earlier views mentioned in this chapter.
4. EUGENICS AND LYSENKOISM
From eugenics to "eugenism"
Eugenics was introduced as a discipline around 1910 chiefly in Anglo-
Saxon countries (including Germany) and France. Francis Galton had
already used the word in 1883 to denote the study of socially controllable
elements that can improve or impair, physically or mentally, the racial
qualities of future generations. What was the reason for Galton's interest?
The historian Bernard Norton supports the hypothesis put forward by Ray
Fancher and Daniel Kevles that goes as follows. Although Galton's family
took him for a genius, he failed his Tripos exams at Cambridge University.
This failure induced a passionate curiosity for the origins of intellectual

The Darwinian Paradigm
69
success and a no less passionate desire to explain his own lack of success.
After reading The Origin of Species, he came to the conclusion that:
a man's natural abilities are derived by inheritance, under exactly the
same limitations as are the form and physical features of the whole
organic world. This explained the limits of his own abilities37
and yet opened up a whole new world before him. Whether this explanation
is true or not - we shall leave the responsibility for it with Norton - Galton
intended to imitate nature using the human species as his material. His plan
was to bring society forth out of the age of Christianity into the age of post-
Darwinism, that is into the age of being "well-born", of orchestrated
improvement, in other words, of eugenics. To this end, he founded in 1907
the Eugenics Education Society which had as one of its directors Charles
Darwin's son, Leonard Darwin. The Society published the Eugenics Review.
Eugenics is based on two fundamental postulates:
1. Genes are at the origin of differences in the potential and
behaviour of individuals; they are subject to evolutionary pressures.
2. The human species is the king pin of evolution; it owes its status
to natural selection which needs to be helped along in order to
maintain this status.
Mankind did not wait until the beginning of the 20th century to battle
against the laws of nature. The art of healing, customs, social laws (in
particular, aid to impoverished families), and culture are all ways of
influencing the course of natural evolution. But geneticists ask, is this battle
always for the "good" of the human species? Should we not show more
concern for the genetic heritage of the human species and protect it against
degradation? Is it not time to offer mankind the means to control the
evolution of its own heritage? This was the aim of the science of eugenics, to
assist and even induce the birth of "good", i.e. better, individuals and
populations.
In a lost novel, Galton described an island governed by a eugenic council
whose goal was to enhance the biological quality of the inhabitants. To be
admitted to the island, immigrants had to pass a test. The results of the test
determined the number of children they were allowed to have. Authority was
in the hands of members of the university. The guiding principles of Galton's
utopia were individual biological quality and scientific power.
There is no reason to doubt the good faith and philanthropic attitude of
the geneticists who developed positive eugenics, as it will be called later.
This form of eugenics is confined to the study of how to improve the
reproduction rate of the most gifted. It calls upon many scientific disciplines

70
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
which are seen by the adepts of eugenics as the strong roots feeding a
harmonious entity. It is a totally different matter, however, when scientists
who claim to be building Galton's utopia usurp all human scholarship and, in
the name of science, take control over the civil and political dimensions of
society. In France, we then no longer speak of eugenics but eugenism. Its
limits are not as readily defined. Eugenism includes the promotion of
negative eugenics, i.e. limiting the number of least fit offspring, and is not
unrelated to social Darwinism.
The expression social Darwinism was introduced in 1880 to cover
theories in which social laws are more or less direct extensions of the laws of
nature (in particular the "survival of the fittest" or the "struggle for life").
To the mind of social Darwinians, notes Daniel Becquemont, interracial
conflict drives history, and eugenist policy is part of this conflict. Even if
many eugenists have severe doubts about absence of immigration control
and may express latent or outright racist views, they nevertheless believe
that new gifted elements from other races are beneficial; in particular,
they often consider that controlling the racial quality of a population is a
way of substituting the more civilised practice of artificial selection for
the inevitability of interracial conflict.38

The Darwinian Paradigm
71
Whether eugenism is linked to social Darwinism or not depends on
whether it chooses to support the idea of conflict between races or selection
among races.
The press, and especially the North American press, often relied on
scientific statements and data to back eugenist views. Indeed the public
would do well to know about some of the data! Who could have imagined
that Ada Jukes, born in 1740, would be at the root of an absolutely
catastrophic family tree that included 64 mentally diseased offspring, 174
sex-perverts, 196 illegitimate children (were they really her descendants?),
142 paupers (an absolutely unacceptable condition at the time), 77 criminals
and murderers. The newspaper's only comment was:
Shall we allow the Ada Jukes of today to continue this multiplication of
misery?
… and we might add of crime and perversity!

72
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Although the Sunday Oregonian is neither a scientific nor a medical
journal, it nevertheless took an interest in the health of the offspring of a
couple of idiots, Karl and Anna. Karl and Anna's family tree was most
demonstrative. It included not only a disturbing number of feeble-minded
individuals, but many of these were not even interned in psychiatric wards!
No doubt, the conclusion the newspaper wanted to impress upon its readers
was that those who were performing sterilisations in Oregon should keep
going. There is even a case of disjunction of an illegitimacy gene that was
reported by an unpretentious local American newspaper. This gene was
present in four generations: Maria, the grandmother, Ruth, the mother, Lena,
the daughter, and William who was just 2 weeks old and already showing
sure signs of being a carrier of the illegitimacy gene (that is, if we believe
the journalist).
As if the newspapers weren't enough, the American Eugenics Society set
up stands to explain that the United States needed more "good" people (of
whom few are born) and less "mediocre" or "bad" people (who are
unfortunately born in large numbers). The results of this campaign were

The Darwinian Paradigm
73
quickly felt. Laws inspired by these eugenic currents were passed and
sterilisation programmes were set up. By January 1, 1935, 21 539 people had
been sterilised in America because they had "bad genes". The laws were not
abrogated until fairly recently (in 1972 in the State of Virginia).
Americans were not alone in putting this kind of social policy into effect;
both Sweden and Germany instituted similar campaigns. On the other hand,
in the United Kingdom, where Ronald Fisher had been worried about the
low reproduction rate of "lords" compared to "other", lower classes of
British society, no such steps were taken.
Scientists dissociated themselves fairly quickly from this enterprise
especially after the monstrous turn it took in Nazi Germany. The Germans
had imitated the hard-line American eugenists and even vexed them by
claiming larger sterilisation numbers. However, there was a crucial
difference between the Americans and Germans. The Americans sought to
improve the race by targeting individuals carrying bad genes; the Germans
based their undertaking on whether a person belonged to a particular race.
This distinction should be kept in mind when we analyse current statements
and projects. Moreover, we should not forget how readily scientists of the
first half of the 20th century took part in a movement that seems so horrible
and reprehensible to us now. They were no doubt as aware of their

74
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of  Evolution
responsibilities as today's scientists and also convinced that they were acting
for the good of mankind. Let's take heed of the traps and snares of science.
What has become of eugenism today? Did it really come to an end with
World War II? Opinions are divided. Nazism has induced such an intense
state of shock that attempts to improve the human species have been
forsaken. The genetics on which first eugenics, then eugenism was based
was of such poor quality that it has been abandoned by research workers and
adepts. However, the risks of a return to eugenism have probably never been
greater than they are today, in two respects. First, there is the issue of birth
control which is in some ways related to social Darwinism. Admittedly, the
planet's population explosion is worrying but how should we view the ways
in which birth control is thrust upon Third World countries? The motives for
birth control programmes do not always lie in pure philanthropy but also
arise from a need to maintain or impose a certain social and political
balance. Second, there are the recent developments in genetics and
molecular biology. What should we think of the techniques and work
programmes for decoding the human genome, screening for hereditary
diseases, selecting embryos or investigating gene therapy? Of course, we
must distinguish between the personal reasons for which parents might use
these methods and the totalitarian rules of a State that decides which
individuals may reproduce and survive within a population. However, the
enthusiasm generated by these techniques, and arising from highly effective
orchestrated media publicity, does not create a climate that awakens
individual consciousness and responsibility.
French public opinion rejects the conclusions of sociobiology, sometimes
considered as the heir of social Darwinism, but paradoxically rarely
questions the eugenic temptations of modern medicine or asks at which level
(individual, family, society, nation, etc) should responsibility lie.
During the last fifty years, biology has not come up with a definition of
man that facilitates medicine's art of healing and devotion to the "good" of
mankind. How should we view alterations (for better or for worse) of a
human being's genetic inheritance today? Can one always differentiate
between the search for mankind's "well-being-ness" and "well-born-ness"?
The eugenics-eugenism file has taught us at least two lessons to be put into
immediate practice:
1. It is part of a research worker's code of ethics to ensure that statements
made by scientists, or by others on the basis of a scientist's work, are exact.
This is essential as society has great faith in the scientific word.
2. The theory of evolution in Darwin's day, but even more so in our
modern genetic engineering age, seems to provide a vision and an
understanding of the future. It is tempting to want to do things for the good
of future as well as present generations, in the name of scientific knowledge

The Darwinian Paradigm
75
and with the help of this knowledge. Is this one of the social roles of the
scientist? A moot point indeed.
Neo-Lamarckism and Lysenkoism
The first thirty years of the 20th century witnessed the birth of many
theories attempting to explain evolution: August Pauly's psycho-Lamarckism
(1905), Hans Driesch's entelechy, Daniele Rosa's ologenesis (1909), Smuts'
holism (1916), Henry Fairfield Osborn's aristogenesis, Lev Semenovich
Berg's nomogenesis (1922), Labbé's allelogenesis (1924), Ludwig von
Bertalanffy's general systems approach (1928) and Przibram's apogenesis
(1929)! 39 Neo-Lamarckism had a great following in France with well-
known adherents such as Giard, Le Dantec, Perrier, Bonnier and Houssay
although inheritance of acquired characters, which many saw as the central
dogma of Lamarck's theory, was still unproven. In 1909, the Viennese
scientist Paul Kammerer claimed to have established inheritance of acquired
characters in the midwife toad but he was accused by Bateson in 1923 of
correcting nature. The partisans of neo-Lamarckism contended that the
genesis of certain structural characters that were ill accounted for by the
Darwinian paradigm could be easily explained by the effects of use and
disuse. Examples were the callosity of the camel, ostrich or wart-hog, the
camber of the hermit-crab's abdomen, and so on. In the middle of the
century, Lamarckism resurfaced with Paul Wintrebert's (1867-1966)
hypothesis of a mechanism not unlike immunisation. The gene was an
antibody bound to the chromosome and thus a kind of reaction against
environmental disturbances. It was not heredity's agent but instrument. The
addition of genes (adaptive responses) determined the evolution of species.
Toward 1928, the Russian Trofim Lysenko (1898-1976) built his
reputation on a procedure called vernalisation. It was based on the
observation that winter cereals can give rise to heads even if sown in spring,
as long as the seeds, once they have been humidified and have germinated,
are kept at relatively low temperatures. He used this procedure, which
belongs to plant physiology and not genetics, as proof that we can modify
heredity without influencing population structure. Lysenko's inability to
distinguish between "training" an individual - even when it is reduced to a
seed - and genetically modifying a population can be linked to Lamarckism.
It led him to believe that nature can be trained. However, what at first
seemed to be just another episode in the history of northern agronomy soon
became the "Lysenko affair",
the perfect model of the construction of a false science by combining a
dogmatic ideology (Marxism-Leninism) with the totalitarian inquisition
of a dictatorial system (the Soviet communist state). It was the triumph of

76
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
a pseudo-science over a genuine science - classical genetics - that was
forbidden by ukase to the soviet peoples and the colonies of the Kremlin's
empire.40
Lysenko did not even discover vernalisation; he just had the idea of
applying it to agronomy. Whether he succeeded in this venture (as
Dominique Lecourt and Francois Dagognet believe) or not (Denis Buican's
view 41), Lysenko managed to impose his ideas on the regime and society of
the Soviet Union. Lysenko claimed that he was following in the footsteps of
the arboriculturist Ivan Mitchourin (1855-1935). Mitchourin had produced
hybrid grafts which did not seem to obey the rules of classical genetics based
on Mendel's and Morgan's discoveries. He was the son of a small outcast
landowner who was an employee of the railways and then a watchmaker.
Fascinated by horticulture, he bought an orchard in 1875 which was later to
become an experimental station, the Flower and Fruit Selection Centre, and
then the "Ivan Vladimirovitch Mitchourin" Central Genetic Laboratory.
Mitchourin had little time for theory (the doctrines of Mitchourism were
enunciated by Lysenko); his approach was empirical. He believed that
mankind could modify nature and control its development, including the
processes of heredity. Heredity was defined as “the property of the living
body to react in a certain fashion to environmental conditions” and then to
pass on this change to the next generation by way of any somatic particle
(and not only the chromosomes). Heredity was similar to metabolism ... and
could therefore be modified by it. The proof was vegetative hybridisation,
the name Mitchourin gave to the theory in which support and graft mutually
influence each other and where inheritance occurs via the sap. Mitchourin
was not hostile to Mendelism as such and used the term gene now and again,
but he doubted whether the laws of inheritance could be established a priori
and whether the results of interbreeding were as predictable as the
predictions made by Mendel with peas.
Lysenko was even more categorical. He claimed to have adapted plants
to specific conditions by vernalisation. From 1930 onwards, at the Institute
of Plant Genetics and Reproduction in Odessa, he undertook physiology
experiments, especially the production of graft hybrids, in order to show that
"plastic matter" circulating between the support and graft could transform
support or graft into a more or less intermediate type by inheritance. The
graft's influence on the germ cells of the support was reflected in the
transmission of the characters of form and colour to the support's offspring.
These were thus characters that were acquired and inherited.
Lysenko's rise in society (he called himself an agrobiologist) began in
1935 42 when he gave a speech at the Collective Farmers Congress which
embraced vernalisation and the class war in a single breath. His speech was

The Darwinian Paradigm
77
rewarded by a "Bravo" from Stalin which was echoed in Pravda. At this
point, Soviet biology officially entered the era of Lysenkoism. Together with
the philosopher and Marxist-Leninist academy member Prezent, Lysenko
attacked chromosome theory which he said was “reactionary, idealist,
metaphysical and sterile”. In 1936, when he presented a paper entitled
Challenging the Problems of Genetics and Breeding at the Lenin Academy
of Agronomic Sciences, the rift between classical genetics and Lysenkoism
was wide open. The VIIth International Congress of Genetics which was to
be held in Moscow the following year had to be transferred to Edinburgh in
1939. In the meantime, Lysenko climbed the ranks of office and honours. He
became president of the Lenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences, director of
the Genetics Institute of the Academy of Sciences (which was to be called
after him in 1948), was a beneficiary of the Stalin prize, a hero of the USSR,
etc. His main rival, the academy member Vavilov, one of the founders of
plant genetics, was arrested in 1940 and sentenced to death. The sentence
was changed to life imprisonment but he was murdered in his cell in 1943.
All geneticists unable to leave the Soviet Union met with a similar fate.
After the war, Lysenko continued to promulgate his ideas, pointing time
and again to the graft hybrids. Opposition was qualified as “reactionary
Mendelism-Morganism” and tracked down relentlessly. Soviet biology had
become Lysenko's monopoly; its heyday was between 1948 and 1952. The
results of his fraudulent experiments on the transformation of one species
into another (wheat into rye, oats into barley, cabbage into swede, pine into
fir) were widely publicised. This is not the place to dwell on the misery of
Soviet agriculture at the time but as D. Buican says:
Lysenko with his harmful "scientific" advice only added a few drops to
the ocean of dearth that bathed the Gulag archipelago.43
Contrary to expectations, Stalin's death did not sound Lysenko's decline.
He quickly found other political support and, thanks to Krustchev, triumphed
again between 1962 and 1965.
That's what science is about [speaking of Lysenkoism]. As you can see,
Lysenko had already introduced a positive point into the debate which
many comrades pursued at this session. Anyone willing to adopt
Lysenko's methods cannot lose. Go and have a look at his wheat; go this
year. I am sure that he will always have a good harvest to show you. Go
and have a look at the corn on his farm, at his sugar-beets… This is the
type of scientist who has something to teach us.44
He was not dismissed from his post as director of the Genetics Institute
until 1965. The following year marked the return of classical genetics in the
Soviet Union.

78
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
NOTES
1. Denton, M., 1985, Evolution: A Theory in Crisis, Burnett Books, London, p. 358. Michael
Denton is not a creationist as is sometimes thought.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Denton, M., ibid., pp. 358-359.
Popper, K., 1972, Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach, Clarendon Press,
Oxford University Press, London, p. 267.
Lecourt, D., L'Amérique entre la Bible et Darwin. Series: Science, Histoire et Société,
Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, p. 114.
Kuhn, T. S., 1970 (first published in 1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
edition, enlarged), The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 10.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., 1963, The Science of Life. A Picture History of Biology.
Thames & Hudson, London, p. 151.
Lamarck, J.B., 1994 (originally published in 1809), Philosophie Zoologique,
Flammarion, Paris.
Darwin, C., 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Murray,
London.
Gayon, J., 1992, Darwin et l'Après-Darwin. Une Histoire de l'Hypothèse de Sélection
Naturelle, Kimé, Paris, p. 1. (transl. Darwinism's Struggle for Survival: Heredity and
the Hypothesis of Natural Selection (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998.)
Gilson, E., 1971, D'Aristote à Darwin et Retour. Essai sur Quelques Constantes de la
Biophilosophie, Series: Essais d'Art et de Philosophie, Vrin, Paris, p. 87.
Darwin, C., 1859, ibid., Chap. II.
Darwin, C., ibid., Chap. II.
Darwin, C., ibid., Chap. III.
Darwin, C., ibid., Chap. IV.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., ibid., p. 157.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., ibid., p. 157.
Gayon, J., ibid., pp. 60 & 61.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., ibid., p. 165.
Gayon, J., ibid., p. 106.
Darwin, C., ibid.
Darwin, C., ibid.
Mayr, E., 1985, Weismann and Evolution, J. Hist. Biol. 18: 311. Mayr points out that
Weismann added many notes on a variety of subjects to the English edition of Studien
zur Descendenztheorie (1876) which was published in 1882. However, he did not
restrain the blatantly Lamarckian statements of the original German text.
Weismann, A., 1887, Über die Zahl der Richtungskörper und über ihre Bedeutung für
die Vererbung, Fischer, Iena.
He was a student of Christian Doppler who described and explained the well-known
"Doppler effect", i.e., the frequency shift that occurs on reception of waves emitted by
a source that moves with respect to the observer.
Blanc, M., 1984, Gregor Mendel: la légende du génie méconnu, La Recherche 15: 48.
Quoted by Taylor, G.R., ibid., p. 312.
Gayon, J., ibid., p. 287.
Gayon, J., ibid., p. 290.
Quoted by Blanc, M., ibid., pp. 58-59. The letter is reproduced in Orel, V. and
Armogathe, J.R., 1985, Mendel, un Inconnu Célèbre, Belin, Paris, pp. 129-139.
Norton, B, 1981, La situation intellectuelle au moment des débuts de Fisher en
génétique des populations, Revue de Synthèse 3 (N°s 103, 104): 241.
Galton, F., 1869, Hereditary Genius: An Enquiry into its Laws and Consequences,
Macmillan & Co, London, p. 26.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

The Darwinian Paradigm
79
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Galton, F., 1885, Regression towards mediocrity in hereditary stature. J. Anthropol.
Inst. of GB and Ireland 15: 246 & 247.
Pearson, K., 1900, On the criterion that a given system of deviations from the
probable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that it can be
reasonably supposed to have arisen from random sampling. Philosophical Magazine,
50 
series): 157-175.
For example, observations by the Russian Sergei Ivanovich Korginski (1900,
Hétérogénèse et évolution. Théorie de la formation des espèces) in whose mind the
origin of the transformation of species resided in this type of variation.
Norton, B., ibid., p. 238.
Johanssen, W, 1903, Heredity in Populations and Pure Lines. A Contribution to the
Solution of the Outstanding Questions in Selection. ("Ueber Erblichkeit in
Populationen und in reinen Linien"), Gustav Fisher, Iena. (Reprinted in 1959 in
Classic Papers in Genetics (ed. J.A. Peters), Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, p. 21).
Galton, F., 1869, Hereditary Genius: An Enquiry into its Laws and Consequences,
Watts & Co, London, 
ed) p. 1.
Becquemont, D., 1996, Darwinisme social, in: Dictionnaire du Darwinisme et de
l'Evolution, Vol. 1, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, pp. 1415-1416.
Taton, R., (ed.), 1964, Histoire Générale des Sciences. Part III: La Science
Contemporaine; Vol. II: Le XXe Siècle, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, p.
714.
Buican, D., 1988, Lyssenko et le Lyssenkisme, Series: Que sais-je? N° 2394, Presses
Universitaires de France Paris, p. 3.
Buican, D., 1984, Histoire de la Génétique et de l'Evolutionnisme en France; Chapter
8: L'Anti-génétique Soviétique en France, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris;
Buican, D., 1987, Génétique et Pensée Evolutionniste, Chapter VII: Pseudo-sciences
dans l'Histoire des Sciences: l'Affaire Lyssenko) and Chapter VIII: La Résonance
Perpétuelle du Lyssenkisme), SEDES, Paris.
Medvedev, Z. A., 1969, The Rise and Fall of T. D. Lysenko, transl. I. M. Lerner,
Columbia University Press, New York.
Buican, D., Lyssenko et le Lyssenkisme, p. 19.
Khrutchev, N., 1964, quoted by Buican, D., ibid., p. 102.

Chapter 3
POPULATION AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS
Neo-Darwinism arose from a need to reconcile Darwinism and
Mendelism. The data on the transmission of hereditary material, obtained
mostly from experiments on the fruit-fly from the beginning of the 20th
century onwards, was increasingly precise and had to be made to fit in with
the theory of evolution. The mathematician Ronald A. Fisher and the
geneticist Sewall Wright were the first in the attempt. In the wake of the
biologist J.B.S. Haldane, they built models that described the evolution of
populations and founded population genetics. The early models were based
on pure speculation because the values of most variables were unknown. To
fill this gap in knowledge, Edmund B. Ford created ecological genetics
(evolutionary ecology); its aim is the experimental study of populations in
their environment.
1. 
POPULATION GENETICS
How do species evolve? At the beginning of the 20th century,
Darwinians claimed that species evolve through the action of selection
whereas Mendelians insisted on the role of mutation. We now know that
both selection and mutation are involved but it took us thirty years (i.e. until
the 1930s) to come to this conclusion. Mutation introduces new alleles1 (new
gene forms) but, once the alleles are there, what happens to them? Well, it is
at this point that selection intervenes and, to understand in what way, a new
concept, allele frequency, was introduced. If a gene can mutate into a new
form, we must be able to evaluate what proportion of the population will
81

82
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
carry this new allele and how this proportion changes with time. This is what
population geneticists do.
Evolutionary pressures
Population geneticists not only build mathematical models but also
observe natural populations and perform laboratory tests to measure the
variables in their models. Let us suppose that the individuals of a population
have either gene form A or a at a given locus of their genome, and let/? and q
be the proportions of these two alleles within the population (p + q =1). The
models of population genetics describe how p and q change with time.
(Some scientists believe that evolution is nothing other than the sum total of
the frequency changes of all genes). The forces responsible for the change in
the allele structure of populations are known as evolutionary pressures. We
want to model their action.
"Wild-type allele"
The reader should beware of the expression "wild-type allele"
because, in natural populations, there are often several different
alleles for a given gene (locus). This undermines an idea from which
we should steer clear, namely, that there are "normal" types from
which certain individuals (mutants, par excellence) deviate.
Let us take the simplest case of so-called haploid species whose cells
have just one copy of each chromosome. (For example, bacteria are haploid
and have a single, circular chromosome). In a population of haploid
organisms, gene forms A and a occur nA and na times respectively, where n
is the number of individuals carrying the allele. Usually, instead of finding
out how nA and na change over tune, we study the changes in the overall
population (N = nA + na) and in the frequency (p = nA/N and q = na/N = 1-
p). Studying variations in N is part of demography and in p of population
genetics. In population genetics, N may be a variable that influences the
variations in p but is not a variable whose variation is explained. The
different approaches of demography and population genetics set the two
disciplines somewhat apart. Population genetics would be hard put to explain
the effect of genetic composition on the demographic growth of a species or
subspecies. This is one of its limitations; we shall mention others later. Its
role is to describe the changes in genetic composition under the action of
four evolutionary pressures: mutation, selection, migration, and genetic drift
(see annex MAI for a mathematical analysis of these pressures).

Population and Ecological Genetics
83
Mutation
If by mutation we mean any hereditary variation in genetic information,
then many events give rise to mutations. Most mutations are errors in the
reproduction of the genetic message:2 simple copying errors (one base
replaced by another), stuttering of the replication machinery (sequence
duplication), and omission (deletion). Errors may also occur during more
complex phenomena such as DNA repair and DNA recombination
(transposition3, gene conversion), chromosome rearrangement (translocation,
inversion), or cell division (mitosis or meiosis) when an entire chromosome
(aneuploidy) or a whole set of chromosomes (polyploidy) is added or
deleted. Population geneticists study all these mutations. For each type, they
need to know the probability of its occurrence at each generation and per
unit of  time in order to calculate its impact on allele frequency.
DNA
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is the well-known molecule with a
double helix structure in which heredity is inscribed or, in Jacques
Monod's words, the "fundamental biological invariant".4 The Swiss
chemist Friedrich Miescher isolated DNA from salmon sperm in 1869
but it was not until 80 years later that the molecule was identified as
the hereditary substance of chromosomes. Several advances occurred
in the intervening years: the biochemical mechanisms that control
gene expression began to be investigated experimentally; G. Beadle
and E.L. Tatum's experiments on amino acid biosynthesis established
an unequivocal relationship between gene and enzyme; this was
followed by the work of Fred Griffith and then of Oswald Avery on
the virulence of pneumococci and their transforming principle (shown
to be DNA); their results were soon to be criticised by Max Delbrück
and the "phage group"; Linus Pauling discovered the alpha-helix
motif in the structure of proteins but failed to understand the structure
of DNA, and Edwin Schrödinger showed astonishing prescience in his
essay "What is life?". These and other milestones finally led to the
publication in 1953 of James Watson's and Francis Crick's paper on
the so-called "double helix" model. Francois Gros sees this model as
the emblem of molecular biology, just like Mercury's wand
(Aesculapius' staff) is the symbol of the art of healing.5 In 1981
Watson wrote:
But … we did not  foresee any immediate practical consequences for
the world about us and no reason why the man on the street, as
opposed to the young student, should know that we existed, much less

84
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
try to understand the increasingly complicated  facts that were to be
worked out over the next twenty  years.6
The spontaneous mutation rate was measured by observing the
spontaneous inactivation of mutated genes. It is fairly low in all species,
about 
mutations per gene per generation. At this rate, 700 000
generations are needed for mutation to halve the frequency of an allele. This
is equivalent to about 10 to 20 million years for the human species and its
forebears and takes us back to the tertiary era, well before we emerged! A
force that needs so much time to just halve allele frequency can hardly have
played a major role in the evolution of populations; its effect must be
negligible compared to that of other evolutionary pressures. However,
mutation does have a key evolutionary role because it produces new alleles.
There is not a single gene in our entire genome that has not been produced
by a series of mutations. It is only when mutation has introduced an allele
into our hereditary pool that other evolutionary pressures intervene to
influence  allele frequency.
Selection
When Charles Darwin made the expression "natural selection" a mainstay
of  his theory of evolution, it had for him the common intuitive meaning that
comes from a knowledge of artificial selection as practised by breeders:
Can it, then, be thought improbable, seeing that variations useful to man
have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations useful in some way to
each being in the great and complex battle of  life, should occur in the
course of  many successive generations? If  such do occur, can we doubt
(remembering that many more individuals are born than can possibly
survive) that individuals having any advantage, however slight, over
others, would have the best chance of surviving and of procreating their
kind? On the other hand, we may  feel sure that any variation in the least
degree injurious would be rigidly destroyed. This preservation of
favourable individual differences and variations, and the destruction of
those which are injurious, I have called Natural Selection, or the
Survival of  the Fittest.7
Later, Darwin's definition had to be adapted to take Mendelian
inheritance into account and in order that it might be more quantitative. We
now use the distribution curve of phenotypes in a population to distinguish
three modes of natural selection:
1. Directional selection acts at one end of the curve (for example, a virus
selects those individuals in a population which put up the best resistance);

Population and Ecological Genetics
85
2. Stabilising or conservative selection favours intermediate, median
phenotypes (for example, selection acting on babies' weights at birth
eliminates the extremes);
3. Divergent selection acts simultaneously at both ends of the distribution
curve (for example, when a new predator arrives on the scene, the prey-
species can increase in size for better resistance and decrease in size for
better concealment).
Irrespective of its mode of action, selection acts on the phenotype which
is determined by many genes and environmental factors. Because we cannot
observe the evolution of the entire genome, we use the concept of the fitness
of a genotype (also called adaptive or selective value) to study the change in
allele frequency at each locus under the effect of selection. This change
depends on the survival and reproduction capacities that the allele confers to
the carrier. Thus, the fitness of a genotype is defined as the number of
offspring the carriers of the genotype leave at the next generation. It is
directly dependent upon viability (the probability of  reaching adulthood) and
fertility (the number of offspring an adult leaves behind).
Fitness depends on the interaction of the genotype under study with all
the other loci of the individual's genome. We cannot therefore attribute
observed differences in fitness just to different genotypes at the locus under
consideration; they may be due to differences in other genes at other loci.
Fitness also depends on the environment which can privilege certain
genotypes. Finally, estimating viability and fertility is part of demography.
To avoid random effects, we must compare many individuals with different
genotypes. Some individuals in a population reproduce more than others for
no genetic reason. All these studies belong to ecological genetics (see
Section 2 of this chapter).
Migration
Migration is the transfer of individuals or gametes between populations
of the same species. It passes on and exchanges genes. These gene fluxes
alter allele frequencies in populations. Migration is thus an evolutionary
pressure. Described as "a sort of genetic glue that holds populations
together",8 it increases the homogeneity of allele frequency in a set of
populations. Its effects are noted:
1. on a population scale: migration limits differentiation of isolated
populations originating from the same initial population. (This genetic
differentiation is due to genetic drift - we shall come back to this below -,
mutation and selection if the populations are subject to different selective
pressures.)

86
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
2. on a local scale: migration runs counter to processes that decrease
variability.
How can we define a population when there is migration? How can we
divide species into populations? Don't individuals mate with close rather
than distant partners? The boundaries chosen by geneticists are somewhat
arbitrary. They define a population as the group that minimises the migration
rate whilst preserving a certain homogeneity. In practice, unless the
boundaries are clear-cut, the "population" under study will tend to be the
ensemble that can be sampled in a reasonable time. There is the risk,
however, that this unit will be smaller or larger than the one undergoing gene
pooling at each generation.
Genetic drift
Genetic drift is a well-established process in population genetics but it is
not easy to grasp. It can call into question the simple conclusions we have
just noted. When calculating the action of the selective forces on a gene in
order to describe the change in its frequency, we assume implicitly that the
law of large numbers applies. In other words, if the population is large
enough, the observed value for allele frequency will hardly differ from the
calculated (mathematically expected) value. However, for this to be true, that
is, for no drift, the population must be infinite. An infinite population does
not exist in practice and the law of large numbers therefore does not apply.
The genes carried by the gametes giving birth to a new generation are just a
sample of the genes of the previous generation. The frequency of an allele
thus fluctuates randomly from one generation to the next, even in the
absence of mutation and selection. The interesting point about this process is
its Markovian nature; it has no "memory". Once the new generation is born,
it forgets the value of the allele frequency in the previous generation. Thus,
in the absence of other evolutionary pressures, allele frequencies fluctuate
randomly. This is known as genetic drift. Its rate is inversely proportional to
population size.
What is the long-term consequence of genetic drift? If no force keeps
allele frequency constant, it fluctuates and can take on any value between 0
and 1. But, it cannot do so indefinitely. Sooner or later, it will reach 0 or 1
and be fixed once and for all. If it becomes 0, the allele in question will have
totally disappeared in favour of another (or several other) allele form(s) at
the locus under consideration. If it reaches 1, it will have eliminated all other
allele forms. Genetic drift has been compared to the gait of a drunkard on a
ridge. If  he cannot walk straight, he will end up by falling from the ridge,
either on one side or the other.

Population and Ecological Genetics
87
Of course, selection can oppose genetic drift which remains present
notwithstanding. If  the population is large enough, the effects of drift will be
negligible compared to those of selection. On the other hand, in a smaller
population, selection is more hard pressed to oppose the effects of random
drift. In other words, the weaker the selection force, the greater the
populations have to be for selection to be effective. An allele that has only a
small deleterious effect, for instance slight myopia, can thus invade a small
population just by chance.
In the course of their history, some populations undergo an important
reduction in size; one speaks of a population bottleneck. When this happens,
a large part of allele diversity can be lost through drift and even become 0
for all loci.
The founder effect obeys the same principle but the scenario is reversed.
A small group of migrants leaves a population (or is accidentally separated
from it) and founds a new population in a location where the species is not
yet present. Because the sample is random, the set of alleles carried by the
migrants may have a very different make up from that of the original
population. The population arising from this founding nucleus will thus
display a noticeably different genetic structure.9 Some evolutionists believe
this phenomenon is important in speciation.

88
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The meanders of ancestry
We have just seen that genetic drift exists because populations never
reach the infinite size that would allow us to apply the law of large numbers
and to describe the exact change in gene frequency in the population. We
must accept that allele frequencies fluctuate randomly, and all the more so,
the smaller the population. We have mentioned the effects of population
bottlenecks and migrant founders on allele diversity. We can also study the
effect of a reduction in population size on inbreeding. This is a way of
investigating the origin of the human species on the assumption that there
was a single ancestral population.
Genetic drift, inbreeding and gene coalescence
Inbreeding is mating between related individuals. It concerns all genes
and increases the number of individuals who are homozygotes in a
population. On the other hand, homogamy - mating of individuals with
similar phenotypes - gives rise to homozygotes only for those genes involved
in the similarity and not for others.
The inbreeding coefficient is the probability that both gene copies at a
given locus in an individual are copies of a single ancestral gene. This
coefficient is one of  the most complex concepts in population genetics. It can
be used, for instance, to measure a deficit in heterozygotes due to
preferential mating between relatives, the reference being a random mating
population with the same allele frequencies and for which the inbreeding
coefficient is arbitrarily set at 0.
On the other hand, in a small population, inbreeding occurs even when
mating is random. The smaller the population, the faster the increase in the
inbreeding coefficient. Of course, the calculated value is only an expected
value because of the effects of chance but we always end up with a
coefficient of 1. Not only is allele diversity lost but the entire population's
genes, at the locus under consideration, end up by being copies of  just one of
the starting genes. This means that, if we climb high enough up the
phylogenetic tree, we can reach the ancestral gene of all current genes for a
given locus.10 This is known as gene coalescence in a population (see annex
MA2).
Coalescence concerns all loci. In sexually reproducing organisms,
however, the ancestral genes for two distinct loci were usually not present in
the same individual at the same time. Moreover, because of within-gene
recombinations, adjacent parts of the same gene can derive from different
ancestors. Coalescence is a random phenomenon. In the absence of selection,
all the genes present at any given time have the same probability of  being the

Population and Ecological Genetics
89

90
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
lucky one, by which we mean the future ancestor of all the genes present in
the population formed by later generations. We cannot tell how long this
process will take. Coalescence time is a random variable for which we can
only calculate an expected value. On average, for k genes, we have to go
back 2k generations to find a single ancestor common to all. For a diploid
population of a constant number N of individuals, i.e. for 2N genes situated
at the same locus, we can expect to have to go back 4N generations to find
the ancestor. Conversely, an average of 4N generations are needed for all the
genes to be copies of  just one of the 2N genes present at a given time.
Did mitochondrial Eve meet the Adam of chromosome Y?
It is easy to calculate the number of ancestors each of us had in
Charlemagne's time. We are separated from this emperor with the white
flowing beard by 1200 years, that is by about 48 generations of 25 years. In
Charlemagne's day, we would thus have had 
(about 
) ancestors.
Assuming that the human population of the time was 
we can conclude
that each of Charlemagne's contemporaries was on average 
times our
ancestor. Moreover, this is an underestimate because they did not all have
offspring. We are all descendants of Charlemagne (if the line did not die out
with his sons Charles, Lothaire and Louis and their progeny); we are all
related! And what if we look even further back into the past?
The Earth's inhabitants all belong to the species Homo sapiens sapiens
which, like the now extinct Homo sapiens neanderthalensis, was preceded
by an archaic species Homo erectus which was, in turn, preceded by Homo
habilis. This human lineage was probably born in Africa, about 5 to 10
million years ago, after diverging from the great African apes as summed up
in the title of a book by the French paleontologist Yves Coppens ("Le Singe,
l'Afrique et l'Homme" - "The Ape, Africa and Man"). But when and where
did modern man appear? Many anthropologists claim that his earliest fossil
remains are African and date back 100 to 200 thousand years but others
think that fossil remains found in Asia might be those of our direct ancestors.
There is some consensus of opinion on the following scenario. Populations
of Homo erectus probably left Africa a million years ago and went off to
settle in other regions of the Old World. The Man from Java and the Man
from Peking would be their descendants. Archaic Homo sapiens appeared
some 250 000 years ago. It is a "hotch-potch" group in which were included
the Neanderthalians from Western Asia and Europe although, in July 1997,
geneticists working on fossil DNA claimed that the Man from Neanderthal
had had a separate evolutionary fate. At this point, the scenario diverges:
1. In the first multiple region model, the process that had given birth to
archaic sapiens populations went on to yield modern populations.

Population and Ecological Genetics
91
Widespread interbreeding between populations established early on a
continuity in the anatomic features of populations from different regions.
Genetic roots would thus be very deep-seated and run back to the time when
populations of Homo erectus reached different parts of the planet.
2, In the second model, modern mankind comes from a single population
of African archaic sapiens whose descendants spread throughout the Old
World and gradually replaced all other populations of archaic sapiens.
According to this model, there is no continuity in regional features. The
genetic roots are much less deep and just go back to when each population
was founded. This scenario has been called the "Noah's Ark" or "Out of
Africa" model and is related to the so-called "mitochondrial Eve" model.

92
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The mitochondrial Eve model was proposed by Allan Wilson and his
colleagues in an article published in January 1987 in Nature.11 This model
supported the notion that molecular biology can provide us with farther
evidence on the origins of the first Homo sapiens. Their mother,
symbolically called Eve, would have lived in Africa about 200 000 years
ago. (Other work suggests that Adam grew up in the land of the Aka
pygmies.) Wilson studied the mitochondrial DNA of our contemporaries.
DNA is found not only in the cell nucleus which harbours the chromosomes
but also in other organelles, especially in the mitochondria which are the
cell's "power stations". In mammals, mitochondria are passed on by females
only and thus the study of mitochondrial DNA tells us about maternal
relationships.
A few years earlier, in 1980, W. Brown had shown that the mitochondrial
DNA of 21 men from different geographic areas and of different ethnic
origins differed little as if, some 200 or 300 thousand years ago, the number
of females with fertile offspring had been considerably reduced. Rebecca
Cann, Mark Stoneking and Allan Wilson compared the mitochondrial DNA
of 147 individuals in populations from five different geographical areas:
Africa (the African sample was composed mainly of American Blacks),
Asia, Australia, New Guinea, and Europe. They treated the mitochondrial
DNA with 12 different restriction enzymes. Restriction enzymes cleave
nucleotide chains at specific points into sequences of a few nucleotides and
each enzyme thus provides a DNA-specific restriction map. A comparison of
all the maps distinguished 134 different DNA types. Calculations were
performed to find out how related they were and highlighted two main
branches in the evolution of the mitochondrial DNA of Homo sapiens, one
comprising only Africans, the other individuals from all five geographical
areas. The most logical explanation for this result is that the common
ancestor of all mitochondrial DNA from current populations comes from
Africa. If we follow the path from DNA to the individual to the family
tree, we find "Eve"; she was black, and the Garden of Eden was in Africa.
When did she live? We can answer this question by converting the number
of observed differences into accrued mutations and years passed. Using this
"molecular clock", the authors of the paper estimated that Eve lived between
280 000 and 140 000 years ago. They determined the time constant of the
clock using variations in the mitochondrial DNA from 18 tribes in New
Guinea assuming that each tribe's DNA originated from a single founding
mother. The measured mutation rate was 2 to 4 percent per million years.
Hardly surprisingly these results provoked uproarious debate in the
scientific community. From the beginning of the 1960s, the small core of
researchers investigating the origins of mankind had been torn between
physical and molecular anthropology. Although the African Eve affair led to

Population and Ecological Genetics
93

94
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
clashes between individuals or schools of thought, it also offered interesting
insight and information on the application of molecular biology techniques
to the study of life. Three of  the issues broached were:
1. A tree should not hide a forest from view. In tracing the evolutionary
history of the mitochondrial DNA sequences, Wilson's team used the
parsimony method which selects the tree built in the fewest "steps" (or rather
with the fewest branches) to derive relationships among sequences. For
instance, with 6 DNA types, we can build 105 different trees. Amongst
these, we have to choose the most parsimonious without knowing which of
the DNAs is the starting DNA (that is, without being able to "root" the tree
with any certainty). Wilson's results concerned 134 DNA types. There were
thus more than 
possible trees of which over 10 000 were considered
parsimonious! His choice of tree was, of course, criticised. There were
criticisms of how he established the mutation rate and how he implicitly
assumed that it was constant in all the tree's branches. There were also
criticisms of his choice of geographic area. To these critics his results
showed that Eve could in fact have come from virtually any one of the areas
and especially from Asia or from both Asia and Africa.
2. A dichotomic scheme based on sequence analysis should not be
mistaken for a genealogical tree. If bifurcations are to be turned into trees,
we must know in which direction the traits under study evolved and
distinguish similarities due to close kinship (sharing derived traits) from
similarities inherited from a long-gone common ancestor (sharing primitive
traits). Only the former can provide precise information on genealogy.
Unlike cladistics, molecular biology cannot discriminate between primitive
and derived traits. We could resort to physical anthropology but with no
guarantee of success.
3. What should we think of the famous bottleneck apparently undergone
by mankind a few hundred thousand years ago? Wilson himself adopted W.
Brown's idea and admits that it is tempting to establish a link between the
appearance of ancestral type DNA and the drastic decrease in population size
(bottleneck).12 According to this hypothesis, even if  Eve were not one of the
partners in a unique couple, she would nevertheless be one of the females of
a restricted population with an exceptional destiny. But let's not be too hasty.
We must not confuse the genealogy of individuals and the genealogy of
genes. Moreover, it is difficult to analyse the way genes behave during
bottlenecks because of the importance that random fluctuations may have at
the time.13 Simulations nevertheless indicate that a very narrow or long-
lasting bottleneck can decrease polymorphism markedly. To account for the
fact that there are currently different alleles for a given locus in a species, we
have to assume that the original population was at least 500 strong. These
estimations are contrary to the hypothesis that species develop from small

Population and Ecological Genetics
95
populations in which random fluctuations in gene frequency amplify the
effects of natural selection. According to Jan Klein and his colleagues,
Wilson's study shows at best that all DNA molecules in present-day
mitochondria come from an ancestral molecule borne by a woman who lived
some 200 000 years ago.13
And what about Adam? Who would want to be an Eve without her Adam
with his Y chromosome? Wilson's work was criticised for neglecting this
chromosome. Even if mitochondrial DNA went through a difficult patch
200 000 years ago, should we link the emergence of modern mankind with
this episode? How did the Y chromosome of males evolve? If Eve really is
the woman who carried the mitochondrion from which all our mitochondria
are descended, and if Adam was the man who carried the Y chromosome
from which all our Y chromosomes are descended, then it is highly likely
that Adam and Eve lived at different times and in different places!
Eve is thus still looking for her Garden of Eden but the controversies she
is kindling on genealogic trees have a fascination of their own. They urge us
to heed the criteria we choose in phylogeny studies and to keep on drawing
comparisons between genetic data, palaeontologic observations, linguistic
analyses, etc.14
Toward reconciling Darwinians and Mendelians
As we mentioned in the Introduction, the challenge of the first 30 years
of the 
century was to reconcile Darwinians (who postulate that evolution
occurs by natural selection) and Mendelians (who propose mutation). We
have seen that we must not choose between these two forces of evolution but
must take both into account and even add migration and genetic drift. Major
contributions of population genetics have been its global approach to the
study of how gene frequencies evolve and its use of mathematical tools.
Nevertheless, the results obtained remain highly speculative as the debates
on the origins of mankind - which have stressed the usefulness but also
limitations of the approach - illustrate. We shall now outline the main
models of population genetics.
The first model (published in 1908) of the genotypic composition of a
population was devised simultaneously by two 
scientists working
independently, Godfrey H. Hardy (1877-1947) and Wilhelm Weinberg
(1862-1937). The law derived from this model bears their joint names. They
based the model on the following hypotheses: gametes associate randomly
with respect to the genes under study (hypothesis of panmixia or random
mating); the population is infinite so that the law of large numbers applies
(the frequency of an event is equal to its probability); and gene frequencies
are not influenced by any evolutionary pressure (mutation, gene selection, or

96
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
migration). Using these simplifications, we can show, on the one hand, that
genotype frequency can be deduced directly from allele frequency (if  p and q
are the frequencies of the alleles A and a, then, according to the hypothesis
of panmixia, the frequencies of the two homozygote genotypes AA and aa
and of the heterozygote genotype Aa are p2, q2, and 2pq, respectively) and,
on the other hand, that allele frequencies - and thus genotype and phenotype
frequencies - do not vary from one generation to the next. The Hardy-
Weinberg law summarises these results as follows: In a closed population of
infinite members, not subject to selection and with no mutation, allele
frequencies are constant. If  mating is panmictic, genotype frequencies can be
deduced directly from a knowledge of allele frequencies; they are also
constant. In 1908, Hardy wrote:
In a word, there is not the slightest foundation for the idea that a
dominant character should show a tendency to spread over a whole
population, or that a recessive character should tend to die out.
The Hardy-Weinberg law is the basis of population genetics. It
constitutes the "null model" for evolution and simply states that if nothing
causes any change, then nothing changes. For some, this law is a truism,
others compare it to the principle of inertia in physics. Calculations and
observations on the genotype structure of populations most often refer to this
law or to one of its variations. When assessing its contribution to our
understanding of  real populations, we must clearly distinguish its two facets:
(i) If nothing arises that might change allele frequencies (a situation of
isolation, infinite population size, no mutation, no selection), these
frequencies do not change. This may seem trivial but it contradicts several
popular misconceptions such as the idea that a dominant gene tends to
invade a population, or that allele ratios spontaneously tend toward a 50/50
equality. (ii) In panmixia, genotype ratios are deduced in a simple fashion
from allele ratios. This second facet of the law is often borne out in real
populations. It must be totally dissociated from the first which is never
confirmed but is instructive.
The Wahlund effect
We obtain the Hardy-Weinberg frequencies (p2, 2pq, q2) only
when the entire population is panmictic. Many populations, however,
are made up of groups (or demes) that mate preferentially. The
outcome of this is the Wahlund effect. When we combine these
panmictic subpopulations with different allele frequencies (in theory
not in practice!), we note an overall deficit in heterozygotes relative to
the Hardy-Weinberg structure even though this is the structure of each
subpopulation.

Population and Ecological Genetics
97
Because it is not always clear at the outset whether the population
under study can be considered as a single panmictic unit, the Wahlund
effect is always a possible explanation for a heterozygote deficit. For
instance, the sample may have included several subpopulations that
are geographically isolated enough to be genetically differentiated and
to display different allele frequencies (think of plants or even animals
that are not very mobile and that are sampled over a large enough
area). Or maybe the sample included two populations that cannot
interbreed freely, or even several generations of different genetic
composition.
During the two decades following Hardy and Weinberg's work, R. Fisher
and J.B.S. Haldane in Great Britain and S. Wright in the United States laid
the true foundations of population genetics.
Ronald A. Fisher (1890-1962) belonged to the same school of
probabilistic statistics as Galton and Pearson did. He was the man behind the
Monte Carlo method, estimation theory and the maximum likelihood
method. In 1919 he was invited by John Russel to join the team at the
experimental station in Rothamsted where he brought about a real revolution
in methodology. Values
obtained by measurement were no longer
considered for what they were but as representations of a set of possibilities
with probabilities attached. Fisher considered extensive and complex
experiments far more effective than simple experiments. In agricultural
experimentation, he said, no aphorism is repeated more often than the one
saying that we can ask nature only a few questions at a time, or even just a
single question. To him this was completely mistaken. Nature willingly
provides answers to a carefully planned logical questionnaire. Even if we
were to ask but a single question, nature would refuse to reply before another
question had been resolved.15
Because experimental results fluctuate, they have to be analysed by
probabilistic methods. We can estimate mean values and deviations, use
significance tests, and eliminate or reduce the causes of systematic errors.
This methodology in hand, Fisher tried to use the action of selection and
mutation to explain several of life's features, such as the evolution of the
system of dominance/recessivity or the evolution rate of a phenotypic
character.
Sewall Wright (1889-1988) was more interested in the effects of drift
than was Fisher. A major contribution of his was the shifting balance theory.
Wright analysed the different kinds of evolutionary pressure and concluded
that a large population subdivided into subpopulations encourages rapid
evolutionary progress. Because of drift, several small populations explore
more avenues than does a single large population. If one such small

98
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
population "finds" a more effective evolutionary path, its offspring will
invade the species, thus producing rapid evolution and an apparent "jump".16
Although John B.S. Haldane's (1892-1964) approach was more diverse
and biological than Fisher's, he also supported the use of mathematics:
At present one may say that the mathematical theory of evolution is in a
somewhat unfortunate position, too mathematical to interest most
biologists, and not sufficiently mathematical to interest most
mathematicians. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to suppose that in the next
half century it will be developed into a respectable branch of Applied
Mathematics.17
The legacy left by Fisher, Wright and Haldane was chiefly theoretical but
it was so astonishingly coherent 18 and convincing that many naturalists
applied their models to their own studies. From this urge to put population
genetics to the test arose ecological genetics.
2.
HEYDAY AND DECLINE OF ECOLOGICAL
GENETICS
A story about moths
In 1895, sixty years had passed since the expedition of the Beagle. The
Universal Exhibition in 1851 had marked Great Britain out as the workshop
of the world, and the industrial revolution, begun in the 18th century,
continued to tap the country's human and other resources. Coal was
particularly heavily exploited, and coal means ... pollution. This is when a
simple moth entered stage. The peppered moth, or Biston betularia, has
white wings mottled with black. It holds a very special position in the
bestiary of the theories of evolution because it provided a concrete example
of natural selection, the sort of example that Darwin's work lacked. Darwin
had had to base his theory on observations of how breeders practised
artificial selection.
The first capture of a black or melanic form of the peppered moth was
recorded in 1848 19 in the city of Manchester in the heart of England's oldest
industrial area. The frequency of this form, baptized carbonaria, increased
rapidly and, by 1895, 98 percent of the Biston betularia specimens captured
in Manchester were melanic. The melanic form also turned up in many other
areas. Clearly, something was up. In 1900 therefore, the Evolution
Committee of the Royal Society in London set up an enquiry with the help of
its corresponding members. The enquiry concluded that melanism was

Population and Ecological Genetics
99
linked to industrialisation since in rural areas only the speckled white form
(called typica) was to be found. Naturalists began to speak of industrial
melanisation and wondered why the moths darkened as the landscape of
industrial England blackened under the effects of soot and other pollutants.
Several
scientists offered 
Lamarckian explanations such as a
physiological effect caused by pollution. Thus, in 1926, in line with
contemporary mutationist thinking, a geneticist argued that melanism was
due to the mutagenic action of certain pollutants and undertook experiments
to prove this. On the other hand, Darwinian-type explanations put the
emphasis on selection through camouflage. Like many night moths, adult
Biston betularia rest by day on tree trunks and in places where they are
difficult to detect. In 1896, J.W. Tutt suggested that, because pollution
darkens the trunks, camouflage might explain melanism. However, it was
not until 1950 that the British biologist H.B.D. Kettlewell conducted a
remarkable set of experiments which were to turn the industrial melanism of
the peppered moth into a case study found in every textbook on evolution.
(Industrial melanism was not encountered in the peppered moth only but also
in more than 100 other species of moth as well as in other insects and
arthropods, in several European countries and in North America.)
Kettlewell was a student of E.B. Ford, the founding father of ecological
genetics. Ford was the leader of a school of English naturalists who, under
the intellectual influence of Fisher, were out to demonstrate the action of
selection in nature. They studied various kinds of polymorphism in animals
(especially butterflies, a field in which Ford was an expert) and plants. Ford's
work Ecological genetics is a compilation of many of these studies.
Industrial melanism, the subject of Kettlewell's investigation, comes across
as one of its most convincing case studies. By a series of controlled crosses,
Kettlewell established the genetics of melanism in the peppered moth. The
phenotype is due to a dominant gene denoted C. CC and Cc individuals are
black (carbonaria), cc recessive homozygotes are light (typica). He also
drew up a detailed distribution map of Biston betalaria forms in Great
Britain which confirmed the relationship between the high frequency of
melanics and industrialisation. To catch his specimens by night, Kettlewell
used mercury vapour lamps after ensuring that they were as effective in
attracting the light and dark forms. He counted the number of specimens of
each form captured at each site. Eighty-five percent of the specimens were
melanic in Birmingham Park whereas no melanic moth was found in Dean
End Wood, a rural area in South Wales (see Table 3.1). He then measured
mortality at both sites using conventional capture-tagging-release-recapture
experiments and found that mortality of the dark form was double that of the
light
form in Dean End Wood whereas the converse was true in
Birmingham. Kettlewell suggested that at each site the least "cryptic" form

100
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
(the one easiest to detect) was prey to birds. His peers were at first rather
sceptical about this selective prey theory. They were only convinced after
seeing on site or on film how the moths on tree trunks were preyed upon by
various species of sparrow.
The selective process described by Kettlewell is simple. In rural areas the
typica form of the peppered moth blended in perfectly with the mottled
lichen sheath on tree trunks. These moths thus escaped from predators that
hunt by sight. In industrial zones, the lichens disappeared because of
pollutants, especially sulphur dioxide. The barks were left bare, became even
darker with soot, and thus provided better camouflage for the carbonaria.
It was a splendid demonstration of how selection (predation) in nature
benefits one form at the expense of another. The very marked selective
difference between the two forms meant that the evolutionary change
occurred incredibly fast despite there being just one generation of peppered
moth per year. It was much faster than most Darwinian naturalists thought
possible. Until then, they had believed that evolution by natural selection
was only perceptible over quasi-geological time-spans. Demonstrating the
importance of selective effects in nature is one of the most significant
contributions of ecological genetics. However, this was not quite the end of
the story of industrial melanism in England. The 1970s saw a case of
inversion of evolution.20 The frequency of the carbonaria form decreased in
many regions apparently in line with the reduction in pollution after the
Clean Air Act.

Population and Ecological Genetics
101
Kettlewell's studies left unsolved problems. Why weren't the typica
eliminated in polluted areas such as Manchester if their fitness in this
environment was really lower? In the years between 1970 and 1980, a team
of British researchers undertook a detailed analysis of a 50-kilometer stretch
of land between Liverpool (a polluted zone with a high frequency of
melanics) and North Wales (a rural zone where typica predominated).21
They conducted experiments similar to Kettlewell's. They measured the
frequency of the two forms at several points along the route (Fig. 3.6A) and
the extent to which each form was preyed upon (Fig. 3.6B). Figure 3.6A
shows that there was a gradual decrease in the frequency of carbonaria from
Liverpool to Wales. Such graded variation in a character along a transect is
called a frequency cline. It is unexpected if just predation were involved. In
sites where one of two forms is a prey of choice, the more vulnerable form is
eliminated irrespective of whether there is a large or small difference in the
extent of predation. (Predation only influences the elimination rate; the
frequency curve should look like a flight of stairs (Fig. 3.6C)).
The observed cline could only be explained by taking migration into
account. A field study confirmed this hypothesis. The males fly out at night
to seek females. The females stay put and secrete pheromones to attract the
males. By placing a network of traps at different distances all around the
release-point of tagged male moths, the British researchers established that

102
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
they regularly flew several kilometres each night and that the moths flew off
in all directions.
We can build a theoretical model combining the effects of predation and
migration and obtain a family of theoretical clines that are more or less flat
depending upon the average distance covered (Fig. 3.6D). However, when
we compare these theoretical clines with the observed cline, we note a shift.
The theoretical decrease in the frequency of melanics occurs nearly 20
kilometres before the observed cline (as measured from Liverpool). In other
words, there is a fairly large area where melanics prevail despite being
preyed upon slightly more often. We must therefore postulate a selection
process independent of predation that favours melanics as long as they are

Population and Ecological Genetics
103
not at an overwhelming disadvantage when face-to-face with the predator.
For the theoretical clines to be centred upon the observed cline, melanics
require a calculated selective advantage of about 20 percent over the typica
(Fig. 3.6E). Data on the viability of various artificially bred forms have
confirmed that the melanics are indeed at an advantage, perhaps because
they absorb heat better or for some other physiological reason.22
Including a second selection process along with predation noticeably
improves the fit between theoretical and observed clines. For a migration
distance of one kilometre per night, the fit is good over the central part of the
cline but not at either end; for a distance of 4 kilometres per night, the
reverse is true. To improve the fit, an additional selection process has been
postulated; so-called frequency-dependent selection advantages the rarer
form at each end of the cline (typica in Liverpool, carbonaria in Wales). As
shown in Figure 3.6F, this leads to theoretical and observed clines with near-
perfect fit. Frequency-dependent selection has been observed in quite a few
cases, in particular when vertebrate predators are present. It is a plausible
explanation but, to our knowledge, has yet to be demonstrated for Biston
betularia.
This example is a good illustration of the kind of approach that ecological
geneticists take to identify the evolutionary factors maintaining
polymorphism. It also highlights the limitations of the approach. As soon as
we examine things in detail, we discover that many factors intervene in
nature, that they interact and are often difficult to put to the test.
The strategy of ecological genetics
The beginnings of ecological genetics were marked by the analysis of
industrial melanism. Ecological genetics springs directly from population
genetics and proceeds in five steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
finding a polymorphism
establishing the genetic determinism of this polymorphism
mapping its distribution
deducing correlations between alleles and environment
testing these causal relationships experimentally.
Because the first step is seeking polymorphism, ecological genetics has
to come to grips with the following questions: What is a population (beyond
the empirical concept we have used so far)? What is the rationale for
biodiversity? Why are species in the same environment so diverse? Why are
individuals within a given species so different? Why do some species need
specific environments or vegetation whereas others can survive under much
more varied circumstances?

104
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
In raptures over thyme essences
We shall use a typical study in ecological genetics to try to find answers
to these questions. We shall describe the steps followed and the obstacles
encountered.
First, we have to select an appropriate organism; we shall go for thyme.
This species of the Labiacae family can be fairly easily defined, from the
standpoint of taxonomy, and is found in a wide range of plant combinations
in the Mediterranean region. Most importantly, two of its easily observable
characteristics display remarkable genetic diversity: sexual form (to be
discussed later) and chemical form (thyme essences have different
compositions).
Thyme is well known for its culinary and medicinal properties. These are
due to monoterpenes produced by cells under the leaves. (Monoterpenes are
molecules formed by the coupling of two 5-carbon entities called isoprenes).
An expert with a "nose" can identify several chemical forms by their
fragrance, either between populations or even within a population, although
chromatography is more reliable and practical especially when we are
dealing with many samples. The chemical characters are not due to the
environment as shown by transplanting specimens into a new site;
transplanted specimens pass on their chemical form to the next generation.
We can thus ask: Do the chemical forms reflect a specific diversity (in which
case, we could use chemotaxonomy for classification purposes) or, on the
contrary, is this a case of gene polymorphism within a species?
Genetic determinism
Each thyme plant usually produces an essence that contains a
predominant monoterpene together with its closest precursors (the molecules
that make up its biosynthetic pathway). Depending on the genotype of the
plant, the monoterpene is either an acyclic compound (geraniol = G or linalol
= L), a non-phenolic cyclic compound ( 
or thuyanol = U) or
a phenol (carvacrol = C or thymol = T). We can thus define six types of
plants, or chemotypes, which are named after the main monoterpene in their
essence. For example, the thymol (or T) chemotype denotes all plants in
which thymol is the main component of its essence. The thymol and
carvacrol chemotypes are phenolic chemotypes.
The type of monoterpene in the essence (chemotype) is governed by a
series of interacting loci (epistatic loci). The phenotypic expression of one
gene masks that of another gene that is not an allele of the first locus. This
phenomenon differs from dominance and only concerns relationships among
alleles. The scheme for thyme is the following:

Population and Ecological Genetics
105
The genetic determinism of the chemotype of thyme displays two
features of interest:
1. First feature: the kinds of genes involved. Juxtaposing the scheme of
the genetic relationships among loci with the monoterpene biosynthesis
pathway established by organic chemists indicates that the dominant genes
act by blocking monoterpene production. In some thyme plants, production
is blocked several months after germination; for instance, in their early life,
L plants can synthesise T and C. From this we can conclude that the genes
involved are probably regulatory genes and not structural genes (that is to
say, they are probably not the genes coding for the enzymes in monoterpene
biosynthesis but for the proteins controlling the expression of these
enzymes). This is an important point as most evolutionists now agree that
evolution (or, at least, adaptation) is due to changes occurring primarily in
regulatory genes. It was also a serious obstacle in that genetic ecologists
routinely employed a highly practical method for tracking down different
forms of the same enzyme (allozymes) (see description of electrophoresis
techniques below) which was however not applicable to the study of the
products of regulatory genes. If a regulatory gene acted on the expression of
the locus under study, it was customary to abandon the system and declare it
unstable.
2. Second feature: the extent of genotypic polymorphism. Plants of the T
chemotype, where nothing blocks the pathway leading to thymol, must be of
genotypes g1g1, g2g2, aa, uu, ll and cc. They are genetically similar and

106
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
homozygotes for the loci under consideration. On the other hand, plants with
a non-phenolic chemotype can be of any genotype at the loci that govern the
steps following the blocked step; several genotypes correspond to the same
phenotype. Consequently, a single genotype specifies the T chemotype
whereas 
i.e., 648 genotypes specify the G chemotype. (At loci GER1
and GER2, there are 8 genotypes controlling geraniol production. Genotype
does not affect phenotype at the four other loci thus leaving three options:
dominant homozygote, recessive homozygote, heterozygote). Non-phenolic
populations can - and indeed do - harbour a much greater genetic diversity
than phenolic populations at these loci.
Geographic distribution
The study of the distribution of the chemical forms of thyme (and the
genes determining these forms) has revealed a transition from the C to T to
non-phenolic types when we travel from the Mediterranean toward the
Cevennes. The order of the chemotypes encountered along a transect from
Montpellier to Vigan is C, T, U, L and A except in a few places such as the
basin of Saint-Martin de Londres. This basin is well known for its rather
untypical ecological conditions and harbours populations of plants of the
non-phenolic chemotype even though it lies at the boundary of zones C and
T. To understand this anomaly, we drew a fine scale map of the chemotypes
in the basin and surrounding areas. It revealed a highly heterogeneous
distribution. The thyme populations on the plateau around the basin were
exclusively of the phenolic chemotype whereas those of the basin itself were
predominantly non-phenolic. The link between a change in environment and
in chemical form could not be due to mere chance. A strong selection
pressure is needed to maintain such a clear-cut difference between two
populations. On the other hand, the distribution of the C and T populations
on the plateau itself, or that of the G, A, U, and L populations in the basin,
were more difficult to explain. Neither the effects of chance nor selection
could be excluded a priori.
Two models can help interpret the above results. The first model, called
stepping stone model, proposed by Motoo Kimura and Takeo Maruyama in
1971, simulates how a set of adjoining populations - where each population
can only exchange genes (or migrants) with its neighbours - evolve under the
influence of genetic drift. Each population evolves randomly because of
genetic drift but close populations tend to become similar because of
migration. If migration is high, all the populations are alike; if migration is
low, haphazard zones appear and, after a number of generations, the
populations are clearly distinguished with respect to unselected genes (we
speak of neutral genes). The simulated map will therefore have a number of

Population and Ecological Genetics
107
clines (or, in our example of thyme, graded series of chemotypes in slightly
different proportions). Kimura and Maruyama concluded that when
metapopulations occupy large territories they spontaneously split into
genetically differentiated subpopulations. This model would seem to provide
a satisfactory description of the structure of the vast areas of thyme in the
Mediterranean heaths ("garrigues").

108
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The second model, proposed by Donald Levin in 1978, simulates how a
population straddling two environments, in which different alleles are
selected, evolves. It can evolve either by remaining polymorphic, if the
average migration distance is large enough, or by differentiating into
subpopulations, if the distance is small.
These two models, involving neutral genes and selected genes
respectively, yield comparable results. Populations can differentiate
geographically only if migration is low. Thus, whenever we encounter
geographic differentiation in a population, we may assume that the migration
distance is small.
We can draw two conclusions from the map of thyme chemotypes around
Saint-Martin de Londres. First, a selective pressure keeps the genes that
determine non-phenolic chemotypes in the basin and those determining
phenolic chemotypes on the plateau. Second, the migration distance is small
enough to have allowed the populations confined to the basin to
differentiate, either by the action of selection or because of drift, depending
upon which of the two models we choose. (In Levin's model, the differences
in habitat inducing differential selection have yet to be identified.) These
conclusions prompt two questions: What are the selective forces that keep
the phenolic and non-phenolic chemotypes so well apart? What is the reason
for the low migration, and does it have other consequences?

Population and Ecological Genetics
109
The dispersal of pollen and seeds
We have seen that migration is low enough for the thyme carpeted areas
to differentiate. How does this migration occur – by pollen and seeds. Pollen
is conveyed by insects only. All studies on pollen dissemination agree that,
whereas butterflies transport pollen over considerable distances, bees tend to
deposit pollen near the collection point. Most thyme pollen is transported by
bees, the remainder by small beetles or ants which transport it scarcely any
farther. Under normal circumstances, thyme genes are not carried more than
50 to 100 centimetres by pollen.
Unfortunately, seed migration is not as easy to observe as pollen
migration. Its study requires indirect methods and special conditions as those
offered by the slopes between the plateau and basin, each with its different
chemotype. These slopes are ideal places for measuring migration. Water
trickling down the slopes sweeps down the seeds of the plateau population.
We would therefore expect to find islands of this chemotype encroaching
upon the basin at the foot of ravines. Surprisingly, there is hardly any
evidence for this, not because the seeds are deposited along the ravine on the
way down, although this does occur, but because selection acts against the
genotypes coming from the plateau and in favour of the seeds that travel
least and quickly take a hold in the soil. It is apparently difficult to escape
from this process of confined migration once it is underway because low
migration means that each population adapts increasingly well to its
environment and that migrants are less likely to establish themselves. If the
environment were perfectly stable, this would be an end to migration but, in
reality, new environments are all the time becoming available for colony
establishment. For a thyme lineage to colonise them, it must retain the ability
to migrate as a seed and, especially, the genetic potential to adapt to a new
environment.
Selective factors
Thyme plants have to overcome two kinds of constraints, the ones due to
the physical environment, the others to competitors and predators. These are
fundamentally different. The physical environment does not try to stop the
plants from adapting. Thus, if a plant has found a way of growing under high
temperatures, the surroundings will tend neither to cool nor to heat up any
further. On the other hand, the biotic environment made up of other living
things invariably tends to fight any novel ways in which the plants may
adapt. If a plant grows to get more light, the shadow it throws over other
plants will lead to selection in favour of height increase in these plants.

110
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The plant can probably overcome, more or less, most of the obstacles due
to the physical environment. This is not true when the obstacles are other
living things. L. Van Valen examined the consequences of such a situation in
his Red Queen hypothesis (1973).23 Engaged in a life struggle, individuals
must dip into their resources and invest all they can because evolution will
keep only those able to make such a sacrifice. But will this investment not
limit the resources available for responding to physiological constraints and
induce competition between two kinds of adaptation? In fact, only a species
with no competitors or predators could indulge in the luxury of investing
enough resources into adapting to the physical environment; cohabiting with
other species can only lessen adaptation.
What is the function of the terpenes produced by thyme leaves? Is it still
the same as it was when the ancestor of thyme produced the ancestors of
modern terpenes? Is it related to the survival of the plant? To answer these
questions, we must establish the main causes of thyme mortality.
Various experiments have shown that the renewal rate of thyme is low
(under 5 percent per year). If most of the seeds that are produced do not give
rise to new individuals, what do they become? In experiments with seed-
beds under semi-natural conditions (subject to wind and rain), the seeds stay
put and the seedlings appear within 5 centimetres of the point where the
seeds were sown. If we choose the right time, we can even spy carpets of
seedlings beneath the plants of wild populations. It is after germination that
problems occur. On counting the seedlings, we note a drastic decrease in
density; some seedlings disappear in a day! Maybe there are predators in the
area. The remainder tend to die over the next few days; only a few lucky
ones grow beyond the stage of ten leaves (stage at which the samples were
taken). Is this due to drought? Or to a microscopic parasite?
Can the herbivores or parasites responsible for the disappearance of the
seedlings tell one chemotype from another? To study the "taste buds" of the
predators, the seedlings were set before slugs that munch away the leaves
one by one at night, with the following results:
1. The slugs had marked gastronomic preferences. They were apparently
repelled by some chemotypes (U), barely tasted others (T) and had a liking
for (or tolerated) two (A and C).
2. Some slugs at least could distinguish the compounds without tasting
the leaves.
3. This selective behaviour was observed only after a training period
during which the slugs showed no preferences. This demonstrated their
ability to "learn".
Predators thus seem to influence the polymorphism due to terpenes in a
way that has yet to be established. However, it is quite unreasonable to wish
to model the behaviour of all species that attack thyme. We know of 20

Population and Ecological Genetics
111
species of snail, at the very least, that go for the plant! We would also have
to take into account the presence of plants that compete with thyme. All this
would require rather complex experiments.
It is much easier to test the influence of the physical environment. To
study how well different chemotypes respond to various physical factors, we
used plants of the same origin but of different chemotype. Under restricted
lighting conditions, chemotype A plants were more resilient than chemotype
T plants, which were, however, advantaged under conditions of drought. To
study the effects of high temperatures, we planted different chemotypes in
the same pot, keeping humidity high and gradually increasing temperature
from 30 to 55°C. Chemotype T displayed the greatest resistance under these
conditions.
Grasp all, lose all
The distribution of the chemical forms of thyme can thus be explained,
on the one hand, by the low level of migration and, on the other, by selection
due to herbivores and climate. Attempts to combine these selective factors
have met with disappointing results because each factor does not act just on
thyme plants but also affects the other factors. For example, the grass
Brachypodium ramorum competes with thyme for light and water. By
attracting slugs and snails, it increases the pressure exerted by these
predators but, by protecting thyme seedlings from the sun's rays, it prevents
drying out. The overall ecological interactions are too complex to predict
chemotype distribution. Although the work outlined above has identified
selective factors and highlighted an adaptive process, because of the
complexity of the situation it falls short of providing an exact description.
In summary, progress in ecological genetics marked time toward the end
of the 1970s because of the increasing complexity of the field it addressed. It
has revealed the mode of action of various factors on allele frequency but it
is uncertain whether it can assist us any further in understanding evolution.
As our example of thyme shows, the understanding of gene distribution
requires a vast volume of research that ultimately provides rather vague
information. One hesitates to undertake such work today. The demonstration
of how extensive is gene polymorphism and the controversies surrounding
ecological genetics have certainly contributed to its loss of staying power.
3.
GENE POLYMORPHISM
Life's wealth and complexity have always been a source of astonishment
and wonder but also a challenge to those who spend their time contemplating

112
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
or scrutinising the world. Naturalists like Linnaeus were primarily - one
could even say exclusively - concerned with the number of living species
and the differences among them. We do not know the exact number as the
inventory is far from complete even for groups generally thought to be well
known. A new species of palm was discovered in Australia at the end of the
1970s, a new species of monkey in the Gabon in 1984, and three new
primates were discovered in the 1990s. There are invertebrates in tropical
forests, creatures of the ocean depths and even micro-organisms whose
diversity we are only just beginning to fathom. However, despite discovering
new species each year, we seem to be faced with ever greater gaps in our
inventories. About 1.4 million living species have been listed; how many
have yet to be discovered? One million, five, ten, one hundred million?
Speculations and extrapolations by experts in systematics abound. Let's note,
however, (some consolation!) that current species probably only represent
one hundredth of the species that have lived on our planet!24
Charles Darwin was not the last to be astonished by this biodiversity. In
his major work, he provides an explanation:
It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many plants
of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects
flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to
reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each
other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all
been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in the largest
sense, being Growth with Reproduction; Inheritance which is almost
implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and direct action
of the conditions of life and from use and disuse: a Ratio of Increase so
high as to lead to a Struggle for Life, and as a consequence to Natural
Selection, entailing Divergence of Character and the Extinction of less-
improved forms. 25
One of Darwin's main arguments to explain evolution by selection was
that there is a considerable and apparently endless variability within species
that is reflected in often very slight individual differences. At the time,
Darwin just noted this variability, but the discoveries of Mendel and of his
followers would explain it, and it would become one of the key concepts of
population genetics. In 1940 E.B. Ford defined polymorphism as the co-
existence within a population of two or more discontinuous forms, in
proportions such that the rarer form cannot be maintained just by recurrent
mutation.

Population and Ecological Genetics
113
Gene polymorphism and how it evolves
The variability in phenotype we have just discussed is due to an
underlying polymorphism at the gene level. Gene polymorphism is the co-
existence of several alleles at a locus. A locus for which only a single allele
is known is monomorphous.
Cryptopolymorphism
As we have seen, mutation is constantly producing new alleles, in most
cases with non beneficial consequences as the mutated gene codes for a
protein that functions less well or does not function at all (whether a single
amino acid is modified or the protein is truncated as in deletions or nonsense
mutations). Sometimes no protein is produced at all. If the carrier of the
mutation does not reproduce well or disappears, the allele is said to be
sublethal or lethal. Individuals, whether non-viable or sterile, who express a
lethal allele (in a phenotypic sense, an allele producing no protein is
expressed if this lack of protein has an effect) have zero fitness. Such lethal
alleles are most often recessive, sometimes dominant.
Lethal alleles are maintained at certain frequencies in populations. A
balance is established between the mutation, which tends to increase the
frequency of the lethal allele, and selection, which tends to eliminate the
allele. However, because the mutation rate is low (it is often estimated
at 
), the frequency of the mutated form is also low and little diversity is
engendered by the process. This situation, called Cryptopolymorphism, is
encountered in nearly all serious genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis,
haemophilia or galactosemia (see mathematical appendix MA3).
Is polymorphism widespread?
The task of quantifying variations and measuring evolution rates in
natural populations has taken much longer than expected but the result has
been worth waiting for. Natural populations display a much greater genetic
variability, and also evolution rate, than the first evolutionists believed. In
1930, Ronald Fisher demonstrated mathematically that the greater the
genetic variation in a population, the more effectively and rapidly selection
leads to evolution.
The biologist Francisco J. 
Ayala confirmed this relationship
experimentally using two kinds of fruit-fly populations. The one kind (S for

114
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
simple) was made up of flies taken from a single site, the other (M for
mixed) was obtained by interbreeding flies from two different sites. The M
populations had greater genetic variability because they incorporated the pre-
existing variants of two populations. Each population was kept in isolation in
a "population cage" and provided with constant amounts of food at fixed
intervals. The competition between the flies for food and space was fierce
because resources were limited; the flies had to evolve rapidly. The
experiments were stopped after a given number of generations. The result
was as expected. Both S and M populations adapted gradually to the
conditions of the population cage, but the M population adapted faster and
more successfully because of its initially higher gene polymorphism. There
is thus a correlation between variation level and evolution rate. All that
remained to be evaluated was the hereditary capacity of the natural
populations to evolve. Two models were proposed, one by Muller, the other
by Dobzhansky and Ford.
Hermann J. Muller (1890-1967), Nobel prize-winner in physiology and
medicine in 1946, was an early collaborator of Thomas Morgan, the father of
the chromosome theory of inheritance. In his model, Muller postulated that a
population's gene pool comprises almost exclusively "natural (wild) type"
alleles that are present at all loci with a frequency of nearly 1. Deleterious
alleles arising by mutation and present at a low frequency would make up
the rest. (The mutations observed in the experiments by Morgan's team were
often deleterious.) According to the model, an individual's normal genotype
is that of homozygote with respect to the greatest possible number of alleles;
the emergence of heterozygotes is harmful. However, if a mutation were to
benefit its carriers, it would spread rapidly through the population and end
up by replacing the allele initially considered to be the wild-type allele. In
this model, sometimes called the classic model, the magnitude of the
hereditary component of variation is low.
In the model of Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975) and Edmund B.
Ford (1901-1988), there is no single wild or normal type allele and no
variant that is a priori any better than any other at all loci. Although some
gene variants may be more frequent than others in a population, this may not
be so in other populations of the same species. In humans, gene I determines
the blood groups A, B and O. This gene has three alleles, Ia, IB and i that
have frequencies that vary with population. The frequencies recorded in the
French population are 28.7 percent, 5.5 percent, and 65.8 percent,
respectively. In all human populations taken together, the frequency of i,
which is usually the predominant allele, lies between 45 and 100 percent
(100 percent in American Indian populations where all individuals are
homozygotes), that of IA between 0 and 55 percent, and that of IB between 0
and 35 percent. In this model, therefore, genetic diversity within populations

Population and Ecological Genetics
115
is the rule and is maintained by various forms of natural selection. Moreover,
because genes do not act in isolation, the selective advantage conferred by an
allele depends on which other alleles are present in the genotype, besides
depending upon environmental factors. (This does not exclude mutations
that are harmful to the carrier and are kept at a low frequency by natural
selection). In plain words, the ideal type does not exist. In this model,
sometimes called the balance model, the emphasis is on inherited variations.
Clearly, these two models reflect contrasting views of the world and of
mankind. The classic model, which claims that there are no marked
differences among individuals of a population, has led to the idea that races
within a species are characterised by great genetic differences. There exists a
normal, perfect, homozygote type with respect to which all other types are
but inferior and corrupt. Muller was in fact an ardent partisan of eugenics
which he took to be the only hope for "the ultimate genetic improvement of
man". In 1939, he published "The Geneticists' Manifesto"26 in defence of
eugenics which was signed by 22 American and British scientists. After the
Second World War, he stuck to his guns whereas most biologists were
horrified by Nazi barbarity and repudiated their ideology. It is this implicit
notion of a superior race that Dobhansky targeted in 1955 with the balance
model. For him, there was no ideal genetic type; only genetic diversity
counted.
The discord between these two models (which at times reflected
ideological dissension or personal rivalry) was not settled definitively until
the second half of the 1960s. Until then, conventional genetic techniques had
restricted the study of genes to the offspring from the mating of individuals
with different forms of a given character. The proportion of offspring of each
class indicated whether the differences were of genetic origin, and whether
one or more genes were involved. We could study only genes whose allele
variety was reflected in observable phenotypic variants but neither invariant
genes nor genes that vary but have no phenotypic effect.
The selectionist versus neutralist hypothesis: Biochemistry
and molecular biology shift the ground
Two advances in molecular biology helped overcome the obstacle. The
first was a conceptual advance. According to a dogma central to molecular
biology, any variation in the amino acid sequence of a protein reflects a
variation in the gene encoding the protein. The study of genes can, therefore,
be reduced to the study of the amino acid sequences of the corresponding
proteins. A gene with no allelic forms codes for an identical protein in all
individuals of the population. Conversely, if a protein's sequence differs

116
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
among individuals, the gene that codes for this protein has several allelic
forms.
The second advance was technical and was the development of protein
electrophoresis on starch or acrylamide gels. In 1966, H. Harris applied this
technique to human proteins and R.C. Lewontin and J.L. Hubby to the
proteins of the fruit-fly.
Enzyme electrophoresis
Gel electrophoresis evaluates the genetic variability of natural
populations by detecting variant proteins. A sample of tissue is taken
from each organism. These samples are homogenized separately to
release enzymes and other proteins. The supernatants of the
homogenates (i.e. the liquid fractions) are then deposited on a starch,
agarose or polyacrylamide gel through which a current is passed for
several hours. Each protein migrates through the gel in a direction and
at a velocity which depends upon its electric charge and molecular
size. After a set time, the protein reaches a distance from the migration
front that characterises it. The electric current is switched off and the
entire gel is covered by a solution containing the enzyme's specific
substrate and a dye. The enzyme in the gel catalyses the conversion of
the substrate into a product that reacts with the dye, and this reaction
gives rise to a coloured band at the protein migration point. Because
the different allelic forms of one and the same protein differ in
molecular structure and sometimes charge (and therefore have
different mobilities in an electric field), the number and position of the
coloured bands of the gel highlight, for each individual, the genetic
composition of the locus or loci which code for this enzyme.

117
Population and Ecological Genetics
Electrophoresis distinguishes among isozymes, i.e. enzymes encoded by
different genes but which display similar functions because they act on the
same artificial substrate. Whenever a gene undergoes a mutation, the enzyme
it codes for can lose all activity. When this happens, the corresponding band
of the gel disappears; we have a nil allele. In actual fact, there are very few
nil alleles because they tend to be counterselected and thus persist in
populations at very low rates. On the other hand, the mutation is not
counterselected when it preserves enzyme activity, at least qualitatively. It
then gives rise to an enzyme that is an "allele" of the original enzyme and
that is called an allozyme. This occurs in some point mutations where one
amino acid is substituted for another. Examination of the genetic code has
revealed that the random substitution of a base in the DNA sequence of a
gene leads about one time in three to an amino acid being replaced by one
with a different charge in the corresponding protein sequence. This alters the
overall charge of the protein and, consequently, its electrophoretic mobility.
If the change does not affect the enzyme's function, the band will not be
suppressed but shifted slightly. By comparing the different runs of a gel, we
can thus visualise the diversity of the sample. This kind of protein analysis
performed on a sufficient number of individuals often reveals several alleles
at a given locus.
More recently, newly developed molecular biology techniques have
enabled the study of polymorphism at the DNA level. The technique of DNA
sequencing, i.e. determining the order of bases (nucleotides) in the chain, is
too cumbersome for the routine study of populations but alternative
techniques are available such as the determination of polymorphism at DNA
restriction sites. This method has revealed that the number and position of
various restriction sites among individuals is highly variable. We speak of
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). It is encountered in all of

118
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the genome and especially in its non-coding regions which, because they are
not translated into protein, cannot be studied by electrophoresis. Since then,
methods to detect polymorphism have flourished (e.g., random amplified
polymorphic DNA (RAPD), amplified fragment length polymorphism
(AFLP)).
These methods have helped define gene polymorphism more precisely
and have resolved the quarrel between Muller and Dobzhansky in
Dobzhansky's favour. To detect a polymorphism in a sample of reasonable
size, the alleles must have frequencies of the same order of magnitude; no
allele should dominate too overtly. In practice, geneticists have set a
threshold for polymorphism. Genetic polymorphism is the co-existence
within the same population of two or more alleles at a locus, the most
frequent having a frequency not exceeding 0.99. The 0.99 threshold is
arbitrary; sometimes we choose a 0.95 threshold. The threshold criteria are
selected so that they are compatible with the study of a reasonable number of
individuals (about 100).
This definition of gene polymorphism however introduces a paradox. If
evolution is really driven by selection by the environment, ultimately only
the hereditary structure that reproduces most efficiently should survive, and
a population should generally have just one allele at each locus, give or take
a mutation. Two explanations have been put forward for this paradox. Either
a selective mechanism is responsible for maintaining polymorphism (the
selectionist hypothesis) or, in addition to the low frequency lethal genes,
there is polymorphism among neutral alleles (with no difference in fitness)
that is maintained by a balance between mutation and drift. Mutation
introduces new alleles, drift eliminates them. This is the neutralist
hypothesis. There is probably some truth in both these hypotheses.
The selectionist hypothesis
According to the selectionist hypothesis, there are several kinds of
polymorphism: polymorphism kept in balance by the overdominance of
fitness, polymorphism maintained by variability in fitness, or even transient
polymorphism.
Overdominance and sickle-cell anaemia
We speak of overdominance when heterozygotes have a higher degree of
fitness than homozygotes. In such cases, polymorphism is stable.
A particularly well informed example of overdominance is sickle-cell
anaemia or drepanocytosis. This hereditary disease of the blood which is
widespread among the black human populations of Africa, or originating

Population  and  Ecological  Genetics
119
from Africa, is due to an abnormal form of haemoglobin. Human
haemoglobin is a protein consisting of four subunits (two 
chains and two
chains). The 
chain has 148 amino acids with glutamic acid in the sixth
position of the chain. A point mutation of the sixth codon of the 
gene can
convert this glutamic acid into a valine. Haemoglobin with this mutated
chain acquires aberrant properties which are reflected in blood abnormalities
in homozygote carriers. The red cells which contain the mutated
haemoglobin look like a sickle hence their name. They block the capillaries
and lead to fatal anaemia in children. The non-mutated form of the protein is
called haemoglobin A, the mutated form haemoglobin S.
The gene of sickle-cell anaemia is also encountered in European
populations but at a very low frequency. It is a recessive allele, that is to say
the parents of an anaemic child are heterozygotes (their red cells contain the
A and S forms) and they do not suffer from anaemia themselves. On the
other hand, the homozygote state of the allele is lethal even in children. How
can we then explain that the allele is common in populations originating
from Africa?
As early as in 1946, Beet noted that haemoglobin S protects against
malaria which is rife in the same regions as sickle-cell anaemia. Subsequent
research confirmed that, whereas homozygote haemoglobin A carriers suffer
and die from malaria, AS heterozygotes - who are not anaemic - are
protected against malaria. Endemic malaria thus favours maintenance of the
mutated allele, in particular in a zone called the sickle belt which stretches
across part of West Africa, Equatorial Africa, Madagascar, Ceylon, and
South India. In certain Baamba tribes living near the Ruwenzori Mountains
and in the Semliki plain, the proportion of heterozygotes reaches 45 percent.
This polymorphism thus arises from a situation of overdominance where
heterozygotes are advantaged. We now need to know what confers them
greater fitness in the sickle belt despite the mutated allele being lethal in the
homozygote state. The answer is that the red cells of the heterozygotes,
which contain a mixture of both haemoglobins, are destroyed faster than
normal red cells. This prevents the malaria parasite from completing its
development cycle. Heterozygotes, who do not succumb to malaria, have
greater longevity and a higher reproduction rate than homozygotes who
express normal haemoglobin.
Except in rare instances such as sickle-cell anaemia, the role of
overdominance and the action of selection on enzyme polymorphisms
remain controversial. We know of many cases where the offspring of mating
between individuals of different stock are superior to their parents (taller,
faster growth, greater fitness, etc.), but we tend to view them as the outcome
of the combined beneficial effects of genes inherited from both parents. As
long as we have no reason to believe that the parental genes are allelic and

120
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
that there is no specific advantage in being heterozygote, we can explain this
phenomenon of vigorous hybrids, or heterosis, without resorting to
overdominance.27
Besides, it is often difficult to show that natural selection is acting upon a
particular locus, first of all for practical reasons, because the true function of
the enzymes detected by electrophoresis is unknown in vivo. Thus, the
fitness of the different protein variants cannot be explained in many cases.
Moreover, testing all possible selective factors is an endless task (see the
example of thyme). Finally, the differences in fitness among individuals are
often small, and it is a colossal undertaking to obtain data on genotype
survival and fertility in different environments. There is an additional
theoretical difficulty. Individuals differ in many of their genes and we may
never be sure that an observed selective difference is due to the allele under
study rather than to alleles at other loci that are statistically correlated with
this allele. (This often happens for genetically linked loci).
Because overdominance is rare and enzyme polymorphism is as great in
haploid as in diploid organisms (the highest polymorphism levels are
observed in bacteria), it is doubtful how great an advantage is heterozygocy
in maintaining variability. Overdominance is still a moot point among
geneticists, and we have had to seek other explanations for polymorphism.
Variable fitness
In a population with constant fitness for different alleles, only
overdominance can account for the maintenance of polymorphism at
equilibrium. On the other hand, polymorphism can be maintained selectively
without overdominance if the fitnesses vary either as a function of gene
frequency or in space and over time. We speak of frequency-dependent
selection when a genotype's fitness varies with its frequency (and/or with
that of other genotypes) in the population. Let us take the example of an
allele that is advantaged when rare. Because selection opposes its
disappearance, polymorphism is selectively maintained. This kind of
selection is called "the advantage of the rare" or "apostatic selection" to
remind us that the "unorthodox" allele is advantaged. It applies to all sexual
systems insofar as one sex needs the other to reproduce. In other words, the
rarer a sex, the more it is sought, and frequency-dependent selection ensures
that it is maintained. It also applies to prey-predator systems. Predators tend
to attack prey they recognise, that is the most common type of prey, which is
thus counterselected until it becomes less common. (We discussed this
mechanism when referring to the melanism of the peppered moth.) Because
pathogenic organisms evolve by developing virulence against the most
common genotypes in host populations, the rare genotypes are advantaged in

Population and  Ecological  Genetics
121
these populations. Similarly, in a population where different types exploit
environmental resources in different ways or have different needs, the rarer
types are advantaged because they suffer less from competition from their
congeners. They thus acquire greater fitness and will increase in number
until they are no longer the rarer type.
Fitnesses can also vary over space and with time. A population's
environment is usually not homogeneous but comprises ecological niches,
that is micro-habitats that are each best suited to a particular genotype. 28
This heterogeneity (or mosaic as it is sometimes called) helps maintain gene
polymorphism but under certain conditions only. Let us imagine that the
spatial variations have a "fine mesh", in other words that the mean distance
between one habitat and the next is small compared to the distances covered
by the individuals, so that during a life-span each individual can try out all
the micro-habitats. In this case, the genotype with the best mean fitness over
the entire environment has the advantage. It may be the heterozygote which
brings us back to the case of overdominance (denoted here as marginal
overdominance) but, if it is the homozygote, polymorphism is not
maintained. On the other hand, if the environment has a "coarse mesh", each
individual will generally only try out just one habitat in its lifetime and,
under certain conditions, polymorphism will be maintained even without any
kind of overdominance.
One of the best studied cases of polymorphism in a mosaic environment
is that of Californian populations of wild oats, an autogamous plant
introduced into California by Spanish settlers. In some of these oat
populations, genetically different individuals cohabit just a few decimetres
apart. Some are adapted to relatively dry and others to more humid micro-
habitats. Distribution depends on the micro-relief of the terrain and the
nature of the soil. Whenever the micro-habitat changes, one type takes over
from the other.
Similarly, changing environmental conditions can encourage different
phenotypes alternately and thus maintain polymorphism. These changes
must be slow enough for each individual not to have to try out all sets of
conditions but fast enough for no allele to become fixed when advantaged.
For example, seasonal variations cannot maintain polymorphism in oaks that
live for centuries but they do in fruit-flies and in many micro-organisms
which present several generations per year.
The way polymorphism is maintained by variation in fitnesses is very
similar to the mechanisms invoked to explain the co-existence of different
species in the same environment. Just as maintenance of genotype diversity
has been attributed to differences in micro-habitats, ecology attributes the
maintenance of species diversity to differences in niches. More recently, it
has been shown that stochastic processes could lead to the maintenance of

122
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the diversity of plant species under variable environmental conditions. Only
overdominance is applicable exclusively to intraspecific variability.
Transient polymorphism
If a new allele introduced into a population by mutation or migration
confers greater fitness to its carriers, it will tend to replace the previous
allele, unless it is lost by random drift when still very rare. A gene that has
appeared by mutation is present initially only as a single copy in a single
individual and, even if it does confer its carrier greater fitness, the likelihood
of it being lost during the first generations is high. However, as soon as its
frequency has increased substantially, the probability of loss decreases
considerably unless the population is really tiny. The substitution of the
previous allele by the new one can take some time, especially if the
difference in fitness between the carriers of the previous allele and of the
new allele is small. During this period, we can observe transient
polymorphism.
The industrial melanism of the peppered moth illustrates another kind of
transient polymorphism. An allele, that until then had been unfavourable,
becomes advantageous because of a change in the environment. The speed at
which the substitution took place in this species, which has only one
generation per year, is a sign of strong selection exerted by predatory birds.
However, all in all, reversal of the direction in which selection acts and
emergence of new advantageous mutants are rare events which doubtless
account for very little polymorphism.
Genetic load
Because sickle-cell anaemia illustrated overdominance so well (too well),
most geneticists considered overdominance a satisfactory explanation for
polymorphism for quite some time. Electrophoresis changed all this because,
as we have seen, it revealed that polymorphism was too extensive to be
explained by overdominance alone. Several arguments then shed doubt on
the predominant role of selection in evolution and in maintaining enzyme
polymorphism. One such argument related to genetic load.
The word load (fardeau in French) should not be construed too hastily in
a negative sense. In the 12th century, the arab word farda denoted a ball of
cloth or merchandise that was carried or placed on a camel's back. In the
17th century, by way of Aragon and Gascony, farde (fr) became hardes (fr)
meaning togs just good enough for beggars on the road. The term fardeau

Population and Ecological Genetics
123
acquired its modern accepted meaning from writers such as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau for whom "the weight of  an early mistake is a load (fardeau) that
has to be carried throughout one's life" or Lamartine who writes in one of
his poetic meditations "to set down the load (fardeau) of human misery, is
this not dying?"
Thus, death, misery, burdens, errors in one's ways and their punishment,
and unimpeachable fate are the ingredients seized upon by the first
researchers into heredity in the 19th century. The expression "genetic
load" will persist both as a nebulous myth and an inexorable reality
related to an unatonable sin.29
The notion of genetic load was introduced in 1950 by Muller to describe
the accumulation of unfavourable mutations in a population. The word load
in this context thus denotes deficient adaptation as underlined by Haldane in
1937 in relation to deleterious mutations. Both the notion and the word were
borrowed in 1966 by R. Lewontin, professor of genetics at Harvard, and J.L.
Hubby, when they published the results of their electrophoresis work on
fruit-fly polymorphism. They saw this polymorphism, unsuspected until
then, as an intolerable burden on populations. The presence of individuals
with different fitnesses in a population decreases the overall fitness with
respect to the fitness of a population in which all individuals would have the
best genotype.
Mutation, which unrelentingly produces "corrupt" individuals, is
responsible for a mutation load. During the substitution period, transient
polymorphism creates a substitution load. When polymorphism is balanced,
maintaining polymorphism in the face of selection produces a genetic load,
the segregation load. It is thus named because, at each generation, Mendelian
segregation produces individuals of lesser fitness by causing the least
advantaged genotype to reappear.30 Paradoxically, the load in this case is
maintained by selection itself (see mathematical appendix MA4).
Irrespective of the kind of selection, the more genes we wish to select at
any time, the greater the genetic load (the greater the number of individuals
of lesser fitness that cannot reproduce) and, therefore, the smaller the
number of begetters or the effective population number, Ne. The result is
increased drift of the other genes and a decrease in heterozygotes. Plant or
animal breeders are well aware of this problem and take care not to select
simultaneously all the traits they desire in a new variety or new race for fear
of losing, through drift, many genes they cannot influence directly but that
may prove of interest later.

124
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
4. 
NEUTRAL THEORY AND THE MOLECULAR
CLOCK  OF  EVOLUTION
The neutral theory of molecular evolution
To solve the issue of genetic load, we can postulate that the considerable
polymorphism of natural populations is not accompanied by any difference
in fitnesses. Such a polymorphism is said to be selectively neutral and has no
cost.
Another way of coming to the same conclusion is to note that, if the
extent of selection acting on different loci varies with locus, preferential
reproduction by carriers of beneficial alleles at the loci that are most often
selected reduces the effective population number so that selection becomes
negligible compared to drift at other loci. These alleles then behave as if they
were neutral and we speak of neutral or nearly neutral alleles.
Motoo Kimura, one of the founders of the neutral theory, summarises it
as follows:
The proposal of the neutral theory (or more precisely the neutral
mutation-random drift hypothesis) represented my attempt to answer
these questions using the stochastic theory of  population genetics. Unlike
the traditional synthetic theory (or the neo-Darwinian view), the neutral
theory claims that the great majority of evolutionary mutant substitutions
are not caused by positive Darwinian selection but by random fixation of
selectively neutral or nearly neutral mutants. The theory also asserts that
much of the intraspecific genetic variability at the molecular level, such
as is manifested in the form of protein polymorphism, is selectively
neutral or nearly so, and maintained in the species by the balance
between mutational input and random extinction or fixation of alleles.
From the standpoint of the neutral theory, evolutionary mutant
substitutions and molecular polymorphisms are not two independent
phenomena, but simply two aspects of a single phenomenon. In other
words, protein polymorphism merely represents a transient phase of
molecular evolution,31
Kimura's view was opposed to neo-Darwinian theory only for a time and
has now been totally integrated into the theory. The very title of Kimura's
book The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution suggests that Kimura is not
proposing an alternative theory of evolution but rather an analysis of
Darwinian theory from a molecular standpoint. The main thrust of Kimura's
work has been to change the null hypothesis (a priori hypothesis) in
evolutionary studies. Instead of assuming that all genes are submitted to

Population and Ecological Genetics
125
selection, evolutionists now consider that alleles are neutral unless they have
proof of selection.
According to Kimura, the genetic diversity we observe is due simply to
the emergence of new neutral forms (or alleles) which in no way modify the
carrier. Drift acts on the polymorphism due to these mutations either by
eliminating the new allele (this is what happens in most cases) or by fixing it
(by eliminating the previous allele). The polymorphism is then transient,
lasting only whilst the substitution takes place. To account for it, we must
suppose that the populations are large enough for the random fixation of a
gene or the loss of the other genes to occur very slowly, and that mutation
continually introduces new neutral alleles. The substitution rate of a neutral
allele by another during evolution is independent of population size.
However, the mean number of alleles at this locus, at any given time,
increases with population size and neutral mutation rate (see mathematical
appendix MA5).

126
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Neutral mutations are a fraction of the total number of mutations.
Mutations can in fact be neutral, lethal or sublethal, or even positively
selected. If m is the total number of mutations, 
the number of neutral
mutations, 
 of lethal mutations and    of mutations that can be selected, then
The neutralist hypothesis postulates that positively selected
mutations are by far the least important category and that the study of
genome variations focuses on neutral and lethal mutations. However,
because there are few lethal mutations, they tend to be eliminated by
selection, and neutral mutations are the most readily observed mutations.
The molecular clock
The first principle of Kimura's neutral theory is as follows:
For each protein, the rate of evolution in terms of amino acid
substitutions is approximately constant per year per site for various lines,
as long as the function and tertiary structure of the molecule remain
essentially unaltered.31
This constant rate hypothesis is challenged by many molecular biologists
studying evolution. Kimura has written at length on its relevance. We shall
discuss its application to phylogenetic tree construction.
It is generally agreed that organisms with a recent common ancestor are
more alike than organisms with a common ancestor from a more distant past.
This simple hypothesis is the basic logic underlying comparative studies of
phylogenetic tree construction, i.e., the evolutionary history of species. By
observing similarities among species, we can establish the points at which
they successively diverged. For example, let us consider three species A, B,
and C. If A and B are more alike than either is like C, their phylogenetic
relationship is probably the following:
Phylogenetic tree construction is not an easy task. Evolutionary rates can
vary considerably depending upon the time period, groups of organisms, or
characters of an organism. Moreover, we have to distinguish similarities due
to a common ancestor from those due to similar lifestyles or accidental
convergence. Identifying characters that can be used to infer phylogeny is
one of the hurdles of systematics.

Population and Ecological Genetics
127
Traditionally, comparative anatomy provides most of the information for
establishing a phylogeny of living creatures. Additional data come from
embryology, cytology, ethology, biogeography, etc, and recently from the
study of macromolecules (i.e. proteins and nucleic acids). By comparing
macromolecules and analysing their differences we can establish molecular
phylogenies. Changes in evolution rates among branches and over time can
make things difficult. The molecular approach, however, has two advantages
over conventional methods. First of all, it is easy to quantify the information.
Once we know the sequence of a given macromolecule in different
organisms, we can establish the number of positions that differ in the
sequence of each. Because of life's deep-seated biochemical unity, we can
thus compare very different types of organisms.32 Second, the study of these
macromolecules provides information on the amount of genetic change
undergone. Let A and B be two living species that have evolved from a
common ancestral species X which is now extinct. Let be the rate of allele
substitution, that is the rate at which an amino acid has replaced another in
the protein sequence under study during evolution. (As we have seen, this
rate corresponds to the number of neutral mutations per generation.) Because
this rate does not depend upon the environment, it is generally agreed that
has the same value in the two phylogenetic branches, from X to A and from
X to B, and that these branches have undergone the same number of
substitutions. Consequently, if A and B differ by k amino acids, we assume
that there have been k/2 substitutions in each branch.
Let us apply this method to cytochrome c, a protein of the cell respiratory
chain. Its sequence has been determined in many organisms. It is 104 amino
acids long in all animals. When we compare cytochrome c from the human
and rhesus monkey, we find just one difference, in position 66; the 103 other
amino acids are identical. We find 12 differences when we compare
cytochrome c from the horse and human but only 11 differences between the
horse and monkey. These results are represented in the "non-rooted" tree on
the left (p. 128). If we assume that the substitution rate is more or less the
same in all branches, we can conclude that the lineages of man and of rhesus
monkey diverged later than those of man and horse, and that the difference
of one amino acid in the cytochrome c sequences of man and monkey
appeared after these two species had separated. The middle rooted tree is the

128
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
one that assumes the greatest equality in substitution rates. The tree below
right has to be rejected.
The methods for estimating genetic change throughout evolution include
the hybridisation of DNA molecules of different origin, protein sequencing,
immunological analysis and electrophoresis. Comparisons of the protein
sequences of a variety of organisms have confirmed that, in many cases, the
evolution rate of protein sequences is remarkably constant. Thus, the
sequence of haemoglobin 
has evolved at the same rate in all vertebrate
lineages, whether these lineages have undergone pronounced and rapid
morphological and ecological evolution (hominids or ungulates compared to
other mammals or, at a higher taxonomic level, amniotes compared to other
vertebrates) or whether they have not evolved, or hardly evolved,
morphologically for a long time (selachians, salamanders or, amongst
mammals, opossums). This apparently constant rate of evolution of a given
protein or DNA sequence has led to the molecular clock hypothesis (E.
Zuckerkandl and L. Pauling, 1965). The existence of such a clock has been a
strong argument in support of the neutral theory, even if its regularity among
lineages, as its causes, are still subjects of controversy.
The technique of DNA/DNA hybridisation
This technique evaluates the overall similarity in the DNA of different
organisms. The starting material is the total DNA of a given species. The
repetitive DNA sequences present in the genome of most higher
organisms are eliminated. The sample of the unique - most informative
and most specific - DNA sequences thus obtained is then labelled with
radioactivity and ''denatured" (the two strands of the double helix are
separated, for instance by increasing the temperature). The DNA
preparation is then fractionated and left to react with denatured DNA
from another species. If the two genomes placed together have similar
sequences, the complementary strands of different origin will pair up to
form hybrids. The extent of the reaction gives the proportion of similar
DNA sequences.
Not all the nucleotides of the sequences that form hybrids need to be
complementary. The level of non-complementary nucleotides in the DNA

Population and Ecological Genetics
129
hybrid is given by the rate at which the paired strands dissociate when the
temperature is increased. The thermal stability is the temperature at which
50 percent of the DNA hybrid is dissociated. The difference in thermal
stability of hybrids from different pairs of species can be used as a
phylogenetic character.
The principle of the molecular clock is the following. If molecular
evolution rate is really constant over time, by dating stages of evolution by
other methods (e.g. palaeontology) we can calibrate the chronology of a
protein's or sequence's phylogenesis. The neutral theory does not, however,
claim to offer a perfect timekeeper but rather a kind of stochastic clock like
the one that measures a decrease in radioactivity in physics. It is the
probability of change that is constant. Despite some variability the molecular
clock can be considered to be fairly accurate over a long time period. Under
certain circumstances, however, it becomes most imprecise. A sequence can
be stable in one species but evolve very rapidly in another. Faced with this
kind of situation, we assume that either the mutation rate itself differs among
species or that selection acts differently according to species. For example,
some alleles could be neutral in one species and selected in another.
Evolution rate may well be more or less constant among species for a
given protein but it varies considerably among proteins. (It is 1.2
substitutions per amino acid and per one thousand million years for the
chain of haemoglobin, 0.3 for cytochrome c, 0.01 for histone H4, but 8.3 for
fibrinopeptide).33 This does not mean that fibrinopeptide undergoes more
mutations than histone H4 but that the proportion of neutral mutations is
very different. For fibrinopeptide, the lethal mutation rate 
is lower than the
neutral mutation rate 
For histone, on the contrary, 
is greater than
Histone H4 has virtually the same sequence in all eukaryotes, from men to
peas. The gene does mutate but any mutation affecting its primary structure
is strongly counterselected because of the strong functional constraints on
the protein. (Histones take part in the packaging of DNA in chromosomes.)
On the contrary, the only function of fibrinopeptide is to prevent, by its
presence at the N-terminal end of plasma fibrinogen, the spontaneous
polymerisation of fibrin into a mesh (coagulation). The precise sequence of
its amino acids is therefore unimportant and many of the mutations are
neutral.
Similarly, some DNA sequences evolve faster than others. For example,
introns (non-coding regions of genes that interrupt the coding sequence)
evolve faster than exons (regions coding for genes between which introns
squeeze themselves) because a change in sequence is less likely to affect the
expression or structure of the gene product of introns than exons. Moreover,
a comparison of coding sequences in species that are close shows that the

130
GeneAvatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
rate of substitution of  bases is higher in the third position than in first two
positions of codons. (Because there are synonymous codons that only differ
in the third position, this base can often be substituted without altering the
meaning of the genetic message.) In general, the non-coding regions of a
genome evolve faster than non-coding regions.
Each gene or protein thus ticks at a different rate (at the mutation rate,
of the gene's neutral alleles) but all genes provide a similar date for the
same evolutionary event.34 This statement was first thought to contradict
Darwinian orthodoxy. If we accept that most evolutionary changes are
adaptive, the molecules and sequences crucial to organism adaptation should
be those that evolve fastest. In fact, in neutral theory, the role of natural
selection in the evolution of organisms is not disputed just as polymorphism

Population and Ecological Genetics
131
selection is not disputed in sickle-cell anaemia. The neutralist hypothesis just
implies that most of the polymorphism highlighted by electrophoresis or the
study of DNA is neutral and that cases of selected polymorphisms are few.
Similarly, within a lineage of proteins, some substitutions undoubtedly do
have adaptive significance. For example, we could probably not exchange
the α haemoglobin chain of carp and man with impunity. Several of the 68
amino acids that differ between them might play a role in aspects of oxygen
transport that are species specific. However, these adaptive substitutions are
drowned by the volume of neutral substitutions with no adaptive value.
The debate between "selectionists" and "neutralists" which emerged in
the early 1960s was very heated in the 1970s and 1980s and spurred many
studies in population genetics. It is, however, impossible to prove that a
polymorphism is neutral (and difficult to prove that it is not). How can we be
sure that we have eliminated all selective factors? At all events, neutralists'
calculations showed that their hypotheses could account for most
observations and could also make predictions regarding molecular evolution
and the structure of variability which were apparently correctly. In the
1950s-1960s, many evolutionists had even refused to consider that there
might be such a thing as a neutral mutation. Ernst Mayr thought it highly
unlikely that a gene could remain selectively neutral for long.35
Nowadays, many partisans of neo-Darwinism are more willing to give
due consideration to neutralism. In 1984 J.H. Gillespie wrote:
...acceptance of  the neutral theory seems to have increased considerably.
This theory is now invoked as routinely as selection was a few years
back.36
Like R.C. Lewontin, who remains highly critical of the neutral theory,
most evolutionists accept that much protein and gene polymorphism could
be neutral even if they still disagree on the importance of chance and
selection.
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The terms "gene", "allele" and "locus" have been used in the previous chapters and, from
now on, will be used regularly. Their definitions, and those of other terms often used in
genetics (indicated by asterisks), are given in the glossary.
Mutation can refer to both process and outcome.
We shall come back to transposable elements later. These DNA sequences can move
within the genome. Most contain genes coding for their own transposition. Mutations due
to transposable elements are an important source of genetic variability.
Monod, J., 1970, Le Hasard et la Nécessité, Seuil, Paris, p. 120.
Gros, F., 1986, Les Secrets du Gène, Odile Jacob/Seuil, Paris.
Watson, J.D. and Tooze, J., 1981, The DNA Story. A documentary history of gene cloning,
W.H. Freeman & Co, San Francisco, p. vii.

132
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
7.
8.
9.
Darwin, C, 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Murray,
London.
Clark, A.G., 1989, Principles of Population Genetics, 
ed, Sinuaer Associates,
Sunderland, Mass., p. 306.
The founder effect explains the high rate of genetic diseases in groups arising from small
numbers of migrants (for example, Tay-Sachs disease amongst the Ashkenazim of
Quebec).
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
Limits have to be fixed for the inbreeding coefficient to work and so that it does not
always equal 1. For example, we reduce it to 0 when there is a mutation.
Cann, R.L., Stoneking M. and Wilson, A.C., 1987, Mitochondrial DNA and human
evolution, Nature 325: 31-36.
See Lewin, R., 1991, l'Anthropologie moléculaire, La Recherche, 22 (N° 236): 1249.
See Klein, J., Takahata, N. and Ayala, F., 1994, Reconnaissance du soi et origine de
l'homme, Pour la Science, 196, p. 60.
See Bourguignon, A., L'homme Imprévu (1989) et L'homme Fou. Histoire Naturelle de
l'Homme (1994) (2 vols), Questions, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Fisher, R., 1950, (originally published in 1926), Contributions to Mathematical Statistics,
Wiley, New York.
Before turning their punctuated equilibria into unexplained phenomena, N. Eldredge and
S.J. Gould had offered this explanation (see Chapter 7).
Haldane, J.B.S., 1938, Forty Years of  Genetics. In: Background to Modern Science. Ed. J.
Needham and W. Pagel. Cambridge University Press, pp. 225-243.
It is rather amusing that Fisher, a conservative, and Haldane, a member of the central
committee of the British communist party, hardly disagreed on anything in science.
Ford, E.B., 1975, Ecological Genetics, Chapman & Hall, London; Kettlewell, H.B.D.,
1973, The Evolution of  Melanism, Clarendon Press, Oxford; Bishop, J.A., and Cook, L.
M., 1987, Industrial melanism and the urban environment, Adv. Ecol. Res. 11: 373-404.
Clarke, C.A., Mani, G.S., and Wynne, G., 1985, Evolution in reverse: clean air and the
peppered moth, Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 26: 189-199; Brakefield, P. M., 1987, Industrial
melanism: Do we have the answers? Trends Evol. Ecol. 2: 117-122.
Bishop, J.A., 1972, An experimental study of the cline of industrial melanism in Biston
betularia (L.) (Lepidoptera) between urban Liverpool and rural North Wales, J. Anim.
Ecol. 41: 209-243; Mani, G.S., 1980, A theoretical study of morph ratio clines with
special reference to melanism in moths, Proc. Royal Soc. London, B210: 299-316;
Brakefield, P. M., op. cit.
Creed, E.R., Lees, D.R., and Bulmer, M.G.(1980) 
Pre-adult viability differences of
melanic Biston betularia (L.) (Lepidoptera), Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 13: 251-262.
We shall address this hypothesis at greater length in "Struggle for life and a royal race"
(Chapter 7, Section 5).
Let's not forget that some species are no doubt more diverse than others. The species is
thus not a suitable unit to measure biodiversity.
Darwin, C., ibid.
Muller, H.J. et al., 1939, The Geneticists' Manifesto, Nature 30: 371-373.
It may seem surprising that the hybrid benefits when advantageous genes combine yet
does not suffer when unfavourable genes combine. Voltaire retorted to the marchioness
who suggested they should have a child combining her beauty and his great intelligence
that he feared the reverse might happen. In general, favourable genes are dominant either
because unfavourable genes are often inactive - and inactivity tends to lead to
recessiveness - or because a "good" gene that has become dominant by mutation will be
selected.
It is a question of polymorphism, and not polytypism, when individuals from different
habitats mate. We are dealing with a single population (as in plants belonging to a

Populationand Ecological Genetics
133
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
particular habitat, but subject to genetic exchanges between habitats through pollen and
seed dispersal.)
Robert, J.M., 1994, Le fardeau génétique, APBG (special issue), p. 45.
In the case of overdominance, it is not possible to maintain 100 percent of heterozygotes
by sexual reproduction. Because of random allele segregation, homozygotes, which are
not advantaged, reappear at each generation.
Kimura, M., 1983, The Neutral Theory of  Molecular Evolution, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
The comparative anatomy of a yeast, pine and human is not easy to establish nor really
relevant unlike the comparison of their macromolecules.
Histone H4: A protein that is part of the structure of the eukaryote chromosome.
Fibrinopeptide: A polypeptide chain that is a product of blood coagulation. It is obtained,
together with fibrin, by the enzymatic cleavage of fibrinogen by thrombin.
Ayala, F.J., 1982, Biologie Moléculaire et Evolution. Series: Biologie évolutive, Masson,
Paris, p. 79.
Mayr, E., 1963, Animal Species and Evolution, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press,
Mass.
Gillespie, J.H., 1984, The status of the neutral theory, Science 224: 732-733.

Chapter 4
THE KEY TO GENES
Nature studies in the 17th and 18th centuries had underscored the conflict
between co-existing species. In the 19th century, Darwinism had highlighted
the conflict among individuals of a single species. At the turn of the 20th
century, what was left of the idea dear to Ancient philosophers that
independence and cooperation lie at the source of natural harmony? It had
taken refuge in the individual. An organism was defined as an ensemble of
organs which were adapted to a particular lifestyle and which, by
cooperating, ensured the individual's survival and the highest reproduction
rate. Although modern biologists had accepted the idea of selection, this idea
was still subject to the view that the individual is a harmonious unity. Many
biologists and others continued to think of the living world in terms of two
fundamentals: the hierarchy of biological systems (part of an organism could
not evolve at the expense of another) and the shaping of an ever better world
(by improved adaptation). This fragile compromise - and it was a
compromise - centred on the individual exploded in the second half of the
20th century.
The discovery of DNA by J. Watson and F. Crick in 1953 added a new
molecular dimension to our understanding of life. A special kind of
information transfer occurs at the DNA level; it lies at the heart of vital
processes and explains morphogenesis and reproduction. It prompted the
questions: On what entities and at what integration levels does natural
selection act? Must we stick to Darwin's struggle for life - the struggle
between individuals - and preserve individual harmony? However, if we read
Darwin's Origin of Species carefully, we find that his thoughts on this
subject were not as clear-cut as we may have believed at first. His theoretical
135

136
GeneAvatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
framework can embrace the idea of selection acting at different levels and
even within each organism. Neo-Darwinians thus undertook to expand on
Darwin's view by taking into account supporting knowledge from genetics
and on selection mechanisms to explain the living world. For a neo-
Darwinian, no integration level can escape selection.
This insight has radically changed the way we view life. Not only is the
definition of life but also of the individual beyond the investigative powers
of human intelligence (see Introduction)! However, the step taken backstage
by the individual is offset (and also provoked) by the arrival onstage of a
new concept, information. The concept of information helps us to clarify the
links between genetics and evolution, and to elaborate a view of life
integrating all levels, from molecule to group.
This chapter will explain this new outlook. We shall first introduce the
main themes - individual, information and selection levels using as an
illustration the presence of females within a hermaphrodite population, then
address each of these themes from a theoretical viewpoint.
1.
MALE OPPOSITION
Selection occurs at the population level because there is just not enough
room for an infinite number of individuals. If selection did not occur, even
individuals which reproduce less well than others would be maintained.
Something similar happens at the individual level. An organism, for example
a plant, acquires a restricted amount of resources within a given time span.
These are allocated to a variety of functions. That which is allocated to one
function, however, cannot be allocated to others; in other words, there is a
trade-off. At any moment, the plant can use its resources for either growth
(to have more resources later on), survival, or production of sexual (pollen or
seeds) or asexual propagules. Agricultural experts are well aware of this
trade-off among functions and try to take advantage of it.
The allocation of resources for reproduction poses interesting problems
but, first, we must distinguish between male and female functions. These can
co-exist in a single individual.
The gender of flowers and plants
Botanical terminology relating to sex, introduced in part by
Darwin himself, is not very clear as it does not distinguish levels
(flower, individual, population and species). We shall therefore define
each term we use unambiguously. The flower can be hermaphrodite
(i.e., carry male organs (stamens) and female organs (pistil, ovary)),
female (or sterile male, we shall see why below), or male (sometimes,

The Key to Genes
137
but rarely, denoted sterile female). The basic floral type is the
hermaphrodite. Individual plants are either hermaphrodites (all
flowers are hermaphrodites), monoecious (both male and female
flowers), andromonoecious (male and hermaphrodite flowers),
gynomonoecious 
(female 
and 
hermaphrodite 
flowers) 
or
trimonoecious (all three types of flowers). At the species level, we
speak of either hermaphrodism (all individuals are hermaphrodites),
monoecia (all monoic), dioecia (some male, some female individuals),
gynodioecia (females and hermaphrodites), androdioecia (males and
hermaphrodites) and trioecia (all three types of individuals).
In their 1976 attempt to model the male and female functions, E.L.
Charnov, J. Maynard Smith and J.J. Bull1 concluded that the resources
allocated to both male and female must be equivalent whether the species is
hermaphrodite, monoecious (in both these cases, male and female functions
are united in a single individual) or dioecious. This conclusion seems
counter-intuitive because, by definition, the male function produces smaller
gametes than the female does. We would expect investment into the female
function to be of greater value for parental fitness. Even if we accept that a
dioecious species such as ours squanders its reproduction potential by
producing about as many males as females, we accept less readily that the
pollen seeds (carriers of male gametes) of a hermaphrodite or monoecious
plant are as costly as its seed-laden pods.
Equal allocation of resources to males and females only holds for
allogamous plants (which require another individual to reproduce; a
hermaphrodite or monoecious plant is allogamous if it cannot self-fertilise).
Autogamy (self-fertilisation) restricts "squandering". Selection gives the
advantage to the autogamous individuals that invest least in their male
function; the plants do not compete to fertilise a given flower. On the other
hand, allogamous individuals do compete in order to reproduce, and there is
no restriction on squandering. Thus, when we select the female function - the
seed - in cultivated allogamous plants (if we are not going for growth or
reserves), we do not reduce investment in the male function. The African
millet producer who selects the plants with the largest number of seeds
privileges the genes of the mother-plants as much as of the father-plants
which provided the pollen; selection is as strong on male and female
functions.
In gynodioecious species, which are fairly widespread and comprise both
female (or sterile male 2) and hermaphrodite (or fertile male) plants, the
reproductive performance of females far outweighs that of hermaphrodites.
For example, in plantain, females produce about 70 percent more seeds than
hermaphrodites do; in thyme, they produce twice as many. Thyme, which we

138
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
have already used as an example in Chapter 3, is an excellent illustration of
gynodioecia for other reasons also:
1. Females often appear in hermaphrodite species because the male
function, like all other biological
functions, can be lost. In most
hermaphrodite species, male sterility is just a very rare genetic disease. It is
not due to genuine polymorphism but, at most, to what we have called
cryptopolymorphism. In thyme, however, the proportion of females in wild
populations is high, always above 10 percent, and sometimes even above 90
percent. For instance, near Montpellier, the mean proportion of females is 60
percent and that of hermaphrodites 40 percent. No male has ever been found.
It is thus highly likely that thyme genes will be carried by a female plant as
they have been selected in a context of gynodioecia.
2. When female (sterile male) plants make up a large part of the
population as in beans, a plant's phenotype may be difficult to establish.
Bean populations often contain plants of intermediate phenotype. On the
other hand, thyme plants can nearly always be classified unambiguously as
either female or hermaphrodite. Although there are several ways of being
female (the stamens can be more or less aborted) and only one way of being
hermaphrodite, the two forms are easily distinguished (see Fig. 4.1).
3. In some species displaying frequent, stable male sterility, female
production capacity in hermaphrodites is so reduced that we can hardly
speak of gynodioecia. The species are potentially but not functionally
gynodioecious. The fig tree is a good example. Its hermaphrodite form does

The Key to Genes
139
not produce seed but "raises" pollinators in its female flowers. Asparagus
may be yet another example. Hermaphrodism is so limited that the plants are
said to be males even though they can produce seed under certain conditions;
female asparagus plants are strictly sterile-male. The hermaphrodites of both
the fig tree and asparagus may not have lost their potential to produce seed
but they have lost the genetic or ecologic equipment needed to express this
potential. Both species illustrate the passage from a hermaphrodite to a
dioecious state. The case of thyme is not as simple. According to genetic and
ecological studies, the wide range of sex ratios in populations of wild thyme
corresponds to a great diversity in the genetic information determining
gender. Interbreeding of thyme plants of different origin has led to
disjunctions in sex characters. Their complexity cannot be explained without
reference to nuclear and cytoplasmic genetic determinants (see below).
It is not clear how male sterility genes can propagate in a hermaphrodite
population to the point of overrunning it, nor how hermaphrodites turned
female by losing their ability to produce male gametes maintain themselves.
For a start, it is hard to consider genodioecia as an evolutionary end-point.
An evolutionist would consider it a transition step or an intermediate stage
between the hermaphrodite and dioecious states. However, as Darwin noted,
the gynodioecia of thyme displays all the properties of a stable state. Is this a
kind of stable disequilibrium?
In The Different Forms of Flowers in Plants of the Same Species (1877),
Darwin used thyme as an example to ask how plants that only reproduce
through the female route could be selected instead of hermaphrodites which
reproduce through both male and female routes. In 1941, D. Lewis' work
provided part of the answer to the question by showing that a male sterility
gene does not undergo the same evolutionary constraints if it is nuclear
(present in the cell nucleus and able to be passed on by either gamete) or
cytoplasmic (included in the genome of organelles - mitochondria or
chloroplasts - and passed on by the maternal route). Selection acts quite
differently on nuclear and cytoplasmic genes because of the distinct ways in
which they are passed on.
Let us consider first the more "conventional" nuclear genes inherited both
paternally and maternally. These genes are reproduced far better by
hermaphrodites than by females. Each time that a female produces a seed, it
reproduces half of its own genome and half of the genome of the
hermaphrodite that fertilised it. Females thus contribute toward the
reproduction of the nuclear genes of hermaphrodites. The reverse does not
apply because hermaphrodite seeds only contain hermaphrodite genes. The
genes of females thus reproduce far less well than those of hermaphrodites
(see Fig. 4.2). Ultimately, these genes - and females - should disappear (if
gender is coded at the nuclear level).

140
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Now let us consider the cytoplasmic genes in cytoplasmic organelles
which are all - or almost all - inherited maternally. This is a quite different
case. Because these genes are not passed on by the male, it is immaterial
whether their carrier produces pollen or not, as this will not change their
transmission mode. Ultimately therefore, the cytoplasmic genes of females
should overrun the population because they produce more seeds (see Fig.
4.3).

The Key to Genes
141
We encounter both hermaphrodite and female predominance in thyme. In
some populations, at certain times, the difference between hermaphrodites
and females is chiefly due to a difference in cytoplasmic genes. Cytoplasmic
genes in females (which determine the female form) increase in frequency,
leading to an increase in the proportion of females; this increase can
sometimes be very high. At other times, hermaphrodites and females differ
primarily in their nuclear genes. Nuclear genes determining the female form
are not advantaged, and the proportion of females decreases. Nuclear and
cytoplasmic genes are subject to opposite selective forces here, and we speak
of "conflict" (we shall come back to this later). Nuclear genes are selected to
produce hermaphrodites. Investment in the male and female is equal because
nuclear genes are passed on equally by both routes. The cytoplasmic genes
are selected to produce females, and all is invested in this route which is the
only one to reproduce them. According to molecular and theoretical
analyses, the "feud" between nuclear and cytoplasmic genes is endless in
thyme and in many other plants. Cytoplasmic genes cut off male function,
nuclear genes restore it.
The genodioecia of thyme thus puts us in an embarrassing but instructive
quandary. 
The 
question 
"Does 
selection 
advantage 
females 
or
hermaphrodites?" has no answer because it is incorrectly phrased. For an
answer, we must change the question to either:
"Which nuclear genes does selection advantage, those that determine the
female or the hermaphrodite form?" The answer is that selection advantages
the nuclear genes that determine the hermaphrodite form;
or "Which cytoplasmic genes does selection advantage, those that
determine the female or the hermaphrodite form?" The answer is that
selection advantages the cytoplasmic genes that determine the female form.
But, if this is the case, selection does not act upon the individual but upon
the gene! As long as the two entities are confused, the question goes
unnoticed. We have stumbled upon it by accident just because, in the
example of the gender of thyme, the reproduction of individuals and that of
genes depends on the type of gene (nuclear or cytoplasmic) considered.
Genes, not individuals, are reproduced. Does this mean that the history of
life is just the history of genetic information passed on from one generation
to the next by individuals with an ephemeral existence? We shall discuss this
now and return to gene "conflict" in an organism later.
2.
INDIVIDUAL, WHERE ARE YOU?
Back in 1945, G. Östergren, a Swedish biologist, postulated that:

142
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the units of selection are never biological individuals but their genes and
their chromosomes.3
This was a daring statement. Is not considering genes or chromosomes as
possible selection levels endowing them with a status normally reserved for
the individual, organism or living creature?
To discover the relevance of Östergren's postulate, we shall first provide
a few definitions starting with that of an individual. According to its Latin
etymology, an individual designates a reality that is:
1.
2.
indivisible, from a given standpoint, thus guaranteeing its unity,
singular, different from any other, thus guaranteeing its uniqueness.
Indivisibility and uniqueness are the two fundamental properties of the
individual. The commonly accepted view of individuality is modelled, to a
large extent, on life and its internal finality; in biology an individual is an
entity that displays genetic and organic unity (or indivisibility) and that is
singular because it is inscribed in history. For example, a zygote is an
individual because it is genetically unique, has organic and genetic unity
(despite being a simple cell, it has regulatory mechanisms), and because it is
a singular (and primitive) step in ontogenesis.4
Uniqueness, unlike indivisibility, poses problems. At the root of the
astonishing and provocative statement that the zygote is an individual lies an
epistemological difficulty of ontological origin. If the aim of science is to
generalise and reduce to the identical in order to understand and explain,
must we conclude that the individual is the limit of what can be scientifically
known? Is a science of the individual not a contradiction in terms?
Individuum ineffabile est; there is nothing to say of the individual, declared
Thomas Aquinas. Plato's Ideas and their "participation" in the material world
thus resurface in the question: Are there non-individuated realities that could
belong to several individuals?
It is hard to find answers to these crucial questions because we are still
influenced by the models inherited from Aristotle and Descartes. These
models are mainly of a physiological and "technological" sort, and have an
instrumental, utilitarian outlook. The first question asked is "What is it for?"
There are, however, other ways of looking at things. For example, to the
philosopher Leibniz, the cell, which had just been discovered by
Leeuwenhoek, was not a tool meant for a particular organ but an individual,
an organism with functions, a "monad". In Monadology, Leibniz defined
monad as "a simple substance, without parts, that enters into the
composition of compounds"; "these monads are the true Atoms of Nature, in
a word the elements of things". All monads differ and change continuously
from within.
According to monadism, the universe is made up of these well-defined
units which belong to a spiritual order unlike atoms which belong to the

The Key to Genes
143
world of mechanics. The monad-cell is not separate from the Universe, nor
is it a specific element of a fundamental and causal whole. It represents the
whole (it is sometimes called a profile) and shares the fate of the Universe.
We shall discuss the limitations of this viewpoint incarnated by the eminent
Dr. Pangloss below. However, if the cell is an individual, linked to other
individuals (cells) by a higher-order relationship, then the scale used in a
physiological approach must be reduced to that of a cell. It ensues that the
structure of the individual (organism) becomes subordinate to the functions
of the component, that is of the individual (cell). Made up of cells, the
organism is "made for" cells, for components that are themselves wholes,
albeit less complex ones. But if an understanding of the whole depends on an
understanding the parts, are we not being reductionist?
Leibniz's view - the transition from the universe to the monad - prefigures
in part how biological thinking was to evolve in the 20th century. However,
even if early 20th century biologists could cut living things up into smaller
pieces than either Leibniz or his contemporaries could, they did not discard
Aristotelian and Cartesian models completely. The criticisms waged against
Östergren's hypothesis are proof of this. Nevertheless, two major conceptual
upheavals of the second half of the 20th century will consolidate the breach
made by Östergren, namely, asking "what is life?" in physicochemical terms
and the advent of the notion of information.
3.
WHAT IS LIFE? ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER'S
"ESSENTIALIST" ANSWER
There is no doubt that physical and chemical sciences exert an influence
on natural sciences. The scientific revolution of the 17th century resulted in
the prevalence of a determinist approach to reality and to the study of living
things. Since then, biochemistry and molecular biology have reinforced the
influence of the "hard" sciences. At the same time, however, emergent
scientific fields have challenged the dominance of determinism. Examples of
these new fields are thermodynamics, a science of the macroscopic world
which states that nature's laws are probabilistic, and the science of chaos
which focuses on all that is irregular, random, or turbulent. Although biology
won its independence in the 19th century in a fight against a certain kind of
physics, it has also benefited from this discipline's constant self-appraisal. In
the first half of the 20th century, the sciences of matter underwent deep
changes which were to inspire a great theoretical physicist's thoughts on the
material basis of life.
The Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger is the author of the famous
wave equation of quantum mechanics. This equation was named after him

144
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
and, in 1933, earned him the Nobel prize which he shared with a fellow
scientist, Paul Dirac. Schrödinger lived at a turning point in the history of
sciences which was characterised by changing relations between physics and
biology. Schrödinger focused on these relations and, to his contemporaries
who were astonished that a physicist dared write about a scientific field in
which he was not qualified, he replied that the nature of his enquiry was
universal and rooted in the philosophy of his culture. He was, he said,
examining life and the living from his own philosophical standpoint using
his own scientific method, constructivism. Concepts and scientific facts were
to be construed as constructs of the human intelligence and not as data
established by nature.
Before tackling the question "What is life?" (the title of his essay5),
Schrödinger asked himself:
how can events in space and time which take place within the spatial
boundary of a living organism be accounted for by physics and
chemistry? 6
It is a legitimate question because today, and even more so in
Schrödinger's day, physics and chemistry have been unable to come to grips
with most vital phenomena, in particular with the transition from inert to
living matter, from the inanimate to the animate. However, for Schrödinger,
this "obvious inability of present-day physics and chemistry is no reason at
all for doubting" that these sciences will not be able to account for such
phenomena in the future.7 Living beings do not "elud(e) the laws of physics
as established up to date" even if these laws cannot explain the specificity of
living matter which must obey "other laws of physics hitherto unknown,
which, however, once they have been revealed, will form just as integral a
part of this science as the former".8 Inadequate analytical methods and
especially biological complexity are hurdles that have yet to be overcome.
We may find Schrödinger's hegemonic view of physics rather extreme.
There is no justification to keep calling the search for knowledge that has
been extended to include living beings "physics"; it is just "science". In fact,
Schrödinger did not suggest that natural selection, which the biological
community had accepted long ago, should be part of his physics.
Physicists and the issue of life
Schrödinger took up a tough challenge. 
Several of his
contemporaries were convinced that physics and chemistry could not
explain life. Their outlook had, in fact, helped biology gain the
independence that it so sorely needed and that vitalism had defended
in its own way a century earlier. According to J.B.S. Haldane, the
more discoveries we make about physiological activity and heredity,

The Key to Genes
145
the more difficult it becomes to conjure up a description or an
explanation in physical or chemical terms that can embrace all the
facts of persisting coordination.9
The physicist Niels Bohr was less assertive than Haldane. He
recognised the specificity of vital processes and wondered whether a
physicochemical explanation was possible. At the same time, he
underscored analogies with the new physics. Just as life is not
explained by biology, quanta are not explained by quantum
mechanics. They are, on the contrary, the basis of quantum
mechanics:
The recognition of the essential importance of fundamentally
atomistic features in the functions of living organisms is by no means
sufficient, however, for a comprehensive explanation of biological
phenomena. The question at issue, therefore, is whether some
fundamental traits are still missing in the analysis of natural
phenomena, before we can reach an understanding of life on the basis
of physical experience. [...] On this view, the existence of life must be
considered as an elementary fact that cannot be explained, but must
be taken as a starting point in biology, in a similar way as the
quantum of action, which appears as an irrational element from the
point of view of classical mechanical physics, taken together with the
existence of the elementary particles, forms the foundation of atomic
physics.10
The first question Schrödinger asked in his essay was why are atoms so
small. This question, he said, is meaningless or, rather, has meaning only in
relation to man's measure, thus echoing Protagoras' words, "man is the
measure of all things".11 By commenting on atom size, Schrödinger wanted
to point out that the strange properties of the subatomic world revealed by
the new physics were no reason for not using physics in biology. The
physicochemical laws to be applied to living things were of a solely
statistical nature; atoms move incessantly and unpredictably. However, his
reasoning had shortcomings. The physicochemical laws must apply not only
to a living being as a whole, that is to an entity of an astronomical number of
atoms, but also to groups of atoms that are too small for the law of large
numbers to apply. These small groups of atoms are important because they
determine the "order" in which organisms appear, grow and die. They are the
chromosomes.
Schrödinger's thinking accompanied a scientific revolution - the advent
of molecular genetics - that marked the end of the first half of the 20th
century. Molecular genetics took a strictly mechanistic and reductionist view
of living organisms and, instead of investigating functions or organic parts as

146
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
a whole, studied the structures of their universal components. A typical
approach was taken by a pioneer of molecular biology, Max Delbrück, who
chose to work on the most simple material, the bacteriophage (a virus that
infects bacteria). The mechanisms that he discovered in this rudimentary
organism as regards both structure and function were so fundamental that the
results could be extended to all living things. Jacques Monod, who was very
close to the "phage group" headed by Delbrück, later wrote:
What do, for example, a blue algae, an infusoria, an octopus and man
have in common? The discovery of the cell and cell theory highlighted a
new unity within this diversity. However, not until the developments in
biochemistry of the second quarter of the 20th century was the deep,
strict unity of all the living world revealed at the microscopic level. We
now know that the structure and mode of operation of the chemical
machinery are intrinsically the same from the bacterium to man.12
The unity of the living world at the molecular level must be compatible
with substantial diversity because, as Schrödinger writes, at this level are
coded:
not only the structure and functioning of that organism in the adult, or in
any other particular stage, but the whole of its ontogenetic development
from the fertilized egg cell to the stage of maturity, when the organism
begins to reproduce itself.13
This led him to suggest that an organism has a "pattern". The four-
dimensional pattern (the three dimensions of space plus time) would be
repeated from one individual and one generation to the next. The implication
was that the concept of information embracing a message and a possible
feedback could be applied to living things. Structural rigidity and conformity
to a specific type depend upon the execution of a strict, prescribed
programme, whereas flexibility in behaviour is guaranteed by self-regulatory
mechanisms and feedback loops. As François Jacob says:
All organisations involve feedback loops in which each element is kept
informed of the effects of its function which it adjusts in the interest of the
whole.14
As early as in 1944, Schrödinger used this "second-hand" biological
knowledge to predict some of the main physical properties of a chassis for
heredity. They were not confirmed until 1953, the year that J. Watson and F.
Crick described the double helix structure of DNA. Schrödinger's predictions
were a brilliant demonstration of the effectiveness of constructivism.
Moreover, the demonstration gave Einstein an a posteriori reason for

The Key to Genes
147
satisfaction since, in disagreement with Heisenberg, he claimed that only
theory determines what can be observed. Schrödinger concluded that, given
the prerequisites of a chassis for heredity, the only possible arrangement of
atoms was the one found in a molecule with a regular, aperiodical crystal-
type structure (with no repetitions). The gene could therefore not be a
combination of atoms that owes its properties to the laws of statistical
physics.
... a gene contains certainly not more than about a million or a few
million atoms. That number is much too small [...] to entail an orderly
and lawful behaviour according to statistical physics - and that means
according to physics. It is too small, even if all these atoms played the
same role, as they do in a gas or a drop of liquid. And the gene is most
certainly not just a homogeneous drop of liquid. It is probably a large
protein molecule, in which every atom, every radical, every heterocyclic
ring plays an individual role, more or less different from that played by
any of the other similar atoms, radicals, or rings.15
Schrödinger advanced several arguments to support his thesis that
heredity is determined by a very small number of atoms. First, the message
is stable because the changes on an atomic scale revealed by quantum
mechanics are discontinuous. The "aperiodical crystal" he imagined would
lose its stability only as a result of a strong perturbation, a quantum jump to
a different energy level, in other words a mutation. Second, an arrangement
of several motifs at the molecular level could account for the variety
demanded by life's diversity. Just a few motifs would be enough. Does not
Morse or binary code in computers encode any text with just two symbols?
The order in vital processes would thus derive from the order in
chromosomes to which would be added the statistical, physicochemical
regularity of molecule behaviour in a cellular environment.
But did Schrödinger locate life for us? Probably not. We now accept that
life can neither be reduced to one or more structures nor observed in the
laboratory with, for example, the tools of molecular biology. The originality
and ambiguity of biological events lie in their halfway house position
between the manifestations of inert matter (determined matter, Schrödinger
would have said) and thought. At the end of his essay, Schrödinger
transformed his What is life? into What is "I"? According to the philosopher
of science Henri Saget, life:
appears at times to reproduce the strict, causal sequences of a
mechanism, at times to reflect the values of meaning and finality that
belong to the mind.16

148
GeneAvatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
He continues:
In a mathematical sense, the whole is the sum of the parts, but the tiniest
organism is evidence enough that the whole is more than the sum of the
parts.
We may be critical of Schrödinger's reductionist approach but we cannot
deny its heuristic value. It was adopted by the pioneers of molecular biology
and led to spectacular progress partly because, when a reductionist approach
encounters barriers or shortcomings, these can be identified. When we read
Monod's comment that "the structure and function of the chemical
machinery is intrinsically the same from the bacterium to man",17 we know
full well that the developing human embryo cannot be described entirely by
mechanisms discovered in bacteria and that the description must include
other kinds of knowledge. Nevertheless, didn't the study of nutrition in
bacteria provide the fundamental data on the regulatory mechanisms of gene
expression which form the basis of embryogenesis?
We should not exaggerate, however, the shortcomings of Schrödinger's
approach. He himself stressed that it should not be taken as strictly positivist
or essentialist. (We have called a view or representation of the world based
on an array of types or essences "essentialist").18 His heirs, especially
molecular biologists, are perhaps less "flexible" than he was when they
declare that there is a genetic order, or that every biological phenomenon
depends strictly on the genetic message inscribed in DNA and transmitted to
the cell machinery. Their view, inherited from essentialist approaches to life,
confers DNA a sort of primordial invariant status by insisting on the self-
reproducing and information-rich structure of the molecule. According to
Ernst Mayr, DNA contains a programme, a determinant, a:
coded or prearranged information that controls a process (or behaviour)
leading it toward a given end. 19
Whereas a machine is made, in a "mortal duality"20, of matter coming
from nature and a form imposed by man, living matter is, on the contrary,
perfectly "informed" thanks to DNA. Its organisation does not come from
without but from within; some authors speak of "pure form". The
information in DNA is passed on by its replication, and it is because this is a
permanent process that we can speak of order.
How do the protagonists of essentialism view evolution? World order is
based on a limited number of essences or forms characterised by two main
attributes, constancy and discontinuity. There is no room for fixism.
Evolution can perfectly well occur discontinuously via quanta and display
regularity. In the end, what is life but a well-ordered array of species and

The Key to Genes
149
populations whose lack of homogeneity, if any, is resolved in a virtually
unalterable genetic arrangement.
This essentialist view is rather hard pressed to make room for mutations.
For Schrödinger, a very high mutation frequency would be an unbearable
burden to living beings (see our discussion of the concept of load). That is
why:
in order to be suitable material for the work of natural selection,
mutations must be rare events, as they actually are. [...] The comparative
conservatism which results from the high degree of permanence of the
genes is essential.21
On the other hand, Schrödinger suggested that we could view mutations
positively as a means of introducing novelty. Novelty counterbalances the
overall weakening of natural processes that occurs at each generation (if we
accept that the overall impact of time is negative). His suggestion is,
however, quite incidental. Genetic mutations (such as extinctions in
palaeontology) are errors or stigmas with respect to a biological ideal, the
ideal of the reproduction of an invariant order or of an organisation that
should tend toward immutability.
In the end, it is best to consider a mutation as a chance or accidental
event that modifies genetic material by conferring it a rare form. The new
form can be integrated into the genome only with the help of, and not in
opposition to, DNA-specific processes (in particular repair mechanisms
which detect changes, try to remedy them, but sometimes fix them). Only the
phenotypic expression of the mutation will tell us whether it is a deleterious
or beneficial mutation, an error or not; no one will deny that mutations at the
origin of cancers are bad.
The effectiveness of Schrödinger's essentialism depends partly on the
constructivist method. Although it has its faults, it is flexible enough to
avoid excessive reductionism. Living structures, at all levels, are not just
machines obeying external orders but can organise themselves and
reproduce. This aspect of Schrödinger's thinking certainly helped introduce
the notion of information into biology.
4. 
AN UPDATE ON INFORMATION
In everyday speech, information is an item of knowledge, of scholarship,
or an insight that the "speaker" has and that he (or she) can, if he wishes,
either pass on to others or keep to himself. Information is a widely accepted
notion and has a key role in our descriptions of power, of people's actions
(how rational is their behaviour), of the way things are organised (data

150
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
availability can help rationalise the way a complex system is set up and
regulated), of automation and know-how. On the other hand, information
theory is all about a statistical approach to communication. It is the outcome
of a considerable amount of work on the optimal use of information
transmission systems such as telephones, televisions, etc. The first person to
provide an overview of information theory was Claude E. Shannon,22 an
engineer at Bell Telephone Laboratories, who showed that Boolean algebra,
which reduces logical reasoning to an algebraic calculation in binary
notation, can be translated into a physical system of open and closed circuits.
The electric signal carries the information which is then transmitted via a
channel (telephone line, Hertzian waves). We can thus study separately the
actual information itself (amount, entropy of the source, etc.), the properties
of the channels and, for optimal channel use, the relations between the
information to be transmitted and the channel used. What the transmitted
messages actually mean, in other words, the semantic aspect of
communication is ignored. The basic concepts of this theory are simple and
easy to generalise (information and amount of information, entropy, code
efficiency and redundancy, coding in the presence or absence of noise,
channel capacity, speed of transmission, etc.). It was therefore soon obvious
that the concepts could be applied not only to the communication means
of modern technology, but also to other fields, such as for instance,
linguistics23 or nervous system physiology. But does human communication
really belong to this conceptual framework? Is it reasonable to reduce the
whole world and its interconnections down to a set of elementary and
distinct events that are translated into data linked by explicable rules? This is
what scientists claim to be doing, at least in part, when they make use of the
notion of information.24
In biology the notion of information has been used to address entropy
(which, at a first approximation, measures the disorder of a system) and
genetics. The idea that "information is nothing but negative entropy" is still
controversial, resting as it does on rather improbable hypotheses. It turns
living beings into creators of order in the Universe, and this view cannot be
accepted without some discussion. Similar caution and doubts need to be
voiced when we apply information theory to genetics. How can we
transcribe the concept of memorising? Can we speak of innate and acquired
information in genetics? How should we view the comparison made by some
scientists between chromosomes and sources that emit signals and the idea
that the sense organs pick up outside information, transmit it to the central
nervous system, transform it, and then store it in genetic form? All these
processes are indeed still somewhat hypothetical.
Clearly, biological information is not reducible to Shannon's model if
only because the decoding systems are part of the information itself. Much

The Key to Genes
151
progress is needed before information theory can account for genetic
information as it has yet to define the meaning of an information and identify
nonsense messages. It is a shame that mathematicians who are experts in
information theory forget to mention these shortcomings and confuse the
weaknesses of their constructions with a flaw in neo-Darwinian theory. We
must therefore make quite clear what genetic information really means.
5.
GENETIC INFORMATION
A willow tree, catkins, fluffs of cotton wool, the banks of a canal… all the
features of a true English landscape are depicted by the eminent Oxford
zoologist, Richard Dawkins, in his book The Blind Watchmaker when he
introduces the theme of genetic information. But the poet soon gives way to
the biologist. The willow's fluffy specks contain a portion of DNA:
whose coded characters spell out specific instructions for building willow
trees that will shed a new generation of downy seeds. […] It is raining
instructions out there; it's raining programs; it's raining tree-growing,
fluff-spreading, algorithms. That's not a metaphor, it is the plain truth. It
couldn't be plainer if it were raining floppy discs.25
It may seem natural to want to apply the concept of information to
genetic material, given the concepts of primordial invariant, code, and
messenger RNA, but this must be done with caution and due regard for
aspects of life such as evolutionary pressures, mutation and selection.
1. We have seen that the way we perceive mutation depends in part on
the importance we confer to the notions of normality and invariance. Is a
mutation an "error" or just a change whose relevance we shall discover later?
How can we reveal a mutation; by noting the impact on the phenotype,
observing the chromosomes, or analysing the nucleic acid sequence?
Moreover, which element in the information chain actually undergoes
mutation; is it the source, the receptor, the transmission mode, or the
information itself?
2. Analogous questions arise when we address selection. Two are
virtually identical. Which entity is actually selected? At what integration
level does selection occur? The second question was debated quite fiercely
from the 1960s onwards although the protagonists themselves were not
always fully aware that this was the question they were actually debating.
V.C. Wynne-Edwards claimed that the group was selected whereas John
Maynard-Smith and George C. Williams thought that selection occurred at
the level of the individual or sometimes of the gene. As for the first question,
Ernst Mayr defended the view that the selected entity was the individual

152
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
whereas Richard Dawkins, J. Maynard-Smith, G.C. Williams and William
D. Hamilton said it was the gene. By drawing a distinction between the two
questions and addressing the first one first, R. Dawkins may not have calmed
the debate but at least he clarified it. According to Dawkins, we must
distinguish between the entity subject to selection pressures (the individual)
and that which is actually selected (the gene). Ernst Mayr accused him of
turning Mendel's "wrinkled-pea" genetics into "beanbag" genetics! Chris J.
Gliddon and Pierre-Henri Gouyon have classified Mayr's stance as "pea-
soup" genetics.26
Because of mutation and selection, we must reformulate the issue of
genetic information in a perhaps new, more fundamental fashion. We need to
differentiate between what is transmitted over time and that which actually
does the transmitting.
6.
GENETIC INFORMATION AND AVATARS
Since that which is transmitted as faithfully as possible during evolution
cannot reasonably be something ephemeral, what can it be? Is it a structure
or is it information? Structure and information were no doubt synonymous in
the first self-replicating systems but, with more elaborate organisms, the
individual structure transmitted to the next generation became harder to
define and the information easier. This explains why the idea of a gene has
been so successful.
A gene is not easy to define as the number of definitions encountered in
the literature prove:
Word invented by Wilhelm Johannsen (1911) to denote a material and
self-catalytic particle which is harboured in the chromosome and which
determines one or more inherited characters (Grand Larousse
Encyclopédique, 1962).
The characters developed by an organism depend upon the presence of
genetic units which were initially called determinants and are now called
genes. Genes have the power to reproduce as identical copies and are
accurately transmitted during cell division (Encyclopaedia Universalis,
1989).
Accurate copies in reproduction are guaranteed by genetic units that are
fragments of chromosomes called genes. These genes pass on the
characters of the parents during fertilisation: they are said to carry the
genetic information (Les Notions Philosophiques, 1990).

The Key to Genes
153
Gene is a word that the Danish biologist W. Johanssen transposed into
German in 1909 from the Greek Word genos meaning "birth, family,
race", which can be related to the word gignestahai "to be born" and "to
become" (since 1911, we also speak of "gene" in English). This
biological term denotes an element of the chromosome that is responsible
for a hereditary factor (Dictionnaire Historique de la Langue Française,
1992).
The chromosome theory of inheritance stipulates that each chromosome
be made up of an ensemble of particles, each with its own role, and that
are called genes […] The gene's intrinsic property is the ability of self-
reproduction: each time the cell divides, each gene of each chromosome
gives rise to two genes that are faithful copies of it (J. Rostand,
L'Hérédité Humaine, 1952).
The end term is the same irrespective of the type of analysis we use: the
gene represents simultaneously the unit of function, mutation and
recombination. The material of heredity is resolved into elementary units
that cannot be split. The gene becomes a kind of atom of heredity. (F.
Jacob, La Logique du Vivant, 1970).
We define the gene as the smallest segment of the DNA macromolecule
that is able to determine a constant character (P.-P. Grassé, L'Evolution
du Vivant, 1973).
Unit of inheritance, borne by a chromosome, transmitted from generation
to generation by the gametes and controlling the development and
characteristics of an individual (translated from the French) (E. Mayr,
Populations, Species, and Evolution, 1970 (see Glossary)).
At some point a particularly remarkable molecule was formed by
accident. We will call it the Replicator. It may not necessarily have been
the biggest or the most complex molecule around, but it had the
extraordinary property of being able to create copies of itself... They
have come a long way those replicators. Now they go by the name of
genes, and we are their survival machines. (R. Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976).
Several of these definitions describe the gene as a sequence of nucleic
acids with defined properties. The gene is thus apparently a physical entity.
But what should we make of gene cloning where a gene is reproduced in
several copies? Do we then refer to several genes? No, we do not; the gene is
unique. We should therefore not view a gene from a physical "nucleotide"

154
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
stance but rather consider it as genetic information determining the observed
phenotype. It is fundamental to note that: "That which is transmitted during
evolution, whatever we call it, is not so much a physical entity as a piece of
information (in the broadest meaning of the word that includes the notion of
structure).” We should not confuse information and matter even if
researchers in the West often find it hard to think in terms other than
physical objects.
When an abstraction, such as the gene, suddenly comes on stage, the
biologist will go to no end to replace it by physical elements, particles or
molecules. It is as if a theory in biology could last only if it refers to some
concrete model.27
Biologists are not being urged to take part in a Copernican revolution,
nor to convert to some kind of oriental spirituality. In any case, there is no
need for this since the gospel according to St. John states that:
in the beginning was the Word... All things were made by him; and
without him was not anything made that was made. In him was life... And
the Word was made flesh.28
They are merely being asked to include the modern notion of information in
their thinking.
To denote that which transmits genetic information or its physical carrier,
we use the term avatar borrowed from the Hindu religion; it alludes to the
physical forms adopted by the god Vishnu on his visits to Earth. The word
was introduced by John Damuth of the University of California to refer to
the selection unit in the case of several competing species interacting in an
ecologic community. An avatar is:
the local "embodiment" or "representation" of the species in the local
community. A community is a population of avatars, each avatar
belonging to a different species. [...] "Avatar" is a purely ecological
concept, and has no relationship to taxonomic concepts such as
"subspecies" or "race".29
The avatar, as noted by J. Damuth, interacts with the environment which
provides for its needs and exerts an influence upon it but, above all, the
avatar is produced by genetic information to ensure that this information is
passed on. Individual organisms easily meet this definition. They interact
with the environment, are produced by genetic information, and copy the
information. The number of copies depends on reproductive capacity,
interaction with other avatars and with the environment, unforeseen events,
and other factors. What is true for the individual must be extended to all of
life's integration levels. Interestingly, with the exception of the word gene,

The Key to Genes
155
the words most often used in biology refer to avatars and not to the
corresponding information!
The distinction between that which is transmitted and that which
transmits, between genetic information and its avatars, can help resolve the
problem of which entities undergo selection. Selection targets only genetic
information, avatars are mere vehicles.
Our conclusion on the gynodioecia of thyme - namely, that the
hermaphrodite and female forms are not the units of selection - can be
extended to the entire living world. Genes, not individuals, are selected, and
this explains life's inventiveness. Genetic information, which is selected on
the basis of an avatar's ability to reproduce this information, will produce
living structures that are increasingly complex.
7.
INDIVIDUALS: GENE INVENTIONS FOR GENE
REPRODUCTION
Darwinian and neo-Darwinian theory have accustomed us to focus on the
individual. We have just shattered the individual's privileged position of
monopoly, and guided readers toward organisms, organs, and cells, right to
the heart of living matter where genetic information lies. Some readers will
tax us with reductionism, quite aptly at this stage because, as we have shown
and will show yet again, a reductionist phase is often necessary to
understand life's phenomena. We shall now take a wide-angle lens and look
at the levels of integration mentioned above in another way.
Our definition of genetic information may have surprised readers more
familiar with matter ("substance") than form ("logos"). Let us go one step
further and qualify genes by an adjective used to describe humans (and
sometimes, by analogy, animals); let us call them selfish and state clearly the
central theme of this chapter: Individuals are artifices that genes have
invented for the purposes of their own reproduction. This assertion is
analogous to Richard Dawkins' statement on the human species:
We are survival machines - robot vehicles blindly programmed to
preserve the selfish molecules known as genes.30
Dawkins speaks of "molecules" whereas we and C.J. Gliddon speak of
information. Whichever the word, the statement surprises, even shocks. But
is it not just an extension of our thoughts on genetic information? Why
should we limit our investigations to entities, "avatars", that will disappear,
however complex, evolved and noteworthy they may be? Only genetic
information will persist even though (or because) it is subject to selection
and variation.

156
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Once we have accepted R. Dawkins' broad statement, of what use is it to
us? It will be our guide on our tour of the edifice of biology. This tour will
take us from genomic events to the behaviour of populations and from the
mechanisms of reproduction to ageing and death.
Is reproduction a trap?
It is commonly said that living beings multiply. How untrue! Are
we gullible or just naive? Individuals do not multiply, their death is
programmed and they will disappear forever. If they have offspring,
their children will never be "them", they will be "others", genetically
other if they are sexual species (the offspring has neither parent's
genotype) or just different even if they have been cloned (e.g. true
twins because otherness exists even in twins). We are all aware of this
but sometimes tend to forget it. No one has seen parents express
horror and surprise because they have acquired sudden proof that
their child is irrevocably another being who cannot be taken back.31
When we say that a successful gene's prime quality is its selfishness
which is expressed in an individual's behaviour, are we not undermining
ethics, "that set of rules of behaviour that are accepted unconditionally and
that are considered to apply"? Is it not pointless to fight man's selfishness if
it is genetically determined? R. Dawkins writes discerningly:
Be warned that if you wish, as I do, to build a society in which
individuals cooperate generously and unselfishly towards a common
good, you can expect little help from biological nature. Let us try to teach
generosity and altruism, because we are born selfish. Let us understand
what our selfish genes are up to, because we may then at least have the
chance to upset their designs, something that no other species has ever
aspired to.32
In other words, we do not have to obey our genes (an example is
contraceptive use). Although the gene is fundamental to the way we view
evolution, it is not the only basis of evolution, especially human evolution.
8.
SELECTION LEVELS
Selection acts on genetic information at all of life's integration levels but
in different ways at each level. Each selection level is a more or less
independent unit.

The Key to Genes
157
Molecular level
The fairly recent discovery that much of the genome is made up of repeat
non-coding sequences that do not correspond to genes was a surprise to
molecular biologists. Their immediate reaction, governed as usual by a
physiological and invariably utilitarian reflex, was to find out of what use
they might be to genome and organism. But here lies a misunderstanding we
have already come across. The repeat sequences are not like simple organs
that cannot reproduce on their own and that have to serve a purpose to
remain part of a larger structure. These sequences can replicate
independently of others and "invade" part of the genome. This idea underlies
the selfish DNA hypothesis proposed by Leslie Orgel and Francis Crick in
1980 in an article that made the front page of Nature, "Selfish DNA: the
ultimate parasite".33
Many molecular mechanisms covered by the generic term "molecular
drive" can increase the number of copies of a sequence in a genome: Gene
conversion which promotes homogeneous sequences (two homologous but
non-identical sequences pair up to form two heteroduplexes; DNA repair
enzymes then resolve the differences to the advantage of one of the forms
and yield two identical sequences), asymmetric crossing over, "sliding" (the
polymerase responsible for replication "stutters" and yields a series of
identical copies), transposition, etc. These "parasitic" processes at the
molecular level can explain repeat sequences as well as phenomena of
concerted evolution;34 they might even be beneficial to avatars, whether
these are individuals or populations. According to G.A. Dover, molecular
drive might play a role in most, even all, evolutionary events.
Whatever the outcome of these molecular mechanisms at the individual
level, they are clearly important early on in the evolution of living beings.
Thus, introns (see Chapter 3), which promote crossing-over by increasing
the chances of recombination, seem to have been present before prokaryotes
and eukaryotes separated. Transposition mechanisms, in which RNA may be
an intermediate, have probably existed for a very long time. The enzyme
required, reverse transcriptase (which catalyses the transition from RNA to
DNA unlike transcriptase which catalyses the transition from DNA to RNA),
might date back to an RNA world that existed before our DNA world. The
claim that RNA preceded DNA, and that reverse transcription preceded
transcription, is not that outrageous if we recall that organisms and their
genomes (in a physical sense) are the means or avatars that genetic
information units have invented to maximise their multiplication over time.

158
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Cellular level
The next level is the cellular level. A bacterium's only dream is to
become two bacteria, wrote F. Jacob. Cell multiplication in higher
organisms, however, is usually governed by a development plan. At times, it
might be worth escaping from the grips of this plan. Thus, cancer cells,
because they divide more often, have a selective advantage over an
organism's other cells. In animals at least, there are mechanisms for
eliminating such dividing cells before their "victory" ends in the death of the
individual. Oncogenes, whose avatars are cancer cells, do not always have a
winning bet because, for instance, some anticancer drugs act by creating a
selection pressure against cells that divide frequently.
Individual level
The level of the individual is the one that has received most attention
since Darwin's day. At this level, the selection of genetic information
depends directly on the avatars' ability to reproduce. However, in the case of
sexual reproduction, there is the problem that only part of the genetic
information is passed on. Ensuring that an avatar reproduces successfully
does not guarantee that the information will be passed on to the next
generation. Each diploid individual only passes on one chromosome of each
pair in a random combination. Moreover, because of recombinations within
each pair, the assorted pieces of information on the inherited chromosome
are also random. Hence George C. Williams' query, what is the smallest
amount of information that can have an effect on an individual's phenotype?
The greater the amount of information, the larger the space it occupies on the
genome, and the smaller its chance of being transmitted in its entirety. In
point of fact, the selected information can be as small as a single nucleotide
(that had for instance undergone mutation) or as large as a haploid genome
(many cases of polyploid selection are known in plants). The information in
a nucleotide has a 50 percent chance of being transmitted. Moreover, the
meaning of this information may depend upon the rest of the genome which
is usually not transmitted in its entirety. We have yet again to define an
individual but this time scientifically. The information carried by the
avatar/individual is not a single unit; each piece of information is selected
according to its own logic.
The question "which is the selection unit" has special prominence at the
level of the individual. How can we specify the exact relationship linking a
piece of genetic information to its avatar? E. Mayr considers the individual
as a whole, as a carrier of a complete genome. R. Dawkins and G.C.
Williams, as we have seen, stick to the gene. Nevertheless, just as in sexual

The Key to Genes
159
species a genome is never passed on in its entirety, a gene is never passed on
in isolation. The selection unit would thus be a set of genes. Since the
variation in the frequency of an allele depends on the reproductivity of all its
carriers and since in each carrier the allele is in a genetically different
environment, the allele's fitness is clearly a statistical, and not an intrinsic,
property.
Group level
V.C. Wynne-Edwards introduced the concept of group selection in 1962.
He used it to explain so-called altruist behaviour in animals. For instance,
whereas most prairie dogs go about their usual business, some look out for
the unexpected arrival of predators. The lookout informs the rest of the
group of the predator's presence by sending out a sound signal but, in so
doing, runs the danger of attracting the attention of the predator. How did
lookout genes become fixed if the lookout dies before passing them on?
Many types of insect spend their lives looking after the offspring of their
sisters at the expense of their own. Similar behaviour is observed in mole-
rats. How can we explain a behavioural pattern that natural selection should
have eliminated long ago? V.C. Wynne-Edwards suggests that the prejudice
to the individual is offset by the benefit to the group, which is thus the
selection unit. But this is not the only possible hypothesis.

160
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
William D. Hamilton has suggested the following explanation. Unselfish
behaviour is always encountered in closely related individuals. In other
words, the gene that "commands" unselfish behaviour is advantaged because
it is also present in the individual who benefits from the altruism. The same
reasoning also applies, for example, to the caring behaviour of parents
towards their children. The gene acts for its own benefit because it is present
in both generations. W. Hamilton also explains how unselfish behaviour is
maintained and even developed in some species outside the strict bonds of
lineage. In bees, because of their special haplo-diploid mode of sexual
reproduction, a female has more genetic points in common with her sister
than with her daughter. This is why workers look after their sisters rather
than produce offspring. At the root of the expression, selfish gene, devised
by R. Dawkins, is the idea that the help one individual gives to another
conceals a tendency to maximise the reproductive worth of the gene.
Hamilton's hypothesis, baptised "kin selection" by J. Maynard-Smith,
underlies a good predictive model. In contrast, Wynne-Edwards' view (a
character, even if it is detrimental to the carrier, will be inscribed in the
species if it is beneficial to the group) is hard to defend. Populations do not
display sufficient individuality to be true selection levels.
We must therefore probably abandon the idea that some hypothetical
group selection might explain the decrease in an individual's fitness due to
unselfish behaviour. As a first approximation, individual selection alone can
explain group evolution and, when it seems to be absent, we should not
immediately invoke group selection. Nevertheless, during evolution, groups
of different sizes (species, phyla) have gone extinct, and current groups are
probably not random samples of what might have existed. Preferential group
extinction which is a kind of group selection (we have rejected it as an
explanation for decreased individual fitness) has therefore no doubt reduced
the number of situations where individual selection could act (we shall come
back to this when discussing the evolution of sex). Living species are thus
clearly not random samples taken from among the results of individual
selection. It is unfortunately difficult to evaluate the true impact of this
phenomenon. How can we measure group fitness? On the basis of what
property? We lack answers to these two questions.
9.
RULES GOVERNING THE EVOLUTION OF
INFORMATION
Genetic information reproduces by using avatars as carriers and as
procreators of other avatars meant to carry identical information. In practice,
avatars with finite resources cannot provide exact copies of the information

The Key to Genes
161
they carry over time. There is a minimum, inevitable amount of diversity for
a variety of reasons. Consequently, different information is reproduced by
avatars using the same resources. There is competition, and the medium is
invaded by the information that is reproduced best, whether by chance (or
genetic drift) because it produces the best avatar (the selection process per
se) or because it is linked to other information that is selected (hitch-hiking).
This relatively simple process is in fact more complicated because there
is not just a single unit or level of selection. Several levels have to be
considered simultaneously and in ranked order. We have already
encountered this in group selection but the rule can be generalised: All
forms, even weak forms, of selection at a given level will dominate over

162
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
selection at higher levels even if this "conflict" may lead to extinction …
Thus, for a character to be selected at the individual level, it has already to
have been selected at the molecular level. Similarly, only the characters that
are successful at the level of individual selection can hope to be selected at
group level (Table 4.1).
We should interpret this hierarchy in a circular manner rather than in the
usual linear way. A well-known example is that of the wings of birds. Do
birds have wings because they fly or do they fly because they have wings?
Owing to mutation and development, which act at the molecular and
individual levels, birds fly because they have wings. Owing to selection,
which acts at the individual and population levels, birds have wings because
they fly. The circular nature of the causes and the hierarchy in life's
integration and selection levels hinge on each other; they let us reintroduce
the notion of finality in its rightful place, to the right extent.
The hierarchy in levels also means that efficient reproduction at one level
does not imply efficient reproduction at other levels. If a piece of genetic
information corresponding to a given nucleotide sequence is reproduced
correctly by the enzyme machinery, it can increase its number of copies in
the genome… but these extra sequences will probably not benefit the carrier.
We have already mentioned the higher level case of cancer cells. There are
many other examples.
The "unreasonable" proliferation of cancer cells (they will die with the
patient) is an incentive to examine situations where several finalities co-exist
at the same integration level. What will happen? Alas, for those who admire
natural harmony or hanker after the Garden of Eden, the result will be
conflict. The conventional view of the genome is thus somewhat modified; it
becomes a place of perpetual conflict.
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Charnov, E.L., Maynard Smith, J., and Bull, J.-J., 1976, Why be an hermaphrodite?
Nature 263: 125-126.
This rather curious terminology refers to the fact that the female flower is a hermaphrodite
flower that has lost its male function.
Östergren, G., 1945, Parasitic nature of extra fragment chromosomes, Botaniska Notiser
2: 157-163.
Two lawyers in England based the concept of a pre-embryo on indivisibility. The pre-
embryo is a small group of cells that make up an embryo of less than 14 days. It can be
used in experimentation because it is not yet an individual and can divide into twins. We
lack the space to discuss the ethical issues involved.
Schrödinger, E., 1944, What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Schrödinger, E., ibid., p. 1.
Schrödinger, E., ibid., p. 2.
Schrödinger, E., ibid., pp. 68 & 69.
Haldane, J.B.S., 1931, The Philosophical Basis of Biology, London, p. 2.

The Key to Genes
163
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
Bohr, N., 1933, Light and life, Nature 131: 457 & 458.
Quoted by E. Schrödinger, 1954, in Nature and The Greeks, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Monod, J., 1970, Le Hasard et la Nécessité. Essai sur la Philosophie Naturelle de la
Biologie Moderne, Seuil, Paris, p. 118.
Schrödinger, E., What is Life? pp. 19-20.
Jacob, F., 1970, La Logique du Vivant. Une Histoire de l'Hérédité, Series: Bibliothèque
des Sciences Humaines, NRF-Gallimard, Paris, p. 272.
Schrödinger, E., ibid., p. 30. A gene, in fact, contains several tens of thousands of atoms,
those of the nucleic acids.
Saget, H., 1978, L'essor de la biologie moléculaire (1950-1965), Cahier d'Histoire et de
Philosophie des Sciences, n° 7, CNRS, Paris, p. IV.
Monod, J., ibid., p. 118.
See Chapter 1, Section 1.
Mayr, E., 1981, La Biologie de l'Evolution, Hermann, Paris, p. 117.
Saget, H., ibid., p. VI.
Schrödinger, E., ibid., p. 41.
Shannon, C.E., 1948, A mathematical theory of communication, Bell System Techn. J. 27,
379-423 & 623-656 and Communication in the presence of noise, 1949, Proc. Inst. Radio
Engin., 37: 10.
In linguistics, the channel is the chain formed by the organ that produces sounds, the
sound waves themselves, and the organ that hears the sounds.
Brillouin, L., 1959, La Science et la Théorie de l'Information, Masson, Paris.
Dawkins, R., 1986, The Blind Watchmaker, Longmans, London. (Penguin Books, 1991, p.
111).
Gliddon, C.J. and Gouyon, P.H., 1989, The units of selection, TREE 4: 204.
Jacob, F., La Logique du Vivant, p. 22.
Testament of St. John, Chapter 1.
Damuth, J., 1985, Selection among "species": A formulation in terms of natural functional
units, Evolution 39: 1137.
Dawkins, R., 1976, The Selfish Gene, Oxford University Press, Oxford, preface (new
edition 1989).
Gouyon, P.-H., 1994, Le sexe, ce choix de l'évolution biologique, Turbulences 1: 9.
Dawkins, R., ibid., p. 3.
Orgel, L.E., and Crick, F.H., 1980, Selfish DNA: The ultimate parasite, Nature 284: 604-
607.
Sequences often do not evolve independently of each other.
Gouyon, P.H., and Gliddon, C., 1988, The genetics of information and the evolution of
avatars, in: Population Genetics and Evolution (G. de Jong, ed.), Springer, Berlin, p. 121.

Chapter 5
CONFLICT AND COOPERATION
It is hard to imagine that components of an organism such as the
cytoplasmic and nuclear genomes of thyme described in the previous chapter
may enter into conflict. Do not different genome compartments1 share the
same evolutionary fate? Are they not transmitted together to the next
generation and selected so that the carrier reproduces as successfully as
possible? By underscoring genetic information's fundamental role in the new
theory of evolution, the previous chapter has given a hard knock to the
conventional harmonious view of the "individual". It has called into question
whether a gene's (or group of genes) evolutionary success does really depend
on how useful the gene is to the individual. This chapter will confirm our
doubts and show that competition - intragenomic conflict - does occur in
individuals. It will then present two theories, game theory and sociobiology,
in order to explain how conflicts are managed at different levels in living
beings.
1.
THE GENOME, AN ARRAY OF
COMPARTMENTS IN CONSTANT CONFLICT
According to the previous chapter, the genome is made up of pieces of
information that interact to "manufacture" an individual that will pass them
on. However, interaction does not imply coherence. The genome is not a
homogenous entity but formed of several compartments each of which has
its own mode of operation and, especially, reproduction. As we shall see
below, transposons - baffling repeat sequences discovered in the 1970s - can
give rise to several subcompartments within the genome. We have already
165

166
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
learnt that the nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes of thyme form two quite
distinct and probably ranked compartments.
How do these different compartments behave toward each other?
Traditionalists were quick to spy instances of co-operation or independence.
However the genome bears many traces of conflict. Sequences that were
"vanquished" in the past, and whose multiplication machinery is inhibited
for the time being, are always on the ready to be expressed again. A single
mutation or interbreeding could re-establish contact and interaction between
pieces of information that lie apart (or separate two antagonist pieces of
information), and set up the sequences so that all restrictions are lifted.
Conflict between asexual chromosomes
Meiosis is cell division in sexually reproducing species. There is passage
from the diploid state (where the individual is endowed with two sets of
chromosomes, one inherited from the father, the other from the mother) to
the haploid state (the sex cells, or gametes, which have one set of
chromosomes only and therefore just one copy of each gene). Meoisis
ensures that genetic information is distributed equitably; half of the gametes
(spermatozoa or ovules) receive one copy of the gene, the other half receives
the other copy. Equitable distribution of alleles to gametes is a conclusion of
Mendel's work. That it does not always occur implies that meiosis is a time
of the life cycle that is especially prone to conflict.
Let us consider a heterozygote with, by definition, two different copies of
a given gene. These two allelic forms compete with each other for presence
in the gametes. If one can bias meiotic segregation so that it will be present
in most gametes, then this "trait" will be strongly selected. This is known as
meiotic distortion, meiotic drive or segregation distortion and can lead to the
disappearance of the other allelic form.
The segregation distortion factor ensures that one allelic form is often
over-represented by eliminating some or all of the gametes where it is not
present. This form will be selected if the number of gametes is not limiting,
that is if destroying half of them does not decrease fertility. This is why
segregation distortion is usually observed in males. An example is meiotic
distortion due to the special allele, haplotype t, in the mouse. Because, after
meiosis in a heterozygote t/+ male, haplotype t is absent in half of the
gametes, cell viability is decreased.2 Haplotype t is thus at a clear advantage
in the progeny of heterozygotes because, instead of being present in just half
of the gametes (as per Mendel's laws), it is sure to be present in nearly all
surviving spermatozoa.

Conflict and Cooperation
167
If there are two copies of the allele however, the homozygote males are
sterile or die, without us knowing whether the damage was due to mutual
destruction of gametes (explaining sterility) or to lethal recessive genes near
the locus of the distortion factor (explaining death). Because the presence of
haplotypes inducing sterility or death in the homozygote state is detrimental
to the entire genome, these genes are usually eliminated rapidly by natural
selection. Haplotype t has avoided this fate because the reproductive
advantage endowed by segregation distortion keeps it in 10 to 20 percent of
the natural population. The conflict between haplotype t and the remainder
of the mouse genome can only be resolved by eliminating the haplotype or
its adverse effects.
Meiotic distortion factors are found in many species. Those that can be
observed - that enter into conflict with the genome and thus do not become
fixed - have a more or less detrimental influence on the remainder of
the genome. When there is no adverse effect in the homozygote state and no

168
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
conflict, the distortion factor rapidly invades the population. Once it is fixed,
its effect is undetectable because it is inherited by all gametes. Our genome
is probably riddled with old distortion factors that are without effect because
present in all of us. A special case is the presence of distortion factors in the
sex chromosomes.
Conflict between sex chromosomes
In many species, gender is determined by sex chromosomes. One of the
sexes is homogamous (it has two homologous sex chromosomes); the other
is heterogamous (it has two different sex chromosomes). Consequently, the
heterogamous individual determines the gender of the offspring. Let's take
the example of mammals where the female is homogamous (XX) and the
male heterogamous (XY). When meiosis proceeds correctly, half of the male
gametes carry an X chromosome and the other half a Y chromosome, thus
ensuring equal numbers of male and female offspring. However, a
chromosome that can bias segregation so as to predominate in the gametes
will be selected. This alters the sex ratio of the offspring. If, for example,
the X chromosome biases meiotic segregation so as to be present in virtually
all spermatozoa, nearly all of the offspring will be female.
If there were just meiosis, there would be equal numbers of males and
females in a population. However, meiotic distortion of sex-determinants
opens the way to a wide range of sex-ratios. It is therefore surprising that,
irrespective of whether genetics or environment determine sex, we nearly

Conflict and Cooperation
169
always encounter equal proportions of males and females. Why? Would we
not expect the optimal sex ratio to be rather low and biased against males as
we only really require the number of males able to fertilise all females? In
other words, for one and the same number of offspring, it does not matter
whether there are 50 percent of males and 50 percent of females, or 99
percent of females and 1 percent of males.
In 1930, Ronald A. Fisher was the first to realise that, in order to explain
the male-female equality in numbers, we should not focus on the number of
children but grandchildren. In 1967, W. Hamilton put Fisher's argument as
follows: Imagine a population with more females than males at birth. In such
a population, a young male has more chances of mating than a female and
will, on average, have more offspring. Parents genetically disposed toward
having more males than females will have more grandchildren. Genes
determining male gender will thus increase in frequency until we reach a
balance between male and female production and the advantage of
producing more males is reduced to zero. The reasoning works whether we
start off with more males or more females and is summarised in the
statement the rarer sex is the one whose representatives transmit the most
genes.
Thus a distortion factor cannot invade an entire population as this
population would end up with individuals of just one sex and become
extinct. In fact, the trend is interrupted sooner or later because the minority
sex has more leeway to expand. Because it cannot become fixed, a distortion
factor carried by a sex chromosome, unlike one carried by a non sex
chromosome, creates a conflict between itself and the entire nuclear genome.
Notwithstanding, many instances of sex segregation have been observed in
natural populations. The one that has attracted most attention is the X
chromosome of the fruit-fly. The genes that repress this distortion are
located throughout the entire nuclear genome.3
Conflict between nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes
We have seen that self-fertilisation in hermaphrodite plant species ends
up by reducing the "cost" of producing males. Once we accept that
evolutionary 
forces 
exert 
different
actions 
on 
different
genome
compartments and that it is possible to redistribute the resources of an
impeded male route, we can understand that it is in the interest of
cytoplasmic genes, which are passed on only by the female, to hold the male
route in check. For example, cytoplasmic genes in hermaphrodite species
have been selected to prevent pollen production. Nuclear genes which are
transmitted by both males and females are a different case. The greater the

170
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
number of male gametes in which a nuclear gene is present, the more copies
it will leave. Selection's action on cytoplasmic genes is offset by its opposite
action on nuclear genes. Ever since male sterility has existed, nuclear genes
have been selected in order to restore male fertility to sterile-male
cytoplasms. We explained this mechanism at length in Chapter 4 using
thyme as an example.
Several studies have modelled the conflict between nucleus and
cytoplasm and shown that it will maintain polymorphism in the population if
we make the following hypothesis. If the population is not to be invaded by
the allele that restores male fertility, we must assume that, in the absence of
the cytoplasm being restored, this allele is at a disadvantage compared to
non-restoring and non-maintaining allele(s). This is probably true if we
consider the sterile cytoplasm as a kind of "internal pathogen" and the
restoring allele as a resistance gene. There are many published examples of
resistance genes that, in the absence of pathogen (or pesticide), are at a
disadvantage compared to the "sensitive" allele. In the area around
Montpellier in France, mosquito populations that had become resistant to
DDT became extinct less than 10 years after DDT use had been
discontinued.
It is therefore quite reasonable to assume that natural selection in
hermaphrodite populations has given the edge to cytoplasmic information
that impeded male gamete production. By transferring the spared resources
to females who alone pass this information on, it enhances their reproductive
fitness. This cytoplasmic information has appeared in many plant species but
has been virtually silenced in contemporary species by subsequent nuclear
restoration genes. Cytoplasmic genes may, at times, wield "power" over the
respiratory chain (some of whose proteins are encoded by the mitochondrial
genome) by blocking androgenesis. During their history, they have devised
several ways of blocking androgenesis and, for some, this is their sole
function. Male sterility cannot, however, be reduced to a mere question of
cell respiration. Its main cause is evolutionary rather than physiological.
The endless race between cytoplasmic sterilisation and nuclear
restoration can take place on many playing fields. If it goes on independently
in two species that diverged some time ago, the cytoplasm of one species
combined with the nucleus of another not unsurprisingly causes male
sterility rather than any other malfunction because the restoring nuclear
information is inadequate. In general, the male function can be easily
perturbed by events such as tissue culture, thermal stress, transposition, etc.
The network of interactions between nuclear and cytoplasmic information is
the result of constant tinkering ("bricolage", to quote François Jacob) and
integrates all past events. Odd interactions and between-compartment gene
transfers occur that make the ensemble fragile.

Conflict and Cooperation
171
Conflict between the nuclear genome and endosymbiotic
parasites
Many examples of "selfish cytoplasms" in animals are not due to
mitochondrial genes but to endosymbiotic parasites. Several species of
arthropods harbour endosymbiotic bacteria in their cell cytoplasm. Like
mitochondria, these bacteria are inherited maternally and undergo the same
evolutionary pressures as outlined above. The host species are not
hermaphrodites but males and females. Because males do not pass the
bacteria on, any gene that makes sure that the bacteria are not present in
males or that sacrifices males for the benefit of females is selected.
Many natural processes let endosymbiotic bacteria multiply at the
expense of the nuclear genome. The most spectacular case is probably that of
the wood-louse Armadillidium vulgare. The bacterium that infests a genetic
male wood-louse transforms it into a functional female, thus substantially
increasing its own reproduction. Instead of being a male that will not
transmit the bacterium to any of its offspring, the wood-louse is a female that
will pass it on to nearly all its progeny. On the other hand, multiplication of
the nuclear genome of the parasite-infested louse is decreased because this
would boost the number of females. As we have already mentioned, the
nuclear genes borne by the predominant sex in a population are
disadvantaged whereas the genes counteracting this
dominance are
advantaged. This explains why nuclear resistance genes against feminisation
are found in populations of Armadillium vulgare.
Similar events occur in other species. In Trichograms (the insects,
hymenopterans), bacteria endow females with the ability to reproduce
clonally, by parthogenesis, thus causing extinction of males. In ladybirds,
bacteria kill off their male hosts. They gain a reproductive advantage
because resources are made available to their female hosts who thus display
improved survival.
Are these valid examples? The conflict arises in one and the same
individual but relates to organisms from different species. Admittedly, but is
not the distinction between endosymbiotic bacteria and mitochondria rather
artificial? Many biologists, like for instance Lynn Margulis, consider that
current organelles arose by endosymbiosis between the ancestors of
eukaryote and prokaryote cells. According to serial endosymbiosis theory,
the ancestors of mitochondria were aerobic bacteria which appeared when
oxygen spread over the surface of the Earth. By absorbing aerobic cells,
anaerobic cells could use oxygen and thus become aerobic also. The crucial
question is how this kind of symbiosis became inheritable and a potentially
powerful evolutionary driving force. L. Margulis speaks of genomic
predation and has suggested that eukaryote cells may have acquired a wide

172
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
range of functions by absorbing the genomes of other organisms together
with their "findings" (such as flagella, respiration, photosynthesis, etc).
Whatever actually happened, we are dealing here with a key issue in the
study of genomic conflicts. What are the true boundaries of an individual's
genome? The boundaries of conflict are even less well delimited in other
examples.
A particularly virulent chromosome
In the 1930s, an extra chromosome, called B chromosome, was
discovered first in plants, then in other organisms. Surprisingly, although a
disproportionate number of B chromosomes are present in gametes and this
number increases with each generation, individuals do not seem to have
many B chromosomes. These chromosomes have apparently reached a state
of equilibrium in natural populations. Biologists immediately asked of what
use they might be to the carrier. They could not answer the question because
individuals lacking a B chromosome did not seem to be disadvantaged in
any way. It was not until 1945 that Östergren postulated that the extra
chromosomes were just parasites. At the time, the idea was quite
revolutionary but it is now part of the more general notion of a selfish
replicator. Although the presence of the extra chromosomes is a sign that
they are useful, “they need not be useful for the plants. They need only be
useful to themselves”.4
The presence of B chromosomes can have an adverse effect on an
individual's genome. An extreme case is the paternal sex ratio (PSR)
chromosome which, when it manages to enter a genome, writes off all other
chromosomes. It has been detected in the hymenopteran Nasonia vitripennis
through its influence on the sex ratio. In Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, ants),
the sex of the descendants is determined by the mother during egg laying. If
she fertilises the egg with spermatozoa in her spermatheca, the descendant is
diploid and female; if she does not, the descendant is haploid and male. This
system means that males normally inherit nothing from their "father" (their
mother's male partner).
Male PSR chromosome carriers have been identified by the high
proportion of males among their progeny. This high proportion could simply
be due to partly sterile sperm (ill-fertilised eggs would just contain the
maternal genome) but these male offspring can, just like their fathers, distort
the sex ratio toward an excess of males. What do they inherit from their
fathers? The PSR chromosome, of course. Present in the sperm this
chromosome inactivates all other chromosomes by their condensation into
heterochromatin during fertilisation. They are lost during the first meioses so

Conflict and Cooperation
173
that the PSR chromosome soon becomes the sole surviving paternal
chromosome. In the end, the embryo develops as a male that contains only
maternal chromosomes together with the PSR chromosome. The fate of the
maternal chromosomes, however, is also sealed because PSR will eliminate
them when they turn up in sperm. In summary, PSR reproduces well from
father to son but no chromosome with which it has been in contact will be
passed on to the next generation.
Conflict between paternal and maternal genes
When the mother provides the resources for embryo development, a
conflict can arise in the embryo between genes of maternal and paternal
origin. The maternal genes in a given embryo will also be present in the
female's future offspring; they are thus selected in order to spare resources
for producing future embryos. On the contrary, there is no guarantee that the
paternal genes will be present in this female's future offspring; they are thus
selected in order to attract the maximum amount of resources, even at the
expense of the mother's survival or future fertility. Conflict will occur only if
the embryo can determine, as in mammals and higher-order plants, the
amount of resources the mother allocates. (Oviparous mammals like the
duck-billed platypus "fill" the egg before fertilisation so that paternal genes
cannot influence resource allocation.)
Certain genes of the mouse display differential expression depending
upon their origin, maternal or paternal. The gene for producing insulin-like
growth factor II (IGF-II) which is a hormone that increases the resources
allocated by the mother to the embryo is an example. During early
development, the paternal genes leading to IGF-II production are expressed
whereas the homologous maternal genes remain silent. On the other hand,
the maternal, but not paternal, genes that repress IGF-II production are
expressed. This is the reason why an embryo does not develop after the
fusion of two ovules (to yield a progenote) or the injection of two
spermatozoa into an enucleated ovule (to yield an androgenote). In the
progenote, the genes from the ovules derive no resources from the surrogate
mother; in the androgenote, the father’s' genes are too costly. Only mixing
the two genomes provides a balance between the "bulimia" of the paternal
genes and the "anorexia" of the maternal genes.5
Do the above examples of conflict between maternal and paternal genes
occur within an individual or between individuals? Even though the conflict
takes place in the embryo, the protagonists are genes from the mother and
father ... We have reached yet again the very limits of the notion of genome
conflict.

174
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Transposons
The propagation of transposons illustrates another such limit.
Transposons are DNA sequences about several hundred to several thousand
bases long that code for at least one protein that enables them to replicate
and invade a genome. The most widely studied transposon is element P,
which, since the end of the 1940s, has invaded the genome of the fruit-fly
(Drosophila melanogaster). It started out from an area known as the
"Bermuda Triangle" and is now found in fruit-fly populations in America,
Europe, and the Far-East.
Transposons are selfish. Their presence cannot be explained by any direct
benefit to the host genome. On the contrary, they decrease reproduction by
inducing partial or total sterility. Many mechanisms controlling their
numbers and adverse effects are known and, paradoxically, most originate in
the transposon itself! Can we therefore speak of conflict? For example, for a
fruit-fly gene to be in conflict, it would have to repress the proliferation of P
elements. Such repressor genes no doubt exist but have not yet been
identified. It is thus not always clear from the outset whether a situation is
really one of conflict or not. A selfish gene does not necessarily induce a
conflict if it suffers as much as the host from the detrimental effect it
induces.
Do P elements, or transposons in general, belong to a genome? In many
organisms there are transposable elements that can move around or duplicate
within a genome. (The sequence is copied and maybe excised. In some
cases, duplication occurs via an intermediate RNA that then undergoes
retrotranscription). These elements live up to their name of transposons and
are rightfully considered to be autonomous. Some species possess
inactivated transposons "frozen" into the genome which can be awakened for
example by genetic engineering. Unfortunately, we know little about them.
Transposons have sequence homologies with viruses. Making a clear
distinction between retroviruses and retrotransposons, which both use an
intermediate RNA, can be hard. Does one derive from the other or do they
both derive from a common ancestor? Despite the possible relationship, we
call viruses - which insert their genome into that of a host - "parasites"
whereas we see transposons as elements belonging to the genome. Once
more, the notion of a genome and thus of an individual is rather hard to
define.
We have to revise the idea that the genome is a coherent assembly of
elements, which, even if they are imperfect, contribute toward each other's
success. The genome is more like a collection of pieces of information, each

Conflict and Cooperation
175
of which goes through a selection process which may be "natural" but which
is not always geared toward the organism's adaptation. All of life's
integration levels - and not just the organism level - are subject to selection
forces. At some levels, the compartments are in conflict; at others, they play
for the same evolutionary stakes and thus function in harmony. They
collaborate often enough for organisms to adapt.
Overall, it is rather remarkable that a genome which is often made up of
rather divergent entities manages to function and produce organisms with
such subtle workings. This paradox is often studied in ecology. Colonies of
living creatures are maintained despite the presence of parasites and
predators. Just as, in ecology, we accept that interactions among species can
prevent ecosystems from functioning optimally, we must suppose that
genome conflicts might explain some of the imperfect ways in which
individuals function and even some of life's other contradictions.
2.
LET'S PLAY!6
The reader will have understood by now that this chapter and the
previous one are crucial to our thesis. We started off with a reductive, even
reductionist, approach (freeing genetic information from the yoke of the
nucleotide sequences in which it has been imprisoned by molecular biology)
and have (re)introduced life's levels in a gradual, articulated, and ranked
fashion, thus rediscovering "matter", organism, population, etc. Thanks to
the ground we have covered, we now have a different outlook on biological
reality. Less innocent or more pessimistic, perhaps, but, in any case, more
intellectually "honest"… We are now ready to explore another of life's
dimensions - games!
The mathematicians Johann Ludwig von Neumann and Oskar
Morgenstern introduced game theory, as it is known today, in the mid-20th
century in order to model the running of economic and military systems and
predict decisions in a market economy. Decisions taken by one set of people
influence actions taken by others, thus causing conflicts of interest. Is the
best strategy the one giving the result that satisfies all players best? A moot
point indeed! Game theory assumes that certain rules govern players' gains
and losses as the game proceeds, the players know and accept the rules, and
each player defines their own strategy at the outset and sticks to it
throughout. The players base their strategy on the rules of the game and on
what they know about the other players' strategies; they can even act in
collusion with other players.

176
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The chicken game or prisoner's dilemma (see appendix MA6)
In the chicken game, two streams of cars heading in opposite directions
have to tackle a bottleneck. What is the best strategy? Once one of the
streams of cars has forced its way through, the drivers in the opposite stream
cannot overturn the situation. Two equilibria are thus possible, each with a
so-called stable strategy. If a driver deviates unilaterally from this strategy,
he loses out.
In the prisoner's dilemma, two players are supposed to have committed a
crime together. Each prisoner has the choice of either admitting to the crime
or denying having taken part. He (or she) is, of course, unaware of his
accomplice's decision. The following rules apply to both "prisoners":
if both admit to the crime, their sentence is light,
if both deny having taken part, they are both released,
if one denies and the other admits, the one who admits will be released
and rewarded, whereas the one who denies will receive a heavy sentence.
Let us imagine we are one of the prisoners. If we think our accomplice
will deny, we have nothing to lose in admitting to the crime; we will even be
rewarded. If we think our accomplice will admit, we have to admit also
because, if we deny and our accomplice admits, we will receive a heavy
sentence. In either case we have to admit to the crime because denial is too
risky (we have assumed that we want to play safe!). Thus, the only sure and
stable strategy is to admit. This strategy does not lead to the maximum gain
either overall or for each player (because they have the same strategy at
equilibrium); the gain is even negative. In such a context therefore, self-
interest does not provide for an optimal overall outcome (as economists have
long known, the "invisible hand" of Adam Smith is sometimes not very
experienced). It is highly frustrating because all that is really needed is for
the prisoners to agree to deny having taken part in the crime. Alas, in
practice, it is always in our best interest to betray.7
Games in evolutionary genetics
R. Lewontin was the first to apply game theory to evolutionary genetics
but J. Maynard-Smith and G.R. Price were its chief proponents.8 The basic
idea was that cohabitation among congeners was just a modus vivendi
between competing individuals. In models of evolutionary mechanisms, the
players are the genes, that is the basic units of genetic information borne by
the chromosomes. At each reproduction cycle, the genes are at start of play.
They play to win the number of copies of themselves that will be present at
each new generation, which we have called fitness or selective value.9
Contemporary genes are those that have defined and implemented the best

Conflict and Cooperation
177
strategy over several thousand million years of evolution, and won. Just as
the prisoner had to choose without knowing what his accomplice had
decided, an individual's genotype is determined at conception, before
entering play and before knowing the strategy adopted by the others. J.
Maynard-Smith and G.R. Price added to these definitions the concept of
Evolutionary Stable Strategy (ESS).8,10 A strategy is evolutionarily stable if
it establishes itself as the best for the individual. When the entire population
has adopted this strategy, no deviant strategy (arising, for example, by
mutation or from another population) can invade the population.
Under these circumstances, how can we account for rare strategies? How
can we, once more, explain genetic polymorphism? One answer is to
imagine some kind of "protection". If the frequency of an allele, initially
close to zero, increases over generations rather than falls to zero, it is said to
be protected.
A bourgeois butterfly (see appendix MA6)
Game theory has been used to study how aggressive behaviour (hawk
strategy), non aggressive behaviour (dove strategy) or territorial behaviour
(bourgeois strategy) are selected. We can demonstrate the following
theoretically. If the advantage of owning a resource (such as food or a
female) is greater than, or even equal to, the risks of confrontation, the ESS
is aggression. On the other hand, if the resource is worth less than the
possible acquisition cost, then the ESS is bourgeois, that is aggressive only if
one came in first.
Various species have adopted a bourgeois strategy. For example, several
primates are bourgeois with regard to ownership of females. N.B. Davies has
described bourgeois behaviour in a butterfly, Pararge aegaria, which lives
in the undergrowth of forests.11 For the males of the species, it is a
considerable fitness advantage to take possession of a pool of sunlight on the
forest floor because these pools attract virgin females. When a male butterfly
arrives first at a light pool, it quickly drives away all other male butterflies
that come close; these do not insist. If we set up a situation where two
butterflies have claims on the same spotlight (by hiding the first butterfly
when introducing the second, which therefore thinks it was there first), the
confrontation lasts a very long time, each butterfly acting as if it were the
owner of the patch.
ESS and sex-ratio
We have already addressed the issue of sex-ratio and equality in male and
female numbers. In a panmictic population of infinite size, the evolutionary

178
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution

Conflict and Cooperation
179
stable strategy with regard to sex ratio is the production of as many males as
females because this is the only strategy that provides for equal fitness of
males and females. However, the fitness of the total population with such a
strategy is below optimal; a population in which females outnumber males
would have better fitness. The female sex is the one that is physiologically
limiting with regard to the number of offspring. Breeders of domestic
livestock are well aware that for maximum reproduction they must not keep
all the males of a herd.
Populations in which related individuals mate can reach near-optimal
fitness. If mating occurs within small units, the fraction of males to which
the females need give birth decreases because of the inclusive fitness
(provided by relatives). The smaller the number of founding females in the
mating unit, the more likely that the female offspring of a given female will
be fertilised by her brothers, who will pass on some of the mother's genes.
The conditions are close to those of autogamy (see Chapter 4) where
selection reduced "waste". The females are thus selectively trained to have
fewer sons. If there is just one female, she will produce just the number of
sons needed to fertilise all her daughters. This is called local mate
competition.
Evolution of seed dispersal rate
In some species, each individual can produce two types of offspring,
those that do and those that do not leave the population or parental site. We
can study how parents behave toward these two types of offspring.
Each plant of some species, especially of Asteracae (Compositae) such as
thistles, produces seeds with or without pappa. The former are dispersed by
the wind; the latter remain in the flower-head until it falls to the ground. The
percentage of each seed type that a plant produces seems to be determined
genetically but varies among plants since there is always some genetic
variability in natural populations. We can use game theory to compute how
selection determines the fraction of offspring that a plant or animal will
disperse in order to colonise new habitats and the fraction that it will keep.12
Work by W.D. Hamilton and others has highlighted real conflicts
between generations when the needs of parents and offspring do not
converge. Often, it is in the parents' interest to send their offspring far away
whereas it is in the offsprings' interest to stay close to their parents. The
outcome depends on the determinism of the migration rate. In plants, the
mother plant "decides" whereas, in animals, the decision is often taken by
the young.

180
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Strategies and rules of the game
Game theory also provides a formal description of how certain traits that
determine the reproduction rates of individuals evolve. We speak by analogy
of the strategy of genes, of pre-established rules and decisions. The idea that
genes may have a strategy is not novel; in 1957 Conrad H. Waddington
entitled his book The Strategy of the Genes. The models in this chapter (sex
ratio, dispersion, bourgeois character) are very robust with regard to genetic
determinism of the traits involved. The conclusions are unchanged as long as
the process is Mendelian (no superdominance and no segregation distortion
of nuclear and cytoplasmic genes at meiosis). We can use these models to
determine possible evolutionary stable strategies for a given set of internal
genetic constraints (population composition) and physiological constraints
(compensation curves between traits). The strategies may be pure (a single
phenotype per genotype), mixed with probabilities attached (several
phenotypes per genotype, each with a probability) or conditionally mixed
(several phenotypes per genotype, adopted according to circumstance, as in
the case of the bourgeois strategy).
There is not always a best strategy per se providing a genotype with
maximum gain. The chosen strategy usually depends on the one adopted by
the other players, as in the examples of frequency-dependent selection. It is
thus defined within the framework of the population. The game of life is,
first and foremost, a game of what is or what is not possible. The gene, like
all genetic information, works out its strategy in a space subject to
constraints.
3.
THE SPLENDOUR AND WOES OF
SOCIOBIOLOGY
To speak of hawk or dove strategy, or even of bourgeois strategy usually
provokes no particular reaction among population geneticists despite the
direct reference to classes of human society. To describe a gene as selfish is
somewhat less anodyne and, to some people, rather worrying. Is there not a
danger that when Richard Dawkins uses this expression he is endowing
genetic structures or information with an independent will? This controversy
reminds us of the time when well-educated people in British, and later
Western, society were indignant when told that man descends from the ape.
Only now, R. Dawkins and his colleagues are telling us that organisms are
just machines for gene survival. Do evolutionists always have to come up
with images that may shock the layman? Intentionally provocative
statements should not blind us but we must admit that discoveries in biology

Conflict and Cooperation
181
have upset our traditional view of the world and our faith in man's position
in this world. If science considers humans as just one among many other
species that have descended from previous species (E. O. Wilson repeated
Darwin's sacrilege in his behavioural studies), must we not conclude that the
human species, like other species, cannot escape from the grips of evolution?
Such a conclusion influences our understanding of men and human societies.
We shall examine several consequences using sociobiology as an example.
The cuckold and sociobiologists
The vaudeville scene we are about to describe would be of no interest at
all - especially in a book on the evolution of biology - if the three traditional
roles, that of the unfaithful wife, her lover and cuckold husband, were not
held by birds with the poetic name of mountain bluebird (Siala currucoides).
In 1976 the biologist David P. Barash carried out an experiment on two pairs
of mountain bluebirds in Mount Rainer National Park, Washington.13 When
the resident male was out foraging, he placed a stuffed male at a metre from
the nest and then watched how the bird reacted to this set-up "adultery" on
its return. Barash repeated the experiment three times, once when the nest
was being built, during incubation, and once the eggs had hatched. The bird's
behaviour was intriguing. The male reacted violently to the intruder the first
time but less aggressively once the eggs had been laid and hatched. Barash
even noted that, during the first experiment, one of the males turned against
the female and "pulled an undetermined number of primary feathers out of
his mate's wing. Two days later, this female was replaced by another female
with whom the resident male successfully reared a brood."13 The male's
paternity, noted Barash, is only threatened during this first experiment when
the "cuckold's" aggressive behaviour is most violent. Aggressive behaviour
and the reaction to adultery thus seem related to the reproductive stakes.
Barash sees this as adaptation from an evolutionist standpoint:
The results are consistent with the expectations of evolutionary theory.
Thus aggression toward an intruding male (the model) would clearly be
especially advantageous early in the breeding season, when territories
and nests are normally defended … The initial aggressive response to the
mated female is also adaptive in that, given a situation suggesting a high
probability of adultery (i.e. the presence of the model near the female)
and assuming that replacement females are available, obtaining a new
mate would enhance the fitness of males … The decline in male-female
aggressiveness during incubation and fledgling stages could be
attributed to the impossibility of being cuckolded after the eggs have
been laid … The results are consistent with an evolutionary
interpretation.13

182
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Barash introduced a new concept, anti-cuckoldry tactics, into studies of
sexual behaviour.14 It is the biological basis of a double standard. Males are
sexually less discriminating, more aggressive, and more available than
females. They put up with the unfaithfulness of their wives less than wives
put up with the unfaithfulness of their husbands. In other times, this could
have been the moral of a La Fontaine fable but D. Barash is no poet nor
moralist but a scientist. How should we then interpret this conclusion? Is it a
view of non-human living creatures that is rather (too) anthropomorphic or is
it a description of life in general that includes humans and might therefore
refer to human societies? In other words, does sociobiology - for that's what
it is - offer a picture of the animal kingdom in human terms or a picture of
human society using animals as examples? Much of the controversy
surrounding sociobiology is underpinned by this alternative which some
people see as an ambiguity or dilemma. We shall come back to this later. For
the time being, we shall go to the roots of this controversy which has
strongly marked the relationships between science and society during the last
quarter of the 20th century.
First social Darwinism, then sociobiology
The use of theoretical tools taken from biology to study human societies
dates right back to the very genesis of Darwin's theory. Darwin was inspired
by livestock breeding and selection methods but was also influenced by the
work of Thomas R. Malthus (1766-1834) on human societies. From the very
start Darwinism was linked to models of social thinking. It is therefore not
surprising that, even before Darwin extended his theory to the human species
in The Descent of Man (1871), several authors had already applied the
Darwinian notions of a struggle for life and selection to individual and
collective human behaviour. The best known defender of social Darwinism
was without doubt Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), an English engineer and
philosopher. (He designed an electromagnetic machine in 1841 and was
interested in the production of metal deposits by electrolysis). Spencer
formulated the first laws of social evolution at the beginning of the 1850s
and invented the expression "survival of the fittest" which Darwin borrowed.
According to the American historian Richard Hofstadter, social Darwinism
encapsulated valid arguments for accumulating capital wealth or opposing
the implementation of public aid programmes for the underprivileged.
Obviously, such views induced reactions. Reformist Darwinism refers to the
views of people for whom it is more natural to cooperate in life than to
struggle for life.
The historian Linda Clark of Pennsylvania University notes that the

Conflict and Cooperation
183
expression "social Darwinism" acquired pejorative connotations at the end of
the 1880s and during the 1890s.15 However, a debate, with obvious political
undertones, was ongoing before then, especially in France where the
situation was more complex than elsewhere because of Lamarck's legacy. In
Les Colonies Animales (1881) Edmond Perrier, a good example of the
French scientists with bias for Lamarck, described the division of labour and
unions as natural laws that were much more important than Darwin's
struggle for life. However, the scientific reasons he gave in support of his
view actually concealed very strong nationalist feelings inspired in large part
by France's defeat in the war against Prussia. His work also echoed the
concerns of many catholic republicans and conservatives who wanted to
emphasise social cohesion rather than a class struggle in a country torn since
1789 by social crises. Some of the republican or socialist statements of the
time nevertheless used Darwinian phraseology. A prominent defender of
social Darwinism was Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854-1936), a French
lawyer and doctor, who suggested, in the name of anthroposociology, that
the French motto "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity" be changed to
"Determinism, Inequality, Selection". He developed theories on racial
inequality together with Charles Richet, a French physiologist who was
awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1913. However, the French
eugenist movement was not of pure Darwinian obedience. Perrier and other
Lamarckians thought that improving the environment could benefit the
"French race".
In 1935, Alexis Carrel, a French doctor and biologist, published
L'Homme, cet Inconnu. This book earned him far more renown than did his
1912 Nobel Prize in medicine for work on surgical techniques (vessel suture
and organ transplantation). In the footsteps of Americans and Germans,
Carrel declared his allegiance to social Darwinism and negative eugenism,
and recommended artificial selection in humans. He wrote:
Eugenism is necessary to perpetuate an elite. It is clear that a race must
reproduce its best elements [...] No human being has the right to impose
a life of misery on another human being and even less the right to
procreate children who will be unhappy. In fact, eugenism demands the
sacrifice of many individuals [...]. Sacrifice is an absolute social need.
This idea must penetrate the mind of modern man.16
A later passage in his book addresses euthanasia with appropriate gases
in institutions.17 Carrel was therefore part of a movement which fostered the
development of scientific racism in France in the 1940s and which was
upheld by the Vichy government and the Nazis who created the Institute of
Anthroposociology.

184
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
From entomology to sociobiology
This period of history, the 1940s, might have led biologists to be cautious
when speaking about human beings but, of course, history does not
remember those who were cautious but who, rightfully or wrongfully,
trespassed upon forbidden ground. In the 1960s, the zoologist Desmond
Morris did not shy away from observing humans with methods that took
them for "naked apes". Edward O. Wilson, an entomologist from Harvard,
was even more daring when he claimed that his knowledge of anthills helped
him understand human societies. We shall trace Wilson's views and the
ensuing debates using his major publications as milestones.
The Insect Societies (1971)
Wilson published The Insect Societies after writing many papers on
diverse 
aspects 
of 
ants 
(behaviour, 
chemical 
communication,
polymorphisms, etc). The book established his position as an expert on
insect societies, and its conclusion heralded what was to become a first
extension of his work, a unified theory of sociobiology.
C.F. Hockett had introduced the term sociobiology in 1948 to describe a
unified science. It supplanted rival terms such as "bio-sociology", "eco-
biology" or even "bio-cultural theory of evolution". The aim of this new
discipline was to explain how social behaviour patterns emerged and
persisted, by postulating an evolutionary mechanism that we might call a
local optimising process. This mechanism depended on the fitness conferred
by a given social behaviour upon a population under specific constraints.
William Hamilton's hypothesis, mentioned at the end of Chapter 4, was to
play a crucial role.
Entomologists asked themselves how altruist behaviour can develop and
persist in insect societies when it apparently brings no benefit to the altruistic
insect and when the information determining this behaviour (genetic
inheritance) is not transmitted directly. According to Hamilton's hypothesis,
the adaptive value of an individual is measured not only from its personal
reproductive success but also from the benefit it procures from the
reproduction of a third party. This applies as long as it has a substantial part
of its genome in common with the third party, that is, if it is a close
relative.18 The hypothesis explains fundamental behaviour patterns such as
altruism but also less "generous" behaviour such as aggression, rivalry
between the sexes (as observed in mountain bluebirds!) or the behaviour of
social parasites. W. Hamilton called inclusive fitness the sum of the altruist's
selective fitness and the indirect genetic benefit to its genes due to altruism

Conflict and Cooperation
185
toward a parent. This is the basis of the kin selection mentioned in the
previous chapter.
E. Wilson studied animal strategies chiefly in terms of the costs and
benefits in adaptive value and used this principle to calculate the optimal
number of insects in the teams that are assigned various duties within an ant
colony.19 This was just a first step towards a synthesis. At the end of the
book, he wrote a chapter on insect societies:
These two groups of animals [vertebrates and insects] have evolved
social behaviors that are similar in degree of complexity and convergent
in many important details. This fact conveys a special promise that
sociobiology can eventually be derived from the first principles of
population and behavioral biology and developed into a single, mature
science.20
We should thus be able to extend the systematic study of the biological
basis of social behaviour, as developed by Wilson for ant populations, to all
living beings including Vertebrates (Wilson mentions rhesus monkeys). So
far, no objection ...
Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (1975)21
This work is a well-illustrated and documented encyclopaedia on animal
societies from the Invertebrates to humans. Wilson affirmed that systematic
study of the biological basis of social behaviour patterns would give rise to a
"new synthesis". A basis for the synthesis was W.D. Hamilton's view: the
aim of altruist behaviour in animal species is not to ensure the good of the
species nor of the altruist but of a relative who indirectly propagates the
altruist's genes. E. Wilson added two models from Robert Trivers (1971) on
reciprocal altruism and parental investment.
Reciprocal altruism is a kind of social contract between individuals who
help each other without trying to take advantage of each other's kindness.
Wilson gives the following definition:
The trading of altruistic acts by individuals at different times. For
example, one person saves a drowning person in exchange for the
promise (or at least the expectation) that his altruistic act will be repaid
if the circumstances are reversed at some time in the future.22
The hypothesis led to several objections. Apart from the fact that, at sea,
it is dangerous to put ones fate in the hands of someone who cannot swim
(but why should the rescued person not save his benefactor from fire some
other time?), there is the problem of the "first step". Reciprocal altruists have
to perform several charitable acts at a pure loss become deriving any benefit

186
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
and, especially, any selective advantage. On the other hand, as the theory's
opponents have stressed, a selfish person will prosper at an incredible rate in
a society of reciprocal altruists. E. Wilson and other sociobiologists admitted
that there were prerequisites to reciprocal altruism such as a rather highly
evolved society or, at least, relationships that are close enough for someone
who takes advantage to be "punished". Notwithstanding, the hypothesis
might explain the behaviour of baboons in Tanzania or of vampire bats.23
The notion of parental investment has also raised objections. It tries to
account for rather strange happenings such as the female murdering the male
during or after mating. This is what the praying mantis and some spiders do:
Murder of the male is no accident. It is not due to a failure in the
inhibitory system of the partner's predatory behaviour. It is due to the
fact that these are carnivorous species and that males are part of a
female's diet. Cannibalism is adaptive for the animals of both sex since
the extra food acquired by the female will enable her to bear more
offspring. It is not the male's intention to sacrifice himself. The males that
managed to escape have been eliminated by natural selection. By
providing less nourishment to the female who bears their heirs, they
invest less in their reproduction.24
In the hypothesis of parental investment, each parent seeks to gain the
maximum return for its investment in offspring. Because the female gamete
is larger and the female nourishes the embryo, maternal investment is far
greater than male investment. Females have to tend and feed the young just
because investment by the two sexes is so disproportionate; even if they
have to make up for it by eating the male! This was the idea - introduced as a
matter of course in the chapter on sociobiology - that sparked things off.
After 26 chapters devoted to animals, E. Wilson started speculating about the
genetic determinism of human behaviour which he took to be universal.
Why not use the theory of parental investment to explain the status of
women in most human societies? And why not see social behaviour as an
expression of gene ethics, of a strategy to enhance reproduction, whether we
are dealing with religion, culture, the existence of social classes, conflicts,
etc.? Should we not invent a new discipline called genetic anthropology to
explain the specific, varied features of human behaviour? In reply to a critic,
E. Wilson wrote in the New York Times Magazine (October 12, 1975):
There is no doubt that the patterns of human social behavior, including
altruistic behavior, are under genetic control, in the sense that they
represent a restricted subset of possible patterns that are very different
from the patterns of termites, chimpanzees and other animal species.25

Conflict and Cooperation
187
To proclaim such ideas is to "put man in the accusation box",26 but also
to go along with Jean Rostand who admitted that he was "more inclined to
find the beast in man than to seek the man in the beast".27 Whether the last
chapter of Sociobiology refers to the first or second proposition is difficult to
say. Is it a picture of animal society in anthropological terms or is it an
analysis of human society based on data from animal populations? E. O.
Wilson chose to elaborate on a human sociobiology.
On Human Nature (1978)28
On Human Nature describes the human species in rather unflattering
terms. Genetically, it is bellicose and prone to blind faith in a divinity or in
its leaders. Relationships between men and women are on a par with those of
D. Barash's mountain bluebirds. Is there not a tendency for man to be
polygamous and jealous, and for a woman to be faithful and to care for her
children, in line with the theory of parental investment? Sociobiology, if
generally applicable, should help human societies identify the genetic basis
for their behaviour patterns, whether these are common or rare, whether they
concern sexuality or culture. If these patterns are the products of an
evolutionary process, why not try changing and amending them, within
certain limits and in certain directions, of course? To those who took him for
a dangerous conservative, E. Wilson retorted that he championed a science
that welcomed all hypotheses and did not defend any ideological social
status quo.
Wilson stuck to his guns in On Human Nature but his adversaries did not
quit the battlefield. The most constructive criticisms probably came from
biologists, in particular from his colleagues at Harvard University. Richard
Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould, a palaeontologist, were the leaders of an
opposition fostered by a very small Marxist group, Science for the People.
They countered Wilson's genetic determinism with the idea of biological
potentiality. For example, S. J Gould wrote:
Violence, sexism, and general nastiness are biological since they
represent one subset of a possible range of behaviors. But peacefulness,
equality, and kindness are just as biological - and we may see their
influence increase if we can create social structures that permit them to
flourish.29
This opinion could be called "environmentalist" but is nevertheless
strictly biological. According to S.J. Gould, the human brain offers a wide
range of possible behaviour patterns which are a priori equivalent and which
form a kind of biological potentiality. He agrees that the brain is a purely

188
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
biological product but rejects the straightjacket of determinism. Wilson will
not.
Genes, Mind and Culture (1981 )30
In Genes, Mind and Culture, Charles Lumden and E. Wilson introduced a
modified version of human sociobiology. They adopted a new working
hypothesis, co-evolution. Genetic information, which is subject to natural
selection, determines the mechanisms or epigenetic rules that will affect
selection and how cultural traits (which they call culture genes) are filtered.
All practices, such as making a harpoon, wearing a long or short skirt,
having brother-sister incestuous relationships or believing in God, came into
being and were maintained by the processes of invention, accident and
diffusion. The rate at which a cultural trait is adopted (each trait has a
fitness) and the frequency of genes programming the selection of certain
traits thus change at each generation.
E. Wilson and C. Lumsden tried to avoid the trap of the culture/gene or
even acquired/innate antitheses. They did not consider the determinism of
these culture genes as entirely genetic but emphasised that genes keep
culture "on a leash". Michel Veuille notes that neither the sophisticated
mathematics of this book nor its use of statistics can hide the authors'
oversimplification in considering both the genome and culture as mere sums
of distinct elements.
Promethean Fire, Reflections on the Origin of the Mind (1983)31
In this book, E. Wilson and C. Lumsden omit the mathematical formulae
thus enhancing the clarity of their message. The image of a man dancing
around the DNA double strand at different stages of his life is a good
description of their opinion; evolutionary progress and genetic determinism
are at the centre.
Will (socio)biologists seize power?
S.J. Gould and R.C. Lewontin were not alone in criticising the opinions
of E. Wilson and the sociobiologists. The criticisms by experts in the social
sciences were, however, of another sort. Did they not have the right to attack
researchers who, although not competent in their field, had the nerve to teach
them lessons? Such reactions were understandable, says the French
sociobiologist Pierre Jaisson, since:
some of the clumsy statements and insufficiently detailed claims made by
the first sociobiologists had complicated the situation.32

Conflict and Cooperation
189
Nevertheless, in line with the principle that "no science can be judged
without evaluating its ability to furnish concepts that might enhance our
knowledge",33 the controversy gave way to debate and dialogue, especially in
the United States.34 For instance, in The Evolution of Altruism and the
Ordering of Love,35 Steven J. Pope admits that Christian moralist theologians
had until then ignored or rejected outright the opportunities offered by
sociobiology studies. His plan was to use these studies to analyse and lay the
foundations for a pillar of Christian morals, the Gospels' command to love
thy neighbour.
Sociobiology had a quite different standing in France which P. Jaisson
summarises in a single sentence. Quite simply, sociobiology had been
forbidden as a scientific discipline because of its "amalgamating logic that
reduced the meaning of a theory to its undesirable effects which presumably
could not be avoided."36 Sociobiology had only existed under the auspices
of the "Nouvelle Droite" (New Right) which transformed it into
"sociobiologism". In 1981 Pierre Thuillier wrote "Will biologists seize
power?" 37 but by biologists he really meant sociobiologists. These reactions
had two consequences. Competent scientists quit the field and the French
anti-Darwinian flame that had waned since the mid-20th century was
rekindled. Whatever the substance and outcome of these debates, their merit
was to make sociobiologists cautious. The Statutes of the European
Sociobiological Society clearly state that:
The Society will, in accordance to its statutes, refrain from using or
abusing such studies for political purposes.
Caution, however, should not only be exercised in deontology and ethics.
The sequel to the mountain bluebird story underscores the need for caution
in science itself.
The cuckold and sociobiologists (contd)
D. Barash's claims may have been daring, correct or excessive, but his
experiments had shortcomings. For example, the male bird might have had
ever weaker reactions when repeatedly confronted with the stuffed bird
simply because he had become accustomed to his rival. Additional
experiments were needed to confirm or refute the first results. In 1978,
Morton, Geitgey and MacGrawth examined the behaviour of the Western
Bluebird, a species close to the Mountain bluebird, but, to quote Michel
Veuille, found no "Blue-beard". On the contrary, the females turned out to
be highly aggressive in counter-experiments with female decoys. Thus, D.
Barash's theory was probably not as widely applicable as he had thought. In
1980, Power and Doner repeated the experiments with the Mountain

190
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
bluebird but increased the number of couples to 41, using either stuffed birds
or birds in cages (these proved to be more reliable). Yet again, the results
were unexpected. The females attacked the female intruder more often than
the males attacked the male intruder! The researchers interpreted this as a
defence of the nest, a behaviour common to both sexes which does not wane
with time. Each partner preferred to attack its own sex probably not because
of anti-cuckoldry behaviour against a rival but rather because it wished to
avoid upsetting individuals of the opposite sex which were potential mating
partners. Anti-cuckoldry tactics only prevailed when the nest was being
built; at this time the male did not budge from the female's side. Does Power
and Doner's work contradict the sociobiologists' theses? Perhaps not,
because it might offer "another form of sociobiology, with a more rigorous
method and less outrageous extrapolations".38 The cuckold in this story
might be the sociobiologist who was a little too quick off the mark to believe
that he had a good illustration of evolutionary adaptation!
Our overview of sociobiology is not meant to be comprehensive. The
reader can refer to the works we have cited and in particular to the work of
the French sociobiologist P. Jaisson who provides a critical and well
documented introduction to these studies as well as keys to understanding
the ideological and sociological dimensions of sociobiology. To conclude
this chapter, we shall expand upon a few of them.
Weighty words, shocking snapshots
By snapshots we mean sociobiology's present-day image. This image
varies a great deal depending on country and on whether biologists took any
notice of sociobiology. The Anglo-Saxon world gradually integrated E.
Wilson and his colleagues’ explorations into their thinking whereas France
reacted to the sociobiologists' theses by brutally rejecting their work. We
should not lay too much emphasis on the exceptional French reaction. Its
origin lies in three factors with different impacts: the history of social
Darwinism and possibly of its political links with Nazism in France; the
clash between Lamarckism and Darwinism, and the changing relations
between "Science" (or scientific statements) and society. We have already
mentioned the first two factors; the third deserves a lengthy digression. Let's
see how it fits in with the three revolutions due to modern science outlined
by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin:
Ever since Galileo (according to the remark by Freud), in the eyes of
Science, Man had not stopped losing, one by one, the privileges that,
until then, had made him seem unique in the World. First, in the eyes of

Conflict and Cooperation
191
astronomy because, like the Earth and with the Earth, Man was lost in
the giant anonymity of the stellar masses; then in the eyes of biology
because, like any other animal, Man was lost in a multitude of sister
species; finally, in the eyes of psychology because in Man's heart there
gaped an abyss of Unconsciousness. In three successive steps and in four
centuries, Man, you hear, seemed to have dissolved definitively into the
common mould.39
Is there a scientific discourse that can claim to be perfectly innocent in
this regard? Even when emphasising science's benefits to Mankind, it will
always reflect the gradual loss in the privileges that Man believes he once
had. The words and images scientists choose to use matter a lot in such a
context. No longer can we describe biological processes with words reserved
to describe humans (in line with the first proposition of the question “does
sociobiology offer a picture of animal society in human terms or a picture of
human society using animals as an example?”) and yet continue to claim that
we adhere to the ancestral separation between human and non-human. Is not
the modem scientific outlook more interested in the differences than
similarities between Man and animal?
Those who defend a "traditional" human identity thus call into question
not only the claims made by D. Barash but also notions such as "genetic
information", expressions such as "selfish gene" or "selfish DNA", and the
idea expressed in the shock-phrase "individuals are artifices that genes have
invented for the purposes of their own reproduction". R. Dawkins specifies
in The Selfish Gene that "We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny
of the selfish replicators".40 Maybe so. However, sociobiology and the
theory of selfish replicators are indicators of the breach to which
contemporary biology has led us along the "revolutionary" road taken by
Copernicus and Galileo.
By placing sociobiology's discourse in a broader epistemological
perspective, we do not, of course, wish to excuse or forget the verbal
excesses and unfortunate, unsubtle statements that marked sociobiology's
first steps and which have not completely disappeared. In a way they
illustrate the social and ideological conditions from which scientific
discourse cannot abstract itself totally. It would be equally foolhardy to hope
to avoid misconceptions. P. Jaisson has recorded the main ones:41
"Sociobiology is predetermination of behaviour by genes", "Sociobiology is
sexist", "Sociobiology is racist" "Wilson is totally isolated and discredited".
He provides a critique of each of these statements, but is it possible to avoid
what Pierre-André Taguieff calls "amalgamating logic"?
The second proposition "does sociobiology seek to describe human
society using animals" is an ongoing question that still needs an answer.

192
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
What science for Mankind?
The last chapter of E. Wilson's Sociobiology (as well as that of The Ant
and the Sociobiologist entitled "Man and the sociobiologist") should not be
overlooked. It claims to offer keys to the understanding of human behaviour
based on work on animal societies. The Parisian biologist Jean-Michel Goux
has noted that it is no longer a question:
of combining trains of thought that until then had been separate, but of
the approach taken by some biologists - not necessarily geneticists - who
tend to disqualify sociology as a science, as knowledge, on the basis of a
theory of individual behaviour. These biologists simply tend to turn the
field of reality made up by human societies into an annex of biology and
refuse to endow these societies with any intrinsic specificity of their own
compared to animal species.42
Goux
underlines the convergence between this view and social
Darwinism. Sociobiological views of our understanding of Man have raised,
beside rather unfortunate historical echoes, questions on three themes: the
competence of sociology, the rationale of the reductionist approach, and
finally the opposition between nature and culture.
The issue of sociology's competence can be viewed as yet another one of
the battles waged between various fields of human knowledge and
experience that purport to understand Man. These fields include de facto all
aspects of anthropology: mythological, philosophical or theological
anthropology, political or economic anthropology, etc. When a branch of
biology takes social sciences, in particular sociology, to task, this obviously
generates friction and reactions. All systems of thought or knowledge tend
toward conformity and react strongly to what might threaten their fields of
competence and influence. In short, some of the reactions provoked by
sociobiology are "fair play"!
The Canadian philosopher Michael Ruse takes this view when describing
the conflict between sociobiology and the social sciences. He places the
conflict issue in the broader context of a passage from one theoretical system
to another and is particularly interested in the instance when an old system
becomes just an example or a specific case of a new system. The substitution
occurs by a process of reduction. The term reduction may be unwelcome
especially when applied to the so-called "social" sciences. Can they be
reduced to a specific case in biology or, worse, in genetics? However, as
noted by Ruse, reduction can be an opportunity for a truly creative
experience that need not involve the "disappearance" of those who have
worked on the non-reduced theory.43 The three revolutions invoked by

Conflict and Cooperation
193
Teilhard de Chardin (that of Galileo, Darwin and Freud) belong to this type
of process. They were both hurdles and inspirations for human thought.
M. Ruse then notes how the anthropological study of societies that have
remained in intimate contact with nature is sometimes close to sociobiology.
The idea is surprising but noteworthy. Of course, we do not wish to compare
peoples in the South Sea Islands with anthills. The issue is the link between
nature and culture, and the role of determinism.44 The South Sea Islanders'
relationship with their environment belongs to the realm of norms rather than
aesthetics. Nature imposes its law and morals to all living creatures
including humans. Individual and collective behaviour is thus strongly
conditioned by what are seen to be natural laws. Does this mean that there is
quasi-total natural determinism? Probably not, because interpreting nature
and its meaning is a kind of culture. It is just that the distinction between
nature and culture is more tenuous in the South Sea Islands than in Western
society. Western society claims to have driven off natural laws in order to
impose human laws, culture ... and fears that they will return disguised as
sociobiology!
This fear is not only expressed in the rejection of the "good savage"
myth. It also concerns determinism. Is not accepting the sociobiological
approach recognising that genetics can determine our persons and societies?
E. Wilson defends genuine genetic determinism but his opinion is far from
being shared by all sociobiologists. As an answer to the accepted idea that
sociobiology tells us that behaviour is predetermined by genes, P. Jaisson
writes:
Most sociobiologists consider that animal and human behaviour patterns
are made possible by their genetic potential. For them, genes do not
predetermine but predispose to the development of behaviour patterns
that will be put into place during epigenetic development under the
influence of the individual's experiences. Animal sociobiology has made
many discoveries on acquisition through experience especially as
regards social or sexual partner recognition.45
Behaviour is a reality that relates to the entire organism under defined
environmental conditions. Maybe we should speak of potentiality rather than
determinism. André Langaney defends the totipotent-nullity of the human
newborn:
Unlike newborn animals, little Man is highly undetermined at birth. As
he is not pre-adapted, he can adapt to nearly everything because he has a
memory, and can integrate and re-use the information he has received.
No other species can do this.46

194
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The notorious issue of the relative importance of heredity and
environment, nature and culture, innate and acquired (these pairs are
probably not equivalent) thus loses intensity in the fields of both social
concourse and intelligence. M. Ruse suggests a compromise between
biology and culture:
Human behaviour can thus be seen as biologically adaptive, which is
what the sociobiologists want, but crucially causally influenced by
learning, which is what the culturalists want.47
Genes and environment interact in an extremely complex fashion and
currently we can neither define nor analyse the interaction. One thing is
certain, people are not molecules and there is neither fatality nor biological
determinism in a strict sense. Neither is there any hope that the individual
can free himself from life's constraints.48 Even humans cannot escape from
the difficulty of defining life in their efforts to understand themselves. This
is the opposite route to the one taken by Schrödinger who after asking What
is life? went on to ask what is "I".49
There is probably not one science of Mankind. Whether sociobiologists
agree with this statement or not, we are clearly reminded of it by
sociobiology's outrageous claims. More so than earlier currents of thought
and theories, sociobiology invites research workers and thinkers, irrespective
of their ideology, to set aside the opposition between nature and culture
when explaining human abilities and behaviour. The weakening of inter-
disciplinary boundaries may be the outcome of sociobiology's excesses but it
is nevertheless chiefly due to current advances in genetics. The compromise
is not an easy one, at least in absolute terms. In practice, maybe we should
accept, with no negative preconceptions, the research work and results that
refer to the one dimension rather than the other. This is not morally obvious.
Morality here, there, and everywhere
Morality (or ethics, we shall make no distinction between them) is in
fashion. At the turn of this century, have we decided to scare ourselves not
with nuclear arms but with genes, transgenes, culture genes and other avatars
of genetic information? This is not a criticism of Western society's scruples
about the risks attached to either old (combustion of coal and petrol) or new
(nuclear energy, biotechnology) technologies. Nor do we want to spread
unease. But can we look at simple indicators such as those for world
population, air pollution, or water quality and availability without being
anxious? Our era has witnessed the birth and growing dominance of a new
principle, the precautionary principle, which clearly rests on fear.50

Conflict and Cooperation
195
Our society's relationship to ethics is still suffering from a double shock
from World War II. Two spectres - death camps and the atomic bombs
released over Japan - haunt our minds and explain our moral dread of
sociobiology and of genetics. Each time we evoke these spectres, we have
the fear of seeing them rise again under a different guise, endowed with an
even greater destructive power. We thus forestall the risks inherent in our
projects and activities, and stamp out, at inception, anything that might look
like an eugenist statement or endeavour.
That ethics should lie at the heart of our society is no surprise. M. Ruse
affirms that culture is not at the origin of morals but that, on the contrary, it
somehow presupposes morals. If a human society does not lay down a
minimum number of rules for cohabitation, there can be no culture. Does
this imply that morality is the product of nature only (in the genetic meaning
of the term) and, as such, subject to natural selection? Unless, in line with
the reversive effect proposed by the philosopher Patrick Tort,51 natural
selection has ended up by selecting civilisation and its morality. But
civilisation and morality are opposed to natural selection and to its avatars
(as commonly understood!) which, according to its opponents, are eugenist
practices and social Darwinisms.
As we have tried to show, the statements on human thinking inspired by
sociobiology and other fields of biology must always be considered in
relative terms. Human society cannot do without morality. But does it need
overzealous defenders of morality? E. Wilson preferred to return to his ants
and now restricts himself to the study of the extinction of species and the
evolution of biodiversity.52
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Chromosomes, the genomes of mitochondria, chloroplasts and endosymbiotic bacteria, as
well as transposons and other repeat sequences within chromosomes, which are more or
less independent, as we shall see.
Before meiosis, the genes that form haplotype t induce the production of harmful
substances that will turn up in the cytoplasm of all gametes. Only the gametes that carry
haplotype t can protect themselves against these substances.
Both in the wild and in laboratory "population cages".
Östergren, G., 1945, Parasitic nature of extra fragment chromosomes, Botaniska Notiser 2:
157-163 (p. 163).
See section entitled "Ad hoc developmental constraints" in Chapter 6.
This section is drawn from Gouyon, P.H. and Olivieri, I., 1989, Génétique évolutive et
théorie des jeux, Société Française de Biométrie 8: 18-38.
This game illustrates the difference between a stable strategy (or "Nash equilibrium",
admitting) and optimal strategy (or "Paretto optimum", denying).
Maynard-Smith, J., 1961, Evolution and the Theory of Games, J. Theor. Biol 1: 382-403.
See the subsection on selection in Chapter 3.
10. Maynard-Smith, J., and Price, G.R., 1973, The logic of animal conflict, Nature 246: 15-
18.

196
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
Davies, N.B., 1978, Territorial defence in the speckled wood butterfly (Pararge aegaria):
the resident always wins, Anim. Behav. 89: 83-129.
Hamilton, W., and May, R., 1977, Dispersal in stable habitat, Nature 269: 578- 581.
Barash, D.P., 1976, Male response to apparent female adultery in the mountain-bluebird:
An evolutionary interpretation, Am. Nat. 110: 1097-1101.
D. Barash supported this interpretation with observations on the mallard duck. When a
male mallard duck discovers that his female has apparently been "raped", he quickly
"rapes" her in turn in order to reduce the chances that her eggs be fertilised by the sperm
of another.
Clark, L., 1984, Social Darwinism in France, University of Alabama Press.
Carrel, A., 1935, L'Homme, Cet Inconnu, Plon, Paris, pp. 287-289.
"As for the others, that is those who have killed, committed armed robberies, abducted
children, made destitute the poor, or taken advantage of the public's faith, they could be
got rid of, quite humanely and economically, in an institution that performs euthanasia
with appropriate gases. Moreover, would not the same treatment be appropriate for
madmen who have committed crimes? " (Carrel, A., op. cit., p. 306)
See Jaisson, P., 1993, La Fourmi et le Sociobiologiste, Odile Jacob, Paris, p. 53.
In particular, he developed the concepts of r-strategy and K-strategy that have since been
used to describe the explosive or moderate growth of animal populations.
Wilson, E.O., 1971, The Insect Societies (Chapter 22: The prospect for a unified biology),
The Belknap Press of Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass, p. 460.
Wilson, E.O., 1975, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, Cambridge Mass.
Wilson, E.O., ibid., p. 593.
See Jaisson, P., ibid., p. 122.
Veuille, M., 1986, La Sociobiologie, Series: Que Sais-je? N° 2284, Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris, p. 51.
Quoted by Gould, S.J., 1991 (originally published in 1978), Ever since Darwin,
Reflections in Natural History, Penguin Books, p. 252.
Grassé, P.P., 1980, L'Homme en Accusation: de la Biologie à la Politique, Albin Michel,
Paris.
Rostand, J., 1978, Pensées d'un Biologiste, Stock, Paris, p. 236. Elsewhere, Rostand
described man as a denatured ape, soluble in nature, or as a miracle of no interest.
Wilson, E.O., 1978, On Human Nature, Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.
Gould, S.J., ibid., p. 257.
Wilson, E.O., and Lumsden, Ch.J., 1981, Genes, Mind and Culture: The Coevolutionary
Process, Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.
Wilson, E.O., and Lumsden, C.J., 1983, Promethean Fire, Reflections on the Origin of the
Mind, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Jaisson, P., ibid., p. 12.
Jaisson, P., ibid., p. 291.
P. Jaisson has described the climax of the crisis, the "cold shower" that E.O. Wilson
received during a symposium in Washington in February 1978.
Pope, S.J., 1994, The Evolution of Altruism and the Ordering of Love, Series: Moral
Traditions and Moral Arguments, Georgetown University Press, Washington.
Taguieff, P.A., 1990, La Force du Préjugé, Gallimard, Paris, p. 68.
Thuillier, P., 1981, Les Biologistes Vont-ils Prendre le Pouvoir? La Sociobiologie en
Question. Series: Le Contexte et l'Enjeu, Complexe, Paris.
Veuille, M., ibid., p. 881.
Teilhard de Chardin, P., 1956, L' Apparition de I'Homme, Seuil, Paris, p. 367. Teilhard de
Chardin bases himself directly on what Sigmund Freud said.
Dawkins, R., 1976, The Selfish Gene, Oxford University Press (new edition 1989, p. 201).
Jaisson, P., ibid., p. 17.

Conflict and Cooperation
197
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
Goux, J.M., 1985, Génétique et sociologie, in: Misère de la Sociobiologie (P. Tort, ed.),
Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, p. 31.
Ruse, M., 1982, Sociobiology: Sense or Nonsense? Reidel, Dordrecht, p. 168.
Lenoble, R., 1969, Esquisse d'une Histoire de l'Idée de Nature, Albin Michel, Paris;
Bourg, D. (ed.), 1993, Les Sentiments de la Nature, Series: Essais, La Découverte, Paris.
Jaisson, P., ibid., p. 17.
Langaney, A., 1987, Le Sexe et l'Innovation, Series: Points Science, Seuil, Paris, p. 105.
Ruse, M., Sociobiology: Sense or Nonsense? p. 160.
See Chapter 7.
See Section 3 "What is life?" in Chapter 4.
Jonas, H., 1979, Das Prinzip Verantwortung, Insel Verlag, Frankfurt-am-Main. The
German philosopher Hans Jonas bases his ethics on responsibility toward future
generations. Moral knowledge is rooted in knowledge of evil, passed on and made visible
by fear.
Tort, P., La Pensée Hiérarchique et l'Evolution (1983), Aubier, and Misère de la
Sociobiologie (1985), Presses Universitaires de France, Paris. Patrick Tort has critically
reviewed statements on Sociobiology and tried to show how far removed they are from
Darwin's statements.
Wilson, E.O., 1988, Biodiversity, National Academy Press, Washington; Wilson, E.O.,
1992, The Diversity of Life, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Chapter 6
EROS AND THANATOS REVISITED
We started this book by asking "What is life?" but immediately added
that the ultimate reply is beyond our reach. However, this did not stop us
from applying the tools of contemporary evolutionary genetics to an
examination if not of life, at least of living things. In the previous chapter,
we examined the relations among genomic elements, members of a
population, and species of an ecological community. We underscored the
tug-of-war between conflict and cooperation before inviting the reader to
reflect on whether, and to what extent, these ecological results could be
applied to human societies and persons. In this chapter, we shall also address
relations among living organisms but from the angle of life's "drama"; we
shall look at sex and death.
In pre-Freudian times, Eros and Thanatos were a virtually inseparable
couple. They were paired up for many reasons that were either mythological,
symbolical or practical. Man's experience of love can be related to his
experience of death; is not orgasm a "little death"? However, we must go
beyond 
this 
anthropomorphic 
comparison 
and 
investigate 
the
interdependence of these events, looking at what is actually passed on by sex
and what is perpetuated in spite of death, in other words genetic information.
Inspired, yet again, by Richard Dawkins, we shall update the chicken and
egg question to conclude: Human organisms are the survival machines for
genes. We need have no fear that this "reductionist" view will destroy the
dramatic or poetic intensity of either death or procreation. Despite its simple
wording, R. Dawkins' paradigm in no way reduces the diversity that
characterises the living. Even from a gene's point of view, there can be many
reproductive strategies and many options for avatar longevity.
199

200
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
1. 
DEATH AT OUR HEELS?
Is death an event of no importance, a simple consequence of time and
chance, that has ultimately little to do with biological reality? Some people,
like for instance MacFarlane Burnet, have claimed that there may be no
genetic process that might delimit ageing in small vertebrates.1 Others like
Jean Hamburger have doubts about this:
The idea that death might be an "accidental" event in many animal
species other than mammals seems to me more novel than certain. An
event from which an animal never, absolutely never, escapes, often at a
given time of his life, can hardly be considered accidental.2
He adds that "I find the idea that life's main secret is error appealing,
even though it is paradoxical at first sight." The idea converges with that
expressed by Jacques Monod in "Le Hasard et la Necessité" ("Chance and
Necessity"). If we pursued this confrontation between Burnet and Hamburger
further, it would take us along a by-road to the questions we have already
raised on the acquired and innate, and on the relative contributions of genetic
inheritance and environment to the fate of an organism's body and mind. In
this chapter, we shall choose the genetics route that is Hamburger and not
Burnet. Death is not at the heels of organisms since it is already inscribed in
them. In other words, the living are born to die. As Jean Didier Vincent put
it:
Ageing is a hereditary disease that we carry in our chromosomes.
3
We shall thus address ageing, or more precisely senescence, which
concerns both the individual as a whole and certain organs and cells in
particular.
Semelparity and iteroparity
In nearly all known sexual species, the life cycle begins with fertilisation
and birth and moves on to the development of an adult individual which can
reproduce its genes. Usually, once the age of first reproduction is passed,
vigour and survival capacity diminish. This phenomenon is termed
senescence. There is an extreme form of senescence called semelparity. A
species is semelparous when the individuals die immediately after
reproducing. This happens in many plants such as annuals (e.g., corn, maize
or poppies), bi-annuals (e.g., beetroot) but also in some perennials which,
having developed over several years, flower, produce seed, and then die.
It also occurs in many insects. The male praying mantis, observed by Jean-

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
201
Henri Fabre (1823-1915), is a well-known example. The cicada spends
several years as an underground larva before emerging, reproducing and
dying. Butterflies and moths also die immediately after reproducing.
The courtship of the praying mantis
We are nearing the end of August. The male, a lover of slight
build, thinks the time has come. He glances several times meaningfully
toward his powerful companion, turns his head towards her, bends his
neck, and puffs up his breast. His roguish little pointed face has a
look that is nearly passionate. Without moving, he observes the object
of his desire at length. Although she does not budge, as if she were
indifferent, her lover has noted some secret sign of acquiescence
which I cannot fathom. He moves in closer and frequently spreads his
wings which quiver convulsively, a sign that he is popping the
question. He then thrusts himself upon her, his puny body on her
portly back, holds on as best he can, and steadies himself. Foreplay
usually lasts a long time. Finally, they mate lengthily sometimes for
five to six hours.
There is nothing to note whilst the two partners keep still. At last,
they separate but come together again in a more intimate fashion. She
likes the poor little thing not only because he brings her ovaries to life
but because he is a tasty morsel. Thus, on the very same day or the
following day at the latest, she grabs him and, as custom will have it,
gnaws at the nape of his neck and then methodically eats him up, bit
by bit, leaving only the wings. This is no case of jealousy in a harem
but downright depraved appetite.4
In other species including ours, which are called iteroparous species,
individuals do not die immediately but can reproduce several times. They
also undergo senescence but of a less violent and more progressive kind.
Some species such as alfafas can display both types of cycle. Alfafas
such as the ones around the Mediterranean are annuals whereas those in
Northern Europe are perennials and iteroparous. If we prevent the annual
species from producing seeds, for instance by cutting their flowers, the
plants can survive for several years; usually they die within a few months.
This would seem to prove that death is linked to reproduction (of genes,
of course) and that it is genetically programmed. Up until now, we have
considered that genes used the individual to reproduce and that, in so doing,
endowed it with desirable properties such as better adaptation to the
environment, improved survival, etc. How can evolution have made genes
program the death of the "vehicles" (Dawkins' word) they have procured for
themselves?

202
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Senescence and death
Three hypotheses have been put forward to explain the genetic
determinism of senescence:
1. In the first hypothesis, by J.S.B. Haldane, senescence arises from the
accumulation in a species of mutations with delayed deleterious effects. The
later a deleterious gene acts in an individual's life, the weaker the selection
force that eliminates it. It is a quasi-neutral gene. A gene that meant certain
death at 500 years of age in humans would not be counterselected even if we
did not age and our reproductive activity went on indefinitely because the
chances are that we would meet an accidental death beforehand.
It is obvious that once an individual has offspring, he is no serious loss to
genes. We can thus model, starting from a non-senescent cycle, how genes
causing the loss of some function or other late in an organism's life, appear
and become fixed in a species. All these genes together would lead to
senescence and finally death.
2. The second hypothesis is by William D. Hamilton who noted that we
could turn this argument round the other way. Genes with beneficial effects
acting early in an organism's life have the edge over genes with the same
effect later on. Natural selection would have gradually improved the
performance of young individuals and ignored older ones. This hypothesis
cannot account for all aspects of senescence. We would have to suppose that
the individuals of the ancestral species looked like old people do today! Its
principal interest was that it led to the third hypothesis.
3. Georges C. Williams proposed a synthesis of the two existing
hypotheses. In his mind, senescence is explained by the popular adage "you
get nothing for nothing"; it is a trade-off as already noted for male sterility.5
The hypothesis states that improved performance in the young is reflected in
lesser longevity. We can find many analogies. For instance, does not a
proverb say: "He who wishes to travel far has to spare his horse"? In their
race to reproduce, genes would have evolved to build increasingly high
performance vehicles at the expense of longevity.
To test these three hypotheses, Michael Rose and Brian Charlesworth6
selected samples of adult fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) using criteria
of longevity or reproductive ability. They showed that selection in favour of
increased longevity led to decreased fecundity at earlier ages, confirming
Williams' hypothesis. Genes thus have several types of action during an
organism's life.

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
203
We might expect all species to be semelparous; why is this not so? Two
possible explanations why semelparity may not be dominant are as follows:
Ecological conditions may be influential. Species that specialise in
colonising empty spaces have often chosen to be semelparous even though
later they are eliminated by less "fast" but better "implanted" species. Let us
imagine an open space left barren by a fire. The first settler plants are
adapted to this kind of environment (they are sometimes called r strategy
species). It is in their interest to produce as many seeds as possible even at
the expense of the survival of the individual because, in an empty space,
each seed is likely to give rise to a plant. This is semelparity typified. On the
other hand, the seeds of a plant in a closed, complex and diverse
environment, such as a forest, are less likely to develop because of greater
competition. Once a plant has managed to establish itself somewhere, it is in
the interest of its genes to stay put as long as possible. Iteroparity is thus
preferred.
If external causes of death provoke an individual's death early on before
reproduction, selection will favour iteroparous cycles. It is in the individual's
interest, once it is over the high risk period, to be able to reproduce several
times. On the contrary, if death occurs after the individual has reproduced,
the genes have nothing to gain from prolonging its existence by commanding
reserves, for instance. Selection will urge individuals to invest their
resources in reproduction and keep nothing for later. This probably explains
the behaviour of the alfafas mentioned earlier. Alfafas reproduce in spring.
The Mediterranean varieties often die of drought in the summer but, having
already reproduced, they can be semelparous. On the other hand, in Northern
Europe, the young plants have a hard time getting through the winter and,
because they reproduce when winter is over, they are iteroparous.
Viewed in the light of neo-Darwinian theory, senescence and death
appear as a compromise between the potential usefulness of keeping going
and the immediate advantage of reproducing (usefulness and advantage
refer to the genes).
Population dynamics
The simplest model for the dynamics of a population depends on
two parameters:
the intrinsic growth rate (r) which gives the instantaneous change
in the number of individuals in a population that can expand without
limit. The growth of such a population is exponential.
the carrying capacity of the natural environment (K) which sets
an absolute limit on population size.
The dynamics of a population is thus a compromise between its
inherent and material ability to expand. In 1963 and 1967, the

204
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
ornithologist Robert H. MacArthur and the entomologist Edward O.
Wilson proposed two extreme cases in their theory of dynamic
equilibrium: the r strategy where the population multiplies rapidly
with no size control; the K strategy where the population takes care
not to overload the ecological niche.
2. 
WHAT USE IS SEX?
The tale of the courtship and demise of the praying mantis could well
have been an introduction to the second part of this chapter on sex and its
evolutionary history. Sex must be really important in life for copulatory
habits of the likes of those of the praying mantis to emerge and last! We
have postulated that death is linked to reproduction. To detail and defend this
postulate, we need to acquire a better understanding of the origin of sex and
of the issues at stake. Darwin had already put his mind to the matter. Alert to
Malthus' ideas on demography, he tried to apply them to the animal and
plant kingdoms. He was already aware of the key role of reproduction when
writing The Origin of Species:
A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which all
organic beings tend to increase.7
Why take an interest in sex?
What Darwin called "multiplication" is what we usually call
"reproduction". Reproduction was defined by Buffon as:
that property common to man and plants, that power to produce a
creature similar to oneself, that chain of individual existences that make
up the existence of the species.
To survive as an individual and to perpetuate itself as a species are the
two 
facets 
of living material's 
fundamental
reproductive 
ability.
Reproduction is much more than just a property of life distinguishing the
animate from the inanimate world; it is a necessity of life.8,9 Each individual
may be subject to wear and tear and destruction, but life can spread, take
over new environments, or simply perpetuate itself thanks to reproduction.
There is no lack of ways of reproducing whether for macromolecules or
higher vertebrates: nucleic acid duplication, cell division, multiplication of
multicellular beings by asexual or sexual reproduction, etc.
We referred to the link Buffon made between individual and species
intentionally because he used it to define species. Before Buffon, the species

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
205
was an arbitrary level of classification just like order, genus and race. Ever
since Buffon, its definition has rested on the criterion of interfecundity and
fertility. Populations belonged to the same species if they could produce
fertile hybrids by mating. Sex thus provided "scientific and experimental
criteria for defining species that were lacking in all other partitions of the
classification of living things".10 In the absence of sex as in bacteria, species
are less clearly differentiated. None the less, as shown by Miroslav Radman
and Christiane Rayssiguier, Escherichia coli bacteria and salmonella are not
only isolated by a restriction enzyme system but also by reproductive
processes.11
Reproduction helps us establish another link between individual and
species that is subservient to the question "who benefits from reproductive
behaviour?" This question has many answers. Reproduction has sometimes
been viewed as a luxury physiological function in an individual who
survives without reproducing when it is in fact a fundamental biological
function for the life of the species. A more moderate view is that
reproduction is an essential physiological function integrated with other
important functions of the organism. For instance, it determines an
individual's biological cycle:
In a living being, everything is organised with a view to reproduction. Of
what better fate can a bacteria, amoeba, or fern dream than that of
forming two bacteria, two amoebae or two ferns?12
Yet another answer is provided by our chosen paradigm summarised in
R. Dawkins' words at the beginning of this chapter. Organisms (with their
reproductive organs and behavioural patterns) are contingent artifices
invented by genes for replication. There is no mention of species, their
perpetuation, and expansion. We therefore need to specify under what
conditions individuals and species are linked through reproduction. In
particular, does their taxonomic relationship have any evolutionary reality?
Is the idea that reproduction exists as much for the benefit of the individual
(or rather his genes) as of the species a valid explanation, or is it merely an a
posteriori, mistaken interpretation of a useful classification? Defining
species as an ensemble of interfecund individuals might indeed equate
reproduction of the individual and of the species but, as we have seen in the
previous chapters, a selection process that promotes individual reproduction
does not always lead to the best overall gain for all individuals. It seems that
reproduction is a highly suitable field for testing the explanatory claims of
evolutionary genetics.
Nature has been most inventive in the field of reproduction and, among
the many reproductive systems it offers, sex has really proven its worth.
More than 95 percent of living species reproduce sexually. For a time, sexual

206
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
reproduction was not thought to take place in lower order forms but we now
know of many cases of parasexuality, e.g. conjugation in ciliates (unicellular
animals - the best known is the paramecium - which cling together by their
mouths, exchange their nuclei, and then separate), hologamy in
Chlamydomonas (a unicellular algae where the two gametes that merge are
indistinct from normal individuals), or somatogamy in Basidiomycetes
(mushrooms in which normal somatic cells mate, the nuclei merge later).
But what is sex? In sexual reproduction, descendants are produced by the
merging of two sex cells (or gametes) from separate individuals. The
resultant egg has two homologous batches of chromosomes that are not
absolutely identical; one comes from the father, the other from the mother.
In adulthood, the individual born from this egg passes on to each of its
gametes, during meiosis, only half of its chromosomes but not as an original
parental batch but in a random mix. The distribution does not involve
homologous chromosomes from the two parents; there are exchanges called
crossing-overs. Both these occurrences - random distribution and crossing-
over - seem to have a single objective, to produce new genetic combinations
of the paternal and maternal genomes. Thus, each zygote lies at the origin of
a unique genetic entity (that can consist of several individuals: twins, grafts,
clones, etc.).
At the beginning there was information exchange
How did sex come about? There is no reason to believe that mitosis or
cloning preceded meiosis and its recombinations. On the contrary, as we
shall see, genetic recombination probably quickly became a repair
mechanism for the genetic information borne by the first molecules of life.
The origin of life itself is still unknown but we must make room for at least
one exception to Pasteur's rule of no spontaneous generation. Life probably
emerged from, and at the expense of, the mineral world. This was also
Darwin's view. All that was needed was a single exception to the rule. This
would agree with the hypothesis that life has a single origin because of its
molecular unity. None the less, we cannot exclude the possibility that other
living forms emerged later but were immediately eliminated by pre-existing
forms. For quite some time, the gap between the mineral world and the fully
formed cell seemed unbridgeable but, nowadays, we can conjure up the
intermediate cell-free steps because "we can use perfectly abiotic molecules
to perform specific catalytic reactions that were earlier thought to be the
sole preserve of enzymes extracted from living organisms. In plain,
selectivity and catalysis could have appeared at the dawn of life outside
living cells".13 However, if these macromolecules were to give rise to life as
we know it today, they had to fulfil two conditions: (1) reproduce and

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
207
replicate hereditary material to provide a virtually identical copy and (2)
establish a code of correspondence between nucleic acids and proteins.
There was also the issue of enzymes for making proteins from nucleic acids.
The discovery of a self-excising ribosomal RNA that needs no enzyme
raised the chicken and egg question again. Which came first, protein or
RNA? And what about co-evolution?
In the primeval prebiotic soup of three to four thousand million years
ago, the genetic information contained in the first DNA and RNA sequences
(which we assume could replicate) came up against two hurdles. First,
information deteriorated fast because of mutations due to radiation falling on
the Earth's surface and because of the inefficiency of the first replication and
DNA repair systems. Second, in the absence of true cells, the integrity of the
"organisms" was not safeguarded. Organisms were poorly isolated from the
outside so that spontaneous recombination of many different pieces of
information could have occurred quite easily.
Paradoxically, at this stage of evolution, these two obstacles probably
balanced each other out and helped promote the development of life. When
information became useless because of a mutation, the "individual" could
exchange part of its genome with that of a "partner" which had not lost the
same piece of information. To use a metaphor, with two copies of a text that
have been poorly transcribed and with a little bit of luck, we can work out
what was the original text. From the two statements "This sentence is +$-
£*%@#" and "This pzzzze is correct", we can obtain "This sentence is
correct" by combining the words before and after "is". From the outset
selection must have perpetuated at least some of these spontaneous
exchanges. Most research-workers support this hypothesis today. To test it,
R. Michod of the University of Arizona submitted bacteria of the species
Bacillus subtilis to mutagenic radiation under three conditions: in the
presence of foreign DNA (which they can take up) in the culture medium
before and after irradiation, and in the absence of foreign DNA.14 The
bacteria that received foreign DNA after irradiation survived best because
integration of this DNA after mutation helped compensate for the damage
undergone by the bacterial DNA. It is for such reasons that sex, which
allows information exchange through meiosis, was selected at life's
beginnings.
Another non-exclusive hypothesis for the origin of sex is based on the
behaviour of existing plasmids (DNA molecules that have a certain
autonomy of replication) and viruses. In order to reproduce, they go from
bacteria to bacteria at times taking along with them part or most of the
chromosome of the bacteria they have just quit. The transfer of genetic
information from one entity to another - leading to sexual reproduction -

208
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
would have found its origin in the infectious nature of these plasmids and
viruses.
As evolution progressed, DNA replication probably became increasingly
faithful and the sequences were kept ever more rigorously apart. When the
cell began to evolve, the chromosomes of bacteria and other prokaryotes
(organisms without nuclei) were located in the cytoplasm and not isolated in
any way. A DNA fragment that penetrated a cell could easily insert itself
into the chromosome and so to speak "infect" it, as some viruses that parasite
bacteria still do. The function of bacterial restriction enzymes is to cut up all
foreign DNA into little pieces and so hinder the intruders' actions. As time
went by, natural selection would have perpetuated the bacteria that were best
able to destroy the intruding parasite DNA.
The cells of eukaryote organisms (animals, plants, fungi, yeasts) have a
nucleus; a nuclear membrane isolates the chromosomes from the
surrounding cytoplasm. To reach the chromosomes, a DNA sequence
entering a eukaryote cell must cross an additional barrier. Restriction
enzymes and the nucleus are thus means of isolating and protecting the
genome. However, isolation needs to be accompanied by improved DNA
replication since otherwise mounting errors at each generation could end up
by killing lineages overprotected from spontaneous recombinations.
Sexual reproduction is thus a compromise between isolation and
exchange of genetic information. Exchanging too much is detrimental to
creating an "identity", too much isolation means succumbing to mutations.
Selection has gone even further by favouring those organisms that can
control this process and choose their partners. This is the origin of meiosis
and of fecundation in eukaryotes. An even higher level of complexity is
encountered in the sexual behaviour of higher-order animals. The
mechanisms of choosing a partner are at the origin of establishing species, if
we stick to our definition of a species as a set of individuals that can
exchange genetic information.
In the beginning, cloning did not reign alone; recombination played a key
role. Sex, the modern version of archaic exchanges, still prevails. We now
have to find out why.
Why sex?
As we have already noted, currently there are few asexual species. They
belong to groups as diverse as plants, insects, lizards or fish15 and reproduce
using a wide variety of systems, with or without the production of sex cells.
An unfertilised female can produce a descendant genetically similar to
herself using her own sex organs. This type of reproduction is called
parthogenesis; the green-fly is a well-known example. Parthogenetic fish

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
209
such as Poeciliopsis monacha insist upon male intervention but the male
belongs to another species since parthogenesis - the only way these fishes
can reproduce - produces females only. The chromosomes of the male are
not passed on to the descendants. Parthogenesis can occur by automixis
when two sex cells of the same female merge. This mode of reproduction is
encountered in some insects (fruit-flies, butterflies, etc.), fish (e.g. crucian)
and lizards. Whip-tailed lizards, among them Cnemidophorus uniparens, are
all females that reproduce by automixis. They make a pretence of mating,
adopting a posture very similar to that of closely related ancestral sexual
species. Another reproduction mode is producing an egg directly by normal
division without meiosis and thus with no change in chromosome number, as
in some reptiles, fish and plants. The plants produce pollen even though they
have no use for it. Finally, autogamy, as practised by hermaphrodites, is a
way of losing sexual reproduction. Systematic self-fertilisation is practised
by some snails and many plants.
In all of the above instances, there is loss of sexual reproduction, never a
lack in its acquisition because, in each case, we can find traces of sex in the
past. Support for this insight comes from the presence of asexual species in
all major living groups. Sex would be an ancestral character that has become
less necessary for the short-term function of the species because current
replication systems are reliable. Is it then an archaic relic, or a practice that is
profitable in the long-term? The usual explanations for the perpetuation of
sex all revolve around the same central idea that recombination is a source of
genetic variation. According to Darwin, evolution is the resultant of two
factors, hereditary variety and natural selection. Which are then the
processes that generate variation? Mutation (i.e., a random change in genetic
information that can be passed on to offspring) and genetic recombination (a
random process that concerns all or part of chromosomes). They are not
independent processes since recombination ensures the spread of new
information produced by mutation. High variability enables rapid evolution
when the environment changes because natural selection then has a wide
choice. This was the reasoning on which Hermann Muller's hypothesis was
based. He postulated in 1932 that, for an organism to adapt well to an ever-
changing environment, genes must be able to mutate and that there is
therefore an advantage to sexual reproduction.
In a population that does not reproduce through sex, favourable
mutations can be incorporated into one and the same individual as long as
they occur in succession in the same lineage. This needs time (at least N
generations for N mutated characters) and enough carriers of the first
mutation for the second mutation to be able to emerge in them (which further
increases the time needed). On the other hand, in a sexed population, sex
ensures that genomes are continually mixed. Two favourable mutations, each

210
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
in a different lineage, can unite quickly without needing to be present in
large numbers of individuals.
The greater the number of advantageous mutations in a population, the
greater the benefit of recombination; all that has to be done is to combine
these mutations in a single individual. Large populations are thus at an
advantage. In 1965, J.F. Crow and Motoo Kimura showed that
recombination hardly benefits small populations because of the time required
for the other mutations to crop up. The rate at which mutations appear is too
low compared to the time taken for each mutant to fix. Moreover, only large
populations can retain genuine polymorphism. And lastly, sexual
reproduction only surpasses asexual reproduction if emergent mutations take
time to establish and are not overtly advantaged; we refer to a low effect
mutation.
Yet another advantage to recombination - to be compared with the
combining of favourable mutations - is avoidance of the accumulation of
unfavourable mutations. This always occurs in asexual reproduction. In
1964, Muller compared such accumulation to the way a ratchet works.17

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
211
A ratchet is a set of teeth on the edge of a rack in which a pawl prevents
backward motion (as in a hand brake or watch spring). In a sexual species,
two genomes carrying different deleterious mutations can recombine to
produce a genome with no mutation. Because this is not possible in an
asexual species, the minimal number of mutations per genome undergoes a
constant increase with time. This is analogous to a ratchet that can only
move forward.
Mutations and populations
Let's take a population of haploid individuals of finite size N, at
different generations. The individuals' genome is made up of L loci
(where L is large) that code for essential proteins with different
functions.
Because of replication errors, functional alleles may
become deleterious alleles with a probability (or deleterious mutation
rate) of u, which is considered to be rather low. Deleterious alleles are
counterselected. Carrying a deleterious allele reduces an individual's
fitness by a fraction s (its fitness becomes 1 - s compared to 1 for
individuals with no mutation). This deleterious effect is assumed to be
multiplicative, in other words, carrying k deleterious mutations
reduces fitness to 
The more mutations an individual carries, the
less it multiplies. The status of the population is defined by the
number of individuals with 0, 1, 
i,....,L mutations. Two opposing
forces influence this distribution: mutation pushes individuals of one
category into a higher category (from i to i+1); selection advantages
the reproduction of individuals with few mutations (it increases the
frequency of category 0 with respect to category 1, and so on). For an
infinite population, an equilibrium is reached. On the other hand, for a
finite population, the numbers in each category undergo random
variations (because some individuals multiply and others do not).
These variations only count for category 0 because, should its
numbers fall to 0, the category cannot be recreated from other
individuals (reverse mutations from a deleterious allele to a functional
allele are extremely rare). The distribution is thus shifted by one notch
and the "ratchet" prevents it from going backwards (line 2 of Fig. 6.2).
However, the distribution reaches a new state of equilibrium where
category 0 is henceforth empty. Random variations again come into
play and end up by emptying the category of individuals with just one
mutation which cannot be recreated either (line 3). The population
will thus accumulate a large number of mutations by a series of shifts
in the different categories. Mathematical analysis indicates that the
ratchet works when the probability of "emptying" the category with
the least mutations is high, that is when u >1- s or, in biological terms,

212
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
when the mutation rate per genome is greater than the disadvantage
due to a mutation. For u = 1-s, the ratchet works for a number of
generations below 1000.
How can we escape from Muller's ratchet? How can we make sure that
the first category - unmutated genomes - never dies out? The answer is by
having a large number of copies, a low mutation rate and a small number of
loci. None of these conditions apply to species with a large genome but
small in numbers (such as Man). Sexual reproduction, which combines intact
chromosome regions in a single genome, thus comes across as a special kind
of DNA repair process. Interestingly, what we commonly call repair in
molecular biology (correcting inappropriate pairing, deleting nucleotide
dimers, etc.) is carried out by the same machinery as does the recombining.
Repair might be an early function of recombination, and thus of sex.
Why not sex?
The above view is common among biologists and often reported by the
popular scientific press. Sexual reproduction creates diversity, and this
diversity may help species overcome future obstacles. Moreover, sex sort of
repairs the genome of living beings undergoing mutations. However, are
there benefits for a species that are not long term?
Muller's 1932 hypothesis16 of the coming together of beneficial pieces of
information is only relevant in an environment undergoing constant change.
For a mechanism like sex to be perpetuated in a fairly stable environment,
there have to be occasional brutal changes - "catastrophes" - to which only
some individuals are able to adapt. A species whose members are diverse
would have the best chances of survival. But is it not at risk of losing sex
whilst the environment is constant?

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
213
Muller's 1964 hypothesis on ratchets and sex as a repair job applies to the
invention rather than perpetuation of sex (in the former case, highly exposed
gene sequences need repair). Is this not a Panglossian situation (see next
chapter) where "all is for the best in the best of worlds" is translated into
"sex exists for the future adaptation of the species"? Explaining sex
maintenance in this way confers natural selection a kind of "prescience". It is
asked to retain a strategy that might provide future dividends but that is
extremely costly in the short term. Support for such reasoning would come
from a phenomenon that counterselects sex and opposes the above examples
"in favour of" sex. It exists, and has been called the cost of meiosis and the
cost of males by John-Maynard Smith and Georges C. Williams (in 1971 and
1973 respectively). Why? Because the female gamete which is much larger
than the male gamete (this is how they are defined), as well as the female
herself in higher-order animals, provide most and sometimes all of the
energy that is needed to produce the egg, to help the embryo grow (there
may be enough reserves in the female gamete as in the vitellin sac of young
fish), and to feed the embryo. The male may invest substantially in seeking
out a partner and mating but, in most cases, he is just a provider of sperm. If
the female were able to reproduce on her own, there would be no cost to
producing a male. The genetic information that determines females makes
them remarkable reproduction tools (an echo of one of our earlier
conclusions). However, before producing a new organism, these genes have
to be halved by cell division (meiosis), the lost half being replaced by genes
from the male. If the female cell had just undergone normal division
(mitosis) and had not been fertilised, each of its genes would have been
reproduced twice as many times (compared to its average reproduction rate
over a large number of meioses). In other words, asexual behaviour would
be twice as beneficial as sexual behaviour. We say that the cost of meiosis
per generation is equal to two in the female. How do we then explain that
selection acting on genes has perpetuated a mechanism (meiosis), which,
even if it is beneficial in the long term, halves the speed of reproduction of
the genetic information that determines it?
The same question arises when we compare the fates of genetic
information carried by a parthenogenetic lineage and a sexual lineage. If, for
example, each female has exactly two offspring, we obtain two females in
the parthenogenetic lineage and one male plus one female in the sexual
lineage. At the next generation, the size of the sexual family will be
unchanged but that of the parthogenetic family will have doubled. Once
again, the cost of meiosis is a factor of two. After 10 generations, the
parthogenetic lineage will be 1000 times larger than the sexual lineage and
will have virtually eliminated it, in the absence of other factors. The long-
term advantages of sexual reproduction would not have had time to show up.

214
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
These two examples thus suggest that there is an important short-term
advantage (of the order of a factor of two at each generation) of sexual
reproduction over asexual reproduction.
Sex as a short-term advantage
The need to find short-term benefits to the perpetuation of sex has given
rise to several hypotheses but few are satisfying. A first model was proposed
by Georges C. Williams in the 1970s. His balance argument is based on the
idea that, in species where sexual and asexual reproduction coexist, some
mechanism perpetuates sex despite its disadvantage. Williams' model, by
making many assumptions, gets several parthogenetic generations to
alternate with one sexual generation. If the offspring are all in an
environment unknown to the mother, it is advantageous to use recombination
to generate the variety lost during the asexual phase despite the cost of
meiosis. The number of asexual generations required to make one sexual
generation "pay off" then depends on the number of offspring per individual;
sex pays off only when this number is high enough. G. Williams calculated
that to do away completely with asexual reproduction, each individual must
have about several hundred million offspring. This hypothesis is inapplicable
to most species even if the reproduction rate of their distant ancestors is
unknown.

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
215
Williams' unrealistic hypothesis is of historic interest only. A single later
hypothesis, by J.A. Antonovics and William D. Hamilton, has resisted the
test of time but even it is not universally accepted. The hypothesis is based
on the idea that an individual has to adapt daily to the organisms around it
(pathogens, parasites, predators, competing species). It postulates that host-
pathogen relations, competitive interactions, and perhaps predators force
species to evolve rapidly. Gene recombination, which redistributes genetic
information, is needed to create the high diversity that permits more efficient
selection. This hypothesis is equivalent to the Red Queen hypothesis, on a
much shorter time-scale.18
Although theories accounting for the perpetuation of sex are scarce,
experimental studies have brought to light a network of interknit factors that
might do so. The assumption that the principal reason for sexual
reproduction is the benefit obtained from mixing genes gives way to a hotch-
potch of reasons at times only distantly related to sexual reproduction. We
shall distinguish between two types of constraints: ad hoc developmental
constraints and bizarre physiological or genetic constraints.
Ad hoc developmental constraints (or when there will no longer be any
men…)
Ad hoc developmental constraints are by far the more common and
varied. They range from the biological incapacity for an egg to develop
without gametes being produced, combined with the intriguing need for
sexual reproduction to produce certain structures. In mammals, no offspring
can be produced by parthogenesis, that is without gametes and meiosis,
although many research-workers have attempted to do so. (In 1997, an
offspring was produced asexually in a mammal but it is most unlikely that
the series of events leading to the birth of the famous sheep Dolly would
occur in nature19). In a French television programme in October 1986, the
consequences of having children of purely maternal origin, conceived
without sperm, were discussed. The programme was based on P. Soupart's
work in the States in 1977 on the development of mouse embryos from two
combined female sex cells (ovocytes). Were baby mice really born without a
father? P. Soupart did not publish his findings and, apparently, only spoke of
them in private. Moreover, his baby mice had the misfortune of being eaten
up by their mother! Like the parthenogenetic rabbits a scientist claimed to
have produced at the beginning of the 20th century, these mice probably
belong to the vast repertoire of scientific jokes. Subsequent work did not
reproduce Soupart's results but, on the contrary, suggested that a male
gamete is essential for the development of a mammal embryo to term. Thus,
even if parthogenesis does occur in most animal groups, it is notably absent

216
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
in mammals. No one has ever observed the birth of a mammalian
parthenogen.
Parthogenetic
mammalian
embryos 
can, 
however, 
be obtained
experimentally by activating ovocytes with chemical or physical agents.
There is even a strain of mice, called LT/s mice, that produces a high natural
rate of spontaneously activating ovocytes. Embryonic development starts off
"normally" and implantation into the uterus of a recipient mouse is possible,
but these embryos never survive beyond the halfway stage of gestation. The
parthenogenetic cells are nevertheless viable. When combined with normal
cells to form chimeric embryos, they do not prevent the baby mouse from
developing to term. They differentiate in all tissues as long as they do not
account for more than 20 per cent of the cells. Apparently, these parthenote
cells lack "signals" required in morphogenesis.
Rapid progress in microsurgery techniques since the 1970s enabled
removal of one of the two nuclei (or pronuclei), whether male or female, just
after fertilisation of the ovule. Only genetic information, and no other
potentially influential material such as the membrane and cytoplasm of the
spermatozoa, was removed in this way. The procedure yielded gynogenotes
(the genetic material is of strictly female origin but there is an extranuclear
contribution from sperm) and androgenotes (the genetic origin of the embryo
is entirely male). Both gynogenote and androgenote embryos developed just
like parthenogens. Development was arrested at or just after implantation.
These results confirmed that genetic material from both mother and father is
needed for the embryo to reach term. Moreover, the two pronuclei are not
interchangeable and thus not equivalent. The egg recognises the origin of all
genetic material. Yet, in theory, the genome is virtually identical in both
sexes, at least in consanguinous lineages. Does this mean that the two
genomes were "marked" differently?
According to Azim Surani and his colleagues at the Institute of Animal
Physiology in Cambridge, UK, gene imprinting endows elements of the
reproductive cell's hereditary material with a kind of memory of their
parental origin. A batch of chromosomes marked father and a batch marked
mother may have to combine for the embryo to develop normally to full
term. The imprint would be extra information carried by genes inherited
from parents. What might be the mechanism? Azim Surani and Wolf Reik
have proposed a hypothesis that supports the work of Carmen Sapienza's
team at the Ludwig Institute on Cancer Research. The DNA would be
methylated (addition of a methyl 
group to the DNA molecule).20
The hypothesis was tested by transgenesis. An individual's genome was
artificially modified by injection of a foreign gene (transgene) into the
embryo. Methylation of the transgene was measured in the DNA of offspring
from crosses between a transgenic male (carrying the transgene) and a wild-

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
217
type female (non transgenic), and between a transgenic female and a wild-
type male. A series of crosses made the transgene alternate between the male
and female. It remained marked but its methylation level, which depends on
the DNA's parental origin, reversed each time it passed into the other sex.
We shall not delve into all the experimental results21 but note that low-level
methylation can be an attribute of either the female or male lineage. In the
male, it would occur in the testes or sperm. Moreover, although the
transgene can insert itself anywhere in the genome, it does not undergo
differential methylation in all lineages; thus only certain chromosome
regions are imprinted.
Such marking can be explained by the distribution of resources between
the female and her embryos, as outlined in Chapter 5. The paternal genes
have all to gain from requisitioning maternal reserves for the embryo that
carries them. On the other hand, the female must fight this and spare herself
for future embryos. This is confirmed by experiments in which two male or
female gametes are united. In the first case, the vitellin stocks are high but
the embryo does not develop; in the second, the embryo develops but the
vitellin shortage causes death. In species where resources are allocated after
fertilisation, genes from each sex lineage must unite to reach a compromise.
Because the male is an absolute requirement in mammals, parthogenesis is
not possible.
Greenfly (aphids, Homoptera) are a rather more complicated case. They
can reproduce by parthogenesis but cannot produce eggs in this way.
Parthogenesis is strictly viviparous. Because the egg is the only form that
withstands the cold, greenfly in temperate climates have to reproduce
sexually at least once a year, in the autumn, in order to survive. When the
winters are mild, strictly parthogenetic lineages invade the population. After
a bitter winter, only the sexual lineages leave offspring.22 Greenfly have
thus retained sex to withstand the cold. It is a short-term advantage of sex
that has nothing to do with gene shuffling.
Similarly, many plants produce structures to be dispersed (seeds, spores)
by just the sexual route; asexual reproduction organs (bulbils, runners) tend
to stay put. The reason why selection maintains the sexual structures is not
an advantage due to gene shuffling but rather the ability to colonise new
territories.
Bizarre physiological or genetic constraints
Physiological or genetic constraints could also help explain sex
maintenance. In Hawaii, there are parthogenetic lineages among fruit flies
such as the Drosophila mercatorum. When, in 1982, Alan R. Templeton of
Washington University Saint-Louis made them compete with sexual

218
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
lineages, the sexual lineages won. Apparently, the way parthogenesis works
in these insects induces dysfunctions in the offspring.
What about plants? Most are hermaphrodites. Self-fertilisation reduces
the cost of producing males since the two chromosome batches come from
the mother plant. Here again, cross-fertilisation (and therefore sex) often
seems to be maintained because of a wide variety of constraints. In
groundsel (Senecio sp.), each individual carries next to flowers that self-
fertilise flowers that do not; sex is thus perpetuated. In the 1980s, R. Abott
showed that self-fertilising flowers are less fertile than other flowers even
when out-crossed. This is due to the flower's structure and is independent of
reproduction mode. Here, the constraint that perpetuates sex is the inability
to produce autogamous flowers with normal fertility whereas natural
selection favours maximal fertility. As for thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.),
cross-fertilisation is maintained by females being next to self-fertilising
hermaphrodites. Females are not maintained because of any adaptive
advantage for the species but because complex genetic and evolutionary
interactions exist between nuclear and cytoplasmic genes.
At first sight, the conclusion of our overview is not very satisfying. The
theoretical approaches have shortcomings. We are faced with a host of
species-specific cases where sex is perpetuated because of constraints
unrelated to what sexual reproduction is really about (gene shuffling). Might
there not be a single cause but many independent causes for something as
widespread as sex? Many people object to this paradoxical idea, preferring
to believe in an unknown factor that is perhaps linked to the evolutionary
race between organisms and parasites. But is there not here an
epistemological misunderstanding about causality? Several independent
causes can have the same effect - i.e., maintain sex - if there is a higher-order
constraint acting on the species.
To address this point, we need to view the situation from the angle of
ranked selection units as discussed earlier. In the case of the evolution of
sex, the avatars must be ranked and there must also be a "chronological"
ranking. 
(Avatar is defined in Chapter 5. An avatar passes on genetic
information and is its material support). There are indeed many short-term
reasons for keeping sex. These fall into two categories: constraints (or the
space of what is possible) and individual selection which concerns the
survival of genetic variation when it appears. It is among the species that
have short-term reasons to reproduce sexually (resistance to the cold,
dispersal of the species, etc.) that we shall find those that will survive in the
long term and adapt best to changes in the environment. The long-term need
for sex acts as a higher integration level on species. The long-term advantage
due to sex identifies, amidst all the forms that see the light of day, those that
cannot lose sex because of a specific constraint.

Eros and Thanatos Revisited
219
In the end, the two questions "Why do species in general reproduce
sexually?" and "Why such and such a species reproduces sexually?" yield
two different answers. The first question addresses a general and slow
mechanism; the second deals with a variety of fast-acting mechanisms. Thus,
even if we know why each species reproduces sexually, we cannot know
why most of them do. Understanding the evolution of sexual reproduction in
the living world is knowing all the short term mechanisms that force existing
species to be and remain sexed. It is also knowing the slowly acting
mechanisms at a higher integration level that have led to most species, in
whom sex is not a constraint, to become extinct. In other words, if sexual
reproduction is so widespread, it is because the species that one day had the
"misfortune" of being able to do without sex did not make any old bones.
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Burnet, M., 1982, Le Programme et l'Erreur. Une Histoire Naturelle de la Mort et de
l'Hérédité, Series: Sciences d'Aujourd'hui, Albin Michel, Paris, p. 30.
Hamburger, J., Postface to Burnet, M., Le Programme et l'Erreur, p. 352.
Vincent, J.D., 1996, La Chair et le Diable, Odile Jacob, Paris, pp. 132-134.
Fabre, J.H., 1897, Souvenirs Entomologiques. Etudes sur l'Instinct et les Moeurs des
Insectes, Cinquième série: La Mante. Les Amours, Delagrave, Paris, pp. 306-307.
See Chapter 4.
Rose, M., and Charlesworth, B., 1980, A test of evolutionary theories of senescence,
Nature 287: 141-142.
Darwin, C., 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Murray,
London.
Williams, G.C., 1975, Sex and Evolution, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Maynard-Smith, J., 1978, The Evolution of Sex, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Langaney, A., Pellegrini, B., and Poloni, E., 1989, L'homme descend du sexe, La
Recherche 20 (N° 213): 998.
Rayssiguier, C., Thaler, D.S., and Radman, M. 1989, The barrier to recombination
between Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium is disrupted in mismatch-repair
mutants. Nature 342: 396-401.
Jacob, F., 1970, La Logique du Vivant, Une Histoire de l'Hérédité, Gallimard, Paris, p. 12.
Danchin, A., 1988, L'origine de la vie, La Recherche 19 (N° 201): 881.
Michod, R.E., Wojciechowski, M.F., and Hoelzer, M.A., 1988, DNA repair and the
evolution of transformation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Genetics 118: 31-39.
Although it is difficult to count the number of species (as there is no sexual reproduction),
these forms nevertheless make up a small percentage of the corresponding genus or
family in terms of numbers of individuals.
Muller, H.J., 1932, Some genetic aspects of sex, American Naturalist, 66: 118-138.
Muller, H.J., 1964, The relation of recombination to mutational advance, Mutation
Research, 1:2-9.
See "Struggle for life and a royal race" in Chapter 7.
As a reminder, Dolly was produced from a diploid nucleus of a mammary gland cell that
was reimplanted into an egg. It is not therefore a cell that was forced to enter ontogenesis.
Among the four bases that make up DNA - adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine - the
only one that can be modified is cytosine. In the sequence cytosine-guanine, it can carry a
methyl group.

220
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
21.
22.
See Tastemain, C, 1987, Les chromosomes se souviennent aussi, La Recherche 18
(N°194): 1537-1539.
Rispe, C., Pierre, J.S., Simon, J.C., Gouyon, P.H., 1998, Models of sexual and asexual
existence in aphids based on constraints. J. Evol. Biol. 11: 685-701.

Chapter 7
WHAT CAN BE DONE, WHAT CAN'T BE DONE
To biologists and those who seek in evolution a key to the meaning of
life, adaptation is a major stumbling block. We tend to consider organisms
and organs as the jewels of natural selection. Natural selection has endowed
them with optimal adaptation to their environment or function. In this way,
we rediscover and safeguard the idea that life's organisation is harmonious.
The previous chapters have already given this idea a knock. In this chapter,
we shall give it the "coup de grâce" by divorcing the natural selection
process from such an adaptive view. For this, we must introduce concepts
we often avoid, or that are rather risqué in their use: chance, contingency,
finality.
1. 
A VISIT TO ST. MARK'S
St. Mark's Cathedral in Venice has a very special place among the
symbols used by evolutionists. In 1978, at the Royal Society in London, S. J.
Gould, speaking in the name of his colleague R.C. Lewontin, started his talk
by describing the cathedral's dome. He claimed that the mosaics, rather than
being the fruit of a premeditated plan, were the consequences of constraints
imposed by the architecture.1 In an article, the two American biologists went
on to describe King's College Chapel in Cambridge where the Tudor Rose
and portcullis alternate in great harmony. Here also, they claimed that the
surface embellishment, however appropriate and artistic, was a mere by-
product of architectural constraints. What were they getting at? Apart from
urging tourists to visit these sites!
221

222
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The dome of St. Mark's as seen by Gould and Lewontin
The great dome of St Mark's Cathedral in Venice presents in its
mosaic design a detailed iconography expressing the mainstays of
Christian faith. Three circles of figures radiate out from a central
image of Christ: angels, disciples, virtues. Each circle is divided into
quadrants, even though the dome itself is radially symmetrical in
structure. Each quadrant meets one of the four spandrels in the arches
below the dome. Spandrels - the tapering triangular spaces  formed by
the intersection of two rounded arches at right angle - are necessary
architectural by-products of mounting a dome on rounded arches.
Each spandrel contains a design admirably fitted into its tapering
space. An evangelist sits in the upper part flanked by the heavenly
cities. Below, a man representing one of the four biblical rivers
(Tigris, Euphrates, Indus and Nile) pours water from a pitcher into
the narrowing space below his feet.
The design is so elaborate, harmonious and purposeful that we are
tempted to view it as the starting point of any analysis, as the cause in
some sense of the surrounding architecture. But this would invert the
proper path of analysis? The system begins with an architectural
constraint: the necessary four spandrels and their tapering triangular
form. They provide a space in which the mosaicists worked; they set
the quadripartite symmetry of the dome above.2
According to the two biologists, whoever thought that the primary
intention of the architects of St. Mark's and King's College Chapel was to

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
223
embellish would only be paraphrasing the words of the good Doctor
Pangloss, the character created by Voltaire in Candide:
Pangloss 
taught 
metaphysical-theological-cosmological 
simple-
mindedness. He could prove admirably that there was no effect that did
not have a cause, and that, in this best of possible worlds, the castle of
his lordship the baron was the most beautiful castle and madame the best
of possible baronesses.
It has been demonstrated that nothing could be different from the way it
is, he used to say. Because everything is made for a purpose, it must be
made for the best purpose. We should note that noses were made to bear
spectacles, and we have spectacles. Legs are clearly for breeches, and we
have breeches. Stones were made to be hewn and to build castles. His
lordship has a very nice castle; the greatest baron of the land must have
the best accommodation. And since pigs are made to be eaten, we eat
pork all the year round. It follows that those who have claimed that
everything is good have said silly things; they ought to have said
everything is for the best.3
According to S.J. Gould and R.C. Lewontin, to claim that the architects'
intentions were, first and foremost, to embellish is to use a Panglossian
paradigm. By repeating this neologism, they were, in fact, criticising the way
evolutionists had overemphasized organism adaptation since the thirties, and
were directly attacking neo-Darwinian theory.
The expression "Panglossian" was introduced by J.B.S. Haldane and is
now in current use among evolutionists. The term criticises an exaggerated
form of finalism at a time when finalism is no longer taboo in biology. It
denotes a gene's "will" to replicate. The word "will" is to be construed in the
sense given by the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. The will is
not specific to humans but a feature of the living world. Little by little, it has
produced different kinds of living creatures and, in the end, consciousness
which is a human epiphenomenon.4
2.
BRACHIOPOD ARCHITECTURE OR
"SEILACHER'S TRIANGLE"
Why shouldn't the living world display architectural constraints similar to
those of our buildings? These constraints, rather than adaptation to a
particular function or use, might be the "raisons d'être" of our organs or
structures. R.C. Lewontin and S.J. Gould give several examples; one of them
is the brachiopod. Brachiopods are a branch of marine invertebrates similar

224
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
to bivalvular molluscs such as the clam. The example seems to be
particularly dear to S.J. Gould who, besides citing the seminal work of the
German palaeontologist Adolf Seilacher, studied brachiopods himself.5
Seilacher studied the morphology of many shells and showed that a number
of traits were not only explained by inheritance, or the need to adapt to
special environments, but also by non-adaptive morphogenetic programmes.
This applied, for instance, to divaricate structure.

What Can Be Done,  What Can't Be Done
225
In a divaricate shell structure, divergent lines or a herring-bone pattern
mark out decorative ribs, coloured motifs, mineralised internal structures, or
groove shapes. Seilacher distinguished morphological traits that have
adaptive value (the majority) from those that do not. For instance, in the
presence of predators, some species use chevron colour as camouflage. But
of what use is it to clams which live buried in the sand or are covered by a
periostracum that conceals shell colour?
There is a "mechanical" explanation for these motifs that does not
involve adaptation. Divaricate architecture could be due to zones of
inhomogeneity in the growing mantle that arise from interference patterns
around regularly spaced centres. This architecture may sometimes turn out to
have adaptive and functional value. Wavy ribs and other patterns might help
creatures buried in the sand dig their way out (even though this may not be
the most efficient means of doing so). Pteria zebra might use its shell's
ramifications as camouflage when it disappears within an arborescent colony
of Hydrozoa. Herring-bone mineralisation patterns might be of use to
Corculum cardissa only. This shell lies flat on the seabed, its posterior
surface, which bears the herring-bone pattern, facing upwards. Whereas the
remainder of the shell is opaque, these patterns are translucid windows that
provide light to the underlying algae that live in symbiosis with Corculum.
Seilacher's conclusion is clear. All morphological traits do not have to be
interpreted in terms of use and adaptation. He suggests that three groups of
factors might intervene in morphogenesis: historical phylogenetic factors,
ecologic adaptive factors, structural (in German, bautechnischer) factors,
which we shall refer to by the expression Seilacher's triangle.
Let us consider each of these factors in turn:
1. Historical and phylogenetic factors. Palaeontologists do not describe
fossils, their distinctive features and their arrangement in layers over time
just for the purposes of stratigraphy. They also try and explain how shapes,

226
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
in particular body plans, come into being and develop. History (all the events
that have taken place in a lineage) and phylogenesis (kinships) are key
aspects of their research.
2. Ecologic and adaptive factors. For the most part, organisms appear
well adapted to their environment "as if each form were the consequence of
external circumstances".6 
The palaeobiological approach (also called
ethological palaeontology) contributed extensively toward the success of
palaeontology in the first half of the 20th century. A major limitation,
however, was that it gave preference to elements of functional convergence
and disregarded non functional observations:
Neither morphogenesis nor any function exists for its own sake. They are
there to ensure, directly or indirectly, that an organism adapts to the
outside world or, at least, maintains itself there.7
Fortunately, since the 1950s, the concept of functional morphology
(Funktionsmorphologie) is used in a wider context.
3. Structural aspects. The structural approach is a compromise between
looking at body plans, on the one hand, and the relations between
environment and adaptation, 
on the other. 
Organisms undergoing
evolutionary change are governed by the structures permitted by morphology
and morphogenesis (bautechnische Lizenzen). Adaptation is not omnipotent;
neither is the body plan a choker.
A. Seilacher grouped phylogenetic, adaptive and architectural features
together under the general term Konstruktionsmorphologie. An organism's
morphological position within Seilacher's triangle is the result of a
compromise between these three factors.
3.
CONSTRAINTS AND BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION
The notion of developmental constraint, nowadays widely accepted by
evolutionists, has links with Seilacher's Konstructionsmorphologie. Inspired
by Seilacher's three classes, S. J. Gould has proposed three ways of
broaching the evolution of living things:8
1. Functionalism is the conventional view of adaptation found in the
natural theology of the Anglican Archdeacon William Paley (1802) and in
Lamarck's and Darwin's work.
2. Historicism is restricted to the study of descendancy and kinship
among living things (J. Maynard Smith calls these local constraints9);
3. Formalism considers the properties of organisms as physical
consequences of their material structure (J. Maynard Smith speaks of
universal constraints).

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
227
The last two approaches, of which neo-Darwinists are rather dismissive,
are particularly important in developmental studies. They help explain both
the production of a variety of phenotypes and the limited diversity of
phenotypes within a body plan, and they are directly related to the notion of
developmental constraint. The question we must ask is, when a species'
morphology undergoes no change over a very long time-span, even millions
of years, is the stable state (or stasis) due to developmental constraints that
limit morphological change or to selection that stabilises and maintains
uniformity? How can we differentiate between developmental and selective
constraints?
J. Maynard Smith and his colleagues suggested two ways of tackling the
issue. The first approach was to compare predicted adaptation with reality
(adaptation as recorded a posteriori). It can be equally well applied to the
study of a population's reproduction mode as to the emergence of functional
structures like those used in locomotion. The underlying question is the
same. Does the problem facing the species or population determine the
direction evolution will take? J. Maynard-Smith's second approach was to
examine whether a single trait is encountered in independent branches of a
phylum as a response to the same environmental need. This second approach
established that selection, rather than developmental constraints, determine
the predominance of certain traits. J. Maynard-Smith concluded that
developmental constraints play a minor role in evolution compared to the
dominant role of selection acting on genes, cells, etc. From then on, they
were seen in a rather negative light; their role was to limit, even impede, the
emergence of certain phenotypes to which selection might give rise.
S. J. Gould does not agree. In his mind, non selective constraints have a
positive role. They make up the space where changes in living beings can
emerge, develop or be perpetuated. They are not secondary to selection. This
view is supported by a study of the Cerion, a species of snail common in
Western Asia. Constraints in shape, such as the twirl of the shell around the
axis, as well as historical constraints, account for the natural variety
encountered in the shells of one and the same population, among
geographically distinct exemplars of a single species, and among
multitaxonomic fauna. The end of S.J. Gould's article is worth citing:
Nikolai Vavilov (1922) advanced too grandiose vision when he hoped
that a specification of genetic and developmental channels might
establish a 'periodic table' of possible forms, thus making biology as
predictive as the chemistry of his countryman Mendeleev. But we may
rightly hope for a predictive geometry of consequences when we can
discern the formal and phyletic rules of development.10

228
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The debate is far from closed and has, recently, been fuelled by two
fields of investigation: body plans and coevolution.
4. 
 WAS LIFE WONDERFUL IN THE CAMBRIAN?
The introduction and conclusion of S. J. Gould's book "Wonderful Life"
strangely echo J. Monod conclusions in "Chance and Necessity".
The old alliance is broken. At last, Man knows that he stands alone
amidst the indifferent immensity of the Universe from which he emerged
by chance. Neither his destiny nor his duty are inscribed anywhere. It is
for him to choose between the Kingdom and darkness. (J. Monod)11
Wind back the tape of life to the early days of the Burgess Shale; let it
play again from an identical starting point, and the chance becomes
vanishingly small that anything like human intelligence would grace the
replay. (S.J. Gould)12
The survival of Pikaia [an ancestor of vertebrates] was a contingency of
"just history". I do not think that any "higher" answer can be given, and I
cannot imagine that any resolution could be more fascinating. We are the
offspring of history, and must establish our own paths in the most diverse
and interesting of conceivable universes - one indifferent to our suffering,
and therefore offering us maximal freedom to thrive, or to fail, in our
own chosen way. (S.J. Gould)13
We should examine carefully how the attitudes of the American
palaeontologist and French biologist differ. Gould adopts a historical attitude
and employs the notion of contingency. He distinguishes contingency from
chance ("the instantaneous throw of the dice") which takes no account of
initial conditions. In brief,
a historical explanation does not rest on direct deduction from laws of
nature, but on an unpredictable sequence of antecedent states, where any
major change in any step of the sequence would have altered the final
result. The final result is therefore dependent, or contingent, upon
everything that came before - the unerasable or determining signature of
history.14
These thoughts are echoed by Jean-Paul Sartre who, after contemplating
the root of a chestnut tree, defines contingency:
A circle is not absurd and can be explained very well by rotating the
segment of a line around one of its ends. Yet, a circle does not exist. On

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
229
the other hand, this root existed in that I could not explain it. Knotty,
inert, nameless, it fascinated me, filled my eyes, and kept on reminding
me of its existence. Although I repeated: "it is a root", this was of no
avail. I saw clearly that one could not go from its function of a root or
suction pump to this, this hard, compact seal-skin, this oily, callous and
stubborn aspect. The function explained nothing. It helped explain what a
root was but did not explain this particular root. This root with its
colour, shape, petrified stance was ... beyond explanation.15
Contingency is essential. I mean that, by definition, existence is not a
necessity. To exist is simply to be there. Those who exist appear, are
encountered, but can never be deduced.16
Going back to our fossils, let's take a brief look at the famous Burgess
Shale upon which S.J. Gould's demonstration is based. The Burgess Shale is
a fascinating story in the recent history of research in palaeontology. At the
end of the autumn of 1909, the director of the Smithsonian Institution,
Charles Doolittle Walcott, went off to look for fossil-rich rocky formations
in British Columbia (Canada). He discovered a bed of fossils with
astonishing forms and tried to "shoehorn" them (to quote Gould) into the
standard classification groups. According to Walcott, these marine
invertebrates from the middle Cambrian period (some 530 million years ago)
were primitive representatives of the original animal groups which had
gradually changed and diversified, that is evolved, to become current fauna.
This perfectly orthodox view was not contested for more than fifty years.
In 1971, Harry Whittington published an essay that threw new light on
the Burgess fossils. This was followed by works by Simon Conway Morris
and Derek Briggs.17 All these authors concluded unequivocally (some of
their conclusions are contested today) that most Burgess organisms do not
belong to any known zoological group. Their morphology is unrelated to that
of any of the range of invertebrate forms currently inhabiting the oceans.
Their body plans are astonishingly varied, for example,
Opabinia, with its five eyes and frontal "nozzle"; Anomalocaris, the
largest animal of its time, a fearsome predator with a circular jaw;
Hallucigenia, with an anatomy to match its name.18
In fact, the Burgess site not only displays spectacular palaeoecological
aspects and exceptional conservation conditions but, most important of all,
an extraordinary disparity of fauna. S.J. Gould suggests that this term should
be used to describe the differences in anatomic organisation and the range of
body plans.
The conclusions from studies of the Burgess fossils have been supported
by excavation work in Greenland and China. Clearly, living things during

230
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the Cambrian period were much more dissimilar than we ever thought. One
speaks of the "zoological big bang in the Cambrian" and of the "Cambrian
explosion". There has been no slow, gradual diversification. On the contrary,
nearly all the great body plans we know today (annelids, molluscs,
echinoderms, chordates etc.), and many others which are now extinct,
appeared in just a few tens of millions of years or less. The Burgess Shale
contains at least twenty types of arthropods, each of them unique in its kind,
in addition to representatives of the four big groups making up the branch.19
The number of species within a phylum (which S.J. Gould calls diversity),
however, is not very large:
The story of the last 500 million years has featured restriction followed
by proliferation within a few stereotyped designs, not general expansion
of range and increase in complexity as our favored iconography, the
cone of increasing diversity, implies.20
S.J. Gould calls this restriction decimation and illustrates it as shown in
the diagram.
Once we accept the idea of decimation, we can no longer interpret
evolution in the light of a high level of adaptation. All body plans and all
ensuing living forms had the same chances of survival. The number of plans
far exceeded the current number and the "space" of the phylogenetically
possible was wide open. Were the body plans that are now extinct decimated
by pure chance, because of a kind of pitiless lottery? It is hard to say.
However, because decimation was so extensive, we must consider all the

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
231
body plans that might have been possible; they were the "initial conditions"
from which history made its contingent selection.
We can now pinpoint the difference in Monod and Gould's views.
Current living things appeared not so much because of chance but because of
a strong historical contingency. In other words, if forms were randomly
pulled out of a bag and then sorted by selection, this occurred within a space
of possibilities limited by the constraints inherent to body plans. This space
was brutally reduced at the end of the Cambrian period when many plans
went extinct. Other worlds could have existed because the decimated forms
did not disappear as a result of lesser adaptation. The idea of adaptation
itself, so perfect, does not fit in with what actually happened. Evolution is
more like a running race against environmental changes which, at times, can
cause decimations and mass extinctions 21 or can be viewed as "a history of
organisms finding devious routes for getting round constraints".22
5.
STRUGGLE FOR LIFE AND A ROYAL RACE
That which applies to relations between a species' evolutionary fate and
environmental changes can be extended to apply to relations between the
evolutionary fates of interacting species. These two kinds of relations do
they not belong to the more general concept of a trophic and biocenotic
relationship? Charles Darwin had already raised the idea in The Origin of
Species:
Thus I can understand how a flower and a bee might slowly become,
either simultaneously or one after the other, modified and adapted to
each other in the most perfect manner, by the continued preservation of
all the individuals which presented slight deviations of structure mutually
favourable to each other.
Darwin spoke of coadaptation, his successors will speak of coevolution, a
term coined by Leigh Van Valen, a researcher at Chicago University. In
1973, Van Valen determined the survival curves of about 50 groups of
current or extinct living things (protists, plants and animals). He noted that,
however long they had been alive, the likelihood of extinction was the same
for each group. To explain this law of constant extinction, he proposed the
Red Queen hypothesis. The "effective environment" of a homogeneous
group of organisms changes according to a stochastic rate which is, on
average, constant. Efforts to adapt must therefore be renewed constantly and
the risk of extinction is always the same. "Effective environment" referred
chiefly to other living organisms.23 Changes in the physical environment

232
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
could be disregarded because biotic factors on their own can generate, at this
level, a continuous, self-steered movement in environment and species.
To understand the hypothesis, let's recall the story after which it is
named. Led by the Red Queen, Alice runs until she is out of breath in order
to stay in the same spot (illustrated by John Tenniel). We shall then show
how it can help explain coevolution.
Alice and the Red Queen
"...Just at this moment, somehow or other, they began to run. Alice
never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how it was
that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand in
hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep
up with her: and still the Queen kept crying, "Faster! Faster!" but
Alice felt she could not go faster, though she had no breath left to say
so.
The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other
things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they
went, they never seemed to pass anything. "I wonder if all the things
move along with us?" thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen
seemed to guess her thoughts, for she cried, "Faster! Don't try to
talk!"
Not that Alice had any idea of doing that. She felt as if she would
never be able to talk again, she was getting so out of breath: and still
the Queen cried, "Faster! Faster!" and dragged her along. "Are we
nearly there?" Alice managed to pant out at last.
"Nearly there!" the Queen repeated. "Why, we passed it ten
minutes ago! Faster!" And then ran on for a time in silence, with the
wind whistling in Alice's ears, and almost blowing her hair off her
head, she fancied.
"Now! Now!" cried the Queen. "Faster! Faster!" And they went so
fast that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching
the ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite
exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground
breathless and giddy.
The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, "You
must rest a little now."
Alice looked round her in surprise. "Why, I do believe we've been
under this tree the whole time! Everything's just as it was!"
"Of course it is, "said the Queen: "what would you have it?"
"Well, in our country," said Alice, still panting a little, "you'd
generally get to somewhere else, if you ran very fast for a long time,
as we've been doing."

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
233
"A slow sort of country!" said the Queen. "Now here, you see, it
takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you
want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as
that!"
"I'd rather not try, please!" said Alice. "I'm quite content to stay
here - only I am so hot and thirsty!" 24
Living species are the first environmental factor to be considered in an
ecosystem. Influences from other species are not just due to prey-predator
relationships. When a species evolves, it changes the effective environment,
and this change then influences it in turn. Even if the physical environment
were to remain stable, living things would still continue to evolve through
mutual influence and adaptation. This is called coevolution.
The Red Queen hypothesis is profoundly Darwinian. It confers autonomy
to living things with respect to nonbiotic factors and, especially, lacks any
notion of perfection through adaptation. The aim is not to improve how one
fits in with natural conditions but to remain alive despite these conditions.
There is no room for anticipation; adaptations that grant greater future safety
cannot be anticipated. All species evolve constantly but this evolution is just
"running [all one can] to keep in the same place."
The Red Queen hypothesis is difficult to test as J. Maynard Smith and
N.C. Stenseth showed in 1984.25 It is often a possible mechanism but not
always a necessary mechanism. There are, for instance, ecosystems of two or
more species that could evolve indefinitely (as some host-pathogen duos).
There are also times when the evolutionary process wanes when each species
has reached its selective local optimum. Myxomatosis kills fewer rabbits
now than some decades ago because selection forces are weaker and the two
protagonists evolve more slowly. Acknowledging that the law of constant
extinction was valid, N.C. Stenseth and J. Maynard-Smith proposed an
alternative between two models, the stationary model and the Red Queen
model.

234
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
1. In the stationary model, evolution gradually grinds to a halt when there
are no physical changes. This happens in test tubes when self-replicating
RNA molecules undergo selective constraints; each species reaches its local
optimum. Evolution during the last three million years would thus be due to
physical changes in the environment.
2. In the Red Queen model, coevolution could go on indefinitely, even in
the absence of physical changes.
Can we choose between these two models? J.N. Thompson and others
have suggested that the different types of species interactions (competition,
parasitism, predation, etc.) in the Red Queen model can be seen as
revolutionary processes. On the other hand, S.J. Gould and N. Eldredge
suggest in their theory of punctuated equilibria based on substantial
palaeontological data26 that only a change in nonbiotic environmental
conditions, for example a change in climate, could cause an observable
evolutionary change.
6. 
FINALISM REVISITED
The number of living forms depends on the limit history imposes on body
plan number. Diversity is not limitless but restricted and due to variations on
a set of morphogenetic themes rather than in actual body plans. A few main
themes are modified in a multiplicity of ways. We have just to look at the
number of known insect species. David Raup, who teaches statistics in
palaeontology at the University of Chicago, has shown that only three
variables are needed to study shell whorls: degree of curvature, translation of
the point describing the spiral around the axis, and the distance of this point
from the axis. If we build the cube representing the space of morphological
possibilities using these three variables, we notice that living and fossil
shells occupy only a few zones within the cube.27 How can we explain such
confined zones when nature is so profuse and diverse? Is it because each of
the three factors of Seilacher's triangle has as great an impact on the
emergence of new forms? It is, affirms S.J. Gould who reminds us that
evolutionists have provided two kinds of explanation for the emergence of
life forms. The first belongs to the Panglossian and adaptationist paradigm
(as in the synthetic theory of evolution). By answering "why" the forms
exist, we shall discover why some zones are empty. The other explanations
refer to "how" the observed forms came into being, how the options in use
depend on history, architecture and environment. Is this a move to avoid the
issue of finality in biology or to tackle it anew?
The development of scientific thinking has discredited finality and
teleology, and advantaged the study of proximal causality. In the past, we

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
235
spoke of order and finality in fields where we now only speak or statistical
regularity or the results of chance. Did we not used to say, like Aristotle who
claimed that a free-falling stone was trying to return "home", that living
beings had tendencies and intentions, in other words all kinds of things that
we are no longer allowed to say today? More than 300 years BCE, Aristotle
developed his concept of final cause in The Parts of Animals. How can we
deny that the eye is made for seeing! Two centuries later, Lucretius criticised
this concept in a chapter entitled "Some vital functions" (De Rerum Natura):
We crave that thou wilt passionately flee
The one offence, and anxiously wilt shun
The error of presuming the clear lights
Of eyes created were that we might see;
Or thighs and knees, aprop upon the feet,
Thuswise can bended be, that we might step
With goodly strides ahead; or forearms joined
Unto the sturdy uppers, or serving hands
On either side were given, that we might do
Life's own demands. All such interpretation
Is aft-for-fore with inverse reasoning,
Since naught is born in body so that we
May use the same, but birth engenders use:
No seeing ere the lights of eyes were born,
No speaking ere the tongue created was;
But origin of tongue came long before
Discourse of words, and ears created were
Much earlier than any sound was heard;
And all the members, so meseems, were there
Before they got their use: and therefore, they
Could not be gendered for the sake of use.
For Lucretius, the statements "eyes created that we might see" and "no
speaking ere the tongue created was" are equivalent. He seems to ignore that
whereas all eyes in the animal kingdom are for seeing, most of the tongues
are not used for talking ... The organ is "providential" in the etymological
meaning of the word. Nature supplies organs, animals use them. Bernardin
de Saint Pierre, who was for a short time superintendent of the Jardin des
Plantes (Paris), made a similar misinterpretation in reverse. He wrote
Harmonies of Nature half a century after Voltaire wrote Candide and yet
insisted that melons, which display such beautifully regular ribs, are for
family meals and pumpkins for meals among friends; better still, nature
cares for our "moral enjoyment": "the laurel for victory, the olive for peace,

236
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the palm for glory". Because observers of nature have no explanatory
mechanism, they have no alternative but to choose between a final cause
inherent to life that induces and shapes the organ, and providence which
anticipates our needs by providing the organ.
Now that we have evolutionary theory, we can at last elaborate "a science
of biological finality". It is mutation and selection combined that has given
birth to current life forms and to the wonderful ways in which they adapt.
Each mutation occurs at random; it is not directed toward any end. The
direction is given later by selection. We can thus say that both Aristotle and
Lucretius were right. At the microscopic level of mutation, Lucretius was
right in claiming that the structures are always there before they come into
use. At the macroscopic level, Aristotle was right because a complex organ
is always geared toward a function.
Because teleology was opposed to mechanisms, it could be nothing but a
doctrinaire belief in a hidden, immanent or transcendent goal. This meant
that any mention of a final cause was outlawed, especially in the teaching of
biology. An English physiologist said in the 1950's that finalism is like a
woman of ill repute with whom we cannot do without but with whom it is
forbidden to be seen in the street. We had to satisfy ourselves with the rather
facile distinction between the "how" of science and the "why" of philosophy
and religion.
Because finality implies anticipation, it is related to time. It is virtually
impossible to perform biological observations without taking the passing of
time (cyclic or linear) into account. We do not mean the time of physics but
the irreversible time of existence and history. In the 19th century, Claude
Bernard had already perceived that physiological mechanisms need to be
studied as if they depended on the achievement of a goal. For him, this goal
was perpetuation of the internal medium.
Claude Bernard and finalism
Physiologists and physicians must never forget that a living being
is an organism with its own individuality. Since physicists and
chemists cannot take their stand outside the universe, they study
bodies and phenomena in themselves and separately without
necessarily having to connect them with nature as a whole. But
physiologists, finding themselves, on the contrary, outside the animal
organism which they see as a whole, must take account of the
harmony of this whole, even while trying to get inside, so as to
understand the mechanism of its every part. The result is that
physicists and chemists can reject all idea of final causes for the facts
that they observe; while physiologists are inclined to acknowledge
an harmonious and pre-established unity in an organized body, all

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
237
of whose partial actions are interdependent and mutually generative.
We really must learn, then, that if we break up a living organism by
isolating its different parts, it is only for the sake of ease in
experimental analysis, and by no means in order to conceive them
separately. Indeed when we wish to ascribe to a physiological quality
its value and true significance, we must always refer it to this whole,
and draw our final conclusion only in relation to its effects in the
whole. It is doubtless because he felt this necessary interdependence
among all parts of an organism, that Cuvier said that experimentation
was not applicable to living beings, since it separated organized parts
which should remain united.29
By having a linear conception of time, we give it a sign or direction and
call the changes it permits either improvement, progress or regression. Let us
consider, for instance, the passage of autotrophous cells, which can
synthesise all they require, to heterotrophous cells and organisms, which rely
on organic molecules produced by autotrophous life forms. People who
"consider that autotrophism is vastly superior because it confers autonomy
on organisms"30 do they not run the risk of attributing time a negative role
and of seeing life's inventions as just ways of compensating weakening
natural aptitudes? The direction given to time is usually positive, even if
progress is relative, as the naturalist Ernst Mayr (a founder of the synthetic
theory of evolution) reminds us:
Evolutionary progress in one character is often paid for by weakening in
another character. Obviously, general, global progress does not exist.31
Introducing time into the natural sciences led to many attempts to invent
laws that would explain the sequences in the history of life and, even, predict
their outcome. We have the laws of increasing size (Deperet's law),
increasing complexity and brain development (Teilhard de Chardin),
recapitulation (Haeckel's law), and irreversibility (Dollo's law). Most were
drawn up with a determinist and finalist outlook, and must be put into
perspective. However, rather paradoxically, E. Mayr has stated that:
Evolutionary biology, more than any other science, can provide valid
answers to questions of the type: What is the object of the universe? What
is the object of man? Why am I alive?32
Is this the sign of the pride of a biologist who believes that the synthetic
theory of evolution can suggest some answers to many questions that
philosophers have been asking since pre-Socratic times whereas the question
why, in the sense with what objective, has no meaning in the world of
inanimate objects33 (a world which, for example, physicists and astronomers

238
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
study). E. Mayr denied adhering to any kind of finalism. In particular, he
underscored that:
founding the analysis of a behaviour on terminology from human
psychology inevitably leads to difficulties [...] Similarly, the assumption
that there is an intention or a goal in every directional process
encourages a teleological interpretation of organic evolution. This
interpretation cannot be confirmed.34
We shall not dwell on the contradictions in these two statements by Mayr
but focus on the four life process categories, whether really or only
seemingly directed, which he distinguishes:
teleomatic processes, physicochemical processes which lead to a starting-
point that is the consequence of a natural law, for example the law of
gravity;
teleonomic processes whose direction depends on a work-programme,
that is coded or preordained information which control a phenomenon or
behaviour;
adapted or functional systems which are the fruits of the natural selection
process and which are not always as perfect as we claim them to be;
evolutionary progression, with the key question that there might be
finality to the world, to which Mayr replies in the negative.
The rendez-vous between fossils and computation
To test is to verify. To verify is to establish facts which we have
produced or predicted. We can produce facts in physiology as in
physics and in chemistry. In paleontology we predict facts not by
anticipating the future but by rediscovering the past. If an experiment
is defined as the testing of a hypothesis, we can say that, in some of its
aspects, paleontology is an experimental science. The paleontologist
who predicts that, by applying the principle of homology to current
species, he will discover their ancestral structures at a given time in
the Earth's history is in a similar position to that of the astronomer
who predicts, by calculation, the existence of a planet which he will
then be able to discover with a telescope. Thus, to quote P. de Saint-
Seine, fossils rendez-vous with computation.
The constancy of the links, through variations in form and
function, display a continuity which is compatible with the emergence
of a new structural arrangement. The ability to predict or, if one
prefers, to test hypotheses suggests that there is an order in nature
that enables us to find the same regularity in the history of life as in
the stars.35

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
239
Contemporary science has evolved in a way that, in a fashion,
rehabilitates finality, even if we have to play with the meanings of the words
teleology and teleonomy. The term teleonomy, introduced by Anne Roe,
George Gaylord Simpson and Konrad Lorenz, owes its consecration to the
success of Jacques Monod's essay Chance and Necessity. For Monod,
teleonomy is one of the three general properties that characterise living
beings and distinguish them from the rest of the universe. The other two are
autonomous morphogenesis and reproductive invariance. Teleonomy
assumes the subjective idea that there is a plan:
We arbitrarily choose to define the essential teleonomic plan as the
transmission from one generation to the next of the invariance content
that characterises the species. All structures, all performances, and all
activities that contribute toward the success of the essential plan are said
to be "teleonomic”.36
Monod's main thrust is to link invariance and teleonomy, whilst having in
mind the "preservation and multiplication of the species".37 He can thus
criticise afresh the dilemma between vitalism and animism, between
intentionality within life and the intervention of an external intelligence. He
concludes his book as follows. Having emerged by chance, man is free to
choose his own plan because there is no other, neither a vital nor a divine
plan.38
Science must rely on the principle of objectivity and cannot advance
using final causes. When we investigate life, we cannot avoid the notions of
finality and teleology because there is a finality (or rather several finalities)
de facto but under no circumstance, does this imply that there is a
conscience. The fundamental invariance of DNA, tied to selection, comes
before everything else in teleology or teleonomy ("only chance is the source
of novelty or creation in the biosphere").39
Monod's natural philosophy deserves attention and respect. However, it
overemphasises the duo chance/necessity and disregards initial conditions
and chain reactions. Of course, Monod was interested in the biochemical
processes involved, in the "how" of things, but maybe, like adaptationists, he
was too quick off the mark to answer the question "why".
One cannot be exhaustive on the subject of finality. We have noted,
however, that the refusal to use this term or function, as the French still often
do, in biology is incongruous. We have also noted that, as Gould, Lewontin
or Seilacher urge us to do, we should look at finality in the (at least
triangular) context of several interlinked constraints and causes acting at
different levels. Adaptation is just one of them. We shall conclude by saying
that evolutionary genetics must ally a fundamental interest in genetic
information to the consideration of constraints.

240
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
Gould, S.J., and Lewontin, R.C., 1979, The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian
paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme, Proc. Roy, Soc. Lond. B 205: 581-
598.
Gould, S.J., 1993, Fulfilling the spandrels of world and mind, in: 
Understanding
Scientific Prose (J. Selzer, ed.), University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, p. 310.
Voltaire, 1930 (originally published in 1759), Candide ou l'Optimisme. Contes et Romans
(Vol. 2). Series: Les textes Français, Fernand Roches, Paris pp. 10-13. The emphasis is
ours.
Schopenhauer, A., 1906 (originally published in German in 1819), The World as Will and
Idea (Die Welt as Wille und Vorstellung), translated by R.B. Haldane and J. Kemp (3
vols), London; Schopenhauer, A., 1907 (originally published in German in 1836), On the
Will in Nature (Über der Willen in der Natur), translated by K. Hillebrand, London.
Gould, S.J., 1989, A developmental constraint in Cerion, with comments on the definition
and interpretation of constraint in evolution, Evolution 43: 516-539; Seilacher, A., 1970,
Arbeitskonzept zur Konstrucktionsmorphologie, Lethaia 3: 393-396.
Daqué, E., 1921, quoted by Seilacher, 1970, ibid., p. 393.
Ibidem
Gould, S.J., 1989, ibid., p. 517.
Maynard-Smith, J., Burian, R., Kauffman, S., Alberch, P., Campbell, J., Goodwin, B.,
Lande, R., Raup, D., and Wolpert, L., 1985, Developmental constraints and evolution,
Quat. Rev. Biol. 60: 265-287 (p. 267).
Gould, S.J., 1989, ibid., p. 537.
Monod, J., 1971, Chance and Necessity, Knopf, New York. Vintage Paperback, 1972.
[Originally published in France as Le Hasard et la Nécessité, Edition du Seuil, Paris,
1970].
Gould, S.J., 1990, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History,
Hutchinson Radius, Great Britain (Penguin Books, 1991, p. 14).
Gould, S.J., ibid., p. 323.
Gould, S.J., ibid., p. 283.
Sartre, J.P., 1938, La Nausée, Series: Folio, Gallimard, Paris, pp. 184-185.
Sartre, J.P., ibid., p. 187.
Conway Morris, S., and Whittington, H.B., 1979, The animals of the Burgess Shale.
Scientific American, 240: 122-133.
Gould, S.J., ibid., p. 14.
Trilobita (which went extinct at the end of the primary era), Chelicerata (spiders,
scorpions and some other groups of fossils), Crustacea (crabs, lobsters, shrimps,
barnacles) and Uniramia (insects, centipedes, millipedes).
Gould, S.J., ibid., p. 208.
Gould, S.J., ibid.
Maynard-Smith, J., Burian, R., Kauffman, S. et al., 1985, Developmental constraints and
evolution, Quat. Rev. Biol., 60, 265-287 (p. 282). Phrase used to describe the opinion of
Lewontin and of other biologists.
Van Valen, L., 1973, A new evolutionary law, Evol. Theory 1: 1-30.
Carroll, L., 1871, Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Saw There, Macmillan,
London.
Stenseth, N.C., and Maynard-Smith, J., 1984, Coevolution in ecosystems: Red Queen
evolution or stasis? Evolution 38: 870-880; Hoffman, A., 1991, Testing the Red Queen
hypothesis, J. Evol. Biol. 4: 1-7.
Eldredge, N., and Gould, S.J., 1972, Punctuated equilibria: An alternative to phyletic
gradualism. in: Models in Paleobiology (T.J.M. Shopf, ed.), Freeman, Cooper & Co., San
Francisco, pp. 82-115.

What Can Be Done, What Can’t Be Done
241
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
Gould, S.J., 1980, The evolutionary biology of constraint, Daedalus 109, 39-52.
Titus Lucretius Carus, Of the Nature of Things. Book IV. Translated by William Ellery
Leonard, 1997. Gutenberg Etext.
Bernard, C., 1966 (originally published in 1865), Introduction à l'Etude de la Médecine
Expérimentale, Belfond, Paris, pp. 154-155. (translated by H.C. Green, 1957, An
Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine. Dover Publications, NY, pp. 88-89.).
We have introduced the bold font.
Roger, J., 1976, Paléontologie Evolutive, Series: Biologie évolutive n°2, Masson, Paris, p.
91.
Mayr, E., 1981, La Biologie de l'Evolution, Hermann, Paris, p. 170. (Section: "Structure
Conceptuelle": conferences given by Ernst Mayr at the Collège de France in 1975).
Mayr, E., ibid., p. 89.
Mayr, E., ibid., p. 108.
Mayr, E., ibid., pp. 112-113.
Piveteau, J., 1983, Origine et Destinée de l'Homme, Masson, Paris, p. XII.
Monod, J., ibid., p. 30.
Monod, J., ibid., p. 26.
This conclusion provoked many reactions not only from "vitalists" and "animists" but also
from researchers. Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, by entitling their book The
Common Alliance leave no room for doubt (Prigogine, I., and Stengers, I., 1979, La
Nouvelle Alliance. Metamorphose de la Science. Series: Bibliothèques des Sciences
Humaines, Gallimard, Paris).
Monod, J., ibid., p. 127.

CONCLUSION
FROM AN IDEAL TO A TINKERED WORLD
Times have changed since the publication of The Origin of Species. The
idea of evolution, its theories and paradigm have continued to evolve during
the century and a half that separates us from the Darwinian "scandal".
However, wherever we turn, the debates are still as fierce now as they were
then, both in the scientific community and in Western society. The conflicts
between fixists and transformists, biometricians and geneticists have given
way to discussions on neutralist theory and the molecular clock, selection
levels and selfish replicators. Social Darwinism and eugenist currents seem
to have regressed because of the opprobrium their excesses of the first half
of the 20th century met with and because of the development of genetics. On
the other hand, sociobiology, the decoding of the human genome, and the
heralded end to Darwinism regularly make the headlines in our news media.
Who can deny that the mystery of life is still far from being solved, even if
everyone claims that they henceforth hold the key to the mystery? How else
can we explain the vitality, even expansion, of creationist thinking, and the
imperious need to nominate ethics committees which decide whether genetic
engineering experiments are warranted? Today as yesterday, biological
evolution continues to arouse mankind's deepest anxieties, those about his
origins and future.
Readers should therefore not merely reflect on the evolutionary theories
presented in this book from a scientific point of view. They should also ask
themselves where they stand with regard to the Darwinian paradigm, the Red
Queen and Selfish Gene hypotheses. We are inviting them to go from the
best of worlds - for instance the one imagined by the partisans of social
Darwinism - to the world of possibilities - that of the Red Queen, constraints
and short-term finality. This new direction may cost a few reassuring "-isms"
243

244
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
and supposedly eternal "-ologies" (the "Darwinian revolution" will probably
cost as much as the "Copernican revolution") but is this reason enough to
refuse stepping through the looking glass?
To conclude, we shall retell the old story of Lot and his daughters who, in
order to ensure offspring to their father and clan, had no qualms in
transgressing one of the most basic laws of human, even animal, societies,
the one forbidding incest. Their action is no doubt blameworthy but it
illustrates one of the central ideas of contemporary evolutionary genetics. If
genetic information has to be passed on through generations, then living
beings are ready to make many sacrifices and even contravene a universal
moral law. Other examples abound in ancient literature especially in cultures
that, by tradition, are less interested in the individual than in the survival and
development of the tribe. A people or tribe is not just an assembly of
physical bodies but also includes all the kinds of information that make up a
society (arts, customs, wisdom, etc.). Such a view of the individual and
society is increasingly rare, and this probably explains the embarrassment or
revolt provoked by the idea of a selfish gene. These reactions should be set
aside or transcended both in the name of scientific research and on the basis
of a different understanding of the place occupied by a human being within
the species. Would this new understanding call into question the many
benefits that individualism has provided us with today? Certainly not.
However, can we and should we continue thinking of the human being as a
free and independent individual? Nowadays, there is no lack of calls for a
renewed understanding of the relationships among individuals, societies and
cultures and between mankind and other living beings.
The biologist's dream should not prevent him or her from the task that
befalls every research worker and member of the human community, that of
building that which is possible.

MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX
MA1. EVOLUTIONARY PRESSURES
1. Mutation
Let's take a gene A of frequency
at generation g which mutates at a
rate u at each generation. If the reversion rate (i.e. the number of reverse
mutations which restore the initial function) is negligible, at the next
generation the frequency of A will be:
The mutation-induced change in the frequency of A from one generation
to the next (the mutation pressure) equals:
From the first relationship, we deduce that:
To halve the frequency of A, a number of generations g is needed so that:
Thus:
and
However, mutation does not always occur in just one direction. Reverse
mutations do exist. For example, let's suppose that gene A mutates into allele
a with a frequency u, and that a mutates into A with a frequency v. The
mutation pressure then becomes:
245

246
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
This formula cancels itself out when p equals v /(u + v). In theory, the
system ends up as a stable equilibrium if we consider mutation forces only.
However, in a natural population, the mutation pressure is so low that gene
frequency cannot be kept at its equilibrium value. Other much stronger
pressures will modify population structure.
2. Selection
The concept of the fitness of a genotype (denoted w) was introduced in
order to study how the allele frequencies of each locus evolve under the
influence of selection. Let's consider a population of haploid individuals with
two alleles, A and a, with fitnesses 
and 
at a particular locus. At
generation g, their frequencies are 
and 
respectively (so that
The mean fitness of the population, i.e. the average number of
descendants per individual, is denoted
In this case, the proportion of A alleles at generation g + 1 is:
We can then calculate the variation in the frequency of allele A from one
generation to the next under the influence of selection:
The sign of 
gives the direction of evolution. Since 
and the product
are always positive, 
has the same sign as the difference between the
two fitnesses 
and
3. Migration
The simplest model to highlight the role of migration is the "island"
model. If 
is the frequency of an allele in the population under study (the
"island") and 
the frequency of this allele in migrants (which are present in
a proportion m per generation), then at the next generation:
The difference between the allele frequencies of the two populations
decreases:
and the change in allele frequency due to migration is:
Equilibrium is reached when

Mathematical Appendix
247
4. Genetic drift
Genetic drift refers to the random fluctuation of allele frequencies in the
absence of other selective pressures. The smaller the population, the more
effective is genetic drift.
Let's consider a population of N diploid individuals. Each of these
individuals is the outcome of two gametes taken at random from those of the
previous generation, i.e. 2N gametes. If the proportion of allele A at
generation 0 is denoted 
the number X of gametes carrying A amongst
those giving rise to the next generation follows a binomial law with
parameters 2N and 
Its expected value and variance are as follows:
and
The proportion 
of allele A, its expected value and variance at the next
generation are calculated by:
The new proportion 
is thus distributed around the expected value
with a standard deviation equal to
For example, let's suppose the value of 
is 0.5. The standard deviation
is then 
which, for a population of 50 million individuals, is
(This is higher than the mutation rate which is about 
per generation).
For a population of just 50 individuals, the standard deviation would be
Genetic drift is more effective in the second case.
MA2. INBREEDING COEFFICIENT
The inbreeding coefficient (denoted f) is the probability that two alleles
in an individual are copies of one and the same gene within an ancestral
population.
Let's consider a population of N diploid individuals (2N genes). Each
individual produces an infinite
number of gametes. A generation
corresponds to 2N gametes sampled from the gamete pool of the previous
generation. If we assume that the 2N genes of the individuals of the initial
generation weren't identical, the inbreeding coefficient (f) at generation 0 is
Let 
be the inbreeding coefficient of generation g. Two situations can
arise:
the two gametes making up an individual at generation g each carry, at
a given locus, a copy of the same gene from the previous generation
(probability of the event: 1/2N). There is a probability of 1 that the
individual's two genes are identical.

248
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
the two gametes carry copies of distinct genes from generation (g-1)
(probability of the event: 1 - 1/2N). The probability that they will be
identical at generation g is therefore 
(inbreeding coefficient of the
previous generation).
Thus,
whence:
MA3. LETHAL MUTATIONS
Let s be the selective disadvantage of the diploid individuals carrying the
mutated form a of the gene under study (one or two copies if the allele is
dominant, a single copy if it is recessive). The so-called normal form is
denoted A. If s equals zero, there is no disadvantage. If s equals 1, the
mutated form is lethal.
Let u be the mutation rate of gene A into form a per generation. By
combining the 
of mutation and that of selection and assuming that they
cancel each other out, we can calculate the frequency q of allele a:
if allele a is recessive:
if allele a is dominant:
MA4. GENETIC LOAD
Genetic load (denoted L) is a decrease in the overall fitness of a
population that is due to the different fitness levels of some individuals. It is
given by:
where 
is the fitness of the best genotype(s) of the population and w is
average fitness. The load is thus the relative difference between the
maximum fitness that a population of individuals with the best genotypes
would have and average fitness.
Selection creates and maintains the load. Let's take the unlikely but
simple case of extreme overdominance. The fitness of heterozygous (Aa)
genotypes 
equals 1; those of homozygous (AA and aa) genotypes, 
and
are 0. Since only heterozygotes reproduce, they are at the origin of all
progeny; polymorphism is thus maintained at 
Overall, the
zygotes produced at each generation are made up of 1/4 AA; 1/2 Aa; 1/4 aa.

Mathematical Appendix
249
At each generation, half of the population's individuals (the homozygotes) do
not reproduce. This is the genetic load. In the case of sickle-cell anemia, the
load is high and is the sum of the anaemic individuals aa and the
homozygotes AA who have died from malaria.
Decreased fitness because of selectively maintained polymorphism at one
locus can also occur at other loci. Individuals that are heterozygotes for one
locus can be homozygotes for another locus, and can be wiped out because
of the genetic load of this second locus. Clearly, under such circumstances,
many loci cannot be maintained in a polymorphous state because too few
members of the population would reproduce. To maintain 100 loci in a
polymorphous state would require that the reproductive population falls to
i.e. to about 
members. This is, of course, impossible. To
maintain just 10 loci polymorphous needs a decrease to 
This is out of
the question for many species including Man.
We have chosen the least favourable case. The differences in the fitness
levels of homozygotes and heterozygotes can be very much smaller (but,
nevertheless, not too small, as then there would be genetic drift). However,
even then, selection with overdominance could not maintain polymorphism
at several hundred loci.
MA5. FIXATION OF NEUTRAL ALLELES
If, in a population of N individuals (2N genes), the rate of neutral
mutations is v, then 2Nv new neutral genes will be produced at each
generation. Each of the 2N genes, whether mutated or not, has the same
probability (1/2N) of becoming fixed (this is what "neutral" means). A newly
mutated gene will fix with a probability of 1/2N x 2Nv = v. This is true for
each generation and thus, on average, a new neutral allele, which will
replace the old one, will appear every 1/v generations regardless of
population size. Using reaction-diffusion equations, Kimura has shown that,
on average 4N generations will pass between the time a mutation appears
and the time it becomes fixed. This is known as coalescence time. In most
species, coalescence time is rather long and the fixed mutation is only
temporary since it will be replaced by another neutral mutation some day. If
the population is large enough (4N>1/n), the allele that will one day replace
the one that is currently replacing an older allele has already appeared. Its
frequency is on the increase. Consequently, there is polymorphism at all
times with usually more than two alleles per locus.

250
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
MA6. GAME THEORY
1. "Zero-sum" games
In "zero-sum" games, one player's gain is another player's loss.
Participants' decisions are usually based on the minimax strategy. Because a
player does not know what his opponent's next move will be, he judges the
strength of his own moves by supposing that his opponent will play the best
move. If player 1 employs strategy i and player 2 strategy j, the gain of
player 1 in the matrix of payoffs (which, by convention, always gives player
1's gain) is given by 
 (row i, column j). Player 2's
In a minimax strategy, each player minimises the maximum loss his
opponent can impose on him. Thus, player 1 searches for the lowest
(minimum) result 
in each row i (i.e. the greatest possible loss). He
selects the row where this result is maximum 
(i.e. the least
expected value of losing heavily). In contrast, player 2 must select
If the two choices match,
Let's use the two following matrices as examples:

Mathematical Appendix
251
The game is stable if any unilateral deviation from the strategy results in
a loss as in matrix n°2 where 
It is not
stable in matrix n°1 where these values are +1 and +7, respectively.
In matrix n°2, if the players play several times and only one of them
changes strategy, he can but lose. Instead of winning 1, player 1 would lose
1, 2 or 8. Instead of losing 1, player 2 would always lose 2. (Let's not forget
that player 1 defines his own strategy only, i.e. the rows, and player 2 can
only choose among the columns). On the other hand, in matrix n°l, the
situation is not stable. Aware that his opponent keeps on choosing column 3,
player 1 might be tempted to play row 2. Instead of winning just 2, he would
win 7. However, his opponent must not guess the change in strategy. If he
does, he plays column 4 and player 1 loses 2 ... The game is stable because
neither player can change strategy without losing.
2. Non zero-sum games
Mad driver game: It is a non-zero game because, as shown in the example
below, when both players choose to go, they both lose (they lose 10).
Prisoner's dilemma is a non-zero game because, as illustrated by the
example below, when one prisoner admits and the other denies, the former
loses more (i.e. 20) than the latter wins (i.e. 1).

252
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
All non-zero games with the following matrix are called prisoner's
dilemma:
where a<b<c<d
3. Pure, mixed and conditional strategies
Pure strategies are encountered when an individual can have only one
phenotype. Let's consider a population of individuals seeking to acquire a
resource of unit value R (in terms of reproductive value) and where each
individual can adopt either a H (Hawk) or D (Dove) strategy. H is an
aggressive, risky strategy whereas d is a defensive, non aggressive strategy
with no risk. When a hawk meets a hawk, it has a probability of 1/2 of
winning resource R, and a probability 1/2 of losing it. If it loses, we assume
it loses an amount P (in resource units). If it meets a dove, it wins the
resource, at no cost. If a dove meets a dove, they share the resource (each
gains R/2), and it costs them nothing. (NB: We are, of course, not describing
interactions between real hawks and doves. The terms relate to the behaviour
of individuals of the same species within a population.)
The matrix of payoffs is a prisoner's dilemma type matrix.
The dove strategy is never stable even though it is the optimum
strategy for the population,. In a population of doves, the hawk wins. The
hawk strategy is stable only if R exceeds P. Thus, if the resource is greater
than or equal to the risk of acquiring it by force, the aggressive strategy is
the ESS. If, on the other hand, the resource is worth less than the possible
acquisition cost, neither strategy is evolutionary stable. Consequently, doves
are at an advantage in populations where there are many hawks, and hawks

Mathematical Appendix
253
are at an advantage in populations where there are many doves.
Polymorphism can thus be maintained under the action of frequency-
dependent selection.
We have seen that when resource R is less than amount P, the population
cannot be made up of hawks only (everyone would lose out). We can
calculate the equilibrium frequency    of hawks; the average gain of hawks -
G(H) - then equals that of doves - G(D):
Equilibrium occurs when 
so that:
Thus:
Let's suppose now that one individual may have several strategies. We
need to find out how the individuals in the population will react. Let p be the
probability that they select the hawk strategy. The probability of selecting
the dove strategy is then (1-p). Is there a value of p that will ensure that the
mixed strategy is an ESS? There is; a mixed strategy where hawk and dove
strategies have probabilities of R/P and 1 - R/P, respectively, is an ESS. The
optimal strategy (dove) is, of course, still not stable.
In nature, however, two "players" hardly ever meet by chance, and a
player is most unlikely to use a probabilistic algorithm to make a choice. He
will give due regard to the favourable conditions offered by the encounter
and adopt a conditional strategy. J. Maynard-Smith has imagined a territorial
(or bourgeois) strategy which involves behaving like a hawk when one
thinks one was there first (the resident) and like a dove if one comes in
second (the intruder). When two individuals taken at random meet, the
probability that one arrived first is 1/2, regardless of its behaviour. We can
thus calculate the gains to be expected under different circumstances. Let's
suppose two bourgeois meet; they do not fight but behave like a hawk and
dove, or a dove and a hawk. Thus, the mean gain of a bourgeois confronted
by another bourgeois is R x (1/2) + 0 x (1/2), i.e. R/2. If a bourgeois meets a
dove, it behaves as if it were the owner - and thus like a hawk - one in every
two times (gain = R), or it behaves like a dove (gain = R/2). Similarly, if a
bourgeois meets a hawk, it acts like a hawk (gain = (R- P)/2) or a dove (gain
= 0) one in every two times. Conversely, if a hawk meets a bourgeois, it is
up against a hawk (gain = (R - P)/2) or dove (gain = R) one in every two
times. Finally, if a dove meets a bourgeois, it is up against a hawk (gain = 0)
or a dove (gain = R/2) one in every two times. The payoff matrix is thus as
follows:

254
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
If R is greater than P, the ESS is the hawk strategy. If R is less than P,
the ESS strategy is the bourgeois strategy. The ESS strategy is better than
all mixed strategies, in particular the one where p equals R/P.

GLOSSARY
A
Alleles (Bateson and Saunders, 1902): Homologous genes that ensure the
same function in different ways. For example, the gene "pea colour" has two
alleles: "yellow pea" allele/"green pea" allele.
Allogamy (also called outbreeding and sometimes cross-breeding):
Mating of individuals with each other (cross-fertilization). The opposite of
autogamy.
Autogamy: Ability of an individual to self-fertilise. The opposite of
allogamy.
C
Character or trait: Any attribute that can be observed in an individual,
cell or molecule (size, colour, reaction to different factors, electrophoretic
mobility).
Chromosome: A structure containing a single molecule of DNA (or
RNA in some viruses) and which therefore bears genetic information. The
eukaryote chromosome was defined initially as the cytological unit that, as a
result of condensation, could be individualised during nuclear division
255

256
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
(mitosis or meiosis). Chromosomes are distribution units during nuclear
division.
Codon: A sequence of three nucleotides in DNA. It is an instruction to
incorporate an amino acid into a polypeptide chain. There are 64 codons and
only 20 amino acids. Several codons are therefore synonymous.
Crossing-over: Swapping of parts of homologous chromosomes by two
non-sister chromatids of a bivalent. (A bivalent is a unit of paired
homologous chromosomes during meiotic division.)
D
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA): A polymer of deoxyribonucleotides.
Two complementary strands of DNA entwined in a double helix form the
genome of most organisms.
Diploid: An individual with two copies of each chromosome in each cell.
Dominance (Mendel, 1866): Originally, the masking of the phenotypic
effect of one allele (a recessive allele) by another (the dominant allele). By
extension, the interaction between homologous genes. When the phenotype
of heterozygote 
is the sum of the phenotypes of homozygotes 
and
alleles 
and 
are co-dominant. When it is intermediate between
these phenotypes, they are semi-dominant.
E
Epistasis (Bateson, 1907): Originally, the masking of the expression of a
gene by another (epistatic) gene at a different locus. By extension, the
interaction between non-homologous genes.
Eukaryote: An organism whose cell nucleus is separated from the
cytoplasm by a membrane.
Evolutionary pressure: An action on a population that modifies allele
structure (drift, selection, mutation, migration).

Glossary
257
Exon: The protein-coding DNA sequence of a gene (i.e. the DNA
sequence that is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA) which is
translated into protein).
F
Fitness (also called adaptive or selective value): The reproductive
success of the individuals of a genotype submitted to selection. It is given by
the average number of progeny at the following generation.
G
Gamete: Reproductive cell with a haploid set of chromosomes.
Gene (Johannsen, 1909) from pangene (De Vries, 1903) from pangenesis
(Darwin, 1868): Information carried by an ordered sequence of nucleotides
in DNA, together with the signals required for their expression, enabling a
basic function to be carried out (production of a polypeptide chain, of
transfer RNA (tRNA) or ribosomal RNA (rRNA)). Homologous genes are
genes which are normally paired up during meiosis and which have the same
function. Genes that are identical through descent are copies, with no
mutations, of the same ancestral gene.
Gene coalescence in a population (Kingman, 1982): All the homologous
genes in a population of a limited number of individuals descend from a
single ancestral gene which was present in the population's genes some
generations earlier.
Gene conversion: Change in an allele sequence of a chromatid by DNA
recombination. The sequence becomes identical to that of the chromatid with
which pairing occurred during meiosis.
Gene frequency: For a population as a whole, the percentage of genes at
a particular locus that are of one form (allele) as opposed to another.
Genetic drift (Wright, 1921): Random fluctuation in gene frequency
over generations in a population of limited size. It is due to the sampling
effect.

258
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Genetic load (Muller, 1950): Decrease in the fitness of a population
which is due to the maintenance of individuals with fitnesses that are lower
than that of the individual in the population with the highest fitness.
Genetic structure: The allele structure and phenotypic structure of a
population taken together.
Genome (Weinkler, 1920): All the genetic information borne by an
individual. In a restricted sense, all the genes making up a functional unit
(mitochondrial genome, genome inherited from an ancestral species in a
polyploid individual, etc.)
Genotype (Johannsen, 1909): The allele composition of a locus (or loci)
in an individual.
H
Haploid: An individual with a single copy of each chromosome in each
cell.
Heterochromatin: Highly condensed and inactive region of a
chromosome.
Heterogamy: Mating of individuals of dissimilar phenotype.
Heterozygote (Bateson and Saunders, 1902): An individual which
carries both members of a pair of alleles at a locus.
Homogamy: Mating of individuals of similar phenotype.
Homozygote (Bateson and Saunders, 1902): An individual which carries
two genes of the same allele form at a locus.
I
Inbreeding: Mating of genetically related individuals.
Intron: The DNA base sequence interrupting the protein coding
sequences (exons) of a gene. Intron sequences are transcribed into RNA but
are cut out of the message before it is translated into protein.

Glossary
259
K
Kinship: Related individuals, with common ancestors.
L
Linkage (Morgan, 1911): Genetic link between two loci.
Linkage disequilibrium (Kimura, 1956): Non random association of
alleles belonging to different loci in a population,
Locus (Morgan et al., 1915): Originally, the position of a gene on a
chromosome. The locus is defined as a homology class. It is named after the
function of the constituent homologous genes. For example: the locus of pea
colour.
M
Meiosis: Two consecutive cell divisions leading to the production of
gametes. It is characterised by the pairing up and segregation of homologous
chromosomes in daughter cells. Each daughter cell takes half the genetic
inheritance.
Migration: Genes passing from one population to another either as
individuals or gametes.
Mitosis: Cell division which is accompanied by chromosome duplication
and the distribution of the chromatids between daughter cells. All of the
genetic information is passed on.
Mutation (De Vries, 1901): A sudden heritable change in genetic
information. Mutations can affect nucleotide sequence, gene arrangement or
the amount of genetic material.
N
Neutral theory: A theory stating that much of the polymorphism
observed in natural populations is selectively neutral and of no adaptive
value.

260
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Nucleus: An organelle harbouring the nuclear genome. During cell
division, nuclear DNA is condensed into chromosomes and the nucleus
disappears.
O
Organelle: A differentiated cell constituent with a specific function
(nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts).
Overdominance (Hull, 1946): A relationship in which, for a given
character, the fitness of a heterozygote is higher than that of the two
corresponding homozygotes.
P
Panmixis (Weismann, 1895): Mating of gametes at random with regard
to a locus (or loci).
Phenotype (Johanssen, 1909): The appearance of an organism with
respect to a particular character or group of characters as a result of the
interaction of its genotype and its environment.
Pleiotropy (Plate, 1910): The effect of a gene on several different
characters.
Polymorphism (Ford, 1940): The coexistence of two or more
discontinuous forms within a population in a ratio such that the rarer form
cannot be maintained by recurrent mutation. Gene polymorphism is the
coexistence within a population of several alleles at a locus.
Polyploidy: The presence of more than two copies of each chromosome
in each cell. It often occurs in plants.
Population (Johanssen, 1903): A set of individuals that mate sexually
with each other.
Prokaryote: A single cell organism with no well-defined nucleus.

Glossary
261
R
Recessive, Recessivity (Mendel, 1866): see Dominance.
Recombination (Bridges and Morgan, 1923): A process by which
progeny derive new combinations of parental characters. The association of
alleles of two linked loci found in the parents is modified and leads to
"recombined" associations.
Reproduction mode: The way in which gametes unite, with regard to
gene(s), to produce progeny.
Restriction enzyme (site, map): A bacterial protein that recognises
specific sequences of a few nucleotides and cleaves DNA at these sites. The
positions of the sites on the chromosome provide a restriction map.
Restriction enzymes probably evolved to protect bacteria from foreign DNA.
Bacterial sites are not cleaved because they are specifically methylated.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA): A polymer of ribonucleotides. RNA is the
product of the transcription of DNA. The genome of some viruses is made
up of RNA that can be retrotranscribed into DNA. Messenger RNA (mRNA)
carries the information for one or more proteins. The passage from mRNA to
protein is called translation.
S
Segregation (Bateson and Saunders, 1902): Separation of allele forms
that were initially combined at a locus.
Selection (Darwin, 1858): A process resulting in individuals surviving or
reproducing better or worse than others, depending upon their genotype.
Selection to improve species can be natural or artificial.
Self-fertilisation: Fertilisation between two gametes, one male, the other
female, from the same individual.
Sister chromatids: Twin copies of a chromosome which remain closely
associated when a chromosome duplicates. Non-sister chromatids belong to
different chromosomes within a homologous pair.

262
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Strain: A breed of individuals that are perpetuated over generations
without any change in the genotype of the individuals. Pure strain: Breed of
genetically identical, homozygous individuals maintained by inbreeding.
Wild strain: Laboratory strain bred from individuals taken from nature and
used as a reference.
Z
Zygote: A diploid cell formed by union of a male gamete and a female
gamete, which will produce an individual.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Atlan, Anne and Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, 1994, Les conflits intra-génomiques, Société
Française de Génétique, pp. 1–9.
Ayala, Francisco J., 1982, Biologie Moléculaire et Evolution. Series: Biologie Evolutive, N°7,
Masson, Paris.
Barra, Jacqueline and Renard, Jean-Paul, 1986, Superflu, le spermatozoïde? La Recherche
17:264–266.
Belhassen, E. and Gouyon, P.-H., 1986, Flux géniques, perturbations, et gynodiœcie chez
Thymus vulgaris, Colloque national C.N.R.S. Biologie des populations, Sept. 1986,
pp. 134–140.
Blanc, Marcel, 1984, Gregor Mendel: la légende du génie méconnu, La Recherche 15:46–59.
Blanc, Marcel, 1990, Les Héritiers de Darwin. L'Evolution en Mutation, Series: Science
ouverte, Seuil, Paris.
Blunt, Wilfrid, 1986, Linné, Le Prince des Botanistes, Series: Un Savant, Une Epoque, Belin,
Paris.
Brakefield, Paul M., 1987, Industrial melanism: Do we have the answers? TREE 2:117–122.
Buican, Denis, 1984, Histoire de la Génétique et de l'Evolutionnisme en France, Series:
Histoires, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Buican, Denis, 1987, Génétique et Pensée Evolutionniste, Series: Regards sur l'Histoire,
SEDES, Paris.
Buican, Denis, 1988, Lyssenko et le Lyssenkisme, Series: Que sais-je? N° 2394, Presses
Universitaires de France, Paris.
Burnet, Macfarlane, 1978, Endurance of Life. The implications of Genetics for Human Life,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Carles, Jules, 1988, La génétique et les origines de l'homme», Nouv. Rev. Théol. 110:245–
256.
Carles, Jules, 1994, Le Premier Homme, Series: Bref N° 49, Cerf/Fides, Paris.
Carton, Yves, 1988,La coévolution, La Recherche 19: 1022–1031.
Chandebois, Rosine, 1993, Pour en Finir avec le Darwinisme. Une Nouvelle Logique du
Vivant, Editions Espaces 34 (Espace Science), Montpellier.
Coppens, Yves, 1983, Le Singe, l'Afrique et l'Homme, Series: Le Temps des Sciences, Fayard,
Paris.
263

264
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Couvet, Denis, Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, and Kjellberg, Finn, 1985, De la métapopulation au
voisinage : la génétique des populations en déséquilibre, Genet. Sél. Evol. 17: 407–414.
Damuth, John, 1985, Selection among "species": A formulation in terms of natural functional
units, Evolution 39: 1132–1146.
Darwin, Charles, 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Murray,
London.
Darwin, Charles, 1871, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, Appleton, New
York.
Dawkins, Richard, 1986, The Blind Watchmaker, Longmans, London.
Dawkins, Richard, 1976 (revised 1989), The Selfish Gene, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dawkins, Richard, 1995, River Out of Eden. A Darwinian View of Life, Weidenfeld and
Nicholson (Science Masters), London.
Denton, Michael, 1985, Evolution. A Theory in Crisis, Burnett, London.
Devillers, C. and Chaline, J., 1989, La Théorie de l'Evolution. Etat de la Question à la
Lumière des Connaissances Scientifiques Actuelles, Dunod-Bordas, Paris.
Devillers, C. and Tintant, H., 1996, Questions sur la Théorie de l'Evolution, Presses
Universitaires de France, Paris.
Doolittle, W. Ford and Sapienza, Carmen, 1980, Selfish genes, the phenotype paradigm and
genome evolution, Nature 284: 601–603.
Eldredge, Niles and Gould, Stephen Jay, 1972, Punctuated equilibria: An alternative to
phyletic gradualism, in: Models in Paleobiology (T.J.M. Schopf, ed.), Freeman, Cooper,
San Francisco.
Fischer, Jean-Louis (ed.), 1991, La Naissance de la Vie. Une Anthologie, Presses Pocket
(Agora-Les Classiques 12), Paris.
Gliddon, Chris J. and Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, 1989, The units of selection, TREE 4: 204–208.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1977, Ontogeny and Phylogeny, Harvard University Press, Cambridge
(Mass.).
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1980, The evolutionary biology of constraint, Dædalus 109: 39–52.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1980, Is a new and general theory of evolution emerging?, Paleobiology
6: 119–130.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1980, The Panda's Thumb, Norton, New York.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1983, Unorthodoxies in the first formulation of natural selection,
Evolution 37: 856–858.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1977, Ever since Darwin, Norton, New York.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1989, Developmental constraint in Cerion, with comments on the
definition and interpretation of constraint in evolution, Evolution 43: 516–539.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1990, The Individual in Darwin's World, Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1989, Wonderful Life. The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History,
Norton, New York.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1995, Adam's Navel and Other Books, Penguin Books (Penguin 60s),
London.
Gould, Stephen J., 1996, Dinosaur in a Haystack. Reflections in Natural History, Jonatham
Cape, London.
Gould, Stephen Jay, Gilinsky, Norman L., and German, Rebecca Z., 1987, Asymmetry of
lineages and the direction of evolutionary time, Science 236: 1437–1441.
Gould, Stephen Jay and Lewontin, Richard C., 1979, The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme, Proc. Roy. Soc. London
B205: 581–598.

Bibliography
265
Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, Gliddon, Chris J., and Couvet, Denis, 1988, The evolution of
reproductive systems: A hierarchy of causes, in: Plant Population Ecology (A.J. Davy et
al., eds), Blackwell Scientific Publications, London, pp. 23-33.
Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, Gliddon, Chris J., and Couvet, Denis, 1988, Conflits
nucléocytoplasmiques et stérilité mâle, Variabilité génétique cytoplasmique et stérilité
mâle cytoplasmique, Les Colloques de l'INRA 45: 35–50.
Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, Maurice, Sandrine and Reboud, Xavier, 1993, Le sexe pour quoi faire?
La Recherche 24: 70–76.
Gouyon, Pierre-Henri and Olivieri, Isabelle, 1989, Génétique évolutive et théorie des jeux,
Société Française de Biométrie 8: 18–38.
Grassé, Pierre-Paul, 1973, L'Evolution du Vivant. Matériaux pour une Nouvelle Théorie
Transformiste, Series: Sciences d'aujourd'hui, Albin Michel, Paris.
Gros, François, 1986, Les Secrets du Géne, Odile Jacob/Seuil, Paris.
Hoffman, Antoni, 1991, Testing the Red Queen Hypothesis, J. Evol. Biol. 4: 1–7.
Jacob, François, 1990 (1st ed. 1970), La Logique du Vivant. Une Histoire de l'Hérédité,
Series: Tel. 2, Gallimard, Paris.
Jacob, François, 1981, Le Jeu des Possibles. Essai sur la Diversité du Vivant, Fayard, Paris.
Jaisson, Pierre, 1993, La Fourmi et le Sociobiologiste, Odile Jacob, Paris.
Kimura, Motoo, 1982, The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Klein, Jan, Takahata, Naoyuki and Ayala, Francisco J., 1994, Reconnaissance de soi et
origine de l'homme, Pour la Science, 196: 56–61.
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 1994, Philosophie Zoologique, Flammarion, Paris.
Langaney, André, 1987 (1st ed 1979), Le Sexe et l'Innovation, Series: Point-Sciences, Seuil
Paris.
Langaney, André, 1999, La Philosophie... Biologique, Belin, Paris.
Langaney, André, Pellegrini, Béatrice, and Poloni, Estella, 1989, L'homme descend du sexe,
La Recherche 20: 995–1007.
Lecourt, Dominique, 1992, L'Amérique entre la Bible et Darwin, Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris.
Le Guyader, Hervé, 1998, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, un naturaliste visionnaire, Series: Un
Savant, une Epoque, Belin, Paris.
Lemarchand, Fabienne, 1993, Explosion cambrienne: le rythme s'accélère, La Recherche 24:
1402–1403.
Lewin, Roger, 1993, Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction (3rd edition), Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford.
Maynard Smith, John, 1962 (1st ed.1958), The Theory of Evolution, Penguin Books,
Baltimore (Mass.).
Maynard Smith, J., Burian, R., and Kauffman, S., 1985, Developmental constraints and
evolution, Quart. Rev. Biol. 60: 265–287.
Maynard Smith, John, 1989, Evolutionary Genetics, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mayr, Ernst, 1970, Populations, Species, and Evolution: An Abridgement of Animal Species
and Evolution, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Mayr, Ernst, 1981, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an Evolutionist,
Havard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Mayr, Ernst, 1981, La Biologie de l'Evolution, Hermann, Paris.
Mayr, Ernst, 1985, Weismann and Evolution, J. Hist. Biol. 18: 295–329.
Medvedev, Zhores A., 1969 (transl.: Lerner, I. Michael), The Rise and Fall of T. D. Lysenko,
Columbia University Press, New York/London.

266
Gene Avatars–The neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
Monod, Jacques, 1970, Le Hasard et la Nécessité. Essai sur la Philosophie Naturelle de la
Biologie Moderne, Seuil, Paris. (Published in English, 1971, Chance and Necessity,
Knopf, New York (Vintage paperback, 1972)).
Müller, Gerd B. and Wagner, Günter P., 1991, Novelty in evolution: Restructuring the
concept, Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 22: 229–256.
Nowak, Marin, May, Robert, and Sigmund, Karl, 1995, L'arithmétique de l'entraide, Pour la
Science, 214: 56–61.
Olivier, Isabelle and Gouyon, Pierre-Henri, 1990, Evolution et théorie des jeux, Science et Vie
173: 144–146.
Orel, Vitezslav and Armogathe, J.R., 1985, Mendel, un Inconnu Célèbre, Belin, Paris.
Orgel, L. E. and Crick, F. H. C., 1980, Selfish DNA: The ultimate parasite, Nature 284: 604–
607.
Pichot, Andre, 1995, L'Eugénisme ou les Généticiens Saisis par la Philanthropie, Series:
Optiques Philosophie, N° 212, Hatier, Paris.
Piveteau, Jean, 1983 (1st ed. 1973), Origine et Destinée de l'Homme, Series: Abrégés,
Masson, Paris.
Ridley, Mark, 1993, The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature, Viking,
London.
Robert, Jean-Michel, 1994, Le fardeau génétique, APBG, pp. 45–48.
de Rosnay, Joël, 1977 (1st ed 1966), Les Origines de la Vie. De l'Atome a la Cellule, Series:
Points-Sciences, N° 10, Seuil, Paris.
Rostand, Jean, 1964 (1st ed. 1945), Esquisse d'une Histoire de la Biologie, Series: NRF-Idées ,
Gallimard, Paris.
Ruse, Michael, 1982 (1st ed. 1979), Sociobiology, Sense or Nonsense? D. Reidel (Pallas
Paperback. 7), Dordrecht.
Sauclières, Gilles, 1988, Eve a la "une", La Recherche 19: 525–527.
Schrödinger, Erwin, 1944, What is Life? The Physical Aspect of Living Cell, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Schützenberger, Marcel-Paul, 1996, Les failles du darwinisme, La Recherche 283: 87–90.
Seilacher, Adolf, 1970, Arbeitskonzept zur Konstruktionsmorphologie, Lethaia, 3: 393–396.
Serre, Jean-Louis, 1984, La genèse de l'œuvre de Mendel, La Recherche 15: 1072–1080.
Tassy, Pascal and Darlu, Pierre, 1987, L'ADN, l'Afrique et l'homme, La Recherche 18: 979–
981.
Tassy, Pascal, 1991, L'Arbre á Remonter le Temps. Les Rencontres de la Systématique et de
l'Evolution, Series: Epistémè Essais, Christian Bourgois, Paris.
Tassy, Pascal, 1991, Le Message des Fossiles, Series: Questions de Science, Hachette, Paris.
Tastemain, Catherine, 1987, Les chromosomes se souviennent aussi, La Recherche 18: 1537–
1539.
Taylor, Gordon Rattray, 1963, The Science of Life. A Picture History of Biology. Thames &
Hudson, London.
Thuillier, Pierre, 1981, Les Biologistes Vont-ils Prendre le Pouvoir? La Sociobiologie en
Question, Series: De la Science, Editions Complexe, Paris.
Tort, Patrick, 1983, La Pensée Hiérarchique et l'Evolution. Les Complexes Discursifs, Series:
RES Résonances, Aubier Montaigne, Paris.
Tort, Patrick (ed.), 1985, Misère de la Sociobiologie, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Tort, Patrick (ed.), 1991, Darwinisme et Société, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Tort, Patrick, 1996, Dictionnaire du Darwinisme et de l'Evolution, Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris.
Veuille, Michel, 1981, L'"adultere" chez les oiseaux: un concept trompeur, La Recherche 12:
880–881.

Bibliography
267
Veuille, Michel, 1986, La sociobiologie, Series: Que sais-je?, Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris.
Vialleton, Louis, 1929, L 'Origine des Etres Vivants. L 'Illusion Transformiste, Plon, Paris.
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 1870, Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection: A Series of
Essays, C. Reinwald, Paris.
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 1912 (1st ed.1889), Darwinism. An Exposition of the Theory of
Natural Selection with some of its Applications, Macmillan, London.
Watson, J. D., 1968, The Double Helix. A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure
of DNA, Weidenfeld & Nicholson, London.
Watson, J.D. and Tooze, J., 1981, The DNA Story. A documentary history of gene cloning,
W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Wilson, Edward O., 1975, Sociobiology. The New Synthesis, Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Wilson, Edward O., 1978, On Human Nature, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Wilson, Edward O. and Lumsden, Charles J., 1981, Genes, Mind and Culture: The
Coevolutionary Process, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Wilson, Edward O. and Lumsden, Charles J., 1983, Promethean Fire, Reflections on the
Origin of the Mind, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
Wright, Robert, 1994, The Moral Animal Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life,
Pantheon Books, New York.

INDEX
Acquired characters, inheritance of, 36, 37,
55
Acquisition cost, 177
Active force, 26
Adaptation, 135
deficient, genetic load as, 123
morphogenesis, 226
rates of evolution, 215
Adapted systems, life process categories, 238
Adaptionist paradigm, 234
Ad hoc developmental constraints, 215–217
Advantage, sexual reproduction and, 208–
212, 214–219
African Eve model, 91–95
Agassiz, Louis, 35
Age of earth, 21
Aging/life span, 200–204
Alfalfas, 200, 203
Allele
ecological genetics from population
genetics, 103
fitness as statistical property, 159
lethal, 113
mutation and, 81–82
neutral, 124–126, 249
segregation distortion factor, 166
terminology, 131n
Allele frequency
genetic drift and, 86–87
Hardy-Weinberg law, 96
Wahlund effect, 96–97
Allele segregation, 133n
Allele structure of populations, 82
Allelogenesis, 75
Allogamous plants, 137
Allozymes, 105, 117
Altruism, 184–185
reciprocal, 185–186
Amino acid sequences, 115–116
Amplified fragment length polymorphism
(AFLP), 118
Analogy, 17, 29, 30
Anatomists, 18
Anaximandrus, 7
Anaximenus, 7
Androdioecious plants, 137
Androgenotes, 216
Andromonoecious flowers, 137
Aneuploidy, 83
Animists, 241n
Ant and the Sociobiologist, The, 192
Anthropology, genetic, 186–187
Antonovice, J.A., 215
Apogenesis, 75
Apostatic selection, 120
Aquinas, Thomas, 142
Architecture, see Body plans
Argenson, Marquess of, 21
Aristogenesis, 75
Aristotle, 9, 10–11, 17, 37, 46, 142, 234–235,
236
Armadillidium vulgare, 171
269

270
Index
Artificial selection, 84
Articlata, 27
Asexual chromosomes, conflicts, 166–168
Asexual reproduction, see also Parthogenesis
advantages of, 210
Williams model, 214–215
Asexual species, 208–209
Asian fossil human remains, 91
Asparagus, 139
Asymmetric crossing over, 157
Atom of heredity, gene as, 153
Augustine, Saint, 1, 11
Autocatalysis, 43n
Autogamy, 137, 209
Automixis, 209
Autotrophism, 237
Avatar, 218
defined, 154–155
information evolution rules, 160–162
Avery, Oswald, 83
Ayala, Francisco J., 113–114
Bacillus subtilis, 207
Bacon, 21
Bacteria, 205, 207–208
Baer, Karl Ernst von, 35
Balance model (Dobzhansky and Ford), 114–
115
Barash, David P., 181–182, 187, 189–190, 191
Barnacle geese, 11–12
Base substitutions, 83
Basidiomycetes, 206
Bateson, William, 64–65, 75
B chromosomes, 172–173
Beadle, G., 83
Beagle voyage, 47
Beanbag genetics, 152
Bean experiments, 138
Behavior, genetic determinism, 187, 193
Bell-shaped curve, 61
Beneden, Pierre-Joseph van, 55
Berg, Lev Semenovich, 75
Bernard, Claude, 236–237
Bernardin de Saint Pierre, 23, 235
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von, 75
Bimana, 37–41
Biodiversity, 111–123, 132n; see also Gene
polymorphism
Darwin’s view, 49
micro-habitats and, 121–122
Bio-geography, 51
Biological cycle, reproduction in, 205
Biometrics, 60–67
academic conflicts, 66
Bateson and mutationism, 64–65
Galton, 61–63, 64
Johanssen’s critique, 66
Pearson, 63–64
Biophores, 55
Biston betularia, 98–103
Body plans, 221–241, 228
brachiopod architecture, Seilacher’s
triangle, 223–226
Cambrian, 228–231
coevolution, 231–234
constraints on biological evolution, 226–228
finalism revisited, 234–239
St. Mark’s Cathedral, 221–223
Bohr, Niels, 145
Bonnet, Charles, 23–24, 32, 48
Bottlenecks, population, 87, 94
Bourgeois strategy, 177, 178, 253–254
Boveri, Theodor, 55
Brachiopod architecture, Seilacher’s triangle,
223–226
Brachypodium ramorum, 111
Breeders, 15, 51, 84
genetic load, 123
Mendel, 56–60
Bridges, Calvin, 68
Briggs, Serek, 229
Brown, W., 92, 94
Buffon, Count of (Leclerc, Georges Louis),
23, 26, 31, 32, 38, 52
age of earth, calculation of, 22
definition of reproduction, 204–205
Natural History, 20–21
Buican, Denis, 76, 77
Bull, J.J., 137
Burgess Shale, 228, 229–230
Burnet, MacFarlane, 200
Butterfly, 177, 178
Cambrian, 228–231
Cancer cells, 158, 162
Cann, Rebecca, 92
Carrel, Alexis, 183
Carriers, mutation incorporation with sexual
versus asexual reproduction, 209–210
Carrying capacity, population dynamics, 203

Index
271
Catastrophe theory, 27, 34–35
Catholic Church, Sacred Congregation of the
Index of, 37
Cell
as individual, 143
selection levels, 158
Cell division, mechanisms of mutation, 83
Chain of being, 24, 25, 35
Chance
pre-Socratic models, 8
selectionists versus neutralists, 131
as source of novelty in biosphere, 239
Chance and Necessity (Monod), 200
Change through use (Lamarck), 43n; see
Lamarck, Chevalier de; Transformism
Chaos, 143
Charlesworth, Brian, 202
Charnov, E.L., 137
Chemotaxonomy, thyme, 104; see also
Thyme essences
Chemotypes, thyme, 105–106; see also
Thyme essences
Chicken embryo, 23–24
Chicken game, 176–177
Chlamydomonas, 206
Chloroplasts, 195n
cytoplasmic inheritance, 139
as endosymbiont, 171–172
Christian religion, 10–11, 17
Chromatic reduction, law of, 55
Chromosomes, 195n
discovery of, 55
rearrangement, 83
reproduction, 206
virulent, 172–173
Chromosome theory of inheritance, 153
Lysenko and, 76–77
Morgan and, 67–68
Ciliates, conjugation in, 206
Cladism, 43n
Clark, Linda, 182–183
Classical genetics, Lysenko and, 77
Classic model (Muller), 114
Classification, 43n
Classification systems, Cuvier and, 27
Cline, frequency, 101, 102, 103
Cloned mammals, 219n
Cloning, 208
Cnemidophorus uniparens (whip-tailed
lizard), 209
Coadaptation, 231
Coalescence, gene, 88–90
Coalescence time, 90
Co-evolution, 188, 207, 228, 231–234, 240n
Colladon, J.A., 56
Colonization
and semelparity, 203
sexual reproduction and, 217
Communications, 150–151
Competition, 161
as coevolutionary process, 234
selection pressures, 215
thyme plants, 109–111
Complexity
law of increasing complexity, 237
of species, Lamarck on, 32–33
Computation, rendez-vous with fossils, 238
Conditional strategies, mathematics, 252–254
Cone of increasing diversity, 230
Conflict and cooperation, 162, 165–197
game theory, 175–180
bourgeois butterfly strategy, 177
chicken game or prisoner’s dilemma in
evolutionary genetics, 176–177
ESS and sex ratio, 177–179
evolution of seed dispersal rate, 179
strategies and rules of the game, 180
genome as compartments in conflict, 165–
175
B chromosomes, 172–173
between asexual chromosomes, 166–168
between nuclear and cytoplasmic
chromosomes, 141, 169–170
between nuclear genome and
endosymbionts, 171–172
between paternal and maternal genes,
173
between sex chromosomes, 168–169
transposons, 174–175
sociobiology, 180–195
controversies, 190–191
cuckoldry experiments, 181–182, 189–
190
entomology, 184–188
morality, 194–195
politics, 188–189
social Darwinism and, 182–183
social sciences and, 192–194
Conjugation, 206
Consciousness, 223

272
Index
Conservative selection, 85
Constant extinction, law of, 231, 233
Constraints
ad hoc developmental, 215–217
developmental, 227, 240n
local, 226
sex
developmental, 215–217
genetic, 217–219
physiological, 217–219
universal, 226
Constraints on biological evolution, 226–228
Constructivism, 146–147
Controversies, sociobiology, 190–191
Copernicus, 191
Coppens, Yves, 91
Copying errors, mutation as, 83
Copy number of genes, 153, 157, 212
Correlations, theory of, 27
Correns, Carl E., 65
Cosmogonies
ancient, 5–6, 7
modern, 17
Creation, 5
Creationism, 11
Crick, Francis, 83, 135, 146, 157
Crocodiles, fossil, 28
Cross-fertilization in plants, 218
Crossing over, 206
Crow, J.F., 210
Cryptopolymorphism, 113
Cuckoldry experiments, 181–182, 189–190
Cuénot, Lucien, 65
Culture genes, 188
Cuvier, Georges, 29, 30, 31, 34, 42n
biological principles, 27–28
catastrophe theory of, 34
organization plans, 27–28, 30
Cyclical time, 17
Cytochrome c, 126–131
Cytoplasmic genes, 166
conflicts, 169–170
and male function, 141
reproduction in females versus
hermaphrodites, 139, 140
selection advantage, 141
thyme plants, 218
Dagongnet, Francois, 76
Damuth, John, 154–155
Darwin, Charles, 2, 41n, 46, 193, 209, 226
biodiversity, 112
Descent of Man, The, 182
finches, 47–48
Mendel’s work and, 57–58
natural selection, 84
Origin of Species, 39, 48, 135, 204, 231
thyme, 139
Darwin, Erasmus, 36–37, 43n, 47
Darwin, Leonard, 69
Darwinian paradigm, 45–79, 243
biometricians versus geneticists, 60–67
Bateson and mutationism, 64–65
controversy/conflict, 65–68
Galton and Pearson, 61–64
Darwinian revolution, 45–55, 244
finches, 47–48
objections to Darwin’s theses, 51–53
origin of species theory, 48–51
Weisman, 53–55
eugenics and Lysenkoism, 68–77
eugenics to eugenisms, 68–74
neolamarkism and Lysenkoism, 75–77
origins of genetics, Mendel, 56–60
Darwinism, 244
academic conflicts, 66
Galton and, 61
reconciling with Mendelians, 95–98
social, see Social Darwinism
Daubenton, 26
Davies, N.B., 177
da Vinci, Leonardo, 18
Dawkins, Richard, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156,
158, 180, 191, 199, 200, 205
Death, 200–204
semelparity and iteroparity, 200–201
senescence and, 202–204
Decimation, 230–231
Deism, 36
Delbrück, Max, 83, 146
Deleterious mutants, advantages of asexual
versus sexual reproduction, 210–211
de Maillet, Benoît, 19–20
Democritus, 8
Demography, 85
de Monet, Jean-Baptiste (Chevalier de
Lamarck), see Lamarck, Chevalier de
Denton, Michael, 45–46, 77n
Deperet’s law, 237
Descartes, Rene, 17, 142

Index
273
Descent of Man, The, 182
Determinism, 193, 237
Developmental constraints, 227, 240n
ad hoc, 215–217
Developmental studies, 227
De Vries, Hugo, 64–65, 67
Diderot, Denis, 24–25
Differentiation, sex and, 205
Diluvian theory, 19
Dioecious plants, 137
Diploid state, 158, 166
gene coalescence in populations, 88, 89
Dirac, Paul, 144
Directional selection, 84
Discontinuous variations, 68
Disequilibrium, thyme gynodioecia, 139
Dispersal, 161
Divergent selection, 85
Diversification, Burgess Shale, 230
Diversity, cone of increasing, 230
DNA, 146, 148, 207
definition of gene, 153
discovery of, 135
discovery of role, 83–84
fundamental invariance of, 239
human origins, 90
mechanisms of mutation/errors, 157
methylated, 216–217, 219n
mitochondrial, 90–95, 92–95
molecular clock, 128–130
mutation mechanisms, 83
repeat sequences, 157, 158, 195n
reverse transcriptase, 157
sequencing, 117
transfer in bacteria, 207–208
transposons, 131n, 174–175
DNA-DNA hybridization, molecular clock,
128–129
DNA polymorphisms, 117–118
DNA repair, 83, 149, 157, 212
DNA replication, 208
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 53, 114–115, 118
Dollo’s law, 237
Domestic breeding, 51
Dominance, 132n
Doner, 189, 190
Doppler, Christian, 77n
D’Orbingny, Alcide, 27
Double helix model, 83
Dover, G.A., 157
Dove strategy, 177, 180, 252–253
Drepanocytosis, 118–120
Driesch, Hans, 75
Drift, 161
Drosophila melanogaster, 67–68, 113–114,
169, 174, 202
Drosophila mercatorium, 217–218
Duchesne, Antoine-Nicolas, 15–16
Duplication of DNA sequences, 83
Dynamic equilibrium theory, 204
Dynamic hierarchy of forms, 26
Earth, age of, 21
Ecological conditions, see Environment/
ecological conditions
Ecological genetics
moths, 98–103
strategy of, 103
thyme essences, 104–111
dispersal of pollen and seeds, 109
genetic determinism, 104–106
geographic distribution, 106–108
limitations of approach, 111
selective factors, 109–111
Ecology, 3n, 161
Effective environment, 231–232
Effective population number, 123, 124
Egg production, failure in parthogenesis, 217
Einstein, 147
Eldredge, N., 234
Electrophoresis, 116–117
Emanation, 5
Embranchements, 27
Embryology, 23–24, 26, 27, 29, 51
early, 18
parthogenic embryos, 216
preformation doctrine, 23
Embryonic parallelism, law of, 35
Empedocles, 8
Endosymbionts, 171–172, 195n
Entelechy, 75
Entomology, see also Insects
greenfly reproduction, 208–209, 217
sociobiology, 184–188
Entropy, negative, 150
Environment/ecological conditions, 3n, 161
ecological genetics, 103; see also
Ecological genetics
effective, 231–232

274
Index
Environment/ecological conditions (cont.)
fitness, determinants of, 85
morphogenesis, 226
polymorphism and fitness, 121
population dynamics, 203
and semelparity, 203
sexual reproduction as advantageous, 210
thyme selective factors, 109–111
transient polymorphism, 122
Enzyme electrophoresis, 116–117
Enzymes, genes and, 83
Epicurus, 8
Epigenesis, 18
Epistatic (interacting) loci, see Thyme
essences
Epistemology, 1, 64
Equilibria
dynamic equilibrium theory, 204
punctuated, 132n, 234, 241n
Eros and thanatos, 199–220
death, 200–204
semelparity and iteroparity, 200–201
senescence and, 202–204
sex, 204–219
ad hoc developmental constraints, 215–
217
advantage conferred by, 208–212
information exchange, 206–208
interfecundity as definition of species,
204–205
parasexual genetic exchanges on lower
forms, 205–206
parthogenesis, 212–214
physiological or genetic constraints,
217–219
as short-term advantage, 214–219
Error
mutation as, 149, 151
systematic, 97
Essences, 148
Essentialism, 17, 148–149
Estimation theory, 97
Ethics, 2, 187, 194–195, 197n
Ethological palaeontology, 226
Eugenics, 64
and Lysenkoism, 68–77
eugenics to eugenisms, 68–74
neolamarkism and Lysenkoism, 75–77
Muller and, 115
Eugenism, 243
Eugenism (cont.)
defined, 69–70
in France, 183
Eukaryotes, 171–172, 208
Euthanasia, 183
Evolution
constraints on, 226–228
ecological genetics, see Ecological
genetics
game theory, chicken game or prisoner’s
dilemma in, 176–177
gene polymorphism, 113–115; see also
Gene polymorphism, evolution of
history of concept, 17–30
fossils, 18–22
Marchant and Duchesne, observations
of, 15–16
modern philosophers, 17–18
precursors of transformism, 22–30
information, rules governing, 160–162
introduction of term, 48
life process categories, 238
molecular clock, 126–131
neutral theory of, 124–126
population genetics, see Population
genetics
rates of, 215
of seed dispersal rate, 179
synthetic theory of, 237–238
Evolutionary pressures, 82
mathematics, 245–247
genetic drift, 247
migration, 246
mutation, 245–246
selection, 246
population genetics, 82–87
genetic drift, 86–87
migration, 85–86
mutation, 83–84
selection, 84–85
wild-type allele, 82
Evolutionary Stable Strategy (ESS), 177, 179
Evolution of information, rules governing,
160–162
Experimental method
Mendel and, 57–58
sociobiology, 189–190
Extinction
group, 160
law of constant extinction, 231, 233

Index
275
Fabre, Jean-Henri, 200
Fancher, Ray, 68
Fardeau, 122–123
Feedback loops, 146
Female function, modeling, 137
Fertility, demography, 85
Fertilization, see also Parthogenesis
autogamy, 137
discovery of, 54–55
Fibrinopeptide, 129, 133n
Fig trees, 138–139
Final causes, 234–239
Finalism revisited, 234–239
Finches, 47–48
First generation uniformity, law of, 58
First multiple region model of human
origins, 90–91
Fish, automixis, 209
Fisher, Ronald A., 81, 97, 98, 113, 132n, 169
Fitness
genetic load, 123
peppered moth experiments, 100–101, 102
variable, selectionist hypothesis, 120–122
Fitness of genotype, 85
Fixism, 7–17, 27, 30, 64–65
fixity of species
Linnaeus on, 14–15
and spontaneous generation, 11–16
Linnaeus on, 14–15
Plato, Aristotle, and Christian tradition, 9–11
pre-Socratic models, 7–9
and spontaneous generation, 11–16
Flemming, Walter, 55
Flowers, gender, 136–141
Fluid motion (Lamarck), 43n
Fol, 55
Folklore, 6
Ford, Edmund B., 81, 99, 112, 114–115
Formal constraints, see Body plans
Formalism, 226
Forms, 148
body plan, see Body plans
dynamic hierarchy of, 26
Fossils, 18–22, 42n
historical observations, 18–22
and Lamarckian transformism, 34
rendez-vous with computation, 238
Founder effect, 87, 132n
France
social Darwinism in, 182–183
France (cont.)
and sociobiology, 190
Franklin, Benjamin, 37, 46
Frascator, 19
Freqency cline, 101, 102, 103
Frequency-dependent selection, 120, 253
Freud, 191, 193
Fruit flies, 67–68, 113–114, 169, 174
automixis, 209
D. mercatorium, parthogenetic lineages,
217–218
fecundity-longevity relationship in, 202
Functionalism, 226
Functional morphology, 226
Functional systems, life process categories, 238
Gaia hypothesis, 41n
Galileo, 14, 190, 191, 192–193
Galton, Francis, 61–64, 68–69
Gametes, 166
haplotype t and, 195n
purity of, 56
size of, male versus female, 213
Game theory, 175–180
bourgeois butterfly strategy, 177
chicken game or prisoner’s dilemma in
evolutionary genetics, 176–177
ESS and sex ratio, 177–179
evolution of seed dispersal rate, 179
mathematics, 250–254
non-zero-sum games, 251–252
pure, mixed, and conditional strategies,
252–254
zero-sum games, 250–251
strategies and rules of the game, 180
Gaussian distribution, 53
Gavials, 28
Gayon, Jean, 48, 50–51
Geese, barnacle, 11–12
Gel electrophoresis, 116–117
Gender in flowers and plants, 136–141
Gene(s)
chromosomal segregation, 58
compartments in conflict, 165–175
B chromosomes, 172–173
between asexual chromosomes, 166–168
between nuclear and cytoplasmic
chromosomes, 169–170
between nuclear genome and
endosymbionts, 171–172

276
Index
Gene(s) (cont.)
compartments in conflict (cont.)
between paternal and maternal genes, 173
between sex chromosomes, 168–169
transposons, 174–175
culture, 188
definitions, 152–153
Eugenics Society on, 69
introduction of term, 66
linkages, 58
protein amino acid sequences, 115–116
recombination
need for diversity, 215
sexual reproduction and, 206, 208, 209
roles of, 83
selection and, 152
selfish, 156, 157, 191
terminology, 131n
Genealogy, Lamarck, 32–33
Gene coalescence, 88–90
Gene conversion, 58, 83
Gene frequency
changes in, 82
Hardy-Weinberg law, 95–96
Gene imprinting, 216
Gene-organism-system level selection
dynamics, 135–163
evolution of information, rules governing,
160–162
gender of flowers and plants, 136–141
genetic information and avatars, 152–155
gene inventions for gene reproduction,
155–156
individual, 141–143
information theory, 149–152
male opposition, 136–141
Schrodinger, essentialism of,
143–149
selection levels, 156–160
cellular, 158
group, 159–160
individual, 158–159
molecular, 157
Gene polymorphism, 103, 132–133n
evolution of, 113–115
cryptopolymorphism, 113
extent of polymorphism, 113–115
selectionist versus neutralist hypothesis,
115–118
extent of, 113–115
Gene polymorphism (cont.)
frequency-dependent selection, 252–253
molecular clock, 128–131
neutral theory, 124
selectionist hypothesis, 118–123
genetic load, 122–123
over dominance and sickle cell anemia,
118–120
transient polymorphism, 122
variable fitness, 120–122
thyme, 104, 105–106; see also Thyme
General systems approach, 75
Generation, 7–8; see also Spontaneous
generation
Genes, Mind and Culture, 188
Genetic anthropology, 186–187
Genetic constraints, sex, 217–219
Genetic determinism
ecological genetics from population
genetics, 103
thyme essences, 104–106
Genetic diseases
founder effect, 132n
sickle cell anemia, 118–120, 122, 131
Genetic drift, 82, 85, 88–90, 118
evolutionary pressures, 247
neutral, 124–126, 130–131; see also
Neutral alleles; Neutral mutations
stepping stone model, 106–107
Genetic exchanges between habitats, 132–
133n
Genetic information and avatars, 152–155
Geneticists versus biometricians, 60–67
Bateson and mutationism, 64–65
controversy/conflict, 65–68
Galton and Pearson, 61–64
Genetic load
mathematics, 248–249
selectionist hypothesis, 122–123
Genetics
as information, 150
Mendel and, 56–60
Genomic predation, 171–172
Genotype
fitness of, 85
Hardy-Weinberg law, 96
introduction of term, 66
panmixia, 96
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Etienne, 27–28, 29,
30, 42n

Index
277
Geographic differentiation, 106–108
Geographic distribution, thyme, 106–108
Geology, 27
Germany, eugenics policies, 73, 74
Germ cells, 54, 55, 166
Gillespie, J.H., 131
Gliddon, Chris J., 152
Goethe, W., 30
Goldschmidt, Richard B., 65
Gould, Stephen Jay, 187–188, 221, 222–223,
224, 226, 227, 229, 231, 234, 239
punctuated equilibrium pherosy, 234
Wonderful Life, 228, 230
Gradualism, phyletic, 241n
Grassé, P.-P., 153
Great Rood, 19
Greenfly, 208–209, 217
Griffith, Fred, 83
Gros, Francois, 83
Groundsel (Senecio), 218
Groups (demes), Wahlund effect, 96–97
Group selection level, 159–160
Growth rate, population dynamics, 203
Gynodioecious plants, 138, 139
Gynodioecious species, 137–138
Gynogenotes, 216
Gynomonoecious plants, 137
Habitats, genetic exchanges between, 132–
133n
Haeckel, Ernest, 3n
Haeckel’s law, 237
Haldane, J.B.S., 81, 97, 98 , 123, 132n, 144–
145, 201, 223
Hamburger, Jean, 200
Hamilton, William D., 152, 160, 169, 179,
184–185, 202, 215
Haploid genome, 158
deleterious mutants, Muller’s ratchet, 211–
212
gene coalescence in populations, 88
Haploid organisms
enzyme polymorphism, 120
males, 172
Haploid state, germ cells, 166
Haplotype t, 166–167, 195n
Hardy, Godfrey H., 95
Hardy-Weinberg law, 95–96
Harris, H., 116
Hawk strategy, 177, 180, 252–253
Heisenberg, 147
Hemoglobin
molecular clock, 129, 130
mutants, 118–120, 122, 131
Herbert, William, 56
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 26
Heredity, atom of, 153
Hermaphroditism
plant, 218
self-fertilization, 209
Herodotes, 18
Hertwig, Oscar, 54–55
Heteroduplex DNA, 157
Heterosis, 119–120
Heterotrophism, 237
Heterozygosity
advantages/benefits, 120
genetic load, 123
Heterozygote deficit, Wahlund effect and, 97
Hierarchy of forms, 26
Hierarchy of systems, 135
Histone H4, 129, 133n
Historicism, 226
History to Darwin, 5–44
evolution concept, 17–30
fossils, 18–22
Marchant and Dushesne, observations
of, 15–16
modern philosophers, 17–18
precursors of transformism, 22–30
Lamarck, 31–41
order of nature, 32–35
phlogiston theory, 31–32
principles of transformism, 35–37
from quadrumana to bimana, 37–41
metamorphosis, fixism, spontaneous
generation, 7–17
fixity, Aristotle and, 10–11
fixity of species and spontaneous
generation, 11–16
philosophy and religious cosmogonies,
5–6
Plato, Aristotle, and Christian tradition,
9–11
pre-Socratic models, 7–9
Hitch-hiking, 161
Hockett, C.F., 184
Holism, 75
Hologamy, 206
Homo erectus, 90

278
Index
Homogamy, 88
Homo habilis, 90
Homology, 17, 42n, 51
definition of, 29, 30
fossils rendez-vous with fossils, 238
Homo sapiens neanderthalensis, 90
Homo sapiens sapiens, 90
Homozygotes, inbreeding and, 88
Hopeful monster, 65
Horticulturists, 15
Host-pathogen relationships, selection
pressures, 215
Host populations, pathogen virulence, 120–
121
Hubby, J.L., 116, 123
Human behavior, genetic determinism, 187
Human evolution
Darwin on, 39
Lamarck on, 37–39
Human origins, 90–95
Human species, Eugenics Society on, 69
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 50
Hybrid grafts, Lysenkoism, 76
Hybridization, DNA-DNA, 128–129
Hybridization of plants, peas (Mendel and
the), 56–60
Hybridizations, interspecific, 56
Hybrid vigor, 119–120, 132n
Ideology, see Eugenics; Sociobiology;
Theology/theologians
Ides/idantes, 55
Inbreeding, 88–90, 132n
Inbreeding coefficient, 88, 132n, 247–248
Independent assortment, law of, 58
Individual, 141–143
legal definitions, 162n
properties of, 142
selection and, 152
Individualism, 244
Individuals
gene inventions for gene reproduction,
155–156
population dynamics, 203
reproduction, 156
selection dynamics, 141–143
species barriers, 205
Individual selection level, 158–159
Industrial melanism, 98–103, 122
Information, 136
Information (cont.)
and avatars, 152–155, 161
DNA and, 135
evolution of, rules governing, 160–162
fossils rendez-vous with computation, 238
gene as, 153–154
life process categories, 238
sex and, 206–208
Information theory, 149–152
Inheritance, chromosome theory of, 67–68
Inheritance of acquired characters, 36, 37, 55
Insects, 7; see also Sociobiology
automixis, 209
fruit fly, see Fruit fly
greenfly reproduction, 208–209, 217
Sociobiology, 184–188; see also
Sociobiology
Insect Societies, The, 184–185
Insulin-like growth factor II, 173
Integration levels, natural selection action at,
135–136
Interacting (epistatic) loci, see Thyme
essences
Interbreeding, early humans, 91
Interfecundity, as definition of species, 204–
205
Intraspecific variability, overdominance and,
122
Invariance, and teleonomy, 239
Inversion, chromosome, 83
Investment, parental, 185, 186
Irreversibility, law of, 237
Islamic tradition, 11
Isolation, Wahlund effect, 97
Iteroparity, 200–201
Jacob, François, 146, 153, 158, 170
Jaeger, Gustav, 54
Jaisson, Pierre, 188, 190, 191, 193
Java man, 90
Jenkin, Flemming, 52–53, 64
Jewish religion, 10–11
Johanssen, Wilhelm, 63, 66, 67, 152, 153
Jonas, Hans, 197n
Judaic tradition, 17
Jukes, Ada, 70–72
Kammerer, Paul, 75
Kant, Immanuel, 17
Kelvin, Lord (William Thomson), 51–52

Index
279
Kettlewell, H.B.D., 99–100
Kevles, Daniel, 68
Kimura, Motoo, 106–107, 124–126, 210
King’s College Chapel, 221, 222
Kin selection, 160, 185
Klein, Jan, 95
Knight, Thomas Andrew, 56
Kölreuter, Joseph Gottlieb, 56
Korginski, Sergei, 78n
Krustchev, N., 77
K strategy, 204
Kuhn, Thomas, 2, 46
Konstruktionsmorphologie,  226
Labbé, allelogenesis of, 75
Labiiacae, see Thyme essences
Ladder of life, 30
Ladder of Nature (Aristotle), 11
Laganey, André, 193
Lakatos, Imre, 46
Lamarck, Chevalier de (Jean-Baptiste de
Monet), 27, 29, 31–41, 42–43n, 47,
183, 226
from ape to man, 38–39
and French reaction to sociobiology, 190
order of nature, 32–35
phlogiston theory, 31–32
principles of transformism, 35–37
from quadrumana to bimana, 37–41
Laplace, Pierre Simon, 17
Large numbers, law of, 95
Lavoisier, Antoine, 31, 46
Laws (legislation), eugenics/sterilization
programs, 72–73
Laws (scientific)
of chromatic reduction, 55
of constant extinction, 231, 233
of deviation from average, 61
of embryonic parallelism, 35
of first generation uniformity, 58
Hardy-Weinberg, 95–96
of increasing complexity, 237
of increasing size, 237
of independence of segregation of
characters, 58
of irreversibility, 237
Lamarck’s, 36, 43n
of large numbers, 95
Meckel-Serres, 35
Mendel’s, 54, 65, 166
Laws (scientific) (cont.)
of purity of gametes, 58
of recapitulation, 237
of regression toward mediocrity, 62, 77n
of segregation, 58
of uniformity of first generation, 58
Leclerc, Georges Louis (Count of Buffon),
see Buffon, Count of
Lecourt, Dominique, 46, 76
Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 142
Le Guyader, Hervé, 30
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 21, 142, 143
Lethal alleles, 113
Lethal mutations, 248
Levin, Donald, 108
Lewis, Donald, 139
Lewontin, Richard C., 116, 123, 131, 176,
187, 188, 221, 223, 239
Life cycle, 200–201, 205
Life force, 7
Life’s ladder, 30
Linear time, 17
Linked genes, 58
Linnaeus, Carl, 14–15, 37–38, 49
Lizards, 209
Local constraints, 226
Locus, terminology, 131n
Longevity, fecundity versus, 202
Lorenz, Konrad, 239
Lovelock, James, 41n
LT/s mice, 216
Lucretius, 8–9, 235, 236
Lumsden, Charles, 188
Lusus naturae, 18
Lyell, Charles, 21, 46, 50
Lysenko, Trofim, 75–77
Lysenkoism, 68–77
eugenics to eugenisms, 68–74
neolamarkism and Lysenkoism, 75–77
MacArthur, Robert H., 204
Mad driver game, 251
Malaria, 119
Male opposition, 136–141
Males
cost of production, 169, 214
loss of in hermaphrodite species, 138
modeling, 137
nuclear versus cytoplasmic genes, 141
paternal-maternal gene conflicts, 173

280
Index
Males (cont.)
paternal sex ratio chromosome, 172–173
segregation distortion in, 166
Male sterility, 138–139, 170
Mallet Benoît de, 19–20
Malpigi, Marcello, 23
Malthus, Thomas R., 49, 182, 204
Mammals, parthogenetic, 215–216
Mapping, genetic, 103
Marchant, Jean, 15–16
Margulis, Lynn, 171–172
Maruyama, Takeo, 106–107
Marxism-Leninism, 75–77
Maternal genes, conflict with paternal genes,
173
Maternal investment, 186
Maternal relationships, mitochondrial DNA,
91
Mathematical appendix, 245–254
evolutionary pressures, 245–247
genetic drift, 247
migration, 246
mutation, 245–246
selection, 246
game theory, 250–254
non-zero-sum games, 251–252
pure, mixed, and conditional strategies,
252–254
zero-sum games, 250–251
genetic load, 248–249
inbreeding coefficient, 247–248
lethal mutations, 248
mixing neutral alleles, 249
Mather, Cotton, 56
Mating, random, 95
Maupertuis, Pierre Moreau de, 24, 26, 42n
Maximum gain, game theory, 180
Maximum likelihood method, 97
Maynard-Smith, John, 137, 151, 152, 176,
177, 253
Mayr, Ernst, 53, 131, 148, 151, 152, 153, 158,
237, 238
Mean values, 97
Meckel-Serres law, 35
Mediocrity, regression toward, 62, 77n
Meiosis, 55, 58, 166, 213
haplotype t, 195n
mechanisms of mutation, 83
paternal sex ratio chromosome, 172–173
Meiotic distortion factors, 166–168
Melanism, industrial, 98–103, 122
Mendel, Gregor, 56–60, 64, 112
Mendelism, 84
academic conflicts, 66
reconciling with Darwinians, 95–98
Weldon and Pearson attacks, 65–66
Mendel’s laws, 54, 65, 166
Mercurialis annua, 15–16
Messenger RNA, 151
Metamorphosis, 7–17
fixity of species and spontaneous
generation, 11–16
Plato, Aristotle, and Christian tradition, 9–
11
pre-Socratic models, 7–9
Metaphysics, 1
Methylated DNA, 216–217, 219n
Mice, LT/s, 216
Michod, R., 207
Micro-habitats, polymorphism and fitness,
121
Middle Ages, 11–12
Miescher, Friedrich, 83
Migration, 82, 161
founder effect, 132n
genetic drift, stepping stone model, 106–
107
mathematics, 246
peppered moth experiments, 101–102, 103
pollen and seed, 109
and semelparity, 203
transient polymorphism, 122
Minimax strategy, 250
Mitchourin, Ivan, 76
Mitochondria, 195n
cytoplasmic inheritance, 139
as endosymbiont, 171–172
Mitochondrial DNA, 90–95
Mitochondrial Eve model, 91–95
Mitosis, 55, 83, 213
Mixed strategies, 252–254
Mixing neutral alleles, 249
Modification of organ by modification of
needs, 36
Molecular anthropology, 92
Molecular biology, 161
DNA polymorphisms, 117–118
electrophoresis, 116–117
Molecular clock, 92, 126–131
Molecular drive, 157, 161

Index
281
Molecular genetics, 145–146
Molecular selection level, 157
Mollusca, 27
Monadism, 142
Monet, Jean-Baptiste de (Chevalier de
Lamarck), see Lamarck, Chevalier de
Monod, Jacques, 8, 146, 148, 231
Chance and Necessity, 200, 228, 239
DNA as fundamental biological invariant,
83
Monoecious plants, 137
Montaigne, Michel de, 1
Monte Carlo method, 97
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, 21
Morality, 193, 194–195
Morgan, Thomas Hunt, 67–68, 114
Morgenstern, Oskar, 175
Morphogenesis, 135
constraints on evolution, 226
parthogenetic embryos, 216
Morphogenetic model, 29
Morphology, 51; see also Body plans
Morris, Simon Conway, 229
Mosaic environments, polymorphism in, 121
Moths, 98–103
Mountain bluebird (Siala currucoides), 181–
182, 189–190
Müller, Hermann Joseph, 68, 209
genetic load concept, 123
quarrel with Dobzhansky, 114–115, 118
ratchet hypothesis, 210–212
Multiplication, 156
Mutability, Lamarck on, 32–33
Mutation, 65, 81–82, 82, 118, 161, 209
with asexual versus sexual reproduction,
210–211
essentialist view, 149
fruit fly genetics, 67
genetic load, 123
Hardy-Weinberg law, 95, 96
Muller’s ratchet, 210–212
lethal alleles, 113
mathematics, 245–246
molecular clock, 130–131
neutral theory, 124–126
normalty/invariance versus error, 149, 151
spontaneous inactivation of genes, 84
terminology, 131n
transient polymorphism, 122
transposable elements, 131n
Mutationism, 64–65, 66
Mutation rate
human, 92
molecular clock, 130
Näegli, Carl, 55, 60
Nash equilibrium, 195n
Natural laws, 193
Natural order, Lamarck’s concept, 32–34
Natural selection, 84
academic controversy, 68
Darwin on, 49
integration levels, 135–136
molecular clock and, 130–131
Nature, 23
and culture, 193
order of, 32–35
Naudin, Charles, 56
Nazism, 74
Neanderthal man, 91
Needham, John, 12, 13, 37
Neo-Darwinian paradigm, 2–3
Neumann, Johann Ludwig von, 175
Neutral alleles
mathematics, 249
molecular clock, 130
Neutralist hypothesis, selectionist hypothesis
versus, 115–118
Neutral mutations
molecular clock, 126–131
selectionists versus neutralists, 131
Neutral theory of evolution, 124–126, 130–
131
New alleles, transient polymorphism, 122
New species discoveries, 112
Newton, Isaac, 21
Niches, ecological, 121
Noah’s Ark model, 91
Nominalism, 17, 32
Nomogenesis, 75
Non-zero-sum games, mathematics, 251–252
Normal distribution, 61
Norton, Bernard, 68
Novelty, chance as source of, 239
Nuclear genes, 166
conflicts
with cytoplasmic chromosomes, 169–
170
with endosymbionts, 171–172
and male function, 141

282
Index
Nuclear genes (cont.)
male sterility, 139
reproduction in females versus
hermaphrodites, 139, 140
selection advantage, 141
thyme plants, 218
Nuclear transfer technology, 216
Nucleic acid sequences, 117
Nucleotide substitutions, mechanisms of
mutation, 83
Nucleus, function of, 208
Null hypothesis, 124–125
Nussbaum, Moritz, 54
Oenothera lamarckiana, 64
Ologenesis, 75
Omodeo, Pietro, 43n
Oncogenes, 158
On Human Nature, 187–188
Optimal strategy, 195n
Order of nature, 32–35
Organ balance, 28
Organelles, 195n
cytoplasmic inheritance, 139
as endosymbionts, 171–172
Organism, defined, 135
Organization plan, 28
Orgel, Leslie, 157
Origin of species theory, 48–51
Origins of world, 5–6, 7
Osborn, Henry Fairfield, 75
Östergren, G., 141–142, 143
Ösetergren, postulate of, 142
Out of Africa model, 91–95
Ova
fertilization, 54–55
preformation doctrine, 23
spontaneously activating ovocytes, 216
Overdominance, 118–120, 133n
Owen, Richard, 29
Palaeontology, 18–22, 27, 29, 51
Burgess Shale, 229–230
ethological, 226
fossils rendez-vous with computation, 238
Silacher’s triangles, 223–226
Paley, William, 37, 226
Palissy, Bernard, 19
Panarge aegaria, 177, 178
Panglossian paradigm, 223, 234
Panmixia, 95, 96
Paramecium, 206
Parasexual genetic exchanges on lower
forms, 205–206
Parasexuality, 206
Parasitism
as coevolutionary process, 234
processes at molecular level, 157
Parental investment, 185, 186
Pareto optimum, 195n
Parthogenesis, 208–209, 212–214
ad hoc developmental constraints, 215–217
greenfly, 217
lineages, comparison of fates of genetic
information, 213–214
mammals, 215–216
Paternal genes, see Males
Paternal sex ratio (PSR) chromosome, 172–
173
Pathogens
selection pressures, 215
variable fitness, 120–121
Pauling, Linus, 83
Pauly, August, 75
Pearson, Karl, 61–66
Peas
Galton’s study, 62
Mendel’s experiments, 56–60
Pea-soup genetics, 152
Peking man, 90
Peloria, 15
Peppered moth, 98–103, 122
Perennials, 200
Perrier, Edmond, 75, 183
Pflüger, 55
Phaseolus vulgaris, 66
Phenomenalist approach of Pearson, 64
Phenotype
introduction of term, 66
selection action on, 85
thyme essences, see Thyme essences
Philosophers, see also specific philosophers
classical and Christian, 9–11
Erasmus Darwin, 36–37
modern, 17–18
pre-Socratic, 7–9
religious cosmogonies, 5–6
Phlogiston theory, 31, 31–32
Phyletic gradualism, 241n
Phylogenetic tree construction, 126–131

Index
283
Physical environment, see Ecological
genetics; Environment/ecological
conditions
Physicochemical processes, life process
categories, 238
Physical system approach of Schrödinger,
143–149
Physiological constraints, sex, 217–219
Pichot, André, 31, 34, 37
Plants/plant breeding studies, 7, 15–16
Galton, 61–63
gender, 136–141
hermaphroditism, 218
peas (Mendel and the), 56–60
thyme, see Thyme
Plasmids, 207–208
Plato, 9–10, 17, 142
Plinus, 18
Politics, sociobiology, 188–189
Pollen dispersal, 109, 132–133n
Pollen migration, 109
Polymorphisms, see Gene polymorphism
Polyploidy, 83
Polytypism, 132–133n
Pope, Steven J., 189
Popper, Karl, 45
Population(s)
Galton’s hypothesis, 62–63
game theory, 180
genetic load, 123
model for dynamics, 203–204
Müller’s ratchet, 210–212
pathogen virulence, 120–121
size of
advantages with asexual versus sexual
reproduction, 210
bottlenecks, 87, 94
and inbreeding coefficient, 88
infinite, Hardy-Weinberg law, 95, 96
neutral allele substitution rates and, 125
and population dynamics, 204
Population genetics, 81–98, 161
Darwinians and Mendelians, reconciling,
95–98
ecological genetics from, 103
evolutionary pressures, 82–87
genetic drift, 86–87
migration, 85–86
mutation, 83–84
selection, 84–85
Population genetics (cont.)
evolutionary pressures (cont.)
wild-type allele, 82
gene polymorphism and, 112
meanders of ancestry, 88–95
genetic drift, inbreeding, and gene
coalescence, 88–90
mitochondrial DNA, 90–95
Population number, effective, 123, 124
Positivism, 148
Pouchet, Félix, 13
Praying mantis, 186, 200, 201, 204
Predation, 161
as coevolutionary process, 234
peppered moth experiments, 100–101 102
selection pressures, 215
thyme plants, 109–111
transient polymorphism, 122
variable fitness, 120
Pre-embryo concept, 162
Preferential group extinction, 160
Preformation doctrine, 23
Preformationists, 18
Pre-Socratic philosophers, 7–9
Price, G.R., 176, 177
Prigogine, Ilya, 241n
Prisoner’s dilemma, 176–177, 251–252
Probabilistic methods, 97
Procession, 5
Progress, idea of, 24, 25, 26
Promethean Fire, Reflections on the Origin
of Mind, 188
Protein(s), 207
amino acid sequences, 115–116
electrophoresis, 116–117
molecular clock, 126–131, 133n
neutral theory, 124
Proximal causality, 234–235
Przibram, apogenesis of, 75
Psycho-Lamarckism, 75
Ptolemeus, 46
Public policy
eugenics, 72–73
Lysenkoism and, 75–77
Punctuated equilibria, 132n, 234, 241n
Pure, mixed, and conditional strategies, 252–
254
Purity of gametes, 56
Quadrumana, 37–41

284
Index
Quarrel of analogies, 29
Quetelet, Adolphe, 61
Radiata, 27
Radman, Miroslav, 205
Random allele segregation, 133n
Random amplified polymorphic DNA
(RAPD), 118
Random drift, neutral theory of molecular
evolution, 124–126, 130–131
Random mating, 95
Randomness in pre-Socratic models, 8
Rare alleles, variable fitness, 120–121
Ratchet hypothesis of Müller, 210–212
Raup, David, 234
Rayssiguier, Christiane, 205
Reactionary Mendelism-Morganism, 77
Recapitulation, law of, 237
Recessiveness, 132n
Reciprocal altruism, 185–186
Recombination, 83, 88, 161, 208
advantages of, 210–211
sexual reproduction, 212
Redi, Francesco, 12, 13, 14
Red Queen hypothesis, 215, 231, 232–233,
234, 243
Regression toward mediocrity, 62–63, 77n
Reik, Wolf, 216
Religion, see also Theology/theologians
condemnation of Zoonomia, 37
Jewish-Christian, 10–11
origin of world, 5–6
Repair, DNA, 83, 149, 157, 212
Repeat sequences of DNA, 157, 158, 195n
Replicator, the, 153
Reproduction, 135, 156; see also Sexual
reproduction
fecundity versus longevity, 202
germ cells, 54
male function, female function, and plant
hermaphroiditism, 136–141
peppered moth experiments, 101–102
resource allocation for, 136, 137
Reproductive rate, population dynamics, 204
Restriction enzymes, 205
Restriction fragment length polymorphisms
(RFLP), 117–118
Retrotransposons, 174
Reverse transcriptase, 157
Reversion, 62
Ribosomal RNA, 207
Richet, Charles, 183
RNA, 157, 207
Robinet, Jean-Baptiste, 26, 32
Roe, Anne, 239
Romanticism, 26
Rosa, Daniele, 75
Rose, Michael, 202
Rostand, Jean, 1–2, 187
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 37, 123
r strategy, 204
Ruse, Michael, 192, 193, 194, 195
Russel, John, 97
Sageret, Augustin, 56
Saget, Henri, 147
Sainte-Seine, P. de, 238
Saint-Hilaire, Etienne Geoffroy, 27–28, 29,
30, 42n
St. Mark’s Cathedral, 221–223
Saint Pierre, Bernardin de, 23, 235
Saltationism, 63
Saltatory evolution, 17, 98
Sapienza, Carmen, 216
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 228
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 223
Schrödinger, Erwin, 83, 143–149, 194
Scientist, social role of, 73, 74
Seed dispersal, 109, 132–133n
Seed dispersal rate, 179
Seed migration, 109
Segregation, random, 133n
Segregation distortion, 58, 166
Segregation load, 123
Segregation of characters, independence of,
58
Seilacher, Adolf, 224, 239
Seilacher’s triangle, 223–226, 234
Selection, 81, 82, 161
apostatic, 120
frequency-dependent, 120, 253
and genetic drift, 87
group, 160
Hardy-Weinberg law, 95, 96
integration level question, 151–152
mathematics, 246
peppered moth experiments, 100–101, 102,
103
selectionists versus neutralists, 131
Selectionist hypothesis, 118–123

Index
285
Selectionist hypothesis (cont.)
genetic load, 122–123
versus neutralist hypothesis, 115–118
overdominance and sickle cell anemia,
118–120
transient polymorphism, 122
variable fitness, 120–122
Selection levels, 156–160
cellular, 158
group, 159–160
individual, 158–159
molecular, 157
Selective factors, thyme essences, 109–111
Self-fertilisation, 169, 209
Self-interest, prisoner’s dilemma, 176
Selfish DNA/gene, 156, 157, 180, 191
Selfish Gene hypothesis, 243, 244
Semelparity, 200–201
Senecio (groundsel), 218
Senescence, 200, 201, 202–204
Sequence duplication, 83
Serial endosymbiosis theory, 171–172
Sex cells, 55, 166
Sex chromosomes, conflicts, 168–169
Sex ratio
Evolutionary Stable Strategy and, 177, 179
thyme, 139
Sex segregation, 169
Sexual reproduction, 204–219
ad hoc developmental constraints, 215–217
advantage conferred by, 208–212
factors maintaining, 218–219
information exchange, 206–208
interfecundity as definition of species,
204–205
loss of, 209, 212–213
maintenance of, 213
origin of, 207–208
parasexual genetic exchanges on lower
forms, 205–206
parthogenesis, 212–214
physiological or genetic constraints, 217–
219
as short-term advantage, 214–219
variable fitness, 120
Williams model, 214–215
Shannon, Claude E., 150–151
Siala currucoides (mountain bluebird), 181–
182, 189–190
Sickle-cell anemia, 118–120, 122, 131
Sielacher, Adolf, 223–226
Significance tests, 97
Simpson, George Gaylord, 53–54, 239
Size, increasing, law of, 237
Size of population, see Population, size of
Smith, John Maynard, 2, 213, 226, 227, 233
Smuts, holism of, 75
Snails, 209
Social Darwinism, 70–72, 74, 243
and French reaction to sociobiology, 190
sociobiology, 182–183
Social role of science/scientist, 73, 74
Social sciences, and sociobiology, 192–194
Sociobiology, 180–195
controversies, 190–191
cuckoldry experiments, 181–182, 189–190
entomology, 184–188
French public opinion, 74
morality, 194–195
politics, 188–189
social Darwinism and, 182–183
social sciences and, 192–194
Wilson’s publications, 184–188
Genes, Mind and Culture, 188
Insect Societies, The, 184–185
On Human Nature, 187–188
Promethean Fire, Reflections on the
Origin of Mind, 188
Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, 185–
187
Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, 185–187,
192
Somatic cells, 54, 55
Somatogamy, 206
Sorbonne Theology Faculty, 21
Soupard, P., 215
Soviet science, Lysenkoism, 75–77
Spallanzani, Lazzaro, 12–13
Speciation/species creation, 161
Darwin on, 49
founder effect, 87
geographic differentiation, 106–108
interfecundity as definition of, 204–205
Species
biodiversity, 121–122, 132n
coevolution, 234
micro-habitats and, 121–122
Species complexity, Lamarck on, 32–33
Species numbers, Burgess Shale, 230
Spencer, Herbert, 182

286
Index
Sperm, 23, 54–55
Spontaneous generation, 7–17
fixity of species and, 11–16
Plato, Aristotle, and Christian tradition, 9–
11
pre-Socratic models, 7–9
Spontaneous inactivation of mutated genes,
84
Spontaneous mutation rate, 84
Sprengel, Christian Konrad, 56
Stabilising selection, 85
Stable strategy, 195n
Stasis, 227
Stationary model, 233–234
Statistics methods, 97
Statistical physics, 147
Stengers, Isabelle, 241n
Stenseth, N.C., 233
Stepping stone model, distribution of thyme
chemotypes, 106–107
Sterility, male, 138–139, 170
Sterilization programs, 72–73
Stoics, 11, 26
Stoneking, Mark, 92
Strasburger, Eduard, 55
Strawberry plants, 16
Structure
constraints on, see Body plans
morphogenesis, 226
Sturtevant, Alfred Henry, 68
Substitution, mechanisms of mutation, 83
Succession, 161
Superorganism, earth as, 41n
Surani, Azim, 216
Survival of fittest, 49
Swammerdam, Jan, 23
Sweden, eugenics in, 73
Symbiosis, 161
Synchronic-diachronic sequence, 33
Synthetic theory of evolution, 237–238
Systematic errors, 97
Systematics, 51
Systems, hierarchy of, 135
Taguieff, Pierre-André, 191
Tatum, E.L., 83
Tay-Sachs disease, 132n
Techermak, Erich von, 65
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 190–191, 192–
193, 237
Teleology, 24, 25, 26, 234–239; see also
Body plans
Teleomatic processes, 238
Teleonomy, 8, 238, 239
Telliamed, 19–20
Templeton, Alan R., 217–218
Theology/theologians, 21, 22–23; see also
Religion
condemnation of Zoonomia, 37
transformism and, 36
Theology Faculty of Sorbonne, 21
Thermodynamics, 143
Thompson, J.N., 234
Thomson, William, see Kelvin, Lord
Thuillier, Pierre, 189
Thyme, 137–138
cross-fertilization versus self-fertilization,
218
hermaphrodite and female predominance
in, 141
reproduction, 137–138
sex ratios, 139
Thyme essences, 104–111
dispersal of pollen and seeds, 109
genetic determinism, 104–106
geographic distribution, 106–108
limitations of approach, 111
selective factors, 109–111
Time
cyclical, 17
finalism, 236, 237
mutation incorporation with sexual versus
asexual reproduction, 209–210
Time scale
of chain of life, 24, 25
rates of evolution, 215
Tort, Patrick, 195, 197n
Transformation, 5
Transformism, 26; see also Lamarck,
Chevalier de
humans, 37–38
precursors of, 22–30
principles of, 35–37
Transgenes, 216–217
Transient polymorphism, 122
Translocation, chromosome, 83
Transmutation, 24
Transposition, 83, 157
Transposons/transposable elements, 131n, 195n
compartments of genome, 165

Index
287
Transposons/transposable elements (cont.)
conflicts, 174–175
Trioecious plants, 137
Trivers, Robert, 185
Tschermak, Erich von, 65
Tutt, J.W., 99
Uniformitarian theory, Kelvin on, 52
Uniformity of first generation, law of, 58
United States sterilization programs, 72–73
Unity of plan, 27–28, 29
Universal constraints, 226
Unselfish behavior, 160
Ussher, Archbishop, 21
Vacher de Lapouge, Georges, 183
van Beneden, Pierre-Joseph, 55
Van Valen, Leigh, 110, 231
Variable fitness, selectionist hypothesis, 120–
122
Vavilov, Nikolai, 77, 227
Vegetative hybridisation, 76
Vernalisation, 75–76
Vertebrata, 27
Veuille, Michel, 188, 189
Viability, demography, 85
Vicq d’Azyr, 27
Vigorous hybrids (heterosis), 119–120
Vincent, Jean Didier, 200
Virulence, pathogen, 120–121
Viruses, 174, 207–208
Vital energy, 11
Vitalism, 144–145, 241n
Viviparity, parthogens, 217
Voltaire, 19–20, 26, 42n, 132n
von Bertalanffy, Ludwig, 75
von Neumann, Johann Ludwig, 175
von Tschermak, Erich, 65
Waddington, Conrad H., 180
Wahlund effect, 96–97
Walcott, Charles Dolittle, 229
Waldeyer, Wilhelm, 55
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 50–51
Watson, James, 83, 135, 146
Weinberg, Wilhelm, 95
Weismann, August, 37, 53–55
Weldon, Walter, 63, 65–66
Whip-tailed lizards (Cnemidophorus
uniparens), 209
Whittington, Harry, 229
Wild-type allele, 82
Will, 223
Williams, Georges C., 151, 152, 158, 202,
213, 214–215
Wilson, Alan, 92, 93, 94, 95
Wilson, Edward O., 181, 184–193, 195, 204
Genes, Mind and Culture, 188
Insect Societies, The, 184–185
On Human Nature, 187–188
Promethean Fire, Reflections on the
Origin of Mind, 188
Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, 185–187
Wintrebert, Paul, 75
Wood louse, 171
Wright, Sewall, 81, 97–98
Wynne-Edwards, V.C., 151, 152, 159
Xenophanes of Colophon, 18
Y chromosome, 95
Zero-sum games, mathematics, 250–251
Zola, Emile, 39–41
Zygote
as individual, 142
as unique entity, 206

