1 
 
Paper prepared for ICPP 2017, Singapore  
T07P08: The Accountability and Legitimacy of Knowledge Experts in Policy Making 
 
The technocratic take-over of democracy: connectivity, reflexivity and accountability 
Anders Esmark 
 
Department of Political Science  
University of Copenhagen 
ae@ifs.ku.dk 
 
Introduction 
It took the dramatic rise of populist parties and movements across the Western hemisphere to 
generate even modest academic acknowledgement of the fact that liberal democracies have for a 
long time been submitted to an altogether different system of rule: that of technocracy. After a 
period of relatively sustained interest in the subject in the 1960’s and the 1970’s, serious debate 
about technocracy effectively died out together with the enthusiasm for the planning and social 
engineering model assumed to be the essence of the technocratic project. However, technocracy has 
gradually entered the debate again through the backdoor, that is to say as an explanation for the 
mounting populist challenge (Müller 2016, Urbinati 2014, Bickerton and Accetti 2017). To be sure, 
there were precursors to this development, in particular the characterization of the EU as the 
‘ultimate technocratic project’ (Schmidt 2006) generating the kind of national backlashes that 
ultimately gave us Brexit. Similarly, the arrival of Donald Trump was not entirely unforeseen, given 
that the political system of the U.S. had already been described as a destructive spiral of 
technocracy and populism (Fukuyama 2014).  
However, the rediscovery has yet to yield a comprehensive analysis of technocracy. Even if 
technocracy is now a consistent factor in the surging interest in populism, it is often discussed rather 
superficially and in terms dependent on the particular definition and understanding of populism 
applied. There is a need for a better understanding of the technocratic project in itself and the 
particular nature of the technocratic challenge to democracy that ultimately spawned the populist 
counter-reaction. Such an approach starts with the acknowledgement of the fact that technocracy is, 
in the strict sense of the term, a system of rule even if it lacks a proper political theory and 

2 
 
constitutional underpinnings. Technocracy is a ‘system of governance in which technically trained 
experts rule by virtue of their specialized knowledge and position in dominant political and 
economic institutions’ (Fischer 1990, 17). As such, technocracy fully deserves a place alongside 
democracy and bureaucracy in the history of the modern polity.  
The introduction of democratic rule always depended on the development of a working compromise 
with bureaucracy and the cadre of expert officials (‘Beamtentum’) previously allied with monarchs 
and dynastic power. As Weber was acutely aware, this intrinsic tension between bureaucracy and 
democracy also means that ‘direct rule of the demos’ and broad public influence ‘inevitably comes 
into conflict with bureaucratic tendencies’ (1978, 985). Nevertheless, the emergence of the 
monocratic bureaucracy as the prototypical form of the modern organization and the wider process 
of bureaucratization also accompanies the process of ‘passive democratization’, ‘the levelling of 
social differences’ and ultimately ‘modern mass democracy’ (Weber 1978, 983). Hence, 
bureaucracy has become inseparable from ‘constitutional democracy and the separation of powers’ 
(Olsen 2006, 9) and ‘part of society’s long-term commitment to a Rechtsstaat and procedural 
rationality for coping with conflicts and power differentials’ (Olsen 2006, 3). 
The third alternative offered by technocracy is, by the same token, fundamentally opposed to 
bureaucracy as well as democracy. Even if technocracy is often superficially associated with 
bureaucracy to the point of indistinction, it is a particular form of rule that has a deeply antagonistic 
relationship with both of these more established systems of rule. However, this antagonism has also 
been subject to an important reversal in the history of the technocratic project. The original version 
of the technocratic project that reached its pinnacle during the 1960’s and 70’s was deeply 
entrenched in mechanical industrialism and combined an overtly and aggressively anti-democratic 
stance with an attempt to appropriate and expand bureaucratic organization for purposes of planning 
and social engineering. By contrast, the current post-industrial version of the technocratic project, 
which has been on the rise since the 1980’s, is radically anti-bureaucratic while straining itself to 
embrace democratic vocabulary and develop its own form of democratic legitimacy.  
It has been suggested that this development corresponds to a shift towards a ‘quiet’ and ‘faceless’ 
technocratic ‘revolution’ (Fischer 1990, 19). Rather than posing as the ‘new men’ of the future with 
sweeping statements about technological and scientific progress and blunt rejections of politics, 
current technocrats ‘modestly step forward’ as organizational ‘servants’ in a ‘subdued and 
pragmatic language addressed to organizational and technical “imperatives”’ (Fischer 1990, 110). 
With the benefit of a few more decades of hindsight, however, we can now substitute the idea of a 

3 
 
quiet revolution for a more specific claim: what we have witnessed since the 1980’s is a 
technocratic revolution carried through primarily by the governance paradigm of public policy and 
public sector reform.  
Although the governance paradigm certainly deploys the language of technical and organizational 
imperatives extensively, it has also been hiding in plain sight as an open, assertive and largely 
transparent paradigm that has brought technocratic principles to bear on government for decades. In 
contrast to the planning and social engineering model of industrial technocracy, however, the 
postindustrial version of the technocratic project is defined rather by the interlocking principles of 
connective governance, risk management and performance management. I have elaborated on the 
implications of these principles for bureaucracy elsewhere (Esmark 2017). The very same principles 
are, however, also at the heart of a technocratic ‘take-over’ of democracy based on the attempt to 
establish connectivity, reflexivity and accountability as core standards of democratic legitimacy. 
Before examining these standards in more detail, we must first outline the basic parameters of the 
technocratic project. 
 
The technocratic project 
 
The technocratic project has never been associated with a particular class, elite or cadre, but rather 
with a heterogeneous group of people from different backgrounds operating from the top to bottom 
in public and private organizations, defined only by a shared capacity to bring specialized 
knowledge, experience and expertise to group decision-making. This group is usually referred to as 
the ‘technostructure’, originally meant to comprise the specialists and technicians responsible for 
the extensive planning and control necessary in the big organizations of ‘new industrial state’ 
(Galbraith 1967). In a more recent and updated inventory, the technostructure has been substantially 
expanded: ‘From this vantage point, the technostructure – policy planners, economists, engineers, 
management specialists, computer analysts, social scientists and technologists – process the critical 
information essential to the stable and efficient operation of our contemporary institutions’ (Fischer 
1990, 110).  
In addition to vague contours of technocrats as a social group, the comparatively sparse literature on 
technocracy has always been faced with the problem that there never was a Weber of technocracy. 
Or, more specifically: although Weber did not use the term, he subsumed technocracy under the 
broader process of rationalization of which bureaucratic organization is an expression. Weber’s 
foresight notwithstanding, however, the postwar period saw a ‘new or second phase in that 

4 
 
“rationalization” which Max Weber already comprehended as the basis for bureaucratic 
domination’, defined by the ‘scientization of politics’ (Habermas 1971, 62). Although ‘technical 
expertise’ and ‘officialdom’ is important in a bureaucracy, Weber also saw it as being confined by 
rational-legal authority, the status of the university-trained jurist and submission to the charismatic 
authority and power instincts of political leaders (Weber 1921). The new form of domination based 
on the scientization of politics thus corresponds to a shift from Weber’s ‘decisionistic’ model for 
the division of labor between professional staff and political leadership to a ‘technocratic model’ 
(Habermas 1971, 63).  
In this technocratic model, the relation between the professional expert and the politician appears to 
have effectively ‘reversed itself’, making the latter ‘a mere agent of a scientific intelligentsia, 
which, in concrete circumstances, elaborates the objective implications and requirements of 
available techniques and resources as well as optimal strategies and rules of control’ (Habermas 
1971, 63). The technocratic model thus leaves the politician with a ‘fictitious decision-making 
power’, acting simply as a ‘stopgap’ in a ‘still imperfect rationalization of power in which the 
initiative has in any case passed to scientific analysis and planning’ (Habermas 1971, 62). In a 
wider sense, the technocratic model calls for the creation of a ‘technical state’ where the state ‘no 
longer appears as an apparatus for the forcible realization of interests that have no foundation in 
principle and can only be answered decisionistically. It becomes instead the organ of a thoroughly 
rational administration’ (Habermas 1971, 64).  
The original incarnation of this technocratic model represents the realization of industrialism as a 
form of political theory, for which Bacon and Saint-Simon are the original exponents. The concept 
of technocracy itself, however, is usually attributed to the now forgotten American engineer 
William Henry Smith who defined technocracy as ‘national industrial government’ (1919), which 
later spawned a short-lived and curious attempt by fellow engineers and thinkers such as Thorstein 
Veblen to turn technocracy into a fully-fledged political movement (Akin 1977, Segal 1985, Tilman 
2014). From these sources, and their idealization of the technical sciences, engineering, mechanics 
and the machine, the technocratic project has derived its founding idea that ‘technology’s 
productive potential holds the promise of a society of abundance. Its link with science and its 
inherent dynamism have the allure of modernity. Its efficiency, the perfect mating of men and 
machine, is a model for society’ (Kuisel 1981, 76).  
The breakthrough for this idea and the technocratic scientization of politics is the postwar 
development of a ‘feedback relation’ between technical development and scientific progress 

5 
 
intimately related to industrialism and the emergence of the industrial society in which ‘science, 
technology and industrial utilization were fused into a system’ (Habermas 1971, 104). The result is 
a form of scientific management, based on ‘a logical, practical, problem-solving, instrumental, and 
disciplined approach to objectives’, as well as a ‘reliance on a calculus, on precision and 
measurement and a concept of a system’ (Bell 1974, 349). The technocratic system of rule is based 
on the ‘assumption that human problems, like technical ones, have a solution that experts, given 
sufficient data and authority, can discover and execute. Applied to politics this reasoning finds 
interference from vested interests, ideologies, and party politics intolerable. Its antithesis is decision 
making through the weighing of forces and compromise’ (Kuisel 1981, 76).  
More than just a nullification of the bureaucratic compromise with political leadership as 
understood by Weber, the technocratic form of rule requires the expulsion of politics as such from 
the state, and the political system in a wider sense, in order to bring about a properly rational 
administration of society based on scientific management. Technocratic scientization of politics, in 
other words, inevitably means depoliticization. The technocratic ‘scientization of politics’ 
effectively ‘severs the criteria for justifying the organization of social life from any normative 
regulation of interaction, thus depoliticizing them’ (Habermas 1971, 112). Technocracy is 
fundamentally at odds with the practical experiences of ordinary citizens, public involvement, as 
well as the influence of interests groups, bargaining and the discretion and leadership of elected 
representatives. Indeed, technocracy means that any kind of societal ‘progress can be achieved only 
by the ‘depoliticization’ of problems’ (Ridley 1966, 43).  
Correspondingly, Putnam sums up the implications of the ‘technocratic mentality’ applied to the 
field of politics in six guiding principles for depoliticization. 1) The idea that the replacement of 
politics with technics provides experts and professionals with an essentially apolitical role. 2) 
Skepticism and even hostility towards politicians and political institutions. 3) A more or less blatant 
disregard for the openness and equality of political democracy tending towards authoritarianism and 
absolutism. 4) The belief that social and political conflict is misguided or even contrived. 5) The 
interpretation of effective policy as a question of pragmatics, not ideology or moral. 6) The notion 
that technological progress is good and questions of social justice are unimportant (Putnam 1977). 
In other words, the commitment to scientific management makes the technocratic project anti-
political, anti-ideological and anti-democratic. However, the particular form of depoliticization 
characteristic of industrial technocracy also seems to have vanished with governmental enthusiasm 
for extensive planning and social engineering that reached its peak during the 1960’s and 70’s. 

6 
 
A quiet or not so quiet revolution: the new technocratic governance 
This abandonment of earlier postures was precisely what Fischer identified as a new form of ‘quiet’ 
technocratic revolution (1990). By substituting the overt and aggressive form of anti-politics for a 
new role as the modest servants of organizational and socio-economic necessities, technocracy 
became all the more influential by receding into the background. Whereas early technocracy was in 
some sense too overtly political in its call for scientization and depoliticization, the quiet 
technocratic revolution managed to effectively conceal the inherently political nature of 
depoliticization, thus fulfilling the promise of true scientific management. Although Fischer’s 
analysis deserves recognition for bringing this fact to light at a time when technocracy was indeed 
very much left to its own devices, the technocratic project has clearly developed well beyond the 
parameters of the quiet revolution in t1he ensuing years, in particular through the governance 
paradigm of public policy and public sector reform, which has imbued the technocratic project with 
a distinct logic of transforming government to governance.  
The quiet revolution was seen by Fischer to display a ‘striking continuity of basic technocratic 
ideas’ (Fischer 1990, 109), echoing the notion that technocracy is simply an ‘ever-recurring 
intellectual doctrine’ of which Saint-Simon is one of the most ‘original exponents’ (Meynaud 1968, 
12). The most original exponent of this idea is Bell’s landmark analysis of postindustrial society as 
‘the age of technocracy’. Bell states that technological, economic and social transformations 
associated with post-industrialism provide the conditions for the realization of the technocratic 
project as it was conceived prior to these transformations, making postindustrial society a society 
permeated by the ‘fundamental themes’ of ‘rationality, planning, and foresight – the hallmarks, in 
short, of the technocratic age. The vision of Saint-Simon seemingly has begun to bear fruit’ (Bell 
1974, 348). Looking ahead, with Bell, Fischer thus concludes: ‘there is an increasing reliance in the 
political system on technical expertise for the definition of, if not the actual resolution of, social and 
political problems. As result, there will be more and more emphasis on the planning of political and 
social life’ (Fischer 1990, 102).  
As it turned out, postindustrial society came to present technological and socio-economic changes 
that made the model of planning and social engineering more or less obsolete, or at least resulted in 
complete governmental abandonment of the model. This development is reflected in a steady stream 
of programs concerned with recreating the public sector and public policy in the image of 
postindustrial society, starting with the NPM reforms of the 1980’s, but becoming more pronounced 
with post-NPM reforms, network governance and New Public Governance (Christensen and 

7 
 
Lægreid 2007, Pollitt and Bouckaert 2011, Olsen 2006, Lodge and Gill 2011, Christensen 2013). 
These reform waves are normally seen as competing quasi-ideological configurations separated by 
their commitment to markets vis-à-vis networks, but ultimately reaching a compromise in the 
current reality of the mixed administration. Seen in the context of technocracy, however, these 
reform waves appear rather as a steady development from the model of planning and social 
engineering towards a carefully balanced program for the transformation of government to 
governance based on the intersecting principles of connectivity, risk and performance. Figure 1 
provides an overview of this model. 
 
---------------------------------------                      FIGURE 1 HERE            ---------------------------------- 
 
It is not surprising then, that it fell to critical governance studies to discover that depoliticization is a 
crucial dynamic inherent in the transformation from government to governance. Hay’s explanation 
for ‘why we hate politics’, in particular, has drawn attention to the challenges posed by the ‘public 
politics of depoliticisation’ were experts and politicians alike converge on the notion that politics 
‘can only prevent the adoption of the technically most proficient solution to any given 
challenge./../it lacks the technical proficiency and specialist knowledge required to select the 
optimal policy choice; it is costly, inefficient, bureaucratic and self-referential to the point of being 
tiresome’ (Hay 2007, 93). Indeed, the basic technocratic idea seems 5 as forceful and radical as 
ever, although Hay makes no mention of technocracy as such: ‘politics is a pathogen; 
depoliticization an antidote’ (2007, 93). Initially seen as the source of political distrust and fatigue, 
such depoliticization has since become a vital component in the interpretation of populism as form 
of ‘repoliticization’ and counter-reaction (Stoker, 2017).    
The politics of depoliticization was also found in the statecraft pursued by New Labour and the 
Blair Government, based on the third way and acceptance of ‘structural dependence dilemma’ 
where ‘government, left wing or not, are constrained in what they can do by the need to sustain 
economic conditions that promote investment’ (Burnham 2001, 128). In the field of economic 
policy, this approach replaced ideological conflicts between Keynesianism and monetarism with a 
form of ‘technocratic managerialism emphasizing the constraints imposed by “global 
capital”’(Burnham 2001, 129). In contrast to earlier versions of the technocratic project, however, 
the depoliticization inherent in the transformation from government to governance is ‘a process 
cloaked in the language of inclusiveness, democratisation and empowerment (..) a potent form of 

8 
 
ideological mobilisation, which reflects and capitalises on the rejigging of domestic bureaucratic 
practices and the changes in the wider international political economy’ (Burnham 2001, 129). Such 
astute observations notwithstanding, critical governance studies have yet to analyze the 
transformation from government to governance as a technocratic challenge to democracy more 
comprehensively. This requires a further look at the principles of connectivity, risk and 
performance. 
Connectivity: networks and communication 
Connective governance is an umbrella term for a number of governance programs shaped by the 
postindustrial logic of network society. Although the network society is in many ways an extension 
of post-industrial society, it also embodies an ‘information age’ defined by digital information and 
communication technologies (ICT’s) in a way not considered by Bell and other early observers of 
the post-industrial age. The principal analysis of this leap in the history of media technology 
sparked by the emergence of digital ICT’s, is Castells’ exploration of how digitally enhanced 
networks processing information have become the primary principle of societal organization across 
the economy, civil society and the state (2000-2004). Faced with the transformations brought on by 
the proliferation of informational networks, states are forced to engage in what Castells has defined 
as the imperative but often difficult transition from the modern state to a late modern ‘network 
state’ (2005, 15).  
The principal goal of connective governance is thus to ensure this imperative but difficult transition 
to a network state faced with the connective logic of informational networks including, inter alia, 
globalization (networks have the potential for global reach and reduce the importance of space and 
territory), openness (the organization of networks in nodes and hubs ensure multiple points of entry 
and continuous extension), flexibility (networks can be build and modified faster than other forms 
of organization), scalability (networks can be formed and reformed to suit any level of action or 
governance), complexity (networks represent a form of ‘ordered complexity’, making disordered 
complexity manageable), self-organization (networks can form and function without central or 
hierarchical guidance) and recursion (networks process information in a non-linear and modulating 
way) (Castells 2005, Lash 2002, Crozier 2007, Chadwick 2013).  
Thus, connective governance involves a complete ‘transformation of political management, 
representation and domination under the conditions of network society’ (Castells 2005, 16). The 
most basic expression of this development is ‘the diffusion of e-governance (a broader concept than 
e-government because it includes citizen participation and political decision-making); e-health; e-

9 
 
learning; e-security; and a system dynamic regulation of the communication industry, adapting it to 
the values and needs of society’ (Castells 2005, 17). As suggested clearly by Castells, the diffusion 
of e-governance has from the outset been followed by a promise of increased citizen participation 
and democratic innovation. Following an initial focus on rationalization and increased efficiency in 
the 1980’s, citizen involvement, participation and even the realization of ‘e-democracy’ have 
consistently been highlighted as the real potential of digitalization and implementation of new 
ICT’s in what has also been called digital era governance (Dunleavy et al. 2006, 478).  
The same logic is clearly visible in other versions of connective governance such as network 
governance, collaborative governance and New Public Governance. Although networks are 
interpreted more broadly in these approaches, ‘joined-up government’ and ‘whole of government’ 
based on horizontal coordination, collaboration and involvement of external stakeholders are still 
seen to open up new avenues for participation and involvement in political decision-making (Stoker 
2006, Rhodes 2007, Ansell and Gash 2008, Goldsmith and Kettl 2009, McGuire and Agranoff 
2011). The proliferation of networks thus creates the potential for a more open, responsive state 
committed to the ‘meta-governance’ of self-governing networks (Sørensen and Torfing 2007, Klijn 
and Edelenbos 2007). Such meta-governance, in turn, requires a more performative and 
communicative form of political authority (Hajer and Wagenaar 2003, Bang 2003). 
That e-governance, network governance and communicative governance mostly fall short of the 
democratic promises made is well documented, occasional exceptions notwithstanding (Dawes 
2008, Sørensen and Torfing 2007, Klijn and Edelenbos 2007). In order to come properly to terms 
with this problem, however, it is necessary to start with the realization that the difficult but 
imperative transition to a network state is a process directed against bureaucracy rather than a 
transition towards democracy. As Castells makes abundantly clear, ‘the rational bureaucratic model 
of the state is in complete contradiction to the demands and process of the network society’ 
(Castells 2005, 17). Unfortunately, this claim all too easily invokes a sense of democratic progress 
when the starting point is a basic opposition between bureaucracy and democracy. In a logic 
illustrated with particular clarity by critical media studies, the proliferation of informational 
networks is fundamentally a force on the side of political insurgency, social movements and 
counter-power against established powers trying to quell network society through the old 
bureaucratic means of censorship, surveillance and policing (Bennett and Segerberg 2008, Castells 
2007, Trottier and Fuchs 2015). 

10 
 
However, the fact that the creation of a network state is a decisively anti-bureaucratic project does 
not make it inherently democratic. With the addition of the third alternative offered by the 
technocratic project, it becomes readily apparent that the difficult but imperative transformation to a 
network state is an expression of the quintessentially technocratic idea of the state as an expression 
of a thoroughly rational administration and a form of government organized and conducted in 
accordance with the requirements of the lead technologies of society. That the defining technologies 
of network society are digital ICT’s rather than the machines and factories of mechanical 
production characteristic of industrial society certainly makes an important difference in the basic 
technological-scientific rationality of the technocratic project. Rather than planning and engineering 
of the great social machine, connective governance requires the adoption of an informational logic 
and the attempt to deal with the transformative effects of informational flows (Crozier 2007, 7).   
E-governance, network governance and communicative governance have undoubtedly made 
government more informational, communicative and open to stakeholder involvement. Networks 
have, however, largely remained an instrument of technocratic governance meant to ensure 
coordination, negotiation, qualification of knowledge and increased implementation capacity. The 
IT-specialist is of course the most apparent cousin to the mechanical engineers of early technocracy. 
The principal governmental function of networks has, however, been to increase the connectivity of 
a drastically increased technostructure. The increased connectivity is an organizational framework 
for a form of technocratic governance exercised through the mutually supporting and reinforcing 
principles of risk management and performance management.  
Risk management: reflexivity and irony  
Connective governance is the bedrock of the governance paradigm. It provides political-
administrative elites with a specific program of transformation from government to governance on 
the level of state form and organization. Risk management, for its part, provides a supporting and 
partially overlapping program of transformation from government to governance on the level of 
basic state functions and capacities. As understood in risk management, the transformation from 
government to governance involves a fundamental reversal of state functions and capacity from the 
provision of safety to the development of resilience necessitated by the internalization of risk and 
the impossibility of insurance against dangers and uncertainty. Faced with fundamental uncertainty, 
looming global catastrophes and wicked policy problems, the primary function of the state is to 
build resilient societies, organizations and individuals.  

11 
 
This variation on the transformation from government to governance corresponds to a subtle shift in 
the logic of postindustrialism from proliferation of informational networks to global risk and 
uncertainty. Although networks and increased connectivity are clearly a source of increased risk, 
the key ‘epochal difference’ between industrial and postindustrial society occurs at moment the 
economic, social, biological and ecological hazards facing the political system ‘undermine and/or 
cancel the established safety systems of the provident state’s existing risk calculations’ (Beck 1996, 
31). What Beck refers to as the provident state is essentially the welfare state of the industrial era, 
forced by its own ‘cognitive and institutional apparatus’ of ‘insurance calculation’ to stem the 
autonomous forces of economic and social development through planning and ‘after-care’, for the 
purpose of which ‘there exist accident scenarios, statistics, social research, technical planning and 
great variety of safety measures’ (1996, 30).  
In risk society, such measures are undercut for two reasons. For one, hazards and dangers have 
multiplied and infiltrated each other to a level where existing safety systems offering insurance and 
compensation for exposure to risk are overburdened. Secondly, risk society implies a growing 
realization that even more than autonomous forces outside the state, hazards and dangers are 
produced by the state itself. Decisions invariably produce unintended consequences and further risk. 
Risk is, according to the standard definition, the ‘effect of uncertainty’, and risk management is 
based on an injunction to relinquish the demand for certainty and cope with uncertainty and change 
(Renn and Schweizer 2009, Beck 1996). Risk management consists in the combination of 
comprehensive risk assessment of hazards with workable forms of damage control in the occurrence 
of ‘catastrophe’ (IRGC 2005, 20).  
Risk management is often related to large-scale catastrophes such as global financial crisis, 
overpopulation, climate change or natural disaster. As Beck has highlighted, however, risk means 
the anticipation of catastrophe rather than responses to catastrophe itself: when the catastrophe 
actually occurs, risk as always ‘moved elsewhere’ to the anticipation of new dangers and 
catastrophes (2006, 332). Moreover, the internalization of risk and impossibility of insurance 
against dangers and hazards equally concerns the problem-solving capacity of everyday policies 
faced with unintended consequences and wicked problems. Indeed, Rittel and Webber’s original 
characterization of wicked problems as being diffuse, open-ended, uncertain, unique and relational 
precisely embodies the problems facing decision-making in a risk scenario (1973). More than 
isolated procedures related to natural disasters and other large-scale catastrophes, the internalization 
of risk and decisions based on the impossibility of insurance involves the reconfiguration of the vast 

12 
 
majority of policy problems as wicked problems and efforts to deal with such problems on all levels 
of governance. 
The primary role of the state in this state of permanent crisis is to build resilient societies, 
organizations and individuals capable of continuous change and transformation in response to risk 
and uncertainty (Syrett and Devine 2012, 96). This may involve the use of markets to ‘force 
individuals to take cost-effective protective measures prior to disaster based on risk assessments’, 
whereas networks ensure the flow of information that ‘may influence individuals to behave 
differently with respect to the actions they take before and/or after disaster’ (Daniels, Kettl, and 
Kunreuther 2006, 8). However, markets have also been criticized as a framework of risk 
management due to their dependence on economic incentives, fragmentation, turf wars and, in 
cruder forms of NPM, an idealization of private business practices that tend to reinstate planning 
systems cloaked as corporate strategies (Head and Alford 2013, 721, Stoker 2006). Networks are, 
according to this line of argument, more suited to ensure critical components of risk management 
such as collaboration, coordination, accumulation of knowledge, and the flow of information (Syrett 
and Devine 2012, Conklin 2006, Helbing 2013).  
This network-oriented form of risk management has been described as risk governance, i.e. a form 
of risk management based on openness, coordination and the application of ‘the principles of good 
governance to the identification, assessment, management and communication of risks’ (Renn and 
Walker 2008, 11, see also Renn 2008). In this sense, risk governance arises at the intersection of 
connectivity and risk management, of network as organization and problem-solving capacity as 
function. The link relation between risk and connectivity is, by the same token, entirely reversible 
and fundamental to the governance paradigm. Rather than a limited subcategory of risk 
management, the concept of risk governance suggests that the requirements of effective risk 
management, although often implicitly, provide the basic rationale for a substantial part of the 
networking activities pursued by current governments and administrations (Koppenjan and Klijn 
2004).   
Risk management is ultimately about survival. Only resilient societies, organizations and 
individuals will have the capacity to survive the disruptions of risk society. The legitimacy of risk 
management, however, not only extends to governmental efficiency in the fight for survival, but 
also to the potential for a more reflexive and even enlightened form of government. As Beck has 
highlighted, risk society coincides with the onset of ‘reflexive modernity’ (Beck 1996, 39). 
Acknowledging uncertainty, the impossibility of insurance and the recursive nature of risk involves 

13 
 
a reflexive moment defined by the ‘self-confrontation with the effects of risk society that cannot be 
dealt with and assimilated in the system of industrial society – as measured by the latter’s 
institutionalized standards’ (Beck 1994, 6). Such reflexivity is indeed more essential to the 
legitimacy of the transformation from government to governance than claims to increased 
participation and deliberation in and of themselves.  
A particularly pronounced example of this logic is Beck’s discussion of the ‘enlightenment shock’ 
of risk society (Beck 2006). If the internalization of risk and impossibility of insurance against 
global risks are acknowledged as a starting point for political action, there ‘are only three possible 
reactions: denial, apathy or transformation’ (Beck 2006, 331). Apathy comprises governmental 
retreat as well as political fatigue and mistrust on the side of citizens alike. Denial can largely be 
equated with post-factualism and populism. Transformation of political action, for its part, involves 
a ‘cosmopolitan moment’ and acceptance of ‘global risk as an impersonal force in the contemporary 
world’ (Beck 2006, 338). The force of global risks includes the emergence of risk as a new medium 
of communication across borders and differences, risk as a source of new social vulnerabilities and 
power asymmetries, and the necessity and possibility of a new cosmopolitan form of statehood. 
Denial and apathy are of course still visible, but transformation means that ‘global risks enforce an 
involuntary democratization’ (Beck 2006, 340). In the face of risk society, the transformation from 
government to (global) governance is not only normatively desirable, but even normatively 
necessary.  
For all the normative ‘force’ of global risks and the ’wake-up call in the face of the failure of 
government in the globalized world’, the ‘cosmopolitan moment’ of statehood in risk society is also 
a situation defined deeply and pervasively by the irony of risk. The reflexivity of risk management 
is, through and through, a formula for how to ‘live in the shadow of global risks’ (Beck 2006, 331). 
For Beck, such irony is more or less identical to the catharsis of tragedy as conventionally 
understood in political philology and theory. In the wider governance paradigm, this intrinsic link 
between reflexivity and irony is both a formula for statehood (Willke 1992) and the logic behind the 
exercise of risk management as ‘meta-governance’ (Jessop 2011). Meta-governance, thus 
conceived, consists in the 1) ‘deliberate cultivation of a flexible repertoire (requisite variety)’ of 
government responses ‘in the face of turbulence in the policy environment and changing policy 
risks’, 2) a ‘reflexive orientation about what would be an acceptable policy outcome (..) and regular 
assessment of the extent to which current actions are producing desired outcomes, and 3) ‘a self-
reflexive “irony” such that the participants in governance recognize the likelihood of failure but 
then continue as if success were possible’ (Jessop 2011, 117).  

14 
 
The transformation from government to governance, in other words, requires a governmental 
cultivation of reflexive irony as formula for statehood as well as specific policy intervention. 
Whether or not such irony is necessary in the face of global risks, it is a rather shaky foundation for 
claims to democratic legitimacy. Rather it appears to represent a new type of adaptive and recursive 
technocracy invested in the continuous observation and accommodation of external circumstances 
quite distinct from, and to some extent even a reversal of, the staunch belief in the power of 
technology to ensure control of the economy, society and the material environment characteristic of 
early technocracy (Habermas 1971). That risk, uncertainty and wicked problems pose a problem for 
planning and foresight was already clear to Rittel and Webber (1973), who nevertheless insisted on 
the viability of the planning model (see also Webber 1978). Since then, however, risk management 
has more or less come to mean the opposite of planning.  
As Beck states, risk awareness and reflexivity are completely irreconcilable with ‘linear models of 
technocracy’, which proceed from the assumption that technical knowledge and planning capacity 
will ensure the development towards a society of ‘zero risk’ (Beck 1996, 35). The very idea of 
planning is to ensure certainty and maintain stability. Unexpected occurrences are the result of 
insufficient planning and will only require more comprehensive planning. Current technocracy, 
however, has substituted the idea of zero risk for the notion of permanent risk and continuous 
adaptation to changing circumstances. Planning and forecasting have clearly not disappeared from 
government. It has, however, largely been subsumed under an overriding concern for risk 
assessment, adaptation and continuous change. Risk management supplants this proactive and 
assertive belief in mechanical control with a more reactive and defensive idea of adaptation in the 
face of risk and uncertainty.  
Whereas Beck seems to assume that this rejection of the early industrial version of the ‘linear’ 
technocracy that served as the operational infrastructure of the provident state implies a new era of 
voluntary or involuntary democratization, risk management seems rather to have brought about a 
new type of adaptive and recursive technocracy. To be sure, the old technocracy project now looks 
like a fata morgana of control and engineering of the great social machine, compared to which the 
current late modern version of technocracy is indeed self-aware of governmental limitations, 
reflexive and open towards external circumstances, resources and perspectives. Reflexivity is not, 
however, an invitation to the exercise of free and unbounded debate and contestation. It is a 
particular mode of thought and action strictly limited to the parameters of continuous adaptation, 
resilience and even ‘survival’. It is also a form of governmental reasoning that more or less 

15 
 
invariably leads to performance management in the search for certainty and best practice in the state 
of permanent crisis and uncertainty. 
Performance management: experimentation and accountability  
In his invaluable analysis of ‘audit society’, Michael Power observed that ‘the audit explosion 
suggests that audit is emerging as a powerful institution of risk processing’ (1999, 139). This 
observation, made almost in passing, has proved to be one of the most acute insights into a now 
consolidated and still developing partnership between risk and performance management in current 
government. In a situation defined by risk, uncertainty and the recursive nature of wicked policy 
problems, performance management has been charged with finding out what works and why in 
order to provide at least a form of temporary certainty and proof of effects to guide public policies 
in the process of continuous adaptation to changing circumstances. The various concepts and 
standards of performance management, including quality management, evaluation, evidence-based 
policy, budgeting for results and auditing etc., can in this sense be summarized under the general 
principle of learning from evidence and continuous improvement of public policy.  
On the societal level, this juxtaposition pits audit society against risk society. Beyond the critical 
undertone and particular focus of Power’s analysis, this society is a reflection of what Donald T. 
Campbell, the godfather of evaluation in public policy, called the ‘experimenting society’ (1998 
[1971]). Defined in explicit opposition to the social engineering, the experimenting society was put 
forward as a vision of a ‘truly scientific society’ that would be active (preferring exploratory 
innovation to inaction), evolutionary (learning), honest (committed to reality testing and self-
criticism), non-dogmatic (committed only to explicit and testable ideals), decentralized (to provide 
the autonomy and variation required for experimentation), responsive (always with an eye for the 
collective good) and accountable (allowing challenges and due process). In a more recent 
formulation, the experimenting society has been called a ‘learning’ society defined by a pervasive 
commitment to the emancipatory potential of experimentation, innovation, reality testing and self-
criticism (Sanderson 2002).  
Defined in the image of the experimenting society, performance management is meant to ensure a 
process of rationally guided social and organizational change, policy experimentation, trial and 
error, emphasizing ‘the role of reflection, lesson drawing and continuous adaptation’ (Stoker 2006, 
49) and ultimately ‘reflexive social learning’ (Sanderson 2002, 9). The overall goal of performance 
management is to link the sequences of the traditional linear process of policy-making together in a 
cyclic and continuous process of innovation and learning that will ensure the development of better 

16 
 
policy solutions (Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 21). This requires development of 
internal procedures for performance measurement based on relevant indicator selection, data 
collection, analysis and reporting, and the subsequent use of the performance information by 
relevant decision-makers (Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 65). In other words, the 
transformation from government to governance here implies the transformation of the policy 
process so that it finally functions as a process of scientific discovery. 
Correspondingly, it is necessary to disassociate performance management somewhat from the NPM 
wave reforms that it is conventionally seen to reflect. The importance of contracts and the emulation 
of business leadership notwithstanding, the principal legacy of NPM is the intrinsic relation 
between the construction of public quasi-markets as frameworks for performance management, and 
vice versa (Pollitt and Bouckaert 2011, 10). The market model is thus dominant to the point of 
sometimes being synonymous with performance management, specifically in the shape of 
cost/benefit analysis and so-called ratio-indicators, including efficiency, productivity, effectiveness 
and cost-effectiveness, which in turn requires specific types of data on costs, inputs, outputs and 
outcomes (Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 21).  
However, the type of indicators and information associated with the market has also been subjected 
to post-NPM criticism calling for ‘wider’ and ‘deeper’ understanding of performance information 
(Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 21). This NPG approach to performance management 
involves broader standards of public and social value beyond the market (Moore 1995, Stoker 
2006), as well as a more holistic perspective on the role of performance management in the ‘whole 
of government’ (Sanderson 2002). Moreover, this approach to performance management mirrors 
the overall post-NPM emphasis on the value of networks. The use of networks in performance 
management has been described as performance governance, i.e. an ‘interactive’ and ‘hyper 
dynamic’ form of performance management, based on a recognition of the need to ‘organize the 
public sector to allow for citizens and customers of public services to participate in the whole policy 
cycle. This means that citizens are involved in co-designing, co-deciding, co-producing and co-
evaluating public services in society’ (Bouckaert and Halligan 2008, 189).  
The goal of co-designing, co-deciding, co-producing and co–evaluating resonates deeply and 
widely within the wider governance paradigm. Even more than improved risk management, 
improved learning and innovation provide proponents of network governance and NPG with a key 
rationale for the use of networks (Osborne 2010). The systematic integration of networks in the 
policy process is seen here not merely to qualify public services from a user perspective, but to 

17 
 
deliver critical information about policy problems, as well as knowledge about concrete effects of 
public policies that are vital to collaboration, learning, innovation and the development of 
sustainable policy solutions in a wider sense (Agranoff 2007, Ansell and Gash 2008, Goldsmith and 
Eggers 2004, Eggers 2005, Goldsmith and Kettl 2009, Ulibarri and Scott 2016). Indeed, this line of 
argument has developed into a substantial literature on networks as a source of public sector 
innovation and user-driven innovation (Bason 2010). 
This overlap between performance management and connective governance may go a long way in 
explaining why the latter tends to fall short of actual citizen participation and deliberation, but it 
must also be seen in the context of the particular claim to democratic legitimacy advanced by 
performance management: increased governmental accountability. Accountability implies 
transparency and a governmental responsibility to continuously demonstrate results and provide 
evidence to the general public, the media and stakeholders with a vested interest in particular issues 
(Lonsdale, Wilkins, and Ling 2011). As such, the concept of accountability has been essential in the 
attempt to establish ‘output legitimacy’ as a governance supplement to traditional ‘input legitimacy’ 
of representative democracy, particularly with reference to the EU (Scharpf 1999). With the 
backing of the World Bank, the EU and a near-universal commitment across national governments, 
it is hardly controversial to state that this attempt has been a resounding success. 
What has perhaps been lost in this process is that the accountability of performance management is 
a standard of scientific management, not democracy. As Campbell made perfectly clear in his 
original argument for evidence-based public policy: accountability is the result of an 
experimentalist scientific rationality and procedural arrangements for testing and debating the 
results produced by policy interventions designed and conducted as social experiments (1969). 
Public policy makers committed to the experimentalist society are more accountable only to the 
extent that they are committed to scientific facts and the procedural arrangements ensuring the 
responsibility of empirical science. Accountability is, at its core, a standard of scientific 
responsibility as developed in academia and the scientific institution. As such, accountability may 
indeed be a necessary correlate of evidence-based policy making in order to protect against political 
manipulation of facts, secrecy, distortion etc.  
More generally, accountability serves to maintain a scientific or at least quasi-scientific structure of 
information. Performance management is clearly responsible for an intensive mining of data 
sources, specifically designed studies and program evaluations, as well as the comparative approach 
found in the emblematic expression of current performance management: grading, scoring and 

18 
 
ultimately ranking of individuals, organizations, types of policy and, in the case of ‘good 
governance indicators’, the entirety of government as such (Pollitt 2014). Provided that such 
information is made accessible to the general public, the traditional form of scientific accountability 
is indeed also being extended and becoming more inclusive, allowing citizens (although clearly 
only the more capable and resourceful) to become part of ‘review’ processes previously reserved for 
specialized scientific audiences and peers.  
What this amounts to, however, is less a reinforced democracy than a more open and transparent 
form of scientific management. Performance management is to some extent the most obvious heir 
to scientific management and, in this capacity, a strong candidate for confirmation of the idea that 
current technocracy is the latest incarnation of an ever-recurring intellectual doctrine. The history of 
performance management has, for example, been presented convincingly as a succession of eight 
performance movements, leading from Taylorism to NPM and current evidence-based policy 
claiming that ‘research and indicators rather than ideology and opinion have to undergird policy’ 
(Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 51). However, the part played by performance 
management in the transformation from government to governance goes beyond ‘revitalization of 
old concepts’ and increased ‘intensity in the use of performance information’ due to ‘technological 
changes’ (Van Dooren, Bouckaert, and Halligan 2015, 55).  
The obsession with quantification and the ‘culture of objectivity’ was always endemic to the 
technocratic project. In the original version of the technocratic project, however, measurement and 
quantification was a means to provide political-administrative elites with the numbers necessary to 
exercise ‘expert judgement and general managerial skills’ with a significant degree of discretion 
and even secrecy  (Porter 1995, 146). Compared to this, performance management is by and large 
committed to openness, transparency and even inclusion of citizens in the scientific process. In this 
sense, Power was not entirely correct when observing that ‘paradoxically, the audit society 
threatens to become an increasingly closed society, albeit one whose declared programmatic 
foundation is openness and accountability’ (Power 1999, 128). The problem is not so much one of 
closure as the assumption that accountability should or could ever mean more than a relatively 
transparent and inclusive vis-à-vis closed scientific management.  
Conclusion 
Technocratic scientization and depoliticization has been called an ‘apolitical ideology’ (Fischer 
1990, 21). On the one hand, the technocratic project is strongly opposed to the established 
ideologies of parliamentary and democratic politics. On the other hand, scientific management can 

19 
 
be said to constitute an ideology in its own right insofar as interest politics is supplanted by a 
‘politics of expertise’ where political decisions are presented as necessary interventions above 
political contestation and debate (Fischer 1990, 26). In Habermas’ original outline of this argument: 
scientific management may be less apparently ‘repressive’ and less relevant for a critique of 
ideology than the conventional list of grand ideologies. Nevertheless, the abstraction from questions 
of practical experience and social forces also make the technocratic ‘fetish of science’ functionally 
equivalent to an ideology insofar as it even more efficiently impedes broad political thought, 
reflection and debate about the foundations of society (1971, 111).  
In this sense it is perhaps not surprising that decades of technocratic governance has now resulted in 
a populist counter-reaction. However, a more substantial engagement with the technocratic project 
also deepens our understanding of the destructive spiral between the two. Technocracy and 
populism are caught in a perfectly symmetrical rejection of democracy as we know it, and the 
current attempts to reassert scientific management against post-factualism is as misguided and 
doomed to fail as the hysteria and postures of populism are dangerous. In the current situation, any 
confusion of technocracy with democracy contributes to a deepening of existing problems. 
Populism is, for all its apparent flaws, a sign that the bluff of technocracy has been called.  
 
References 
Agranoff, Robert. 2007. Managing Within Networks: Adding Value to Public Organizations. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Akin, William. 1977. Technocracy and the American Dream: The Technocrat Movement, 1900-
1941. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ansell, Chris, and Alison Gash. 2008. "Collaborative Governance in Theory and Practice."  Journal of 
Aministration Research and Theory 18 (4):543-571. 
Bang, Henrik, ed. 2003. Governance as Social and Political Communication. Manchester: 
Manchester University Press. 
Bason, Christian. 2010. Leading Public Sector Innovation: Co-creating for a Better Society. Bristol: 
The Policy Press. 
Beck, Ulrich. 1994. "The Reinvention of Politics: Towards a Theory of Reflexive Modernization." In 
Reflexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order, 
edited by Ulrich Beck, Anthony Giddens and Scott Lash, 1-55. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Beck, Ulrich. 1996. "Risk Society and the Provident State." In Risk, Environment & Modernity: 
Towards a New Ecology, edited by Scott Lash, Bronislaw Szerszynski and Brian Wynne, 27-
43. London/Thousand Oaks/New Delhi: Sage. 
Beck, Ulrich. 2006. "Living in the world risk society."  Economy and Society 35 (3):329-345. 
Bell, Daniel. 1974. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting. New 
York Basic Books. 
Bennett, W. Lance, and Alexandra Segerberg. 2008. The Logic of Connective Action: Digital media 
and the personalization of contentious politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

20 
 
Bickerton, Christopher, and Carlo Invernizzi Accetti. 2017. "Populism and technocracy: opposites or 
complements?"  Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 20 (2):186-
206. doi: 10.1080/13698230.2014.995504. 
Bouckaert, Geert, and John Halligan. 2008. Managing Performance: International comparisons. 
London/New York: Routledge. 
Burnham, Peter. 2001. "New Labour and the politics of depoliticisation."  British Journal of Politics 
and International Relations 3 (2):127-149. 
Campbell, Donald T. 1969. "Reforms as experiments."  American Psychologist 24 (4):409-429. 
Campbell, Donald T. 1998 [1971]. "The Experimenting Society." In The Experimenting Society: 
Essays in Honor of Donald T. Campbell, edited by William N. Dunn, 35-68. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. 
Castells, Manuel. 2000-2004. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture (3 volumes). 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. 
Castells, Manuel. 2005. "The Network Society: from Knowledge to Policy." In The Network Society: 
from Knowledge to Policy, edited by Manuel Castells and Gustavo Cardoso, 3-23. 
Washington DC: John Hopkins Center for Transatlantic Relations. 
Castells, Manuel. 2007. "Communication, Power and Counter-Power in the Network Society."  
International Journal of Communication 1:238-266. 
Chadwick, Andrew. 2013. The Hybrid Media System. Politics and Power. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Christensen, Tom. 2013. "New Public Management and Beyond: The Hybridization of Public Sector 
Reform." In Global Themes and Local Variations in Organization and Management. 
Perspectives and Glocalization, edited by Gilli Drori, 161-174. London/New York: Routledge. 
Christensen, Tom, and Per Lægreid, eds. 2007. Transcending New Public Management: The 
Transformation of Public Sector Reforms. Farnham: Ashgate. 
Conklin, Jeffrey. 2006. Dialogue Mapping: Building Shared Understanding of Wicked Problems. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Crozier, Michael. 2007. "Recursive Governance: Contemporary Political Communication and Public 
Policy."  Political Communication 24 (1):1-18. doi: 10.1080/10584600601128382. 
Daniels, Ronald J., Donald F. Kettl, and Howard Kunreuther. 2006. On Risk and Disaster: Lessons 
from Hurricane Katrina. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Dawes, Sharon S. 2008. "The Evolution and Continuing Challenges of E-Governance."  Public 
Administration Review 68:86-102. 
Dunleavy, Patrick, Helen Margetts, Simon Bastow, and Jane Tinkler. 2006. "New Public 
Management Is Dead—Long Live Digital-Era Governance."  Journal of Public Administration 
Research and Theory 16 (3):467-494. 
Eggers, William. 2005. Government 2.0: Using technology to improve education, cut red tape, reduce 
gridlock, and enhance democracy. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Esmark, Anders. 2017. "Maybe It Is Time to Rediscover Technocracy? : An Old Framework for a 
New Analysis of Administrative Reforms in the Governance Era."  Journal of Public 
Administration Research and Theory 27 (3):501-516. doi: 10.1093/jopart/muw059. 
Fischer, Frank. 1990. Technocracy and the Politics of Expertise. Newbury Park/London/New Delhi: 
Sage. 
Fukuyama, Francis. 2014. Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the 
Globalisation of Democracy. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1967. The New Industrial State. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Goldsmith, Stephen, and William Eggers. 2004. Governing by Network: The New Shape of the 
Public Sector. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution. 
Goldsmith, Stephen, and Donald F. Kettl. 2009. Unlocking the Power of Networks: Keys to High-
Performance Government. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution. 
Habermas, Jürgen. 1971. Toward a Rational Society. London: Heinemann. 

21 
 
Hajer, Marten, and Hendrik Wagenaar, eds. 2003. Deliberative Policy Analysis. Understanding 
Governance in the Network Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hay, Colin. 2007. Why We Hate Politics. Cambridge: Polity. 
Head, Brian W., and John Alford. 2013. "Wicked Problems: Implications for Public Policy and 
Management."  Administration & Society. 
Helbing, Dirk. 2013. "Globally networked risks and how to respond."  Nature 497 (7447):51-59. doi: 
10.1038/nature12047. 
IRGC. 2005. White Paper on Risk Governance: Towards an Integrative Approach. Geneva: 
International Risk Governance Council. 
Jessop, Bob. 2011. "Metagovernance." In The Sage Handbook of Governance, edited by Mark Bevir, 
106-124. London: Sage. 
Klijn, Erik-Hans, and Juiran Edelenbos. 2007. "Meta-governance as Network Management." In 
Theories of Democratic Network Governance, edited by Eva Sørensen and Jacob Torfing, 
199-215. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Koppenjan, Joop, and Erik-Hans Klijn. 2004. Managing Uncertainties in Networks. London/New 
York: Routledge. 
Kuisel, Richard F. 1981. Capitalism and the state in modern France. Renovation and economic 
management in the twentieth century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lash, Scott. 2002. Critique of Information. London: Sage. 
Lodge, Martin, and Derek Gill. 2011. "Toward a New Era of Administrative Reform? The Myth of 
Post-NPM in New Zealand."  Governance 24 (1):141-166. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-
0491.2010.01508.x. 
Lonsdale, Jeremy, Peter Wilkins, and Tom Ling, eds. 2011. Performance Auditing: Contributing to 
Accountability in Democratic Government. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
McGuire, Michael, and Robert Agranoff. 2011. "The Limitations of Public Management Networks."  
Public Administration 89 (2):265-284. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9299.2011.01917.x. 
Meynaud, Jean. 1968. Technocracy. New York: Free Press. 
Moore, Mark H. 1995. Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in Government. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 
Müller, Jan-Werner. 2016. Was ist Populismus? Berlin: Suhrkamp. 
Olsen, Johan P. 2006. "Maybe its time to Rediscover Bureaucracy."  Journal of Public Administration 
Research & Theory 16 (1):1-24. 
Osborne, Stephen P., ed. 2010. The New Public Governance?: Emerging Perspectives on the Theory 
and Practice of Public Governance. London: Routledge. 
Pollitt, Christopher. 2014. "Simply the Best? The International Benchmarking of Reform and Good 
Governance." In Comparative Administrative Change and Reform, edited by Jon Pierre and 
Patricia W. Ingraham, 91-113. Montreal: McGill-Queens Universit Press. 
Pollitt, Christopher, and Geert Bouckaert. 2011. Public Management Reform. A Comparative 
Analysis - New Public Management, Governance and the Neo-Weberian State Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Porter, Theodore M. 1995. Trust in Numbers. The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Power, Michael. 1999. The Audit Society. Rituals of Verification. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Putnam, Robert. 1977. "Elite Transformation in Advanced Industrial Societies: An Empirical 
Assessment of the Theory of Technocracy."  Comparative Political Studies 10 (3):383-412. 
Renn, Ortwin. 2008. Risk Governance: Coping with Uncertainty in a Complex World. London: 
Earthscan. 
Renn, Ortwin, and Pia-Johanna Schweizer. 2009. "Inclusive risk governance: concepts and application 
to environmental policy making."  Environmental Policy and Governance 19 (3):174-185. doi: 
10.1002/eet.507. 

22 
 
Renn, Ortwin, and Katherine D. Walker, eds. 2008. Global Risk Governance: Concept and Practice 
Using the IRGC Framework. Voorkant: Springer. 
Rhodes, R.A.W. 2007. "Understanding Governance: Ten Years On."  Organization Studies 28 
(8):1243-1264. doi: 10.1177/0170840607076586. 
Ridley, F. F. 1966. "French Technocracy and Comparative Government."  Political Studies 14 (1):34-
52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1966.tb00387.x. 
Rittel, Horst W. J., and Melvin M. Webber. 1973. "Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning."  
Policy Sciences 4 (2):155-169. 
Sanderson, Ian. 2002. "Evaluation, Policy Learning and Evidence-Based Policy Making."  Public 
Administration 80 (1):1-22. doi: 10.1111/1467-9299.00292. 
Scharpf, Fritz. 1999. Governing in Europe: Effective and Democratic? Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Schmidt, Vivien. 2006. Democracy in Europe: the EU and national polities. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Segal, Howard P. 1985. Technological utopianism in American culture. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press. 
Smyth, William Henry. 1919. "Technocracy—Ways and Means to Gain Industrial Democracy."  
Industrial Management 57:385-389. 
Stoker, Gerry. 2006. "Public Value Management: A New Narrative for Networked Governance?"  
The American Review of Public Administration 36 (1):41-57. doi: 
10.1177/0275074005282583. 
Syrett, Michel, and Marion Devine. 2012. Managing Uncertainty: Strategies for surviving and thriving 
in turbulent times. London: The Economist. 
Sørensen, Eva, and Jacob Torfing, eds. 2007. Theories of Democratic Network Governance. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave/Macmillan. 
Tilman, Rick. 2014. Thorstein Veblen and His Critics, 1891-1963: Conservative, Liberal, and Radical 
Perspectives. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Trottier, Daniel, and Christian Fuchs, eds. 2015. Social Media, Politics and the State. Protests, 
Revolutions, Riots, Crime and Policing in the Age of Facebook, Twitter and Youtube. 
London: Routledge. 
Ulibarri, Nicola, and Tyler A. Scott. 2016. "Linking Network Structure to Collaborative Governance."  
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory. doi: 10.1093/jopart/muw041. 
Urbinati, Nadia. 2014. Democracy Disfigured: Opinion, Truth, and the People. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 
Van Dooren, Wouter, Geert Bouckaert, and John Halligan. 2015. Performance Management in the 
Public Sector. 2nd ed. London/New York: Routledge. 
Webber, Melvin M. 1978. "A difference paradigm for planning." In Planning theory in the 1980s: a 
serch for future directions, edited by R.W. Burchell and G. Sternlieb. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Center for Urban Policy Research. 
Weber, Max. 1921. "Politik als Beruf." In Gesammelte Politische Schriften, edited by Max Weber, 
396-450. München: Drei Masken Verlag. 
Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society. Edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. Los 
Angeles: University of California Press. 
Willke, Helmut. 1992. Ironie des Staates. Grundlinien einer Staatstheorie polyzentrischer 
Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
Figure 1: Technocratic governance 
 

