Hallucination and Its Objects
Alex Byrne
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Riccardo Manzotti
IULM University of Milan
When one hallucinates a ﬂying pig, one does not see a ﬂying pig, because
there are no ﬂying pigs to be seen. But there is considerable pressure to
admit that one nonetheless sees (or, at least, is aware of) some thing. That
pressure can either be resisted, or else a suitable object of hallucination
can be identiﬁed. The large philosophical literature on hallucination has
recently tended toward to the ﬁrst option, but the second retains some
notable supporters. This is symptomatic of a serious dilemma: an object
of hallucination is hard to resist, but ﬁnding a plausible candidate has
proved well-nigh impossible.
In the ﬁrst part of this article (sections 1–4), we review and rein-
force this dilemma. In the second part, we argue for taking the second
horn, and introduce our candidate for the object of hallucination. On
our account, the hallucinator is aware of a physical object, albeit some-
times not a familiar one.
Thanks to Rami Ali, David Chalmers, Lucrezia Compiani, Yuval Dolev, E. J. Green, David
Hilbert, Stephanie Hromadka, Mark Johnston, Heather Logue, Fiona MacPherson, Mike
Martin, Gregory Owcarz, Tim Parks, Susanna Schellenberg, Susanna Siegel (apologies to
people we have failed to remember), and audiences at the Australian National University,
National Yang-Ming University, North Carolina State University, the University of Illinois
at Chicago, the University of Leeds, and the University of Toronto. We are also much
indebted to anonymous referees and the editors of the Philosophical Review.
Philosophical Review, Vol. 131, No. 3, 2022
DOI 10.1215/00318108-9743835
© 2022 by Cornell University
327
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
1. A Framework for Hallucination
There is not much consensus in the philosophy of perception. How-
ever, underlying the main disputes are some threads of agreement. It
is not essential to our argument, but it will greatly help our presenta-
tion if we work within a framework for thinking about hallucination that,
although not universally accepted, is well motivated by these common
threads.
1.1. Successful and Illusory Cases
Imagine you see a yellow pad and a blue pencil on top of a desk. (As
is common, we will concentrate on the visual case.) Suppose that you
see these objects as they are—the pad looks yellow and is yellow, the
pencil looks straight and is straight, and so on. What is it like to see this
quotidian scene? As a philosopher might put it: what is the “phenomenal
character” of your experience?
Since a central point of perception is to enable the organism
to know about its environment, one might expect that attempting to
answer by attending to one’s “experience” will end in failure, with
one’s attention simply directed to the environmental objects of the expe-
rience. But even though one’s experience may not be an object of
attention in its own right, one can apparently discover its phenome-
nal character by attending to its environmental objects. Thus Michael
Tye:
Suppose you are standing before a tapestry in an art gallery. As you take
in the rich and varied colors of the cloth, you are told to pay close atten-
tion to your visual experience and its phenomenology. What do you do?
. . . You attend closely to the tapestry and details in it. You are aware of
something outside you—the tapestry—and of various qualities that you
experience as being qualities of parts of the tapestry, and by being aware
of these things you are aware of what it is like for you subjectively or phe-
nomenally. (Tye 2009: 117)
This sort of view is very popular among philosophers of percep-
tion, who are otherwise divided on a range of central issues.1
1. Examples include Harman 1990; McDowell 1994: 191; Dretske 1995; Martin
1998: 174; Byrne 2001; Campbell 2002: 116; Fish 2009: 5–16; Pautz 2013; Logue 2014;
Speaks 2015; Schellenberg 2018, chap. 6. Notable dissents include Block 2003 and Pea-
cocke 1983.
328
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Tye’s talk of your experience’s “phenomenology” (and other simi-
lar locutions) could be replaced with the nontechnical ‘how things seem
to you,’ on a contextually natural interpretation of that phrase. Tye, then,
is suggesting that “how things seem to you” can be characterized by var-
ious qualities of the pencil, the pad, and so on, together with the pencil
and the pad themselves. But that is clearly not all, as is indicated by his
remark about “qualities of parts of the tapestry.” If we change the color
of the pencil from blue to yellow and the pad from yellow to blue, we
have changed how things seem, even though you are still aware of the
same qualities and objects. Clearly what is missing in the characteriza-
tion of how things seem to you is that yellowness is instantiated in the
pad, and blueness is instantiated in the pencil. In other words, the pad
and yellowness are insufﬁcient—we need to add the fact that the pad is
yellow.2
When you see the pad and the pen, a portion or tract of reality
is revealed. A fact concerning the scene before your eyes is, to borrow a
phrase from McDowell (1994: 191), “present to consciousness,” or (for
short) present.3 That this fact is presented, Tye is saying, determines the
“phenomenology” of your experience, or the way things seem.4 That is,
along with many other philosophers, Tye endorses:
TRACT In successful perception, a certain sort of fact is present
and thereby determines the way things seem.
(No doubt many philosophers sympathetic to TRACT would quib-
ble with its formulation, but in-spirit endorsements will do.5)
What about unsuccessful cases of perception? In particular, what
about illusions, where one sees an object but it is not as it looks? The
straight pencil might be half-immersed in water, and so look bent. Due
to abnormal lighting or a color contrast effect, the pencil may look to
have a shade of blue that it doesn’t in fact have. At least at ﬁrst glance, in
such cases there are no available facts to be presented, and to determine
the way things seem.
2. Cf. Fish 2009: 53; Martin 2002: 399.
3. An early occurrence of the ‘presentation’ terminology is in Searle 1983: 46. The
presented fact is no doubt “complex” in some sense, and may not be fully expressible in
a natural language (apart from demonstrative constructions such as ‘This is how things
are’).
4. See Tye 2009: 119–20.
5. See note 8, below.
329
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
TRACT suggests an obvious solution. Facts are arguably true
propositions.6 And if they are, then although there is no such thing as
the fact that the pencil is bent, the (false) proposition that it is bent can be
pressed into service, yielding the following more general claim:
SCENE In successful and illusory perception, a certain sort of
proposition, a scene, is present and thereby determines the way
things seem.
Here those on board with TRACT diverge. Many, like Tye, support
its extension to SCENE. Others will immediately get off the bus.7
However, since SCENE makes our theory of hallucination easier
to motivate and present, we will henceforth assume it; that assumption
could be dropped without materially affecting the argument.8
6. Cf. Williamson 2000: 43. For dissent, see King, Soames, and Speaks 2014: 68.
See also Byrne 2019: 13n12, 14n13.
7. Including John Campbell, M. G. F. Martin, and William Fish (see note 1); see
also Travis 2004; Kalderon 2011; Brewer 2011; Genone 2014; Beck 2019; French and
Phillips 2020.
8. Those who accept TRACT (or something close to it) and reject SCENE treat
illusions as successful cases of perception that are nonetheless misleading—a view some-
times called naive realism. On a naive realist account of illusion, “a person is simply
presented with the actual constituents of the physical world themselves” (Brewer 2006:
169). It is invariably assumed that hallucination cannot succumb to the same treatment.
Since (as will become clear later) our view assimilates hallucination to perception (specif-
ically, illusion), it should be congenial to the naive realist dissatisﬁed with the current
menu of theories of hallucination.
Craig French and Ian Phillips (2020) are naive realists who deny that the “actual
constituents of the physical world” presented in perception determine the way things
seem. What determines the way things seem, on their view, is the “way” those presented
elements are perceived (7–9). As naive realists, they reject SCENE; they would also reject
TRACT as formulated in the text.
Michael Pendlebury (1990) agrees that in veridical perception and illusion one is
presented with a scene (a proposition), but he denies that the presentation of this propo-
sition determines the way things seem, partly by appeal to the (much discussed) example
of blurry vision: “The blurred character of some visual experiences may have no ‘mean-
ing’ or representational signiﬁcance” (216). Pendlebury would therefore reject both
TRACT and SCENE as formulated in the text.
The views mentioned in the previous two paragraphs do not make the problem of
hallucination any easier. Their proponents need to respond to an amended version of
Argument † (see below), with different premises but the same conclusion. Although
demurring at the details of our framing, they have no special reason to reject our solu-
tion.
330
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
2. Particularity and the Problem of Hallucination
What are hallucinations? Characterizations from scientists typically
involve some variation on the following:
An hallucination is a strictly sensational form of consciousness, as good
and true a sensation as if there were a real object there. The object
happens to be not there, that is all. (W. James 1898: 115)
Hallucinations are perceptions without a corresponding stimulus
externally. (Bleuler 1934: 59)
A hallucination can be deﬁned as a conscious sensory experience
that occurs in the absence of corresponding external stimulation
of the relevant sensory organ and has a sufﬁcient sense of reality
to resemble a veridical perception. (Aleman and Larøi 2008: 15)
Since, on our view, (visual) hallucinations do have a “real” or “external”
object, albeit not one usually before the eyes, the ﬁrst two characteri-
zations are (at least) misleading. The third is better, because it puts the
emphasis on the lack of “stimulation of the relevant sensory organ,” while
remaining neutral on whether the hallucinator is aware of any object.
In the spirit of the third characterization, we can informally char-
acterize (visual) hallucinations as follows: S (visually) hallucinates when
S “seems to see” an object, but no such object is currently affecting the
eyes. But what is “such an object”? Here is a more careful characteriza-
tion. S hallucinates iff S seems to see an object that looks F . . . to S, but
there is no object affecting the eyes that looks F . . . to S. (Take ‘F . . . ’
to be an exhaustive speciﬁcation of the way the ostensible object looks.)
The relevant sense of ‘seems to see an object that looks F . . . ’ can be illus-
trated by examples of veridical seeing and examples of illusions. Viewing
a pencil on a desk, one seems to see an object that looks straight . . . ;
viewing a pencil half-immersed in water, one seems to see an object that
looks bent. . . . If one sees a pencil on the left of the desk, and simultane-
ously hallucinates a pencil on the right, then one seems to see an object
that looks straight and on the right . . . , but there is no object affecting
the eyes that looks straight and on the right. . . .9 If there is an object that
looks straight and on the right, then it is a hallucinatory object.
9. Further reﬁnements to this characterization of hallucination could be made,
but its purpose is simply to convey to the reader the target phenomenon, in a neutral
fashion that does not rule out our view from the start. Some visual experiences (e.g.,
331
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
In paradigm cases of seeing an object, a pattern of light altered by
the object is entering the eyes. There are many actual cases where people
report (in effect) that they seem to see an object, but there is no good
light-altering candidate in the environment. Here is an example:
On 28th February, 1799, at the Royal Society of Berlin, a well-
known German bookseller called Christoph Friedrich Nicolaï
(1733–1811) read an autobiographical paper entitled “Memoir
on the Appearance of Spectres or Phantoms occasioned by dis-
ease; with Psychological Remarks”. . . . He reported that one morn-
ing of the year 1790 (a particularly stressful one for him) he
“suddenly observed, at the distance of ten paces, the ﬁgure of a
deceased person. I pointed at it, and asked my wife [who was sit-
ting by him at the time] whether she saw it. She saw nothing but
being much alarmed, endeavoured to compose me, and sent for
the physician. The ﬁgure remained some seven or eight minutes,
and at length I became a little more calm. . . . In the afternoon
the ﬁgure which I had seen in the morning again appeared. I was
alone when this happened. I went therefore to the apartment of
my wife, to whom I related it. But thither also the ﬁgure pursued
me. Sometimes it was present, sometimes it vanished; but it was
always the same standing ﬁgure. . . . The ﬁgure of the deceased
person never appeared to me after the ﬁrst dreadful day, but sev-
eral other ﬁgures showed themselves afterwards very distinctly—
sometimes some I knew—mostly, however, of persons I did not
know.” (Berrios and Marková 2015: 7)
There are also many similar cases where the absence of any rel-
evant light-altering object is evident, because there is no light entering
the eyes at all. Experiences of phosphenes, known to the ancient Greeks,
are a classic example. Accordingly, taking the reports at face value, there
are visual hallucinations, as we are using this expression.
Hallucinations as just explained can be called psychologists’ hal-
lucinations, to distinguish them from—in the terminology of Howard
Robinson (2013: 313)—philosophers’ hallucinations, which would result if
“the perceptual system and brain were stimulated in just the way they are
stimulated in genuine perception, and not by the usual external objects.”
In Martin’s terminology, these are causally matching hallucinations, “those
seeing in thick fog) do not (clearly) involve object perception; their corresponding hal-
lucinations are not under discussion here.
332
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
with the same proximate causes as veridical perceptions” (Martin 2004:
71). The proximate (presumably neural) causes, Martin and Robinson
suppose, are sufﬁcient for perceptual experience. Philosophers’ hallu-
cinations are, in this sense, internal: seeing a pig requires some porcine
contribution from the environment, causally affecting the subject, but
hallucinating a pig requires no environmental contribution at all. Per-
haps some psychologists’ hallucinations are also philosophers’ hallucina-
tions, but this should not be assumed at the outset. That philosophers’
hallucinations are at least possible is very widely accepted; nonetheless,
at the end of this article we will conclude that it should not be. In any
event, when developing a theory of Xs it is wise to begin with the actual
Xs, rather than merely possible ones. According, our focus until the last
section will be on psychologists’ hallucinations.10
Once SCENE is accepted, a seemingly innocuous next step is to
endorse a similar thesis for hallucinations:
SCENE†
In hallucination, a certain sort of proposition, a scene, is
present and thereby determines the way things seem.
It is here that the problem of hallucination arises. In the success-
ful and illusory cases, you do not merely see a pad, you see (and hence
are aware of) this pad; you do not see a qualitatively identical pad in the
stationery cupboard. Vision acquaints you with a particular object, this pad;
it does not acquaint you with the pad in the cupboard. Accordingly, the
presented scenes in the successful and illusory cases, which determine
the way things seem, concern this pad, not merely some pad or other. It
is thus natural to think that the scenes are object-dependent, in this sense:
necessarily, anyone presented with these very scenes would be aware of this
pad.11
A plausible accompaniment to SCENE is therefore:
10. For reasons of space, we are ignoring hallucinations in sense modalities other
than vision; these are not unimportant and ideally they should be examined at length.
For example, schizophrenic hallucinations often involve “hearing” voices. (For a nonvi-
suocentric discussion of hallucination, see Farkas 2013.)
11. Note that—at least arguably—one may see (and so be perceptually aware of) an
object without attending to it.
The characterization of object-dependence in the text is sufﬁcient for our purposes,
but since it is tied to perception there is no pretense to generality. Ephraim Glick (2018)
defends a general account of object-dependent (or singular) propositions that ﬁts nicely
with the more restricted account given here.
333
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
OBJECT
If SCENE is true, scenes in successful and illusory cases
are object-dependent.
Note that adding OBJECT to SCENE does not imply that merely
permuting particular objects can change “phenomenal character,” or the
way things seem. Imagine looking at one egg and then a qualitatively
identical egg. The way things seem doesn’t change. However, the pre-
sented scene changes: the ﬁrst presented scene concerns one particular
egg; the second presented scene concerns another. There is no route
back from the way things seem to the presented scene, which is why
SCENE says that the presented scene determines the way things seem.12
Now consider OBJECT’s hallucinatory counterpart:
OBJECT†
If SCENE† is true, scenes in hallucinatory cases are
object-dependent.
Given the palpable particularity of hallucination, OBJECT† can
seem tempting. However, given SCENE† and OBJECT†, it follows that
the hallucinator is aware of an object—that is, there are hallucinatory
objects. We thus have Argument †:
SCENE†
In hallucination, a certain sort of proposition, a scene, is
present and thereby determines the way things seem.
OBJECT†
If SCENE† is true, scenes in hallucination are object-
dependent.
† There are hallucinatory objects.
Most of the voluminous philosophical literature on hallucina-
tion can be viewed as responding to Argument †—either by denying
OBJECT†, or by denying SCENE†. Since our overall argument depends
on the plausibility of Argument †, we need at least to sketch the main
problems with both kinds of response. (Those already convinced that
existing theories of hallucination are inadequate can skip ahead to sec-
tion 4.)
12. For helpful discussion of particularity and phenomenology, as well as references
to the literature on the topic, see French and Gomes 2019.
334
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
3. Resisting Argument †
To begin, suppose that while SCENE† is true, OBJECT† is false: when hal-
lucinating a ﬂying pig against the clear blue sky, a scene is presented,
but that scene is not object-dependent.13 That is, there is no object x
such that the hallucinator is aware of x. Still, as Susanna Schellenberg
(2016: 878) puts it, “it seems . . . as if a particular object is present.” What
sort of presented scene (proposition) could explain this? There are two
options. The most obvious one is that the scene characterizes the halluci-
nated pig purely descriptively—for instance, using a deﬁnite description.
To introduce the other, note that on some theories of propositions, an
object-dependent scene (proposition) is a structured entity with the rel-
evant object as a constituent. Then perhaps there are “gappy scenes”:
scenes just like object-dependent ones, but with a “gap” where an object
should be (see, e.g., Braun 1993). There are, then, two ways in which
OBJECT† might be false: ﬁrst, hallucinatory scenes are descriptive; sec-
ond, they are gappy. Let us take these in order.
If hallucinatory scenes are descriptive, there is no reason to treat
successful perception and illusion any differently, and indeed propo-
nents of the descriptive response do not (e.g., Pendlebury 1986: 98; Hill
2021). So, in a successful case of seeing a yellow pad, the presented scene
picks out the pad by description: it is, say, the yellow rectangular object
on the left. A natural descriptivist suggestion is that you are aware of
the pad because the scene is the proposition that . . . the F . . . , and the
pad is the F . However, cases of illusion immediately raise a problem.
Imagine you see (and so are aware of) Pad, a yellow rectangular pad on
the right, but Pad does not appear that way. Perhaps, due to distorting
mirrors and lighting conditions, Pad appears to you as a white square
pad on the left.14 The presented scene does not pick out the pad by
description, yet you are visually aware of it. Why? John Searle (1983: 48)
suggested, in effect, that this shows that the scene has been mischaracter-
ized: it does pin down Pad by description, because it speciﬁes that the F is
“causing this visual experience,” and Pad is the F .15 Searle’s view has met
with a number of well-known objections, for instance that there is no
independent reason to think that perceptual experience has this kind
13. The conditional in OBJECT† should be read as material, and so it is not an
option to deny both SCENE† and OBJECT†.
14. If we add that there is a white square pad on the left, which you do not see, we
get a variant of a classic example due to H. P. Grice (1961: 142).
15. See also Searle 2015: 63–65.
335
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
of self-referential content (Burge 1991: 205). Perhaps more fundamen-
tally, Searle’s response, rather than denying OBJECT†, actually reinstates
it: scenes are object-dependent, with the pertinent objects being “experi-
ences.” Moreover, once it is conceded that vision can pick out particular
experiences nondescriptively, there is little motivation for insisting that it
cannot pick out pads and pigs nondescriptively. And if vision can pick out
pads and pigs nondescriptively, the assumption of self-referential content
is otiose.16
Turn now to the second way of denying OBJECT†: the kind of
scene presented in hallucination is not object-dependent, not because
it is descriptive, but because it is a structured entity with a “gap” where
an object is typically to be found. Perhaps the main problem with this
idea is that although the existence of descriptive propositions is not con-
troversial, gappy propositions are dubious entities. For example, a gappy
proposition intuitively lacks a truth-value.17 If someone says ‘That is a
goat’ while demonstrating nothing, they may have expressed a proposi-
tion with a “gap” corresponding to the subject term ‘That’, but they have
not succeeded specifying a way for the world to be—or not to be. But the
supposition that a proposition is neither true nor false can apparently
be reduced to absurdity by simple classical reasoning (Williamson 1994:
187–89).18
16. Christopher S. Hill (2021: 1392) offers a variant that appeals to causation as a
further condition, not as a component of the presented scene: “A subject S is percep-
tually aware of an object O just in case (1) S’s experience E represents that there is a
(single) object with such and such perceptible qualities in such and such a location, (2)
O is causally responsible for E, and (3) O comes closer than any of the other causes of
E to satisfying its representational content.” Concentrating, as Hill does, on vision, one
problem is that E’s causes can arguably include an unseen object O* which due to illu-
sion “comes closer than any of the other causes of E,” including the perceived object
O, “to satisfying its representational content.” (Imagine that O* hits O behind a barrier,
causing O to emerge into a hall of distorting mirrors that make O appear exactly like
O* and completely unlike itself.) Hill’s proposal thus seems to predict that S is aware
of the unseen object O* and not aware of the seen object O. Whether this sort of pro-
posal could be ﬁxed by placing restrictions on the causal relation (see Hill 2021: sec. 8)
is something we will have to put aside here.
17. See Salmon 1998: 318n54; and also Adams and Stecker 1994: 389. David Braun
(1993: 464), however, denies that gappy propositions lack truth values, taking the atomic
ones to be false. See also the next note.
18. Schellenberg (2010, 2011, 2013, 2018) develops a Fregean version of the gappy
content view. She argues that “a hallucination can have a gappy content and nonetheless
be inaccurate” (Schellenberg 2018: 95). (Schellenberg prefers ‘inaccurate’/‘accurate’
over ‘false’/‘true’ [see 93], but for present purposes we can use these pairs interchange-
336
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Suppose, alternatively, that SCENE† is false. When one halluci-
nates, no scene is “present to consciousness,” not even a gappy one.
Since the point of denying SCENE† is to evade the conclusion †, one
is not (or need not be) aware of any particular object, not even a sense
datum. Somehow an explanation of hallucinatory experience must be
found without appeal to an ostensible tract of reality (a scene), or a hal-
lucinatory object. That is not much to work with.
One option is to reject the explanandum: really, there is no such
thing as hallucinatory experience. This has been defended at length by
William Fish (2009: 94–95): on his view, if someone hallucinates a yel-
low pad she undergoes no “phenomenal experience,” but instead merely
has the “cognitive effects” (principally “beliefs or judgments”) that would
ably.) If Schellenberg has made a case that gappy propositions or contents can be false,
then the objection in the text does not get off the ground. Schellenberg argues as follows:
Distinguish two ways in which a content can be inaccurate. One way is for the
content to make a claim about the environment that is not accurate. A second way is for
it to fail to make an accurate claim about the environment. To illustrate this second
sense of inaccuracy, suppose that I claim that Pegasus lives in my apartment.
This claim is inaccurate. Given that “Pegasus” does not refer, the inaccuracy in
question is that I have failed to make an accurate claim about who lives in my
apartment. If inaccuracy is understood in this second way, then a hallucination can
have a gappy content and nonetheless be inaccurate. On this understanding of gappy
contents, the fact that a content is gappy implies that the content is necessarily
inaccurate insofar as a gappy content could never make an accurate claim about
the world. (94–95; emphasis added)
Let p be the gappy content that Pegasus is F, which for vividness we can write as ‘that _ is
F ’. (For Schellenberg’s ofﬁcial Fregean notation, and other complications not relevant
to the present issue, see 88–92.) Schellenberg thinks (surely correctly) that p fails to
make a true (accurate) claim about the environment. Since p fails to make a true claim,
according to Schellenberg we can regard it as “inaccurate” (or false) in “the second sense
of inaccuracy.” In Schellenberg’s second sense, because p fails to make a true claim, it
is false. (Notice that in this sense, anything that fails to make a claim at all is false or
inaccurate.) But what about the ﬁrst sense of ‘inaccurate’, which is the relevant one
for the objection in the text? In the ﬁrst sense, ‘inaccuracy’ (or ‘false’) applies only to
“claims,” or propositions that “make claims.” A tomato, which fails to make any claims,
is false in the second sense but not in the ﬁrst. Now the gappy proposition p does “make
a claim”—put more simply, p is a claim, albeit a gappy one. So: is p, a “claim about the
environment,” false or inaccurate? Schellenberg has not shown that it is. Granted, p fails
to be a true claim, but for all Schellenberg has said, that is because p is a truth-valueless
claim, not because p is a false claim.
Tye (2009: chap. 4) endorses a Russellian version of the gappy content view for hal-
lucination. Tye (2014) later rejected it, mainly because (he argues) it is hard to make
sense of the alleged “gap.” For another argument against gappy propositions, see Byrne
2019: 23. See also Hill 2021: sec. 5.
337
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
have been produced by a veridical perception of a yellow pad. Naive hal-
lucinators do not just mistakenly think they see things, they mistakenly
think they (phenomenally) seem to see things.19
The main complaint against Fish’s account is that it places hal-
lucination on the wrong side of the border between perception and
cognition. (Visual) hallucination, according to Fish, is a sophisticated
kind of blindness-denial or visual anosognosia, a rare condition in which
cortically blind subjects claim that they can see. Since hallucination has
many of the signatures characteristic of perception (unlike visual anosog-
nosia), an account in terms of “beliefs or judgments” does not seem
promising.20
What’s left? Hallucinators may not be aware of some thing, but
plausibly they are aware of something: if one hallucinates a yellow pad,
one may not be aware of any pad (or any particular object), but one
arguably is aware of various (uninstantiated) properties and relations;
in particular, one is aware of what Mark Johnston (2004: 134) calls a
sensible proﬁle, “a complex, partly qualitative and partly relational prop-
erty, which exhausts the way the particular scene before your eyes is if
your present experience is veridical.” (A sensible proﬁle is very similar to
a gappy scene, although proﬁles are not supposed to be propositions.)
According to Johnston (2004: 156), the hallucinator mistakes a property
(speciﬁcally, a sensible proﬁle) for a particular:
The act/object account of hallucination is secured by treating hal-
lucination as visual awareness of an uninstantiated sensible pro-
ﬁle. If some such presented proﬁle strikes a subject as [a yellow
pad], then the subject counts as hallucinating [a yellow pad].
As with Fish, there is a worry that a purely perceptual phenomenon is
taken to be partly cognitive. And in any case, it is doubtful that John-
ston has adequately explained why a universal—a complex property with
yellowness as a constituent—could “strike one” as a particular—a yellow
pad.21
Someone who wants to deny SCENE† might seem to have run out
of options. A genuinely experiential hallucination of a yellow pad must
19. Fish (2009: 93–94) prefers to describe his view as “eliminativist about phenom-
enal character,” rather than as eliminativist about hallucinations; he would accordingly
reject the account of hallucination we gave earlier in section 2.
20. For criticism broadly along these lines, see Siegel 2008; Martin 2013; Pautz 2013.
21. For his explanation, see Johnston 2004: 142. See also Byrne 2019: 19–21. John-
ston later amended his account of hallucination: see Johnston 2022.
338
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
be secured without appealing to the presentation of an ostensible tract
of reality, or any awareness of an object or property. Among the meager
resources left is this: someone who hallucinates a yellow pad can’t tell
that she’s not seeing a yellow pad. Is that enough? M. G. F. Martin (2004,
2006) thinks it is.
Martin holds, roughly, that to hallucinate a yellow pad is simply to
be in a situation that is indiscriminable (not knowably different from) a
situation in which one veridically sees a yellow pad.22 The negative epis-
temological condition of indiscriminability from a situation in which one
veridically sees a yellow pad trivially applies when one does veridically see
a yellow pad, since falsehoods cannot be known. It also applies when
one sees a white pad that looks yellow, at least if we restrict (as Martin
[2004: 47] does) the sources of knowledge to “introspection and reﬂec-
tion on [one’s] experience.” One might know that one is not seeing a
yellow pad because one set up the illusion oneself, but here the source
of one’s knowledge is not reﬂective introspection. In both these cases
there is an additional “mental characterisation” (72): one sees a pad and
it looks yellow. Hallucinations, according to Martin, are cases where no
such additional characterization is available.
If we focus on simple cases where one hallucinates an object
against a plain background, and sees nothing other than the back-
ground, the proposal can be put as follows (leaving the qualiﬁcation
about reﬂective introspection tacit23):
HM S hallucinates an F iff S’s situation is indiscriminable from a
situation in which S veridically sees an F , and S neither veridically
sees an F nor has an illusion of an F .
If the negative epistemic condition on the right-hand side holds,
then either (1) S veridically sees an F , or (2) has an illusion of an F ,
or else (3) neither veridically sees an F nor has an illusion of an F . In
either (1) or (2), S has a (visual) experience of an F ; by HM, this is also
22. Martin (2004: 15) intends this theory only to apply to “causally matching”
hallucinations—see section 2. Many “psychologists’ hallucinations” will therefore fall out-
side the scope of his account.
23. One can “veridically see a tomato” by seeing one far away, or seeing one in
very dim light, and so on. These ways of veridically seeing a tomato are not relevant to
Martin’s account of “hallucinating a tomato”; rather, ‘veridically seeing a tomato’ is to be
interpreted as something like: veridically seeing a tomato in a way such that the tomato
is easily recognizable as a tomato. This rough characterization will do for our purposes.
339
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
true in (3). HM thus entails that the negative epistemological condition
is sufﬁcient for an experience of an F . As Martin (2004: 52) puts it:
A sensory experience of a lavender bush . . . is no more than
. . . a situation which is indiscriminable through reﬂection from
a veridical perception of a lavender bush.
One might think that this consequence of HM cannot be right. A dog, we
may suppose, has no capacity for reﬂective introspection at all. A fortiori,
it cannot tell its situation apart from a situation in which it is veridically
perceiving an F (for any ﬁlling for ‘F ’). Yet it is presumably not enjoy-
ing every possible veridical experience simultaneously (Siegel 2004: 383;
Martin 2006: 379–80; Siegel 2008: 210–14). Martin (2006: 380–96) has
replied to this objection at length; to avoid delaying the introduction of
our positive proposal, we will pass over the details and simply note that
(as Martin himself would not deny) there is plenty of room for dispute.24
That completes our discussion of the standard ways of responding
to Argument †. It has hardly been conclusive, but enough has been said
to suggest that the conclusion is difﬁcult to avoid. In the second part of
this article we will argue that there is no reason to avoid it.
4. Scattered and Gerrymandered Objects
In the philosophy of perception, the existence of “ordinary objects”—
lemons, pads, rocks, pencils, pigs, and the like—is taken for granted,
and this article is no exception.25 Familiarly, once the being of lemons
and the rest is assumed, it is a short step to the conclusion that ordi-
nary objects are merely the tip of an iceberg. First, as noted by Richard
Cartwright (1987), some ordinary objects are (apparently) scattered,
occupying disconnected regions of space. For instance: Cartwright’s
(1987: 174–75) pipe, lying on his desk with its stem removed from the
bowl, or his copy of McTaggart’s The Nature of Existence (volume 1 being
at some distance from volume 2). There are also slightly less ordinary
examples, like ﬂocks of birds and constellations. At least Cartwright’s dis-
assembled pipe and a murder of crows have some intuitive “unity” to
them, but constellations have none. Orion, for instance, is an arbitrary
group of different sorts of stars at varying (vast) distances apart: the two
brightest stars in Orion, the supergiants Riga and Betelgeuse, are more
24. For helpful discussion, see Soteriou 2016: 169–82; Pautz 2021: 209–15.
25. A rare exception is Korman 2014.
340
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
than one hundred light-years apart. Indeed, the stars in a constellation
may exist at different times—perhaps some stars in some constellations
have long since exploded.
Once Cartwright’s pipe, The Nature of Existence, constellations, and
the like are admitted, it is hard to resist the incursion of an army of extra-
ordinary objects: trout-turkeys, consisting of “the front half of a trout
plus the back half of a turkey” (Lewis 1991: 7), the Great Roe (“A mytho-
logical beast with the head of a lion and the body of a lion, though not
the same lion” [W. Allen 1974: 20]), and Harry, composed of a book
of matches and one distant match, earlier removed from the book. To
deny existence to Harry, as Cartwright (1987: 183) points out, would
seem to mistake the “parochial concerns of human beings” for a meta-
physical principle. Many metaphysicians embrace extra-ordinary objects,
although of course there are dissenters.26
We will make the defensible assumption that there are these extra-
ordinary scattered objects, some with radically diverse parts, and some
with large spatiotemporal gaps. Since it will be useful to emphasize the
intuitive lack of unity between the parts of such things, we will call them
gerrymandered objects. Nothing else will be assumed: in particular, there
is no commitment to mereological universalism, a topic-neutral notion
of parthood, temporal parts, or any claims about the persistence condi-
tions or essential properties of gerrymandered objects. All we need are
spatiotemporal gerrymandered objects like trout-turkeys and constella-
tions, not (for example), trout-pies, objects composed of a trout and .
Leaving these qualiﬁcations tacit, we have:
Claim A.
There are numerous gerrymandered objects.
Suppose a trout and a turkey, and so a trout-turkey, are before you.
You see the trout, and the turkey. Do you also see the trout-turkey? Well,
you see both its parts: the front half of the trout and the back half of the
turkey.27 And this would appear to be enough: you can see Cartwright’s
dissembled pipe by seeing its parts, for instance. Of course, you may well
not realize that you see the trout-turkey—or Cartwright’s pipe, for that
26. Thus Daniel Z. Korman (2015: 160), who defends the “conservative” view that
there are ordinary objects like trout and turkeys, but no trout-turkeys, reports that con-
servatism is thought untenable by “the vast majority of metaphysicians.”
27. To sidestep distractions about undetached parts, imagine that you see a severed
front-half trout next to a severed back-half turkey.
341
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
matter—but one may see an F unknowingly (Dretske 1969: 36–37). How-
ever, saying that you see the trout-turkey, and leaving it at that, blurs an
important distinction. Vision does not recognize the trout-turkey: it may
segment the scene into a trout-head, a trout eye, and other objects, but
the trout-turkey is not included. The trout-turkey, unlike the trout and
its head, does not appear “as one.” That is at least part of the explanation
of why the trout-turkey’s existence is not part of “common sense.”
However, sometimes gerrymandered objects do appear “as one.”
A pencil sharpener, stapler, Post-it notes, pencils, and other ofﬁce para-
phernalia scattered on a desk form a gerrymandered object. Like the
trout-turkey, you see it, although it is not recognized by vision. Imagine
that the sharpener, stapler, and so on start moving together, like a ﬂock
of birds. Phenomenologically, in addition to the plurality—the sharpener,
stapler, . . . —there is also a singularity—the ofﬁce-supply-“ﬂock.” Or, alter-
natively, imagine that the spatially separated sharpener, stapler, and so
on are aligned and oriented in such a way that from a particular angle
they appear as the head of Barack Obama.28 In these cases the gerryman-
dered object comes into view in a more interesting sense: vision segments
it from the scene, as it segments the sharpener and stapler themselves.29
5. Hallucinations and Memory
One striking fact about hallucinations, often not emphasized enough, is
how humdrum they are. The philosopher H. H. Price (1964: 15) once
took the psychedelic alkaloid mescaline, and reported that he halluci-
nated “a pile of very large dead leaves.” Not terribly impressive (although
Price himself was “greatly delighted”). Migraine hallucinations are typi-
cally of simple visual patterns, like zigzags. Hallucinations characteristic
of Charles Bonnet syndrome are much richer, but are not otherworldly:
The most common image is that of a person. Disembodied dis-
torted faces; small costumed ﬁgures and branching structures;
vivid images of animals and ﬁgures; subtle geometric forms; well
28. The American artist Michael Murphy has created direction-dependent sculp-
tures of this sort; there are many similar examples.
29. The gestalt psychologists formulated various principles to explain why some per-
ceptual elements are grouped together as one. For example, the “principle of common
fate” is supposed to explain why birds moving together appear as a single ﬂock. For a
review, see Wagemans et al. 2012.
342
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
deﬁned complex ﬁgures; faces; Lilliputian . . . , normal-sized, and
‘larger than life’ images. (Menon et al. 2003: 60)30
Despite much experimentation with mind-altering drugs, Oliver Sacks’s
(2013) most noteworthy hallucination was of a “pear-shaped blob of the
purest indigo.” Admittedly (if we take his purple prose at face value), “it
was the color of heaven, the color, I thought, that Giotto spent a lifetime
trying to get but never achieved”—still, hardly an utterly alien shade.
The neurosurgeon famous for his experiments on direct brain
stimulation, Wilder Penﬁeld, never succeeded in inducing hallucinations
that were out of the ordinary. “It was like being in a dance hall, like
standing in the doorway—in a gymnasium—like at the Kenwood High
school. . . . My mother was telling my aunt over the telephone to come up
and visit us tonight. . . . I am seeing a picture of a dog and a cat” (Penﬁeld
and Perot 1963: 614, 617, 632).
The world of hallucination is not some exotic realm, but very
much like the familiar perceptible world, albeit distorted and rear-
ranged.31
As these examples indicate, hallucinations at least sometimes
depend on memory: Price’s leaf hallucination presumably draws on
his previous encounters with leaf piles in autumnal Oxford. It may be
“unclear whether [Charles Bonnet] images represent playback of previ-
ous visual memories” (Menon et al. 2003: 61), but evidently memory is
implicated somehow. Eighteenth-century Charles Bonnet sufferers hallu-
cinate coaches and horses, not aircraft or automobiles. “The conclusion
is inescapable,” Penﬁeld wrote, “that some, if not all, of these evoked
responses represent activation of a neural mechanism that keeps the
record of current experience” (Penﬁeld and Perot 1963: 679).
As Johnston (2004: 221) notes, one may “hallucinate real things
and real people,” for instance one’s mother; see also the quotations from
G. E. Berrios and Ivana S. Markova (section 2), and Wilder Penﬁeld and
Phanor Perot (above). There is no obvious reason to deny that such hal-
30. See also ffytche 2013: 51. For a case report of “Lilliputian” hallucinations in a
migraine sufferer, see Podoll and Robinson 2001. For mundane descriptions of hallu-
cinations in blindfolded subjects (“ﬂashing lights, mirrors, lamps, trees”; “amorphous
shapes”; “a mouse-like face”; “cities, skies, kaleidoscopes, lions, and sunsets”), see Mer-
abet et al. 2004.
31. Admittedly psychedelic-induced hallucinations are sometimes taken to reveal
the mysterium tremendum, the interconnectedness of all things, the nonexistence of the
ego, and the like (see Huxley 1990; Pollan 2018). But if they do that, it is not by seeming
to present completely novel objects and properties.
343
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
lucinations are ways of becoming aware of these things (see James 2014).
Thus one may become aware of a particular pig (say, one’s favorite pig,
the Empress of Blandings), and particular wings (say, the wings of one’s
pet parrot) by hallucinating them. Drawing on the observation made at
the end of the previous section, one may also hallucinate the Empress
and the wings together, so they appear as one—in particular, as a ﬂying
pig. Probably this happens occasionally, which gives us:
Claim B.
Sometimes hallucinators are aware of diverse spatiotemporally scat-
tered objects that appear as one.
Claim B is a claim about some hallucinations, perhaps only a tiny
minority.32 Further, it is not especially original. Similar claims can be
found in the empirical literature—for instance:
Everything that one perceives can also become a hallucination, in such a
way, that the various elements can be combined freely; a hallucinated lion
can have wings, a human ﬁgure can be composed out of the properties
of various persons. (Bleuler 1934: 59)33
6. The Gerrymandered Object of Hallucination
We are now in a position to set out and defend our theory of hallucina-
tion. On quite minimal assumptions, over the last two sections we have
argued for claims A and B. Together, they give us a modest version of our
theory of hallucination. By claim B, the hallucinating subject is some-
times aware of diverse spatiotemporally scattered objects that appear as
one. By claim A, there is such a gerrymandered object. In some cases,
then, there is an object of hallucination: a physical object, no more
mysterious than a lemon or a lump of clay, that we parochially minded
humans tend to overlook.
The case for the modest view does not depend on any of our
criticisms of philosophical accounts of hallucination. It just appeals to
32. For our purposes, this weaker version of claim B would do: it could easily have
happened that a hallucinator is aware of diverse spatiotemporally scattered objects that
appear as one. For simplicity we will stick to the stronger thesis in the text.
33. See also a claim made by Dominic H. ffytche (2013: 59): “CBS [Charles Bonnet
Syndrome] hallucination content is based on juxtaposed or unusually intense fragments
of normal visual perception.” Here ffytche does not appear to be thinking of the “jux-
taposition” of objects of normal perception, but rather the juxtaposition of mental items,
perceptions, or experiences.
344
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
a metaphysical view that is of considerable appeal, together with some
relatively mundane observations about hallucinations. The proponents
of views mentioned in section 3 have no compelling reason to deny it:
their theory, they may say, ﬁts the (perhaps many) cases that the modest
view does not cover.
We now appeal to our earlier discussion of Argument †. Consider-
able ingenuity has been devoted to avoiding the conclusion—that there
are hallucinatory objects—because it is almost always assumed to require
(in Schellenberg’s phrase) “strange particulars” like sense data. We have
now amassed reasons to question this assumption. Sometimes there is an
ordinary object of hallucination—say, one’s mother. But sometimes the
object is gerrymandered. Given that this is sometimes the case, and given
the difﬁculty of denying the premises, the natural hypothesis is that Argu-
ment † is, after all, sound: there is always an object of hallucination, and
that object is always a physical object—sometimes an ordinary object, but
sometimes a gerrymandered one. This is our theory of hallucination: the
Gerrymandered Object Theory of Hallucination, or GOTH.34
Before turning, in the ﬁnal section, to the implications of GOTH
for philosophers’ hallucinations and more general issues in the philoso-
phy of mind, we will elaborate the theory and discuss an empirical issue
that bears directly on it.
GOTH is the conjunction of claim A and this universalized version
of claim B:
Claim B+.
Hallucinators are always aware either of ordinary objects or of
diverse spatiotemporally scattered objects that appear as one.
34. A similar account (developed independently) is in Barkasi 2020. It is worth
pointing out that there is a closely related theory of hallucination that dispenses with
gerrymandered objects, the Morphed Object Theory of Hallucination, or MOTH. On this
theory, the object of hallucination is always an ordinary object: when one hallucinates a
ﬂying pig, the object is simply (say) the Empress of Blandings, perceptually distorted so
as to appear to have wings. One problem with MOTH is that it is unmotivated, given
that scattered objects can perceptually appear “as one”—as birds can appear as a ﬂock,
for example. According to us, the appearance of the ﬂock should be taken at face value:
there really is such a scattered object, and it can be detected by vision. But even if this
is disputed, the observation that the birds appear as one remains. Whatever accounts for
the phenomenology can presumably be pressed into service to explain how the Empress
and a parrot’s wings can appear in hallucination as one.
345
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
The counterpart of claim B+ for the objects of dreams (which are
often taken to be a species of hallucination35) is in the First Meditation:
It must surely be admitted that the visions which come in sleep are
like paintings, which must have been fashioned in the likeness of
things that are real, and hence that at least these general kinds of
things—eyes, head, hands, and the body as a whole—are things
which are not imaginary but are real and exist. For even when
painters try to create sirens and satyrs with the most extraordi-
nary bodies, they cannot give them natures which are new in all
respects; they simply jumble up the limbs of different animals.36
(Descartes [1642] 1984: 13)
To a ﬁrst approximation, a siren is half-woman, half-bird. A paint-
ing of a siren, although no doubt “fashioned in the likeness” of women
and birds encountered by the painter, need not be of a particular woman
or a particular bird. Similarly, a painting of a ﬂying pig need not be of a
particular pig—the Empress of Blandings, say—or of a particular pair of
wings. Is GOTH committed to the view that when one hallucinates a ﬂy-
ing pig, one is aware of a gerrymandered object that is composed of parts
that would form (something like) a ﬂying pig, were they glued together
appropriately?
No, it is not. Consider hallucinating a perfectly ordinary pig. If
one keeps a single pig, the Empress of Blandings, she may well be the
object of the hallucination. If one keeps two pigs, the Empress and Piglet,
one may perhaps be aware of the gerrymandered object consisting of
Piglet’s head and the Empress’s body. However, there is another candi-
date that is a more plausible ﬁt for most cases, where there is no reason
to think that a particular pig, or pig-part, is salient. A useful model is
a contrived sort of binocular fusion, where the object presented to the
left eye is distinct from the similar object presented to the right. Even
though the pig (the Empress, say) seen with the left eye is distinct from
the pig (Piglet) seen with the right, they appear as one. That gerryman-
35. For example, Aristotle (1941: 625) took dreams to be “presentation[s] based on
the movement of sense impressions, when such presentation occurs during sleep.”
36. Immediately following the quoted passage, Descartes qualiﬁes this somewhat.
The observation that memory inﬂuences the content of dreams goes back at least to
classical antiquity. In The Interpretation of Dreams, Freud (2010: 44) remarks that “all the
material making up the content of a dream is in some way derived from experience, that
is to say, has been reproduced or remembered in the dream—so much at least we may
regard as an undisputed fact.”
346
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
dered object looks very much like a pig, but it isn’t. It has two pigs as
parts, but one does not see the parts as parts. Despite looking like a pig,
the gerrymandered object is not composed of parts that, were they all
appropriately glued together, would form a pig, or indeed anything like
a pig. If we say that an amalgam of Ks is an object composed of some Ks,
then the proposal is that the typical object of a pig-hallucination is an
amalgam of pigs that, to the hallucinator, looks like a single pig.37
The object of a hallucination is not currently affecting the sub-
ject’s retinas, and cannot be scrutinized by holding up a magnifying glass.
In that respect hallucinations are unlike illusions. However, according
to GOTH, there are signiﬁcant commonalities. Like illusions, halluci-
nations involve visual awareness of an object, and the object (typically)
appears a way it isn’t: an amalgam of pigs appears as a single pig, for
instance.38
GOTH thus has considerable degrees of freedom in account-
ing for hallucinations, since there are few limits on how an object can
appear (see Ali 2018: 607–13). However, this does not insulate the theory
from empirical refutation, because its plausibility depends on substan-
tive claims about memory. Despite the degrees of freedom, potential
evidence against GOTH is easy to ﬁnd.
37. There are other more complicated proposals along similar lines; for ease of
illustration we will focus on amalgams.
Johnston (2004: 130) makes the plausible observation that “I can secure my ﬁrst
singular reference to the quality cherry red or to the structural property C major by way
of hallucinating a scene or a tune.” (Recall Sacks’s hallucination of the “purest indigo”
in section 5.) In contrast, Johnston says, “hallucination could not be an original source
of de re thought about particulars” (129). If GOTH is right, the contrast here is not as
Johnston has it: hallucination could allow one to secure one’s ﬁrst singular reference to
what appears to be a pig but is in fact a pig-amalgam.
Another Johnstonian contrast that GOTH overturns concerns “intensional identity”:
“Absent special cases such as those in which their respective hallucinations are anchored
in thought about some actual dagger or daggers, no sense is to be made of Macbeth and
Macduff hallucinating either the same or different daggers” (143). On the GOTH model,
it always makes sense to ask if the objects of Macbeth’s and Macduff’s hallucinations are
identical. A surprising result, but no more than that: the answer is grounded in Macbeth’s
and Macduff’s complex history of causal interactions with objects. Actually ﬁnding the
answer may be practically impossible, but that is no objection.
38. The converse is also possible: a single pig (say Pinky) can appear as an amalgam
of pigs, as in double vision, for instance, when one sees a ﬁnger twice over. Moreover,
Pinky can appear as a “drift” of pigs, moving in concert and segmented from the scene
in the manner of a ﬂock of birds. Here one is not aware of a gerrymandered object
composed of Pinky many times over, but simply Pinky himself. (Thanks to an anonymous
referee.)
347
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
As a simple example, consider phosphenes. What are phosphenes,
according to GOTH? A reasonable hypothesis is that they are amalgams
of ﬂashes or patches of light, where the component ﬂashes may be dis-
torted by memory to appear, say, smaller or brighter than they actually
are. Apart from the conjecture about amalgams, this hypothesis involves
little more than familiar psychological mechanisms, since we certainly
can remember (somewhat imperfectly) ﬂashes of light. A congenitally
blind person has no memories of any ﬂashes, so if she experiences
phosphenes, they must be nonoptical entities of some sort. Perhaps
sounds, which (despite the lack of any visual input) somehow appear as
emitting light? However, there is no independent evidence that the dis-
tortions of memory can be so extreme, and the amalgam model (at least
as illustrated above) is of no help. GOTH, then, predicts that the con-
genitally blind cannot experience phosphenes. That prediction appears
to be supported by the evidence (e.g., Kupers et al. 2011; cf. Fish 2009:
128–29). Be that as it may, potential threats to GOTH are everywhere.39
7. Perception, Memory, and Imagination
Many philosophers of perception have stressed the phenomenological
point that perceived objects are “present to consciousness” in some intu-
itively direct or immediate way that does not apply to objects of belief
or thought. Sometimes a contrast is also made with sensory imagination,
as in Jean-Paul Sartre’s claim that its objects “are given to intuition as
absent” (quoted in K. Allen 2015: 289). If one assumes, as Keith Allen
(2015: 292) does, that “like sensory imagination, hallucination is essen-
tially a mode of consciousness of that which is absent or merely possible:
dead relatives, angels, pink rats, and so on,” then classifying hallucina-
tion as a kind of degenerate perception is implausible. Rather—as Allen
himself argues—it is more attractive to assimilate hallucination to sen-
sory imagination.
39. Here is another example. GOTH ﬁts naturally with this simple inhibitory model
of hallucination: a subject who has previously seen pigs is poised to hallucinate pigs,
but is typically prevented from doing so because of current sensory stimulation or some
other inhibitory factor. A hallucination of a pig will thus be induced if the inhibitor
is itself removed or inhibited. Evidence against the inhibitory model is a strike against
GOTH. We think that the evidence generally favors the inhibitory model—e.g., hallu-
cinations are induced by sensory deprivation, and the psychedelic drug psilocybin, the
ingredient in “magic mushrooms,” appears to depress neural activity (Carhart-Harris et
al. 2012)—but the present point is merely that GOTH is testable. See also ffytche 2013:
54–55; Manzotti 2017: 138–43.
348
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
However, assuming GOTH, the hallucinator is aware of a physical
object, and given the felt perceptual nature of hallucination, there is no
reason to deny that such objects are present to the mind as they are in
ordinary perception.
On the view defended in this article, then, hallucination is assim-
ilated to perception. Perception, according to some neuroscientists, is
“controlled hallucination.” GOTH reverses this slogan: hallucination is
uncontrolled perception.40
When one hallucinates a ﬂying pig, parts of the hallucinatory
object are causally responsible for one’s hallucination via the earlier
stimulation of one’s sensory surfaces, as in ordinary perception. Unlike
ordinary perception, stimulation from different parts of the hallucina-
tory object may occurred at different times, laying down a succession
of visual memories. The contrast between ordinary perception and hal-
lucination is signiﬁcant—there is no hallucinatory analogue of moving
around an object to get a better look at it, for example. But this does not
spoil the assimilation. Memory is operative in ordinary perception too
(see, e.g., Olkkonen and Allred 2014).
Perception takes time. In the visual case, light has to get from
the object to the eye. Of course, that interval is negligible for terrestrial
objects. For the moon, the delay is more than a second, and for the North
Star it is centuries. The visual pathways inside the head also induce a
delay, on the order of a tenth of a second. What if the signals from the
retina had to traverse miles of tightly wound neural cabling, producing a
massive postponement of perception? One would then see a pencil, say,
years after it had affected one’s eyes. Likewise if the delay were further
downstream, after the pencil’s visual features like color and shape had
been extracted from the retinal signal. We could even imagine that one
sees the pencil in the usual way, with a copy of the processed visual signal
remaining in a buffer, only to produce a reseeing of the pencil much
later.
That last case is close to GOTH, on which hallucination is a kind
of delayed perception, slowed down by memory. Hallucination is not nec-
essarily re-perception, though: when one hallucinates a ﬂying pig, one
has perceived its parts before, yet one may be perceiving it for the ﬁrst
time.
40. For the neuroscientists, see Clark 2016: 308n3; Barrett 2020: 71. The reversed
slogan is borrowed from Andy Clark (2016: 196)—it ﬁts our view better than it ﬁts his.
349
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
The type of memory relevant to GOTH is episodic memory, as
when one visually recollects being in a faculty meeting, or visually rec-
ollects the yellow pad and blue pencil laying on the desk. Endel Tul-
ving (2002: 6), who was the ﬁrst to distinguish episodic from factual
(or “semantic”) memory, describes the former as “allow[ing] people to
consciously re-experience past experiences.” The quotation suggests that
episodic memory can fruitfully be thought of as delayed (re-)perception,
albeit a highly degraded and transformed kind readily told apart from
perception of the here and now. As Tulving notes, “We seldom confuse
the feeling that we are remembering a past event with the feeling that
we are looking at the world” (2). According to GOTH, awareness of a
hallucinatory object is typically enabled by a jumble of different episodic
memories of different objects.
Episodic memory, although notoriously unreliable in some cir-
cumstances, can give us knowledge of the past. But episodic memory
would be entirely useless if it freely reshufﬂed experienced objects in
the manner of many hallucinations. For that reason, GOTH is not the
view that all hallucinations involve abnormally vivid “playback of pre-
vious visual memories” (see the quotation from Menon et al. 2003 in
section 5 above, and especially ffytche 2013: 58). Rather, GOTH holds
that episodic memory provides a basic inventory of familiar objects which
under certain conditions allows the visual system to present gerryman-
dered objects composed from the inventory.
What about sensory imagination? Compatibly with GOTH, it may
be given a radically different treatment, for instance as a way of repre-
senting perceptual experiences (see Peacocke 1985; Martin 2002). But it
is more natural, from a GOTHic perspective, to take sensory imagination
to be a degenerate kind of hallucination, sometimes subject to voluntary
control.41
8. Some Rival Strategies
The view that hallucinations are (quasi-)perceptions of physical objects
has recently gained some steam.42 Thomas Raleigh (2014: 95) argues
that philosophers’ hallucinations (in his terminology, “perfect” halluci-
nations) are perceptions of “whatever external factor (evil neuroscien-
41. Defending that view would require a separate article. We are also sympathetic
with a similar GOTHic treatment of dreaming (see note 36). Note that both sensory
imagination and dreaming share the humdrum nature of hallucination (section 5).
42. In addition to the authors cited in this paragraph, see Ali 2018: 607.
350
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
tist, vat-machine, demon, etc.) is causing the ‘perfect’ hallucination.”
Rami Ali (2018) argues that this view can be extended to cover hypo-
thetical cases where there are no such “external factors.” Farid Masrour
(2020) goes further, suggesting a relationalist treatment for psycholo-
gists’ hallucinations.
Since our focus is still on psychologists’ hallucinations, we will
compare and contrast Masrour’s proposal with GOTH. One type of case
Masrour considers is an “embedded” hallucination, where the halluci-
nator “correctly perceives” a portion of his environment, as when John
hallucinates a pink elephant in “the bare corner of his room” (Masrour
2020: 749). Masrour gives a relationalist strategy for accommodating
embedded hallucinations, which he calls “Displacing.” In the case of
John:
The object of John’s experience is the room. The aspect of John’s
experience that corresponds to the pink elephant is re-described
as corresponding to a property that he experiences the room as
having. As a working characterization, in Displacing, an aspect of
experience that is taken to be presenting a non-existent object is
re-described as misrepresenting a property of a perceived external
concrete particular. (746)
Importantly, Displacing is not the idea that the scene presented to
John is (structurally akin to):
J2 a is room-like and b is pink and elephantine, and b is in the
corner of a.
Where, in fact, a is room-like, a D b, and so b is neither pink nor
elephantine, nor in the corner of a (see Masrour 2020: 748–49n18.) On
J2, there is a hallucinatory object—the room. Rather, Displacing gets rid
of the hallucinatory object entirely, with the corresponding scene being:
J1 a is room-like and pink-and-elephantine-in-the-corner.
John’s experience does not present an object as being pink or
elephantine, or as being in the corner. Rather, it presents an object
(the room) as having a property (“being pink-and-elephantine-in-the-
corner”), leading John to think that he is confronted with a pink ele-
phant. When John describes his experience as one of an object, a pink
elephant, this is not “faithful to the phenomenology of his experience”
(748).
351
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
As Masrour emphasizes, this is an empirical conjecture, and one
that is amenable to experimental testing. With the common assumption
the perceptual system uses “object ﬁles” (representations used to store
information about particular objects, and to keep track of objects over
time), Masrour’s conjecture predicts that no new object ﬁle is created
when John hallucinates a pink elephant.43 However, Masrour does not
provide any evidence for the conjecture, and there are reasons to be
skeptical. For instance, someone with Charles Bonnet syndrome who is
hallucinating a dancing pig on a (real) table should, by being suitably
attentive, be able to rid herself of the impression that there is a particular
pig, and come to see the “pig” somewhat like a varying highlight or pink
“discoloration” (746), a component of the variegated pattern of light,
color, and texture that qualiﬁes the desk. We know of no reports of this
syndrome that suggest that this is possible.
The simpler idea (which Masrour rejects)44 is that some perceived
physical object—for instance, the table in the above example—appears
twice over, once (veridically) as a table and the other (illusorily) as a
dancing pig. This suggestion has a clear empirical upshot—namely, that
the removal of the physical object from the scene before the eyes would
extinguish the hallucination. One would expect this to feature in the
psychological literature, if it actually occurred. And on the general strat-
egy of trying to squeeze as many hallucinations as possible under the
umbrella of ordinary perceptual illusions, it is worth noting that hallu-
cinations occur in normal subjects after visual deprivation (see Merabet
et al. 2004; for some quotations see note 30 above), and Charles Bonnet
hallucinations can occur in subjects who are completely blind (McNa-
mara, Heros, and Boller 1982).
9. Philosophers’ Hallucinations and Externalism
Recall from section 2 that philosophers’ hallucinations are supposed
to have sufﬁcient internal conditions (presumably neural). If GOTH
is true, no actual hallucinations are philosophers’ hallucinations. Still,
as noted earlier, it is widely assumed that philosophers’ hallucinations
could occur. Martin (2006: 358), for instance, characterizes the follow-
ing as a “common observation”:
43. On object ﬁles see, e.g., Green and Quilty-Dunn 2020; Hill 2021: sec. 2.
44. For his discussion of a related suggestion from William Alston, see Masrour
2020: 748–49n18.
352
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Someone who succeeds in producing an hallucination in a subject
does not have to induce an appropriate correlation between the
subject and any other entities beyond the subject’s brain or the
mind; or, if there are such necessary conditions of the occurrence
of an hallucinatory experience (that other such entities should
exist and be suitably related to the experience), then the causes
of experience must also be sufﬁcient to guarantee that these addi-
tional conditions obtain.45
GOTH is motivated, in part, by the study of actual hallucinations.
But that doesn’t mean it should be taken to merely be a theory of hal-
lucinations that occur in familiar kinds of embodied creatures. Pending
some argument for restricting the theory’s scope, GOTH should be taken
as an account of the nature of hallucinations. Granted Martin’s common
observation, GOTH is incorrect.
Why accept the common observation? One reason is that philoso-
phers’ hallucinations are, in some intuitive sense, “conceivable.” Accord-
ing to some, that is evidence that they are possible. Fortunately, we
need not investigate this here, because conceivability casts a very wide
net indeed: in the sense in which philosophers’ hallucinations are con-
ceivable, so are “zombies,” whose healthy brains are unaccompanied by
conscious experience; and “ghosts,” or disembodied minds (see, e.g.,
Yablo 1993; Chalmers 2002; Cutter 2019). The conceivability objection
to GOTH brings dualism in its wake; like many of the philosophers we
have discussed, we are simply setting dualism to one side to keep the
dialectic manageable.
Another potentially more threatening reason to accept the possi-
bility of philosophers’ hallucinations is empirical. The scientiﬁc study of
perception, it might be thought, has not just implicated the brain, but
has made it plausible that neural activity alone—absent any “appropri-
ate correlation” with entities like pigs, pencils, or stars—can be sufﬁcient
for hallucination. But this, we think, is just an artifact of a philosophical
picture on which perceptual objects, the neural states they produce, and
the corresponding perceptual experiences are related as objects before a
video camera, the electromagnetic states they produce on a video moni-
tor, and the corresponding monitor colors. In the latter case, the object is
dispensable, and internal states of the video monitor are sufﬁcient for the
45. The “other such entities” mentioned in the second disjunct are “mind-
dependent” (sense-data, on one conception); see Martin 2006: 358.
353
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
monitor colors. The comparison with perception can seem inevitable,
but it would be a mistake to think that the philosophical picture is sup-
ported by perceptual psychology or neuroscience (see, e.g., Fish 2009:
chap. 5).
If Martin’s common observation is entirely up for grabs, the evi-
dence for GOTH suggests that it should be rejected. And without the
common observation, the “reverse causal argument,” which Martin uses
to motivate his version of disjunctivism, is unsound (see Martin 2004:
53–54; 2006: 368–69).
Contemporary philosophers of mind have generally embraced
externalism, with its consequence that internal duplicates can differ
mentally. They have also moved away from the once-popular idea that the
basic insight of internalism can be preserved by recognizing the “narrow
content” of mental states, a kind of content that is internally determined
(Yli-Vakkuri and Hawthorne 2018). But when it comes to experience,
the analogous idea has been hard to shake: granted, seeing a pig is not
an internal state, but hallucinating a pig must be. Hallucination is the
last redoubt of the internalist. And that last redoubt is, we have argued,
overrun by GOTH.
References
Adams, Fred, and Robert Stecker. 1994. “Vacuous Singular Terms.” Mind and
Language, no. 9: 387–401.
Aleman, André, and Frank Larøi. 2008. Hallucinations: The Science of Idiosyncratic
Perception. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ali, Rami. 2018. “Does Hallucinating Involve Perceiving?” Philosophical Studies
175, no. 3: 601–27.
Allen, Keith. 2015. “Hallucination and Imagination.” Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy 93, no. 2: 287–302.
Allen, Woody. 1974. “Fabulous Tales and Mythical Beasts.” New Republic, Novem-
ber 30, 19–21.
Aristotle. 1941. “De Somniis.” In The Basic Works of Aristotle, edited by Richard
McKeon, 618–25. New York: Random House.
Barkasi, Michael. 2020. “Some Hallucinations Are Experiences of the Past.”
Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 101, no. 3: 454–88.
Barrett, Lisa Feldman. 2020. Seven and a Half Lessons about the Brain. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.
Beck, Ori. 2019. “Rethinking Naive Realism.” Philosophical Studies 176, no. 3:
607–33.
354
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Berrios, G. E., and Ivana S. Marková. 2015. “Visual Hallucinations: History and
Context of Current Research.” In The Neuroscience of Visual Hallucinations,
edited by Daniel Collerton, Urs Mosimann, and Elaine Perry, 3–22. New
York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bleuler, Eugen. 1934. Textbook of Psychiatry, translated by A. A. Brill. New York:
MacMillan.
Block, Ned. 2003. “Mental Paint.” In Reﬂections and Replies: Essays on the Phi-
losophy of Tyler Burge, edited by Martin Hahnand Bjørn Ramberg, 165–200.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Braun, David. 1993. “Empty Names.” Noûs 27, no. 4: 449–69.
Brewer, Bill. 2006. “Perception and Content.” European Journal of Philosophy 14,
no. 2: 165–81.
Brewer, Bill. 2011. Perception and Its Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, Tyler. 1991. “Vision and Intentional Content.” In John Searle and His
Critics, edited by Ernest LePore and Robert Van Gulick, 195–213. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Byrne, Alex. 2001. “Intentionalism Defended.” Philosophical Review 110, no. 2:
119–240.
Byrne, Alex. 2019. “Perception and Ordinary Objects.” In The Nature of Ordinary
Objects, edited by Javier Cumpa and Bill Brewer, 6–26. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Campbell, John. 2002. Reference and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Carhart-Harris, Robin L., et al. 2012. “Neural Correlates of the Psychedelic
State as Determined by fMRI Studies with Psilocybin.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 6: 2138–43.
Cartwright, Richard. 1987. “Scattered Objects.” In Philosophical Essays, 171–86.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chalmers, David. 2002. “Does Conceivability Entail Possibility?” In Conceivabil-
ity and Possibility, edited by Tamar Szabó Gendler and John Hawthorne,
145–200. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, Andy. 2016. Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cutter, Brian. 2019. “Against the Middle Ground: Why Russellian Monism Is
Unstable.” Analytic Philosophy, 60, no. 2: 109–29.
Descartes, René. (1642) 1984. “Meditations on First Philosophy.” In The Philo-
sophical Writings of Descartes, vol. II, translated by John Cottingham, Robert
Stoorthoff, and Dugald Murdoch, 1–62. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dretske, Fred. 1969. Seeing and Knowing. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Dretske, Fred. 1995. Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Farkas, Katalin. 2013. “A Sense of Reality.” In Macpherson and Platchias 2013:
399–415.
355
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
ffytche, Dominic H. 2013. “The Hallucinating Brain: Neurobiological Insights
into the Nature of Hallucinations.” In Macpherson and Platchias 2013:
45–63.
Fish, William. 2009. Perception, Hallucination, and Illusion. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
French, Craig, and Anil Gomes. 2019. “How Naïve Realism can Explain Both
the Particularity and the Generality of Experience.” Philosophical Quarterly,
no. 274: 41–63.
French, Craig, and Ian Phillips. 2020. “Austerity and Illusion.” Philosophers’
Imprint 20, no. 15: 1–19.
Freud, Sigmund. 2010. The Interpretation of Dreams, translated by James Strachey.
New York: Basic Books.
Genone, James. 2014. “Appearance and Illusion.” Mind, no. 490: 339–76.
Glick, Ephraim. 2018. “What Is a Singular Proposition?” Mind, no. 508:
1027–67.
Green, E. J., and Jake Quilty-Dunn. 2020. “What Is an Object File?” British Jour-
nal for the Philosophy of Science 72, no. 3: 665–99.
Grice, H. P. 1961. “The Causal Theory of Perception.” Aristotelian Society Supple-
mentary Volume, no. 35: 121–53.
Harman, Gilbert. 1990. “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience.” Philosophical Per-
spectives, no. 4: 31–52.
Hill, Christopher S. 2021. “Perceptual Existentialism Sustained.” Erkenntnis 86,
no. 6: 1391–410.
Huxley, Aldous. 1990. The Doors of Perception, and Heaven and Hell. New York:
HarperCollins.
James, Steven P. 2014. “Hallucinating Real Things.” Synthese 191, no. 15:
3711–32.
James, William. 1898. The Principles of Psychology. Vol. 2. New York: Henry Holt.
Johnston, Mark. 2004. “The Obscure Object of Hallucination.” Philosophical
Studies 120, nos. 1–3: 113–87.
Johnston, Mark. 2022. “The Manifest.” Unpublished manuscript.
Kalderon, Mark Eli. 2011. “Color Illusion.” Noûs 45, no. 4: 751–75.
King, Jeffrey C., Scott Soames, and Jeff Speaks. 2014. New Thinking about Propo-
sitions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Korman, Daniel Z. 2014. “Debunking Perceptual Beliefs about Ordinary
Objects.” Philosophers’ Imprint 14, no. 13: 1–21.
Korman, Daniel Z. 2015. Objects: Nothing out of the Ordinary. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kupers, Ron, Pietro Pietrini, Emiliano Ricciardi, and Maurice Ptito. 2011. “The
Nature of Consciousness in the Visually Deprived Brain.” Frontiers in Psychol-
ogy 2: art. 19. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00019.
Lewis, David. 1991. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
356
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Logue, Heather. 2014. “Experiential Content and Naive Realism: A Reconcil-
iation.” In Does Perception Have Content?, edited by B. Brogaard, 220–41.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Macpherson, Fiona, and Dimitris Platchias, eds. 2013 Hallucination: Philosophy
and Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Manzotti, Riccardo. 2017. The Spread Mind. New York: OR Books.
Martin, M. G. F. 1998. “Setting Things before the Mind.” In Current Issues in Phi-
losophy of Mind, edited by Anthony O’Hear, 157–79. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Martin, M. G. F. 2002. “The Transparency of Experience.” Mind and Language
17, no. 4: 376–425.
Martin, M. G. F. 2004. “The Limits of Self-Awareness.” Philosophical Studies 120,
no. 1/3: 37–89.
Martin, M. G. F. 2006. “On Being Alienated.” In Perceptual Experience, edited
by Tamar Szabó Gendler and John Hawthorne, 354–410. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Martin, M. G. F. 2013. “Shibboleth: Some Comments on William Fish’s Percep-
tion, Hallucination, and Illusion.” Philosophical Studies 163, no. 1: 37–48.
Masrour, Farid. 2020. “On the Possibility of Hallucinations.” Mind, no. 515:
737–68.
McDowell, John. 1994. “The Content of Perceptual Experience.” Philosophical
Quarterly, no. 175: 190–205.
McNamara, M. E., R. C. Heros, and F. Boller. 1982. “Visual Hallucinations in
Blindness: The Charles Bonnet Syndrome.” International Journal of Neuro-
science 17, no. 1: 13–15.
Menon, G. Jayakrishna, Imran Rahman, Sharmila J. Menon, and Gordon N.
Dutton. 2003. “Complex Visual Hallucinations in the Visually Impaired:
The Charles Bonnet Syndrome.” Survey of Ophthalmology 48, no. 1: 58–72.
Merabet, LotﬁB., Denise Maguire, Aisling Warde, Karin Alterescu, Robert
Stickgold, and Alvaro Pascual-Leone. 2004. “Visual Hallucinations during
Prolonged Blindfolding in Sighted Subjects.” Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology
24, no. 2: 109–13.
Olkkonen,
Maria,
and
Sarah
R.
Allred.
2014.
“Short-Term
Memory
Affects Color Perception in Context.” PLoS ONE 9, no. 1: e86488.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086488.
Pautz, Adam. 2013. “Do the Beneﬁts of Naïve Realism Outweigh the Costs?
Comments on Fish, Perception, Hallucination, and Illusion.” Philosophical Stud-
ies 163, no. 1: 25–36.
Pautz, Adam. 2021. Perception. London: Routledge.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1983. Sense and Content. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
357
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

B Y R N E a n d M A N Z O T T I
Peacocke, Christopher. 1985. “Imagination, Experience, and Possibility.” In
Essays on Berkeley: A Tercentennial Celebration, edited by John Foster and
Howard Robinson, 19–35. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pendlebury, Michael. 1986. “Perceptual Representation.” Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society 87, no. 1: 91–106.
Pendlebury, Michael. 1990. “Sense Experiences and Their Contents: A Defence
of the Propositional Account.” Inquiry 33, no. 2: 215–30.
Penﬁeld, Wilder, and Phanor Perot. 1963. “The Brain’s Record of Auditory
and Visual Experience: A Final Summary and Discussion.” Brain 86, no. 4:
595–696.
Podoll, K., and D. Robinson. 2001. “Recurrent Lilliputian Hallucinations as
Visual Aura Symptom in Migraine.” Cephalalgia 21, no. 10: 990–92.
Pollan, Michael. 2018. How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of
Psychedelics Teaches Us about Consciousness, Dying, Addiction, Depression, and
Transcendence. New York: Penguin.
Price, H. H. 1964. “A Mescaline Experience.” Journal of the American Society for
Psychical Research 58, no. 1: 3–20.
Raleigh, Thomas. 2014. “A New Approach to ‘Perfect’ Hallucinations.” Journal
of Consciousness Studies 21, no. 11–12: 81–110.
Robinson, Howard. 2013. “The Failure of Disjunctivism to Deal with ‘Philoso-
phers’ Hallucinations.”’ In Macpherson and Platchias 2013: 313–30.
Sacks, Oliver. 2013. Hallucinations. New York: Vintage Books.
Salmon, Nathan. 1998. “Nonexistence.” Noûs 32, no. 3: 277–319.
Schellenberg, Susanna. 2010. “The Particularity and Phenomenology of Per-
ceptual Experience.” Philosophical Studies 149, no. 1: 19–48.
Schellenberg, Susanna. 2011. “Perceptual Content Defended.” Noûs 45, no. 4:
714–50.
Schellenberg, Susanna. 2013. “Externalism and the Gappy Content of Halluci-
nation.” In Macpherson and Platchias 2013: 291–311.
Schellenberg, Susanna. 2016. “Phenomenal Evidence and Factive Evidence.”
Philosophical Studies 173, no. 4: 875–96.
Schellenberg, Susanna. 2018. The Unity of Perception: Content, Consciousness, Evi-
dence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, John. 2015. Seeing Things as They Are: A Theory of Perception. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2004. “Indiscriminability and the Phenomenal.” Philosophical
Studies 120, no. 1–3: 91–112.
Siegel, Susanna. 2008. “The Epistemic Conception of Hallucination.” In Dis-
junctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge, edited by Adrian Haddock and
Fiona Macpherson, 205–24. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Soteriou, Matthew. 2016. Disjunctivism. London: Routledge.
358
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

Hallucination and Its Objects
Speaks, Jeff. 2015. The Phenomenal and the Representational. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Travis, Charles. 2004. “The Silence of the Senses.” Mind, no. 449: 57–94.
Tulving, Endel. 2002. “Episodic Memory: From Mind to Brain.” Annual Review
of Psychology, no. 53: 1–25.
Tye, Michael. 2009. Consciousness Revisited: Materialism without Phenomenal Con-
cepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, Michael. 2014. “What Is the Content of a Hallucinatory Experience?” In
Does Perception Have Content?, edited by Berit Brogaard, 291–308. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Wagemans, Johan, James H. Elder, Michael Kubovy, Stephen E. Palmer, Mary A.
Peterson, Manish Singh, and Rüdiger von der Heydt. 2012. “Perceptual
Grouping and Figure-Ground Organization.” Part 1 of “A Century of
Gestalt Psychology in Visual Perception.” Psychological Bulletin 138, no. 6:
1172–217.
Williamson, Timothy. 1994. Vagueness. London: Routledge.
Williamson, Timothy. 2000. Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Yablo, Stephen. 1993. “Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility?” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 53, no. 1: 1–42.
Yli-Vakkuri, Juhani, and John Hawthorne. 2018. Narrow Content. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
359
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/131/3/327/1654221/327byrne.pdf by MIT LIBRARIES user on 25 February 2023

