EPISTEMIC STRUCTURAL REALISM AND
POINCARÉ’S PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Katherine Brading and Elise Crull
Recent discussions of structuralist approaches to scientiﬁc theories have stemmed primar-
ily from John Worrall’s “Structural Realism” in which he defends a position (since charac-
terized “epistemic structural realism”) whose historical roots he attributes to Poincaré. In
the renewed debate inspired by Worrall, it is thus not uncommon to ﬁnd Poincaré’s name
associated with various structuralist positions. However, Poincaré’s structuralism is deeply
entwined with neo-Kantianism and the roles of convention and objectivity within science.
In this article we explore the nature of these dependencies. What emerges is not only a
clearer picture of Poincaré’s position regarding structuralism but also two arguments for
versions of epistemic structuralism different in kind from that of Worrall.
1.
Introduction
In what has become a seminal paper in the contemporary literature on scien-
tiﬁc realism, Worrall (1989) offers a middle ground for those who feel the re-
alist pull of the “no-miracles” intuition while recognizing the antirealist thrust
of arguments based on the pessimistic metainduction. Following Ladyman’s
(1998) distinction between ontic and epistemic approaches, Worrall’s position
has been further clariﬁed and dubbed epistemic structural realism (ESR). In his
work, Worrall appeals to Poincaré as a historical source for his position. We
Contact Katherine Brading at Department of Philosophy, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
IN 46556 (kbrading@nd.edu). Contact Elise Crull at Department of Philosophy, The City College of
New York, New York, NY 10031 (ecrull@ccny.cuny.edu).
Our thanks to the very helpful suggestions of two anonymous referees; to Mary Domski, Janet
Folina, and Elaine Landry; to those present at talks we have given in Paris (Perspective in Physics
and Philosophy, École Polytechnique, 2008) and at Macalester College (2009); and to participants
in the Structuralism in Physics seminar at Notre Dame (fall 2008). This research was supported by
the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0724383 Brading 201201).
HOPOS: The Journal of the International Society for the History of Philosophy of Science, vol. 7 (Spring 2017).
2152-5188/2017/0701-0006$10.00. © 2017 by the International Society for the History of Philosophy of Science.
All rights reserved. Electronically published March 2, 2017.
108

argue that the ways in which Poincaré’s own position differs from that of con-
temporary ESR turn out to be highly signiﬁcant.
We begin by offering a reading of Poincaré’s epistemology that acknowl-
edges his neo-Kantian commitments (see sec. 2). These commitments should
be taken into account when evaluating the epistemic aspect of Poincaré’s alleged
ESR. Furthermore, these neo-Kantian commitments lead to an argument for
structuralism very different from any found in the contemporary scientiﬁc struc-
turalism literature, as a result of which Poincaré’s structuralism is of a different
kind from that advocated by Worrall. Moreover, if this neo-Kantian reading of
Poincaré is accepted, then an obvious consequence is that Poincaré’s realism dif-
fers from the scientiﬁc realism of the contemporary debate in which Worrall is
engaged, precisely in virtue of this neo-Kantian framework.
But even should one take exception to our preferred neo-Kantian reading of
Poincaré’s epistemology, both Poincaré’s conventionalism and his analysis of
objectivity must be taken into consideration when interpreting his realism
(see sec. 3). We show that these considerations—quite apart from any neo-
Kantian commitments—themselves lead to a second argument for structural-
ism differing importantly from Worrall’s ESR.
In section 4, we turn our attention explicitly to Worrall. There we provide
context for his invocation of Poincaré and how exactly he takes this earlier phi-
losophy to be a precursor to his own approach. In describing Worrall’s argu-
ment for structuralism (the third argument of this kind presented in this arti-
cle), one notices nontrivial differences not only in scope but also in motivation
(e.g., contingency on the history of scientiﬁc theories). We end (sec. 5) by bring-
ing the analyses of Poincaré’s philosophy of science generated in earlier sections
of the article to bear on the contemporary structuralism debate.
Thus, the goals of this article are situated on two levels: to provide a more
nuanced reading of Poincaré’s philosophy of science in and of itself and to apply
this reading to contemporary accounts of structuralism. This application not
only corrects the historical narrative generated by contemporary structuralists
but furthermore introduces two novel arguments for potentially stronger struc-
turalist stances—those actually found, we claim, in Poincaré.
2.
Poincaré’s Neo-Kantian Epistemology
There is no doubt about the appropriateness of labeling Poincaré’s position as
epistemic in some sense, for in all of his popular works he stresses that which is
knowable. More speciﬁcally, he is concerned repeatedly with that which is
knowable by us—with the particular faculties we have qua human beings. In
this section we brieﬂy review his philosophy of mathematics and use this to
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
109

highlight the roles of synthetic a priori intuition in his philosophy of mechanics
and mathematical physics. We argue that this neo-Kantian aspect of Poincaré’s
philosophy of science has signiﬁcant consequences for our understanding of the
epistemic character of his position.
2.1.
Mathematics and the Roles of A Priori Intuition
We begin with arithmetic and proceed to geometry; in the latter we largely fol-
low Folina (1992). Our goal is to move from this background to the cases of
mechanics and mathematical physics (see sec. 2.2). Like Kant, Poincaré grounded
arithmetic in synthetic a priori intuition. Poincaré argues that “indeﬁnite repe-
tition of the same act,” and thus reasoning “by recurrence,” is essential to arith-
metical reasoning, allowing us to pass from particular results to general theo-
rems. He argues that this rule of reasoning by recurrence is obtained neither
from experience nor from logic (it does not follow from the principle of noncon-
tradiction) but is a synthetic a priori intuition. He writes: “This rule, inacces-
sible to analytical proof and to experiment, is the exact type of the a priori syn-
thetic intuition” (1902/1952, 12–13). He goes on: “The mind has a direct
intuition of this power, and experiment can only be for it an opportunity of using
it, and thereby of becoming conscious of it” (13). In other words, through using
the rule, we become aware that we have this intuition.
Poincaré also grounded geometry in synthetic a priori intuition, but here he
made an important departure from Kant. In Science and Hypothesis, Poincaré
constructs the mathematical continuum in two steps, each of which makes
use of the arithmetical synthetic a priori intuition of “indeﬁnite repetition of
the same act” mentioned above. However, in chapter 3 of Last Essays, Poincaré
is explicit that we have an intuition of the spatial continuum that is indepen-
dent of our arithmetical intuition. He writes:
I shall conclude that there is in all of us an intuitive notion of the con-
tinuum of any number of dimensions whatever because we possess the
capacity to construct a physical and mathematical continuum; and that
this capacity exists in us before any experience because, without it, expe-
rience properly speaking would be impossible and would be reduced to
brute sensations, unsuitable for any organization; and because this intu-
ition is merely the awareness that we possess this faculty. And yet this
faculty could be used in different ways; it could enable us to construct
a space of four just as well as a space of three dimensions. It is the exterior
world, it is experience which induces us to make use of it in one sense
rather than in the other. (Poincaré 1913/1963, 44)
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
110

Poincaré maintains that metrical and projective properties are not part of the
intuition that grounds our ability to construct space. Rather than a geometrical
intuition (alongside the arithmetical), we have a more general spatial intuition.
Thus, Poincaré differs from Kant in maintaining that the dimensionality of
space is not synthetic a priori. Folina argues, successfully in our opinion, that
according to Poincaré this is because “it is possible to construct viable empirical
theories based upon the hypothesis that space is, for example, four-dimensional”
(Folina 1992, 36), where “viable” means “viable for us.” This connects directly
with Poincaré’s famous conventionalism concerning the axioms of physical geom-
etry: when Poincaré says that “one geometry cannot be more true than another;
it can only be more convenient” (1902/1952, 50), this is because one need not
use Euclidean geometry in order to describe the empirical world as we experi-
ence it.
In both mathematics and science, Poincaré focuses on what we can know—
that is, what is knowable by us, as ﬁnite beings, with our intuitive faculties.
Folina argues that in the case of arithmetic, the signiﬁcance of the synthetic a
priori status is that we cannot build a “nonstandard” arithmetic—or indeed
any formal system—without these principles. Similarly, she says, in the case
of geometry (or rather, spatial continuity): the signiﬁcance is that any account
of the world as we experience it will necessarily presuppose the continuity of
space. She urges that the relationship of mathematics to experience is crucial
to understanding Poincaré’s philosophy of mathematics: “Mathematics, like
any science, must seek after truth. And truth means more than mere consis-
tency. In mathematics it means (on the Poincaré view) that the axioms cohere
with our intuitions, that is, with the form of experience” (Folina 1992, 114). As
we will see again later, the notion of truth for Poincaré has the special meaning
of applying to intersubjective agreement regarding experiential data, and this
importantly qualiﬁes the sense in which he is read as a realist.
2.2.
Empirical Science and the Roles of A Priori Intuition
Both arithmetical and spatial intuitions are indispensable for empirical science.
In the above quotation from Last Essays, Poincaré states that the very possibility
of our experience of the world as containing empirical objects depends on spa-
tial intuition when he writes, “this capacity exists in us before any experience
because, without it, experience properly speaking would be impossible and
would be reduced to brute sensations, unsuitable for any organization.” In other
words, spatial intuition is that through which our sensations are constituted
into our experiences of physical objects; objects that endure through space and
time.
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
111

But the role of a priori intuition in empirical science extends beyond this, or
so we will argue. This is because a science of empirical objects goes beyond
mere experience of objects: we must form generalizations over these objects,
and our ability to form these generalizations is itself grounded in a priori intu-
ition. In Science and Hypothesis part 1, chapter 2, Poincaré asserts that the busi-
ness of science concerns generalizations—to move from premises to conclu-
sions that are “in a sense more general than the premisses [sic]” (Poincaré
1902/1952, 4). His position may be summed up by his own slogan: “There
is no science but the science of the general” (4). Granting this, we can ask ﬁrst
about the nature of this generalization and then about what grounds our ability
to form such generalizations.
Poincaré distinguishes between mathematics and the physical sciences in
the following relevant respect. He highlights the similarity between reasoning
by recurrence in arithmetic and by induction in physical science and then
points out that induction in the physical sciences is uncertain, whereas reason-
ing by recurrence is not (Poincaré 1902/1952, 13). The reason he gives is that
induction depends for its success on “an order which is external to us,” whereas
proof by recurrence depends for its success on “a property of the mind itself”
(13). Poincaré’s own writings leave us at this point of distinguishing between
the nature of the generalizations found in mathematics and the physical sci-
ences. But with this difference noted, we might still want to ask what grounds
our ability to perform inductive reasoning in the physical sciences. We have
seen that in mathematics our ability to generalize is grounded in arithmetical
intuition. What about the physical sciences? In answering this, it seems to us
that a plausible case can be made for three further roles for a priori intuition
within Poincaré’s philosophy of science.
To make this case, we again ﬁnd Folina’s analysis a helpful place to start.
Folina begins with the role of spatial intuition with respect to our experience
of physical objects and then moves on to consider generalizations:
A priori intuition—or the form of experience—is that via which we un-
derstand, by our sensory manifold, an experience of a single object en-
during through space and time, despite the inevitably incomplete char-
acter of experience. It is also that via which we understand certain rules
as characterizing inﬁnite, yet determinate, collections. A priori intuition
can thus be regarded as a “glossing over” faculty: a faculty which glosses
over the incomplete character of both empirical and mathematical expe-
rience. It is a procedure whereby we ignore all the elements which could
be generated by a rule, and we disregard or “smooth out” the disparate
character of perception. (1992, 86)
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
112

Folina argues that for Poincaré our ability to “gloss over” and thereby make
generalizations lies in a priori intuition (in spatial intuition for empirical gen-
eralizations and in arithmetical intuition for mathematical generalizations).
The point here is that, in order to form generalizations, we must disregard
as irrelevant certain features of the particular objects that we are placing under
the generalization. In the case of physical objects it is, according to Folina’s
reading of Poincaré, our spatial intuition that allows us to do this.
The second place where a priori intuition plays a role is as follows. Disre-
garding certain features as irrelevant is necessary but not sufﬁcient for us to
form a generalization: we require also the concept of indeﬁnite iterability (a
concept that, e.g., allows us to repeatedly apply rules). As Folina writes: “Poincaré
believed that the concept of indeﬁnite iterability . . . is foundational, not only
for arithmetic, but for all systematic thinking; and its epistemological source
is synthetic a priori intuition. . . . It underlies all systematic thinking because
it underlies our ability to generalize” (1992, 93). In short, our ability to gener-
alize is grounded in arithmetical a priori intuition because this intuition grounds
our ability to perform iterations. Thus, arithmetical intuition also plays a crucial
role in our ability to generalize with respect to empirical objects.
We will come to the third role for a priori intuition shortly, but ﬁrst—with
the above point in mind—we can return to where Poincaré left us, with the
distinction between mathematical reasoning by recurrence and induction in
the physical sciences. We saw that the difference lies in the objects that are
the subject matter of the generalization. The fallibility of induction lies in the
fact that we can make mistakes when we decide which aspects of the particular
physical objects to consider irrelevant and which to take into account when
forming the generalization. Nevertheless, with this decision made, what grounds
our ability to form the generalization is the same in the case of induction as it is
for mathematical reasoning by recurrence: it is arithmetical a priori intuition.
This is not something that Poincaré says, but it is, we maintain, a plausible an-
swer to a question he left unanswered. The plausibility of this answer is sup-
ported by the discussion that Poincaré does offer regarding generalization in
physical science, as we now show.
Generalization is involved in physical science at two distinct stages. The ﬁrst
is when the empirical data are organized: we must draw our line through the
dots on the page recording our experimental results. The relevant point for
our purposes is that this choice goes beyond “mere” generalization: “However
timid we may be, there must be interpolation. Experiment only gives us a cer-
tain number of isolated points. They must be connected by a continuous line,
and this is a true generalisation. But more is done. The curve thus traced will
pass between and near the points observed; it will not pass through the points
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
113

themselves. Thus we are not restricted to generalising our experiment, we cor-
rect it. . . . Detached facts cannot therefore satisfy us, and that is why our science
must be ordered, or better still, generalised” (Poincaré 1902/1952, 142–43).
Thus, the interpolation—the act of drawing a curve to ﬁt the data—is a mo-
ment in which Poincaré claims we not only generalize the data but also correct
them. This additional feature of empirical generalization (beyond that found in
mathematics) arises from the different nature of objects that serve as subject
matter for the generalizations and leads to the fallibility of those generalizations.
The second type of generalization takes the results of this ﬁrst stage (draw-
ing curves through data points) as input in order to generate empirical laws.
Hence, the laws are grounded from the start on generalizations. It is these laws,
then, that enable us to achieve the desired generality the human mind seeks
(Poincaré 1905/1958, 14) and that allow us to make progress in science. In
Poincaré’s words:
Who gives us the right of attributing to the principle itself more gener-
ality and more precision than to the experiments which have served to
demonstrate it? This is asking, if it is legitimate to generalise, as we do
every day, empiric data. . . . One thing alone is certain. If this permission
were refused to us, science could not exist; or at least would be reduced
to a kind of inventory, to the ascertaining of isolated facts. It would not
[sic] longer be to us of any value, since it could not satisfy our need of
order and harmony, and because it would be at the same time incapable
of prediction. (1902/1952, 129–30)
In sum, it seems to us that a priori intuition clearly grounds our ability to con-
struct the generalizations that form the very substance of physical theorizing.
There is yet a third role for a priori intuition. It is not just our ability to
construct generalizations that is grounded in a priori intuition: our ability to
apply the resulting generalizations is similarly grounded. With respect to math-
ematics, Folina writes: “In order to understand the abstract characterization of
a rule, we must understand an arbitrary instance of it. . . . Applying a rule re-
quires that we see that the application possesses the same essential structural
properties, or ‘shape’, as the arbitrary instance given in the schematic charac-
terization of the rule. The aspects which are structural are those which an ar-
bitrary instance possesses. A priori intuition supplies us with the ability to un-
derstand what these are” (1992, 87). If this reading of Poincaré is correct, then
the conclusion is readily extended beyond mathematics. A physical law is a par-
ticular type of rule, and it is a generalization. In order to apply laws (general-
izations) to physical objects, we must be able to recognize that the objects in-
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
114

stantiate the law. We might go further and insist that to understand a physical
law is to be able to recognize an instance of that law. The point is this: insofar as
our ability to recognize phenomena as instantiating a law depends on arithmet-
ical or spatial intuition, there is this further role for a priori intuition in Poin-
caré’s philosophy of science.
The generalizations in play here are structural generalizations, as Folina her-
self emphasizes. That this must be the case follows from her account of a priori
intuition. There is, moreover, an additional way to see that the type of gener-
alization at work in physical science must be structural. We discover below that
for Poincaré, laws capture the relations between things; to recognize that ob-
jects offer an instance of a given law is to recognize that they stand in the re-
lations described by the law. In order to achieve this, we must ignore the
nonrelational features of the objects, if any such are presented to us in experi-
ence. A priori intuition is therefore not only that which enables us to generalize
but also that which enables us to apply the resulting generalizations. By the very
nature of what is involved in the construction and application of generaliza-
tions, they must concern relations: hence the name structural generalizations.
The above reading of Poincaré’s epistemology alters how we evaluate the ep-
istemic and realist aspects of Poincaré’s philosophy. This reading furthermore
leads to an argument for structuralism stemming directly from Poincaré’s neo-
Kantian commitments that differs from any such argument found in the con-
temporary scientiﬁc structuralism literature. We state this structuralist argu-
ment as follows:
Argument 1—From generalization
1. Scientiﬁc laws are our generalizations.
2. We are able to generalize due to our arithmetical synthetic a priori
intuition.
3. In particular, arithmetical intuition enables us to form structural
generalizations.
4. Therefore, scientiﬁc laws are structural generalizations.
So far as we are aware, Poincaré never states this argument explicitly. However,
he is explicitly committed to the ﬁrst premise, as various statements in Science
and Hypothesis make plain (cf. quote above from Poincaré 1902/1952, 129–
30). Additionally, Poincaré goes on from that quote to claim, “It is not sufﬁ-
cient merely to observe; we must use our observations, and for that purpose
we must generalize” (140). And a few pages further along he deﬁnes a good
experiment as “that which teaches us something more than an isolated fact. It is
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
115

that which enables us to predict, and to generalise. Without generalisation,
prediction is impossible” (142). A good experiment, in other words, allows
us to translate particular instances into laws by generalizing those instances.
In this way, laws are themselves generalizations. Moreover, our discussion of
Poincaré qua neo-Kantian shows that it is at least plausible he was committed
to the remaining premises. Granting these, the conclusion follows readily. Note
that Argument 1 presents a kind of structuralism distinct from Worrall’s ESR;
more on this comparison will be said in section 4, once all three arguments for
structuralism have been put on the table.
3.
Poincaré’s Realism
Whether or not one accepts the above neo-Kantian reading of Poincaré and to
what degree, there remain signiﬁcant differences between Poincaré’s realism and
realism within the contemporary debate. These differences arise from the role
of convention in Poincaré’s philosophy of science (treated below in sec. 3.1)
and from his account of objectivity (sec. 3.2). These two aspects contribute sub-
stantial shading to Poincaré’s variety of realism, yielding a second argument for
structuralism.
3.1.
Conventionalism
Perhaps an obvious place to challenge the interpretation of Poincaré as a sci-
entiﬁc realist is through the most famous aspect of his philosophy of science:
his conventionalism. However, most discussion on this point focuses on con-
ventionalism in philosophy of geometry speciﬁcally; perhaps it is less obvious
that conventionalism enters his account of mechanics and physical science as
well. In this section, we argue that Poincaré’s conventionalism does indeed ex-
tend into mechanics and physics and that this fact demands we read the “re-
alist” classiﬁcation of his philosophy with care. We begin with an overview
of his geometric conventionalism, so that we might more easily trace aspects
of conventionalism into his description of other scientiﬁc arenas.
3.1.1.
The Axioms of Geometry as Convention
Poincaré’s conventionality with respect to geometry is widely known. Con-
cisely, Poincaré’s argument involves reasoning by elimination: he asks, what sort
of science is geometry? Can it be considered an a priori science, as Kant insisted?
Poincaré answers in the negative, arguing against Kant in part by discussing the
equal conceivability of non-Euclidean geometries and in part by appealing to
the indemonstrable axioms deﬁning them, to wit—“Every deductive science,
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
116

and geometry in particular, must rest upon a certain number of indemonstrable
axioms” (Poincaré 1902/1952, 35). Poincaré argues that the axioms of other ge-
ometries of constant curvature—namely, those of Lobatschevsky and of Rie-
mann—are logically possible and internally coherent, and so their truth cannot
be evaluated a priori. This, as was well appreciated by geometers of Poincaré’s
day, renders Kant’s argument for the a prioricity of Euclidean geometry trouble-
some.
If not a priori, can geometry then be considered empirical science? The an-
swer here is again negative, and Poincaré provides two reasons why. First, he
asserts that geometry is unlike empirical sciences in that it cannot be modiﬁed
in light of new experimental data. Second, geometry is exact and does not rely
on approximations the way empirical sciences are constrained to do. Thus, nei-
ther is geometry a proper empirical science.
If geometry can be considered neither empirical science nor a priori science,
it must be situated on some middle ground. For Poincaré that middle ground is
convention: “The geometrical axioms are therefore neither synthetic a priori intu-
itions nor experimental facts. They are conventions. Our choice among all pos-
sible conventions is guided by experimental facts; but it remains free, and is
only limited by the necessity of avoiding every contraction, and thus it is that
postulates may remain rigorously true even when the experimental laws which
have determined their adoption are only approximate. In other words, the ax-
ioms of geometry . . . are only deﬁnitions in disguise” (1902/1952, 50; emphasis
original).
3.1.2.
Convention in Mechanics and Physics
Already in the author’s preface to Science and Hypothesis, after stating his thesis
about the conventional nature of geometry’s axioms, Poincaré tells his readers
to expect the following: “In mechanics we shall be led to analogous conclu-
sions, and we shall see that the principles of this science, although more directly
based on experience, still share the conventional character of the geometrical
postulates” (1902/1952, xxvi). This is a clear statement that his conventional-
ism extends at least to mechanics, if not farther. Regarding mechanics, Poincaré
says that the principles appear to us under two different aspects: “On the one
hand, there are truths founded on experiment, and veriﬁed approximately as
far as almost isolated systems are concerned; on the other hand, there are pos-
tulates applicable to the whole of the universe and regarded as rigorously true.”
It is under this second aspect that principles are seen to rely on convention.
Poincaré continues: “If these postulates possess a generality and a certainty
which falsify the experimental truths from which they were deduced, it is be-
cause they reduce in ﬁnal analysis to a simple convention that we have a right
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
117

to make, because we are certain beforehand that no experiment can contradict
it” (135–36).
A few pages later Poincaré reafﬁrms the relationship between principles and
conventions as follows: “Principles are conventions and deﬁnitions in disguise.
They are, however, deduced from experimental laws, and these laws have, so to
speak, been erected into principles to which our mind attributes an absolute
value” (1902/1952, 138). He goes on to explain the process of elevating laws
to the status of principles:
How can a law become a principle [convention]? It expressed a relation
between two real terms, A and B; but it was not rigorously true, it was
only approximate. We introduce arbitrarily an intermediate term, C, more
or less imaginary, and C is by deﬁnition that which has with A exactly the
relation expressed by the law. So our law is decomposed into an absolute
and rigorous principle which expresses the relation of A to C, and an ap-
proximate experimental and revisable law which expresses the relation of
C to B. But it is clear that however far this decomposition may be carried,
laws will always remain. (138–39, emphasis original)
In the preceding quotations, we see Poincaré insisting that while convention
may no longer be sufﬁcient for describing relations in the case of mechanics as
it was in the case of geometry, it is nevertheless still necessary. While conven-
tions in geometry describe an exact relation between objects of the right sort
(e.g., different points in space), they are only able to ascribe that relation ex-
actly in virtue of the idealized nature of such objects. Mechanics no longer
deals exclusively with idealized objects, and so we will require the application
of laws in addition to convention in order to exactly describe relations between
the appropriate classes of referents. Consider the example described in the pas-
sage above: in order to express a relation between two real objects A and B, one
must ﬁrst relate A to some idealized entity C using whatever convention will
yield a “rigorously true” relation under the appropriate mechanical laws. Only
then can one consider relations involving some further real object like B—one
ﬁrst applies the principle (“absolute and rigorous”) to the relation A–C and
then relates C to B via another application of those same laws (noting that
the derivation of this second relation is not exact and is revisable).
Poincaré builds his argument for the conventional nature of mechanical
principles using the same tactic employed in his argument for the conven-
tionality of geometrical axioms: the principles of mechanics cannot be consid-
ered a priori because they are the result of empirical investigation. Yet neither
are these principles wholly empirical in nature. Although the principles are
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
118

originally derived from experiment, we choose to elevate them to a status that
no longer admits of empirical veriﬁcation or falsiﬁcation. Newton’s laws of mo-
tion and the law of energy conservation are examples of mechanical laws-cum-
principles-cum-conventions, for “being based on experiment, [they] can no
longer be invalidated by it” (Poincaré 1902/1952, 127–28). This failure of me-
chanical principles to qualify as purely a priori or purely empirical leads Poincaré
to classify them as convention.
Might one limit the conventional element to geometry and mechanics and
keep it from entering the laws of “higher up” natural sciences like physics? Could
one not simply stipulate that laws within the natural sciences remain empirical
laws, never to be elevated to the status of principles and thereby become tainted
by convention? Such a move is indeed consistent with Poincaré’s own view.
However, it seems to us that it is difﬁcult to make a robust distinction here be-
tween mechanics and other areas of mathematical physics. For example, which
is the nature of the second law of thermodynamics? Unless a robust distinction
can be made that shows how and why the principles of mechanics are conven-
tional whereas the laws appearing elsewhere in mathematical physics are not,
some aspect of convention will persist throughout.
Given the nontrivial role convention may play within mechanics and phys-
ics, the following question naturally arises: how and in what sense do these
conventions come to express real relations? A further story from Poincaré is re-
quired at this juncture in order to understand in what sense he might be called
a realist. Unfortunately, no such story is offered, and so we are compelled to
conclude as follows: Poincaré’s conventionalism—if it can be said to comport
with any kind of realism at all—certainly cannot be considered to be realist in
the same manner as are the positions on offer in the contemporary debate.
3.2.
Objectivity
3.2.1.
Objectivity and Truth
Poincaré’s popular writings are full of terms like “objective reality,” “true rela-
tions,” “real relations,” and so on. Much of this talk sounds realist, at least about
relations. In the very chapter of Science and Hypothesis appealed to by Worrall
for his arguments, Poincaré writes (1902/1952, 161): “The true relations be-
tween these real objects are the only reality we can attain.” However, such state-
ments concerning truth, reality, and objectivity should not be given a straight-
forward realist interpretation, as Domski (2000) points out. To wit, consider
the following excerpt: “If truth be the sole aim worth pursuing, may we hope
to attain it? It may well be doubted. Readers of my little book ‘Science and Hy-
pothesis’ already know what I think about the question. The truth we are per-
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
119

mitted to glimpse is not altogether what most men call by that name” (Poincaré
1905/1958, 12).
What does Poincaré mean by truth, then? We alluded brieﬂy to Poincaré’s
special notion of truth when discussing his neo-Kantianism; let us now add
some meat to those bones. A few pages after the above quote from Value of Sci-
ence, we ﬁnd Poincaré making these considerations:
Does the harmony the human intelligence thinks it discovers in nature
exist outside of this intelligence? No, beyond all doubt, a reality completely
independent of the mind which conceives it, sees or feels it, is an impos-
sibility. Aworld as exterior as that, even if it existed, would for us be forever
inaccessible. But what we call objective reality is, in the last analysis, what
is common to many thinking beings, and could be common to all; this
common part, we shall see, can only be the harmony expressed by math-
ematical laws. It is this harmony then which is the sole objective reality, the
only truth we can attain. (1905/1958, 14)
As this statement makes clear, knowledge of a mind-independent reality is, for
Poincaré, impossible. Moreover, objectivity means intersubjective agreement (be-
tween human beings or beings with faculties “sufﬁciently similar” to our own),
and truth—as mentioned in section 2—is located within this same intersub-
jective agreement. Scientiﬁc truth and objectivity are what is intersubjectively sta-
ble for creatures sufﬁciently like us, and since mathematical laws express relations
between scientiﬁc facts, “objective reality” refers tointersubjective agreement con-
cerning these relations.
Similar remarks to those quoted above occur often in the body of Poincaré’s
works, and this is sufﬁcient to warrant the conclusion that his realism is differ-
ent from the realism of contemporary philosophers of science. Note that this
conclusion holds independently of neo-Kantian considerations.
3.2.2.
Objectivity and Structuralism
As just stated, Poincaré’s understanding of objectivity is derived from intersub-
jective agreement. Related to this is Poincaré’s account of objective knowledge
more generally, which gets us to a further argument for structuralism.
In their book on objectivity, Daston and Galison (2007) claim that the
grounds for Poincaré’s structuralism lie in his account of objectivity. They dis-
tinguish this from the motivation of current structural realists, for which they
cite the challenges posed to realism by underdetermination of theory by data
and the pessimistic metainduction. They write, “Yet the preoccupations of the
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
120

late twentieth-century structural realists were not those of the early twentieth-
century structural objectivists: the former, like all realists, were primarily inter-
esting in the justiﬁcation for the claim that science was true, that it correctly de-
scribed the real features of the world; the latter (including Poincaré) were chieﬂy
concerned with the justiﬁcation for the claim that science was objective, that it
was ‘common to all thinking beings’” (261). According to Daston and Galison,
the challenge to which Poincaré and others were responding arose from develop-
ments in mid-nineteenth-century physiology, psychology, and ethnology that
cast doubt on shared experience as the grounds of objectivity. The response was
“not to reject scientiﬁc objectivity but to deepen it” (259). We can see Poincaré
responding to exactly this challenge in chapter 6 of Value of Science, entitled
“Objectivity of Science.” First, he argues for the claim that “what is objective
must be common to many minds and consequently transmissible from one to
the other” (Poincaré 1905/1958, 345). Then, Poincaré argues: “Sensations are
therefore intransmissible, or rather all that is pure quality in them is intrans-
missible and forever impenetrable. But it is not the same with relations between
these sensations. From this point of view, all that is objective is devoid of all qual-
ity and is only pure relation” (345).
He argues for this by considering the case of color perception, claiming that
we have no means of verifying whether “the sensation I call red is the same as that
which my neighbour calls red” (Poincaré 1905/1958, 345). This is an expression
of the challenge to objectivity discussed by Daston and Galison. Poincaré con-
cludes: “we must nevertheless admit that nothing is objective which is not trans-
missible, and consequently that the relations between the sensations can alone
have an objective value” (345).
The argument for structuralism that Poincaré gives here can be put into premise-
conclusion form as follows, with “communicable” substituted for “transmissible”:
Argument 2—From objectivity
1. Objective knowledge is necessarily common to all (i.e., intersubjec-
tively stable).
2. That which is common to all is necessarily communicable.
3. That which is communicable is knowledge of relations only.
4. Therefore, objective knowledge just is knowledge of relations.
This is a very strong conclusion: all objective knowledge (not just scientiﬁc
knowledge) is necessarily knowledge of relations. It rests on Poincaré’s account
of the relationship between objectivity and communicability (expressed in prem-
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
121

ises 1 and 2) and on the empirical discoveries stressed by Daston and Galison (on
which premise 3 rests). The argument is independent of the neo-Kantian consid-
erations discussed in section 2.
As applied to science, Poincaré’s view that objective knowledge is knowl-
edge of relations ﬁnds expression in his famous statement in the preface of Sci-
ence and Hypothesis: “The aim of science is not things in themselves, as the
dogmatists in their simplicity imagine, but the relations between things; out-
side those relations there is no reality knowable” (1902/1952, xxiv). Poincaré
is clear that when doing science, our commitment is to relations rather than to
the things in themselves. Moreover, this has implications for Poincaré’s view of
scientiﬁc theories. Poincaré describes the role of mathematical physics within
physics to be a structural one: in constructing a scientiﬁc theory we use math-
ematics to structure empirically derived scientiﬁc facts. Writing about this, he
says: “Science is built up of facts, as a house is built of stones; but an accumu-
lation of facts is no more a science than a heap of stones is a house” (141).
Employing a different analogy, Poincaré compares the function of mathemat-
ical physics to that of a library catalog, where the experimental facts serve as
the “books” (144–45). It is the duty of the mathematical physicist to take new
data generated by experiment and order them usefully (where “usefully” means
that this cataloging process directs us toward the sorts of experiments neces-
sary for supplementing the library with interesting new books). In short, facts
must be given structure—this is what it is to do science and to construct scien-
tiﬁc theories.
It is here, in his focus on the relations between things and in his structural
characterization of theories, that Poincaré comes closest to the structuralism
endorsed in contemporary ESR. What Argument 2 highlights, however, is that
for Poincaré knowledge of the scientiﬁc facts themselves is knowledge of rela-
tions. Absent Argument 2, one could adopt Poincaré’s structuralist approach to
scientiﬁc theories without also committing to his view that objective knowl-
edge (including knowledge of scientiﬁc facts) is just knowledge of relations.
Once Argument 2 is adopted, however, the resulting form of structuralism is
deeper and more thoroughgoing than that of the typical contemporary episte-
mic structural realist: all objective knowledge, including all scientiﬁc knowl-
edge, is necessarily knowledge of relations.
We have demonstrated thus far that a careful, context-sensitive reading of
Poincaré’s philosophy of science can support two arguments for structuralism,
and we have shown that each has signiﬁcantly different scope and motivation
from contemporary ESR. Thus, insofar as Poincaré’s structuralism arises from
Argument 1 or Argument 2, and therefore from neo-Kantian considerations
or from considerations of objectivity, respectively, it would be a mistake to
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
122

equate it with contemporary ESR. We turn now to a third argument for struc-
turalism—that offered by Worrall (1989)—and to the relationship between
Poincaré and contemporary ESR.
4.
Worrall’s ESR in Relation to Poincaré
The central thesis of Worrall’s ESR is that we have good reason to believe that
the entities in the world exemplify the structures posited by our best scientiﬁc
theories, but we should be epistemically noncommittal about the nonstruc-
tural natures of the entities in question. Worrall writes: “[The structural realist]
insists that it is a mistake to think that we can ever ‘understand’ the nature of
the basic furniture of the universe” (1989, 122). The position is thus presented
as a retreat from full-blown scientiﬁc realism that reﬂects the epistemic mod-
esty appropriate in light of the argument from the pessimistic metainduction.
Because the position was developed in this manner, it follows that it is highly
contingent on the actual history of science. Worrall says:
No one should claim a stronger sense of continuity, and hence a stronger
version of realism, than is compatible with the historical record. We
should look for the strongest such version and see if it is a continuity
worth having. If there is no such notion of continuity worth having, then
there is no sustainable version of realism. However, I hold that there is a
continuity (admittedly of an approximate kind) at the structural level
that is substantial enough to count and hence I hold that [structural sci-
entiﬁc realism] is a sustainable version of scientiﬁc realism, and indeed . . .
the only sustainable version. (2007, 144)
Poincaré enters the picture as being, in Worrall’s view, the ﬁrst ﬁgure to both
present a version of the pessimistic metainduction and advocate a position sim-
ilar to his own ESR. Worrall writes:
There was continuity or accumulation in the shift [from Fresnel’s theory
of light to Maxwell’s], but the continuity is one of form or structure, not
of content. In fact this claim was already made and defended by Poin-
caré. And Poincaré used the example of the switch from Fresnel to Max-
well to argue for a general sort of syntactic or structural realism. . . . This
largely forgotten thesis of Poincaré’s seems to me to offer the only hope-
ful way of both underwriting the ‘no miracles’ argument and accepting
an accurate account of the extent of theory change in science. (1989, 117,
emphasis original)
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
123

This characterization of Poincaré as a historical precursor for contemporary
ESR can be found elsewhere in the literature. For example, Zahar agrees with
Worrall in characterizing Poincaré as an epistemic structural realist: “Poincaré’s
structural realism is in a sense a reversal of Quine’s slogan: to be is to be quan-
tiﬁed over (in some ﬁrst-order theory); for according to Poincaré, only the uni-
versals, and more particularly the relations occurring in a uniﬁed and empiri-
cally successful theory, mirror the ontological order of things. As for the nature
of the relata, it will forever remain hidden from us” (Zahar 2001, 37). Like
Worrall, Gower (2000) designates Poincaré as one of the earliest adherents to
structural realism, where Gower understands the term as follows: “In the case
of ‘structural’ scientiﬁc realism, the central idea is that scientiﬁc theories do in-
deed provide information unavailable to us in observation and experimenta-
tion, but that information is about the form or structure, rather than the nature
or content, of what is unobservable. Often, it is claimed, when one theory is
replaced by another, it is information about the essential nature of what is un-
observable that is replaced, rather than information about the structure of the
unobservable” (73–74).
Gower goes on to state that “the idea of structural realism, broadly con-
strued” (2000, 74) had been adopted by Poincaré, Duhem, Cassirer, Schlick,
Carnap, and Russell. Gower proceeds to give an account of how several of these
historical ﬁgures, among others, can be considered as latching onto particular
tenets of structural realism. He begins the section on Poincaré by claiming, “The
view we know as structural scientiﬁc realism was explicitly and clearly expressed
by Poincaré” (80), a statement that is footnoted with references to the discussion
of Poincaré’s position in Worrall (1989, 1994), to Psillos (1995), and to Zahar
(1996).
After a brief sketch of Poincaré’s view (supplemented with the usual quotes
from Poincaré’s major works), Gower concedes that although from a modern
perspective one might easily ﬁnd something like the no-miracles argument and
the pessimistic metainduction in Poincaré, one must ask whether this modern
characterization misrepresents his position; Gower notes in particular the
mind-dependent aspect of Poincaré’s view we have described above (see Gower
2000, 101). In the end, though, Gower decides that the usual “rough” charac-
terization of Poincaré is generally correct, writing: “For both Poincaré and
Duhem, then, a defensible scientiﬁc realism must be structural in the sense
that it attributes reality to the relational structure of a scientiﬁc theory” (86).
We think that there is widespread recognition that attributing ESR to Poin-
caré is a little rough and ready. For example, Domski (2000) explicitly argues
that Poincaré’s position should not be interpreted as straightforwardly realist.
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
124

We agree with her assessment and have argued that all three terms in the ESR
classiﬁcation of Poincaré’s position (epistemic, structuralist, and realist) should
be handled with care: each means something rather different for Poincaré than
for Worrall (and for contemporary ESR in general).
The motivation for Poincaré’s position also demands reexamination. As men-
tioned, Worrall (1989) uses the pessimistic metainduction to motivate his ESR:
in order to avoid the antirealist thrust of the pessimistic metainduction, he urges
a retreat from standard scientiﬁc realism to structural realism, wherein we com-
mit ourselves to only the structural part of our theory and remain agnostic about
the natures of the entities instantiating or undergirding those structures.
Worrall points to the preface and chapter 10 of Science and Hypothesis to
argue that Poincaré both confronts the pessimistic metainduction and rejects
it via his structuralism concerning scientiﬁc theories (Worrall 1989, 117–18). First,
Worrall interprets the following passage from Poincaré as a version of the pessi-
mistic metainduction: “The ephemeral nature of scientiﬁc theories takes by sur-
prise the man of the world. Their brief period of prosperity ended, he sees them
abandoned one after another; he sees ruins piled upon ruins; he predicts that the
theories in fashion today will in a short time succumb in their turn, and he con-
cludes that they are absolutely in vain. This is what he calls the bankruptcy of
science” (Poincaré 1902/1952, 160; emphasis original). For the purposes of this
discussion, we follow Worrall’s interpretation of this passage, in which the bank-
ruptcy of science is identiﬁed with the pessimistic metainduction. However,
it should be noted that the phrase “bankruptcy of science” has a rich historical-
contextual relevance, and Poincaré’s use of it here is, consequently, laden with
meaning that ought not be overlooked.1
Second, Worrall cites the following passage as providing the structural solu-
tion:
The true relations between these real objects are the only reality we can
attain, and the sole condition is that the same relations shall exist be-
tween these objects as between the images we are forced to put in their
place. If the relations are known to us, what does it matter if we think it
convenient to replace one image by another? In the case of contradiction
[between two theories] one of them at least should be considered false.
But this is no longer the case if we only seek in them what should be
sought. It is quite possible that they both express true relations, and that
1. We will not explore this further here, but we point the reader to Paul (1968), esp. 301, 311, and 320.
We thank a reviewer for alerting us to the special history of this phrase and for supplying relevant references.
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
125

the contradictions only exist in the images we have formed to ourselves
of reality. (Poincaré 1902/1952, 161, 163)
In other words, theories that contradict one another at the level of the images
associated with them may be found to agree once we restrict our attention to
the relations expressed by the theories. It is this observation (incorporated
within Poincaré’s epistemic relationism) that can be put to work in rejecting
the bankruptcy of science. By focusing on the relations instead of troublesome
entity talk, one can tell a continuous and progressive story about the history of
scientiﬁc theories. Poincaré stresses that while the entities may change in the
transition from one theory to the next, the form of the old theory is preserved:
“Our equations become, it is true, more and more complicated . . . but nothing
is changed in the relations which enable these equations to be derived from
each other” (1902/1952, 181). A successful theory is not one that necessarily
gets the entities right—indeed, recall that Poincaré is skeptical whether the
truth of such claims can be evaluated at all—but instead, a successful theory
is one that correctly describes observed relations and fails to afﬁrm false ones.
The very best theories are those throwing into relief the greatest number of
known relations and thereby exhibiting “traces of deﬁnitive construction” (175).
This reading of Poincaré constitutes a third argument for structuralism.
What is the relationship between the bankruptcy of science and Poincaré’s
structuralism? The standard interpretation, stemming from Worrall, is that the
pessimistic metainduction is a motivation for Poincaré’s structuralism. If this is
correct, then Poincaré’s position might similarly be understood as a retreat
from scientiﬁc realism in the face of the pessimistic metainduction and might
justly be thought of as a historical forerunner to Worrall’s position.
It seems to us, however, that reading the inference as going from Poincaré’s
epistemic structuralism, independently grounded, to the rejection of the bank-
ruptcy of science (rather than the other way around, as in Worrall’s arguments)
is a more plausible interpretation of Poincaré. This claim is supported by the
structure of Poincaré’s argument as set out in Science and Hypothesis. In this text,
Poincaré is developing an epistemology of science that begins with arithmetic
and geometry and goes on to explain the role of mathematical physics in the
natural sciences. As we have discussed here, his central concerns are the status
of arithmetic and geometry, and of objective knowledge, as those issues were
understood at the turn of the century, and his solutions are rooted in his neo-
Kantian epistemology. He is not primarily concerned with defending empirical
science from antirealist arguments in the form of the pessimistic metainduction.
In fact, it seems instead that after developing his position, Poincaré then consid-
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
126

ers the bankruptcy of science to be addressed by his very position in the manner
of a corollary. Poincaré’s discussion of the bankruptcy of science and its rejection
by appeal to epistemic structuralism occurs in the tenth of thirteen chapters in
Science and Hypothesis, only after he has already introduced, motivated, and elab-
orated his (multifaceted) structuralist position.
In short, we believe we have demonstrated that the pessimistic metainduc-
tion plays a much smaller role in Poincaré’s overall considerations than is com-
monly believed and little if any in the arguments he makes for his position.
This is not to say that one cannot use Poincaré’s ideas to construct Worrall’s
argument for epistemic structuralism (and even ESR)—surely one can. The
point is simply that this is not how Poincaré himself went about arguing for
his position.
5.
Conclusion
On Worrall’s account, ESR is motivated by epistemic modesty, the grounds for
which rest on a claim about history: as a matter of historical fact (so the claim
goes), it has turned out that science has witnessed a series of ontological discon-
tinuities concerning theoretical entities. There is nothing in Worrall’s argu-
ment for ESR that warrants the claim that the development of science had
to go this way or that it must continue to show such ontological discontinu-
ities. ESR is thus consistent with a future in which the ontology of our best
theories has been stable for such a long time that the pessimistic metainduction
loses its force, and epistemic immodesty begins to regain its plausibility. In
sum, the commitment to ESR is contingent on the history of science.
By contrast, neither the argument from generalization (Argument 1) nor the
argument from objectivity (Argument 2) is historically contingent. The former
argument rests on Poincaré’s epistemology (speciﬁcally, his account of a priori
intuition and its role in grounding our ability to generalize), while the latter
rests on a speciﬁc claim about the nature of objective knowledge.
The argument from generalization is speciﬁc to scientiﬁc theories. The con-
clusion of the argument from generalization is that the generalizations con-
structed on the basis of the scientiﬁc facts (whatever the nature of these facts
may be) must be structural. In considering this argument alone, one might
think (contrary to Poincaré’s overall position) that there could be nonstructural
aspects to “the facts” (or at least to some of the facts). One might therefore also
think that scientiﬁc theorizing could go astray if, when we generalize over the
facts, we inadvertently “boost” nonstructural aspects associated with the facts
up into the theories. According to the argument from generalization, such
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
127

“boosting” of nonstructural aspects is illegitimate. Why? Because our ability
to generalize is grounded in a priori intuition, and the generalizations that a
priori intuition warrants are of a structural nature. The appearance in our gen-
eralizations of any nonstructural features of the fact must thereby be consid-
ered epistemically unwarranted. Thus, Poincaré’s position is stronger than that
endorsed by contemporary advocates of ESR because it follows from his ac-
count of how scientiﬁc knowledge is possible at all: rather than arising from
a choice that we make about being epistemically modest in the face of history,
it follows from what is epistemically warranted given our nature as knowers.
By contrast, the conclusion of the argument from objectivity (i.e., objective
knowledge just is knowledge of relations) extends beyond scientiﬁc theories to
objects of knowledge in general, including scientiﬁc facts. These too, according
to Poincaré, are relational. The conclusion of this argument is therefore much
stronger than the claim argued for by contemporary advocates of ESR.
Our primary goal in this article has been to clarify the ways in which Poin-
caré’s views differ from current ESR. In so doing, we have taken into account
the roles of his neo-Kantianism, his conventionalism, and his account of ob-
jectivity in informing his overall position. As we have shown, each of these re-
quires that we interpret his position somewhat differently from contemporary
ESR. Moreover, we have seen that Poincaré’s position is motivated by two ar-
guments not found in the current literature on ESR, as a result of which he
can be understood as endorsing a stronger thesis than is associated with con-
temporary ESR. Current ESR is motivated primarily by the desire to overcome
the pessimistic metainduction while doing justice to the no-miracles intuition.
The two additional arguments for structuralism given here, and attributable to
Poincaré, may perhaps offer alternative ways to think about structuralism within
philosophy of science.
R E F E R E N C E S
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison. 2007. Objectivity. New York: Zone.
Domski, Mary A. 2000. “The Epistemological Foundations of Structural Realism? Poincaré
and the Structure of Relations.” Paper presented at University of Leeds Informal Semi-
nar, May 19.
Folina, Janet. 1992. Poincaré and the Philosophy of Mathematics. New York: St. Martin’s.
Gower, Barry. 2000. “Cassirer, Schlick and ‘Structural’ Realism: The Philosophy of the Ex-
act Sciences in the Background to Early Logical Empiricism.” British Journal for the His-
tory of Philosophy 8 (1): 71–106.
Ladyman, James. 1998. “What Is Structural Realism?” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Science 29:409–24.
HO P OS
|
Epistemic Structural Realism and Poincaré
128

Paul, Harry W. 1968. “The Debate over the Bankruptcy of Science in 1895.” French His-
torical Studies 5:299–327.
Poincaré, Henri. 1902/1952. Science and Hypothesis. Repr. New York: Dover.
———. 1905/1958. The Value of Science. Repr. New York: Dover.
———. 1913/1963. Last Essays. Repr. New York: Dover.
Psillos, Stathis. 1995. “Is Structural Realism the Best of Both Worlds?” Dialectica 49:15–46.
Worrall, John. 1989. “Structural Realism: The Best of Both Worlds?” Dialectica 43:99–124.
———. 1994. “How to Remain (Reasonably) Optimistic: Scientiﬁc Realism and the ‘Lu-
miniferous Ether.’” In PSA 1994: Proceedings of the 1994 Biennial Meeting of the Philos-
ophy of Science Association, vol. 1, ed. D. Hull, M. Forbes, and M. Burian, 334–42. East
Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association.
———. 2007. “Miracles and Models: Why Reports of the Death of Structural Realism May
Be Exaggerated.” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 82:125–54.
Zahar, E. 1996. “Poincaré’s Structural Realism and His Logic of Discovery.” In Henri Poin-
caré: Science and Philosophy, International Congress Nancy, France, 1994, ed. J. L. Greffe,
G. Heinzmann, and K. Lorenz, 45–68. Paris: Blanchard.
———. 2001. Poincaré’s Philosophy: From Conventionalism to Phenomenology. With an ap-
pendix coauthored by John Worrall. Chicago: Carus.
Brading and Crull
|
S P RING 2 017
129

