VIRUS OF THE MIND 1ST EDITION Free
Author: Richard Brodie
ISBN: 9781401926007

Zoltan Torey. The Mind Club. Daniel M. Wegner and Kurt Gray. Perceptual Learning. Zhong-Lin Lu and Barbara Dosher. How to Fly a Horse.
Kevin Ashton. The Data Detective. Protocol Analysis, revised edition. Anders Ericsson and Herbert A. Beyond Boundaries. Miguel Nicolelis.
Research Misconduct Policy in Biomedicine. Barbara K. Algorithms Are Not Enough. Herbert L. The Way of the Ninja. Masaaki Hatsumi.
Individual and Collective Memory Consolidation. Patrick Watson , Thomas J. Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. The Most Human Human. Brian Christian.
The Art of Negotiation. Gerard I. The Creativity Leap. Natalie Nixon. Richard Restak, M. Five Constraints on Predicting Behavior. Jerome
Kagan. For a better shopping experience, please upgrade now. Javascript is not enabled in your browser.

Enabling JavaScript in your browser will allow you to experience all the features of our site. Learn how to enable JavaScript on your browser.
NOOK Book. Home 1 Books 2. Read an excerpt of this book! Add to Wishlist. Sign in to Purchase Instantly. Explore Now. Buy As Gift.
Overview Virus of the Mind is the first popular book devoted to the science of memetics, a controversial new field that transcends psychology,
biology, anthropology, and cognitive science. Memetics is the science of memes, the invisible but very real DNA of human society. In Virus of the
Mind , Richard Brodie carefully builds on the work of scientists Richard Dawkins, Douglas Hofstadter, Daniel Dennett, and others who have
become fascinated with memes and their potential impact on our lives.
But Richard goes beyond science and dives into the meat of the issue: is the emergence of this new science going to have an impact on our lives
like the emergence of atomic physics did in the Cold War? He would say the impact will be at least as great. The system of existing and not
existing filters all things, so that things that aren't good at existing, don't exist; likewise, things that are good at existing, exist. The most highly refined
viral memes of today are not exactly designed by the meme, they're just the mutations of it that replicate better than other mutations, and survive
better than other mutations. This is why 'bad' ideas can persist.
Ideas don't persist because they're 'good'; they persist because they mutate into forms that are more replicable and more survivable. If they didn't,
they would cease to be. The book ends with a call for living at 'level 3' of consciousness, which basically means to be intentional in what we want
and not being controlled by memes that are simply satisfying their own needs at our expensive. According to my current understanding of
consciousness, we're not really any one particular thing with one particular will, such as Descartes' pineal gland observer soul thingy.
We're an accumulation of simultaneously competing and complimenting memes and genes. Identifying 'ourselves' as one thing is a tricky task. But I
think if we can come to an understanding of what overall brings us life and happiness, we can work toward those ends and experience life and
happiness. Self-understanding is probably the biggest first step, and then recognising memes and genes that compete against our health and
happiness is the next step, beyond which most people never get. I feel pretty empowered by this book, as well as overwhelmed. The myth of self
and eternal life and the centrality of humans is fading I don't quite like the idea that everything that exists is simply vying for existence against
everything else, but maybe there's a way to make it work and still love and enjoy life.
I need to think about how best to achieve that. And I need want to read some more books on this topic. Feb 13, Brandon Henke rated it liked it
Shelves: science , nonfiction , genetics. As a seasoned veteran of The Great Meme War of , it was a bit underwhelming. However, this book could
function as a perfectly acceptable introduction to memetics for normies. Either way, its good to brush up on the basics for the upcoming battle in
Oct 30, Jared rated it it was ok. Virus of the Mind is a mix between Dawkins ideas of the meme, self help, poor philosophy which can be blamed
on Dawkins ,and a championship of Zen meditation.
So this book was a mixed bag. I am not a fan of Dawkins ideas about religion. I don't think that man has a clue about what he is talking about.
However, I do think his ideas of genetics being used to explain evolution is a clever idea, and applying evolution to the spread of ideas is also an
interesting concept. Richard Brodie does a very Virus of the Mind is a mix between Dawkins ideas of the meme, self help, poor philosophy which
can be blamed on Dawkins ,and a championship of Zen meditation.
Richard Brodie does a very good job explaining Dawkins ideas of genetic evolution, and the meme and makes it accessible to a wide audience.
Understanding the theory of memetics is worth the price of admission. Unfortunately, I think Brodie takes the idea too far. He goes as far to say
that everything is a meme, that we can not know an absolute truth, and that religion is all just a meme.
At that point it should be pointed out that the idea of that we can not know any absolute truth must in and of itself be absolutely true if it is to be
believed. In other words Brodie is just putting forward a new "clever" form of postmodernism A lot of the rest of the book is actually good advice.
We should not be too tuned into the tv, and movies. We should learn logic and learn how to analyze the ideas that are being put into our head. We
should be aware of what makes certain ideas stick and not be fooled into believing bad ideas just because they are sticky.
Unfortunately, his answer is more postmodernism, with a zen twist. I am not saying that meditation is not a useful practice, but I will point out that
most religions do advice some form of meditation, and not just zen. Christianity practices meditation, Islam does, Buddhism does, Native
Americans do as well. Zen is not unique. And most of the ideas of memetics have been known since the Middle ages, just look up the medieval
idea of the mind worm. Key idea is that a successful meme is an idea that replicates itself from one mind to another.
Advice is given on how to inoculate yourself against memes that others evangelists, advertisers, etc. It gets interesting when he digs ok book about
the "meme", coined by Richard Dawkins to describe unit of cultural evolution analogous to gene as unit of biological evolution. It gets interesting
when he digs into a specific topic -- e. But a lot of the book seemed to consist of a describing a very familiar observation ads incorporate sexually
attractive people even when this feature is irrelevant to the product Sep 27, Regan rated it it was ok Shelves: The author's enthusiasm for the
subject is appreciated and does lend an element of enjoyability to the book.
I thought his writing was lacking in a few ways though. I just couldn't get past the fact that he was so convinced that what he was writing was so
revolutionary and powerful rather than an interesting different perspective on well understood ideas. As a person of faith I thought he was
particularly sloppy in addressing the topic of religion - making condescending generalizations and fitti The author's enthusiasm for the subject is
appreciated and does lend an element of enjoyability to the book. As a person of faith I thought he was particularly sloppy in addressing the topic
of religion - making condescending generalizations and fitting his ideas about memes to criticize religion yes he came back around to recognize
some of the value of religion but that came across as hollow ramblings of a writer who tries to be eclectic in his life philosophy.
I was a bit surprised after his general critique of religion that he went on to try to use his ideas around memes to fit fairly generic self-help themes.
Despite the criticisms I felt he book provoked thought and provided a perspective on modern life that was different from what I currently have and
thus held some value. Richard Dawkins mentions this book in The Selfish Gene , as a discussion of memetics.

And it is a concise discussion of the subject of memes, along with some libertarian digressions, elements of self-help and attempts at consciousness
raising. As such this book tries to be a popular science text, a socio-political manifesto of sorts, and a motivational essay on adding meaning to
one's life. Because of that split it's not very good in any of the three categories. As a science book, it lacks the slow Richard Dawkins mentions this
book in The Selfish Gene , as a discussion of memetics. As a science book, it lacks the slow and gradual step by step demonstration of new facts
from more basic building blocks in logical succession.
As a socio-political manifesto it lacks persuasive power and uses some poor rhetorical devices. And as a motivational essay it doesn't really leave
you with any concrete guidelines or next steps. Made me think, though, that counts. Jan 18, Martin rated it it was ok. I know that others
supposedly like it, at least other books dealing with Memetics, are typically found in the Science section. Having just finished the book, I now
know why I found it where I did. I wanted to learn about the emerging science of Memetics, not be issued value judgments on the validity of one
meme over another. The author is quite witty and I did enjoy reading it, even though I grew tired of his shameless and pretty much constant self-
promotion.
Sep 09, Mary Paul rated it it was ok. This would have a higher rating if M Brodie did not include enormous relatively irrelevant sections on sex and
evolution. While the original chapters on memetics were insightful and promising, he dives head first into a childish and unsophisticated lecture on
human dynamics rather than stick to what he knows best An interesting discussion but not very intelligent and the illustrations are awful. I can see
this selling well but it's barely popular science fluff.
I've only read a l This would have a higher rating if M Brodie did not include enormous relatively irrelevant sections on sex and evolution. I've only
read a little Dawkins but looking at the bibliography and writing suggests this is the 50 shades to Dawkin's Twilight. Sep 07, Mary K. I think
Richard Dawkins is the one that first came up with the word "meme," which, in essence, addresses the issue of how much we believe about what
we think we know has come from our readings, listenings, experiences, parents, traditions, society, etc.
He estimates that a good percentage of what we think we remember never really happened The more one l "Memetics" is not a new term, but it
was for me! The more one learns about memetics, the less one can be fooled, manipulated, and scammed. I'm not explaining this very well, so just
read this fascinating book! Solala - although the basic tenet is fine. But you can summarize it in one sentence: The meme is to the mind what the
selfish gene is to the organism - beware of the meme's goals and ensure that these goals don't influence your thinking when it is not rational for them
to do so from your wellbeing's perspective.
Apr 25, Irene rated it did not like it. Everything manulative trick he warns readers to look out for and resist is exactly the tricks he uses to convince
the reader to accept and promote his odd-ball theory. And, simply because I resist the truth of his claims, that in of itself proves that his theory
must be true according to him. Jul 21, Michael rated it did not like it Shelves: pop-culture. So far, this book is horrible. It seems like pure fluff -
sort of like Malcolm Gladwell's books. Update: I officially gave up on this one.
Oct 18, Rachel rated it did not like it Shelves: general-non-fiction. Possibly the dumbest, least useful book I've ever read. It would make great
kindling. Apr 23, Bert Hopkins rated it it was ok Shelves: thinking. Very disappointed by the book. I wish I had gotten more from the book but it
was not for lack of trying. Jan 26, Janelle Rouse rated it did not like it. Apr 18, Matthew Gilbert rated it did not like it. I can has mind hijack? Nov
11, Correen rated it it was ok.
Surgical Cases : Communicated To The Boston Society For Medical Improvement, October 27, 1856 (1856) pdf
Happy Fucking 33rd Birthday : Funny Birthday Journal. Better Than a Birthday Card! download pdf
Sex, Drugs, and Sea Slime The Oceans Oddest Creatures and Why They Matter 1st edition download PDF
The Pinetum : Being a Synopsis of All the Coniferous Plants at Present Known, with Descriptions, His download book
Weird Al download ebook

