518
Quantum Chemistry
Quantum Chemistry
Ana Sim˜oes
When introducing the International Journal of Quantum Chemistry in 1967, the
Swedish quantum chemist Per-Olov L¨owdin (1916–2000) deﬁned the then forty-
year old discipline in the following manner:
Quantum chemistry deals with the theory of the electronic structure of matter: atoms,
molecules, and crystals. It describes this structure in terms of wave patterns, and it uses
physical and chemical experience, deep-going mathematical analysis, and high-speed elec-
tronic computers to achieve its results. Quantum mechanics has rendered a new conceptual
framework for physics and chemistry, and it has led to a uniﬁcation of the natural sciences
which was previously inconceivable; the recent development of molecular biology shows
also that the life sciences are now approaching the same basis.
Quantum chemistry is a young ﬁeld which falls between the historically developed areas of
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology.
Written at a time in which quantum chemistry was experiencing intense network-
ing and growing internationalization and was exploring the potential of a promising
instrument – the electronic digital computer – at the same time as extending its
domain to molecules of biological interest, the deﬁnition bears witness to the chal-
lenges posed by this recent juncture when contrasted with the previous state of
things. It calls attention to the subject-matter of quantum chemistry – the eluci-
dation of the electronic make-up of atoms, molecules and aggregates of molecules;
the interplay of inputs from theory, experiment, mathematics and computation in
building the methodological apparatus of quantum chemistry; its relationship with
the neighboring disciplines of mathematics, physics, and biology; and ﬁnally the
assessment of the role of quantum mechanics in providing a unifying framework
for the natural sciences and eventually for the life sciences. The inﬂuence of quan-
tum chemistry was to extend to all branches of chemistry, from physical, organic,
analytical, and inorganic chemistry to biochemistry.
Evidence of the difﬁculties encountered in positioning the new ﬁeld in rela-
tion to neighboring areas such as chemistry, physics and mathematics lies in the
multiplicity of names attributed to the ﬁeld extending well into the period when
L¨owdin founded the journal. Extra evidence includes the different names assigned
to chairs occupied by its practitioners, the titles of journals used as outlets for their
publications or the descriptions of courses taught on the subject. The new ﬁeld has
been called mathematical chemistry, quantum theory of valence, molecular quantum
mechanics, theoretical chemistry, chemical physics as well as the now standard
quantum chemistry. Although hard to ascertain, the ﬁrst appearance of the desig-
nation ‘quantum chemistry’ in the literature is probably due to Arthur Erich Haas
(1884–1941), the professor of physics at the University of Vienna who published in
1929 Die Grundlagen der Quantenchemie, a collection of four lectures delivered to
the Physico-Chemical Society in Vienna.

Quantum Chemistry
519
Q
L¨owdin wrote this passage forty years since the German physicists Walter Heitler
(1904–1981) and Fritz London (1900–1954) published their 1927 joint paper usu-
ally considered as marking the birthday of quantum chemistry. Heitler and London
extended Heisenberg’s quantum-mechanical treatment of the two indistinguishable
 electrons in the helium atom (1926) to the quantum-mechanicalexplanation of the
formation of the hydrogen molecule. They started with a  wave function that took
into consideration the  indistinguishability of the two electrons and minimized
the system’s energy by using perturbation theory. They obtained two values for
the energy expressed as a function of three integrals – Coulomb integral, exchange
integral and overlap integral – and showed that attraction between the two atoms
occurred only when electrons had opposite spins (‘electron pairing’), giving rise to
a covalent bond. Covalent bonds were thus shown to be pure quantum-mechanical
effects and  spin became one of the most signiﬁcant indicators of valence behav-
ior. Despite a selection of the simplest of all molecules, the rationale behind this ﬁrst
successful attempt to solve an intrinsically chemical problem – understanding why
and how atoms combine to form molecules – was to treat it as a many-body prob-
lem, which they handled by means of the integration of  Schr¨odinger’s equation.
The difﬁculty in solving Schr¨odinger’s equation for molecular systems exactly lay
at the heart of quantum chemistry.
This state of affairs was soon encapsulated in Paul A.M. Dirac’s 1929 dictum to
the effect that ‘the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory
of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are [now] completely known,
and the difﬁculty is only that the exact application of these laws leads to equations
much too complicated to be soluble’. This statement has been cited frequently by
historians and philosophers of science in the context of discussions on the hypo-
thetical reduction of chemistry to physics. Chemists, however, took it as a historical
prediction (not a philosophical claim) proven wrong due to the inability to foresee
the importance of exact computations for chemistry. Extending this argument, one
may well claim that Dirac was unable to foresee that a new breed of chemists would
emerge sharing a culture very different from the reductionist culture of physicists
but taking seriously the perspectives opened up by the use of quantum mechanics.
By embracing different methodological and ontological commitments, they suc-
cessfully devised semi-empirical approximate methods which became a constitutive
feature of quantum chemistry in its ﬁrst decades, and which had to face the challenge
of an era of wholly theoretical (ab initio) computations following the extensive use
of electronic digital computers after World War II.
While Heitler and London attempted unsuccessfully to extend their pioneering
work to polyelectronic molecules using group theory to help generalize results
derived by perturbation methods, other German physicists tried to understand
quantum-mechanically the nature of the chemical bond. Friedrich Hund (1896–
1997) classiﬁed the electronic quantum states of diatomic molecules and Erich
H¨uckel (1896–1980) built a theoretical model for the benzene molecule. By the
late 1930s, they all had abandoned the ﬁeld as it proved impossible to treat in an
analytical manner Schr¨odinger’s equation for molecules including more than three
electrons.

520
Quantum Chemistry
In the meantime, the Americans Linus Pauling (1901–1992) (Nobel Prize 1954),
John Clarke Slater (1900–1976) and Robert Sanderson Mulliken (1896–1986)
(Nobel Prize 1966) developed a different perspective for the quantum-mechanical
explanation of the chemical bond. While German physicists thought the theories
of the chemical bond should be derived from ﬁrst principles ﬁrmly grounded on
the postulates of quantum mechanics, Americans acknowledged the importance
of quantum mechanics and, at the same time, aimed at developing semi-empirical
methods dependent on the formulation of short-cut rules based on a sort of induction
from available data (which in many instances they gathered themselves) together
with the introduction of concepts which facilitated the making of approximations.
Pauling’s valence bond approach, envisioning molecules as aggregates of atoms
bonded together along privileged directions, was meant to extend classical struc-
ture theory. Both Slater (1931) at M.I.T. and Pauling (1931–1933) at Caltech built
on Heitler and London’s 1927 valence bond paper, but outlined a semi-empirical
approach based on the idea of hybridization of atomic orbitals to form bond or-
bitals possessing directional character. In this way they explained the formation of
molecules such as water and methane. Pauling subsequently attempted to understand
the formation of more complex molecules, dealing with the stability of aromatic and
conjugated compounds. In molecules such as benzene, for which no single struc-
ture seemed to represent adequately all its properties, Pauling suggested that the
molecule could be represented as a hybrid of two or more conventional forms, a
situation he dubbed ‘resonance among several valence-bond structures’. Introduced
in ‘The Nature of the Chemical Bond’ series, the ‘theory of resonance’ was further
developed and presented to a wider audience in the famous book The Nature of the
Chemical Bond (1939).
Clariﬁcation of the relations between electronic states and the structure of molec-
ular spectra (1928–1932) was the basis on which Mulliken grounded his rejection
of the ontological foundation of classical valence theory. He refused to reduce a
molecule to an aggregate of atoms, and built it instead from nuclei and electrons.
Reasoning by analogy with Bohr’s building-up principle, Mulliken considered that
molecules were formed by feeding electrons into orbitals encircling two or more
nuclei. Electrons were delocalized in the sense that there was a non-zero proba-
bility of ﬁnding them near more than one nucleus. The assignment of quantum
numbers to electrons in molecules was achieved by exploring the relations to the
united-atom description and the separated-atom description put forward by Hund,
and the classiﬁcation of molecular orbitals in polyatomic molecules applied group
theory (1932–1935). New auxiliary concepts were introduced such as promoted
and unpromoted electrons, bonding, non-bonding and anti-bonding electrons, and
varying bonding power of electrons. Mulliken’s approach was semi-empirical in the
sense that the relative order of energy states was obtained from quantum mechanics
but energy levels were dependent on spectroscopic and thermochemical data.
To highlight the choice of opposite methodological stances, noted already by
John H. van Vleck (1899–1980)and Albert Sherman (1907–38) in their 1935 review
paper, historians of science have suggested that the usual division appearing in the
chemical literature and in textbooks between the Heitler–London–Slater–Pauling

Quantum Chemistry
521
Q
valence bond method (VB) and the Hund–Mulliken method of molecular orbitals
(MO) should be replaced by another dichotomy – Mulliken–Pauling–Slater versus
the Heitler–London-Hund.
In the meantime, John Lennard-Jones (1894–1954), the British physicist from
Cambridge University who was soon to hold the Plummer Chair in Theoreti-
cal Chemistry (1932), had introduced the physical simpliﬁcation of representing
molecular orbitals as linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAO) (1929), a step
that proved crucial to the subsequent mathematization of MO theory. Together
with Douglas R. Hartree (1897–1958) and Charles Alfred Coulson (1910–1974),
who was to become the ﬁrst holder of the Chair of Theoretical Chemistry at the
University of Oxford (1972), these British theoreticians played a decisive role in the
further development of quantum chemistry. All strongly inﬂuenced by Mulliken’s
legacy, they perceived the problems of quantum chemistry ﬁrst and foremost as cal-
culational problems; and by devising novel calculational methods they tried to bring
quantum chemistry within the realm of applied mathematics.
Until the 1950s VB theory dominated quantum chemistry for reasons that were
not due to its empirical adequacy, explanatory power or predictive ability when
compared with MO theory; they rather depended on contrasting rhetorical skills
and personal characteristics of the advocates of both theories. The ascendancy of
the MO theory was largely associated with the contributions of Coulson, its advo-
cate who rivalled with Pauling in rhetorical and pedagogical skills. His textbook
Valence (1952) counterbalanced the approach set previously in The Nature of the
Chemical Bond. Furthermore, MO theory proﬁted from being easily adapted to the
classiﬁcation of the excited states of molecules – one of the realms of molecular
spectroscopy – and, above all, was suitable for computer programs. In fact, in the
period right after the end of World War II, quantum chemists were eager to take
advantage of electronic digital computers in the computation of molecular wave
functions and energy levels.
Considered a ‘watershed’, the international program outlined at the Shelter Island
Conference (1951) clariﬁed chemical concepts such as electron pairs, bond ener-
gies and bond orders, hybridization and chemical reactivity. But, above all, it aimed
at obtaining formulas for the troublesome multi-central integrals which acted as
‘bottlenecks’ to the integration of Schr¨odinger’s equation in the ab initio manner.
These formulas thus became available to the community of quantum chemists in
standardized tables. While at ﬁrst dependent on human computers aided by desk
calculators, the program soon evolved to articulate an efﬁcient cooperative network
that took advantage of the slowly increasing number of electronic digital comput-
ers available to the international community. Computers turned into an essential
tool to calculate the time-consuming integrals of the increasingly sophisticated ver-
sions of the MO method (Pariser–Parr–Pople, Self Consistent Field, Hartree–Fock,
Conﬁguration Interaction, etc.) and in many instances replaced laboratory experi-
ments as sources of new data, especially in the investigation of molecules otherwise
inaccessible to experimentation.
By 1959 a conference convened in Boulder, Colorado, debated the impact of
computers in quantum chemistry. In an after-dinner speech delivered at the end of

522
Quantum Chemistry
the conference, Coulson announced the splitting of the community into two dis-
tinct groups – those interested in exact calculations in molecules including up to 20
electrons (ab-initionists) and those still faithful to semi-empirical methods, those
loath to abandon conventional chemical concepts and those claiming that chemistry
was still an experimental science built around quite elementary concepts. The split
resulted from diverging views concerning the use of large-scale electronic comput-
ers, and pointed to deep, perhaps irreconcilable, divisions among the practitioners
of quantum chemistry (Group I included the ab-initionists, those who explored the
potentialities of electronic computers, while Group II included the a posteriorists
who did not bet on the importance of electronic computers for quantum chemistry).
In 1965, John A. Pople (1925–2004) (Nobel Prize 1988) illustrated these divisions
with a chart, later known as the ‘hyperbola of quantum chemistry’, which depicted
the inverse relationship between the size of the molecules under study and the so-
phistication of computational methods.
Also reﬂecting on the impact of computers, the French quantum chemist Alberte
Pullman (1920-) whose group was extending MO theory to biological molecules,
predicted the merging of the two groups into a single group of ‘ab initio for every-
body’ (1970). Sensing that in the near future ever more powerful but also cheaper
computers would become available to increasingly large fractions of the quantum
chemical community, she pressed theoreticians to abandon their ‘ivory tower of
abstractions’ to venture into the exploration of real problems of chemistry, rang-
ing from the hydrogen molecule to biological macromolecules. In fact, by 1990
Martin Karplus (1930-) suggested replacing the two-dimensional Pople diagram by
a three-dimensional one including as an extra dimension the estimated accuracy of
calculation for the system under consideration. At the same time, he changed the
linear scale of the axis in Pople’s diagram representing the size of the molecule
(which covered 1–100 electrons) by a logarithmic scale going up to 106 electrons.
This change highlighted the possibility of conducting ab initio computations at a
satisfactory accuracy for reasonably complex molecules and their reactions. Fur-
thermore, Karplus recognized that density functional methods appeared to violate
the ‘hyperbola of quantum chemistry’ in the sense that they fall within the range of
accuracy and sophistication of Hartree-Fock type calculations but handle molecules
with a larger number of electrons within available computer time.
Having these recent developments in mind, one wonders whether Dirac’s 1929
prediction has been fulﬁlled to a signiﬁcant degree. One wonders further whether the
divorce in the quantum chemical community that haunted the perceptive Coulson in
time converged into a peaceful cohabitation and eventually into a successful mar-
riage of the two different cultures of practitioners.
Primary Literature
1. C. A. Coulson: Valence (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1952)
2. C. A. Coulson: Recent developments in valence theory – Symposium ﬁfty years of valence.
Pure and Applied Chemistry 24, 257–87 (1970)

Quantum Chemistry
523
Q
3. P. A. M. Dirac: Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London A123, 714–33 (1929)
4. W. Heitler, F. London: Wechselwirkung neutraler Atome und hom¨oopolare Bindung nach der
Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 44, 455–72 (1927)
5. M. Karplus: Three-Dimensional ‘Pople Diagram’. Journal of Physical Chemistry 94, 5435–6
(1990)
6. J. A. Pople: Two-Dimensional Chart of Quantum Chemistry. Journal of Chemical Physics 43,
S229–30 (1965)
7. D. A. Ramsay, J. Hinze, eds.: Selected Papers of R.S. Mulliken (University Press of Chicago,
Chicago 1975)
8. J. Van Vleck, A. Sherman: The Quantum Theory of Valence. Reviews of Modern Physics 7,
167–228 (1935)
9. L. Pauling: The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of Molecules and Crystals
(Cornell University Press, New York 1939)
Secondary Literature
10. K. Gavroglu: Philosophical Issues in the History of Chemistry. Synthese 111, 283–304 (1997)
11. K. Gavroglu, ed.: Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 31 (2000). Spe-
cial Issue: Theoretical Chemistry in the Making: Appropriating Concepts and Legitimizing
Techniques.
12. K. Gavroglu, A. Sim˜oes: The Americans, the Germans and the Beginnings of Quantum Chem-
istry: The Conﬂuence of Diverging Traditions. Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological
Sciences 25, 47–110 (1994)
13. A. Karachalios: On the making of quantum chemistry in Germany. Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 31, 493–510 (2000)
14. I. N. Levine: Quantum Chemistry (Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 31983)
15. B. S. Park: The ‘Hyperbola of Quantum Chemistry’: the Changing Practice and Identity of a
Scientiﬁc Discipline in the Early Years of Electronic Digital Computers, 1945–1965. Annals
of Science 60, 219–47 (2003)
16. B. S. Park: In the ‘context of pedagogy’: Teaching strategy and theory change in quantum
chemistry, in D. Kaiser, ed.: Pedagogy and the Practice of Science. Historical and Contem-
porary Perspectives (MIT, Cambridge 2005, 287–319)
17. R. Parr: The Quantum Theory of Molecular Electronic Structure (W.A. Benjamin, New York
1963)
18. A. Sim˜oes: Dirac’s claim and the chemists. Physics in Perspective 4, 253–66 (2002)
19. A. Sim˜oes: Chemical Physics and Quantum Chemistry in the Twentieth-Century, in Modern
Physical and Mathematical Sciences, M.J. Nye, ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
2003, Vol.5, 394–412)
20. A. Sim˜oes, K. Gavroglu: Quantum Chemistry qua Applied Mathematics. The Contributions of
Charles Alfred Coulson (1910–1974). Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 29, 363–406
(1999)
21. A. Sim˜oes, K. Gavroglu: Quantum Chemistry in Great Britain: Developing a Mathematical
Framework for Quantum Chemistry. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
31, 511–48 (2000)

