Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience
Research
Vuong M. Pham, Huong T. T. Ha, and Nitish V. Thakor
Contents
1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2
Microﬂuidics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.1
Brief Overview of Microﬂuidics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.2
Microﬂuidic Chamber for In Vitro Cell Culture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3
Applications of Microﬂuidic System in Neuroscience Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.1
Axonal Regeneration in Micro-Chambers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.2
Neuromuscular Junction Formation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.3
Myelination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4
Brain Organoids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4
Future Directions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
V. M. Pham ()
Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology (SINAPSE), National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
Department of Biotechnology, Ho Chi Minh City University of Food Industry, Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam
e-mail: vuongpm@huﬁ.edu.vn; phamminhvuong28@gmail.com
H. T. T. Ha
School of Biomedical Engineering, International University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
e-mail: htthuong@hcmiu.edu.vn
N. V. Thakor
Neuroengineering and Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Neurology,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
e-mail: eletnv@nus.edu.sg; thakorjhu@gmail.com; nitish@jhu.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_128
39

40
V. M Pham et al.
Abstract
Over the past few decades, micromachined chips such as microﬂuidic systems
are making a big impact on neuroscience research and the industry due to
their low-cost potential and great control over miniature amounts of biological
sample and reagents. In this chapter, we discuss the design, material choice,
and fabrication of microﬂuidic devices. More importantly, we highlight various
applications of both systems on studying several key biological processes or
phenomena of the nervous systems. The main applications being discussed
include axon degeneration, neuromuscular junction formation, myelination, and
brain organoid. For each application, a brief description of the process or
phenomenon will be introduced prior to a detailed discussion of how microﬂuidic
devices are utilized to study such topics. Both applications with two-dimensional
(2D) and three-dimensional (3D) cultures will be described. We also discuss
the future prospects of microﬂuidics for neurobiological applications. While
this technology is still in its nascent stage, its robust development is expected,
thanks to the advancement in material sciences, stem cell culture, and optical
and electrical stimulation techniques.
Keywords
Microﬂuidics · Microﬂuidic chambers · 3D models · Microﬂuidic culture ·
3D culture · Axonal regeneration · Myelination · Organoids · Lab-on-a-chip
Abbreviations
2D
Two-dimensional
3D
Three-dimensional
AIM
Axon injury micro-compression
ALS
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
CNS
central nervous system
DRG
Dorsal root ganglion
EB
Embryoid body
hiPSC
human induced Pluripotent Stem cell
HNoaC
Human Nerve-on-a-Chip
mESCs
Mouse embryonic stem cells
MN
Motor neuron
MNP
Motor neuron progenitor
NMJ
Neuromuscular junction
NSC
Neural stem cell
OPC
Oligodendrocyte progenitor cell
PDMS
Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG-DA
Poly-ethylene glycol diacrylate
PNS
Peripheral nervous system
PR
photoresist
SC
Schwann cell
UV
Ultra violet

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
41
1
Introduction
The brain contains hundreds of billions of neurons interconnected into functional
neural circuits (or networks) to perform speciﬁc functions. Within a circuit, neurons
innervate each other via specialized junctions called synapses. Unlike other cell
types, mature neurons extend their branches over long distances and make thousands
of synapses with other cells away from their cell bodies [1]. These cell bodies,
processes, and synapses are all densely packed within the complex cytoarchitecture
of the brain. Hence, analysis of in vivo subcellular physiological activity has been
extremely challenging. Many studies turned into traditional neuronal culture models
and have highlighted the similarity of cultured neurons with in vivo neurons in
terms of fundamental morphology and physiology. However, in vitro neurons lack a
dense extracellular matrix, a cytoarchitecture, and directional growth. Therefore,
it remains difﬁcult to study how subcellular signals of individual neurons inﬂu-
ence their activity, development, differentiation, and participation in the neuronal
networks. The understanding of these processes is highly important because their
dynamic changes dictate the ﬂow and processing of information and, hence, of
memory. The lack of this understanding also will render the ineffective restoration
of brain function in different diseases and conditions. To further our understanding
of local subcellular signaling in physiological and pathological contexts, new
approaches allowing (1) local high-resolution dissection and (2) the highest ﬁdelity
to in vivo structures are required.
Local high-resolution analyses of neuronal activities can be achieved with
microﬂuidics. This is an interdisciplinary technology that produces devices with
a small width and height scale, respectively, between 100 nm and 100 μm, but
is capable of outperforming the classical devices [2]. By virtue of its ability to
control and handle cellular microenvironments, microﬂuidics offers new capacities
for achieving biological insights. The microﬂuidic technology has many signiﬁcant
advantages over the conventional methods as an ideal platform for cell culture,
which include the following: (1) the ability to operate at complicated microscale
dimensions that are similar to those of many microstructures and environments
native to in vivo systems; (2) a small amount of samples and the reagent needed,
which signiﬁcantly reduces costs for the designed studies; (3) certain common
substrates used in microﬂuidic devices such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) which
are permeable to O2 to support cell proliferation; and (4) microﬂuidic technology
which can integrate with other devices for speciﬁc assays [3]. Particularly, in
neuroscience research, microﬂuidic devices can provide compartmentalized cham-
bers which help to segregate soma and distant axon or dendrites to mimic the
microenvironment of a neuron in vivo [4].
In particular, when combining with three-dimensional (3D) cell cultures,
microﬂuidic device offers the highest ﬁdelity of structure and function in comparison
with other culture models [4]. Many different cell types have been successfully
established in microﬂuidic 3D cell cultures such as stem cells [5, 6], cancer
cells [7, 8], neural cells [9, 10], and cardiac cells [11, 12]. The 3D microﬂuidic

42
V. M Pham et al.
platforms enable the reproduction of real tissue by establishing the cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix interactions [13]. Previous studies showed that cells in a
3D culture environment naturally form spheroid/aggregate structures [14]; develop
many stages of cell cycles including proliferating, quiescent, hypoxic, and necrotic
cells [15]; and express a gene proﬁle that is closer to tissues in vivo [16]. In addition,
3D cells offer better predictions of in vivo drug responses before translating the
treatment into clinical applications [17]. Due to these evident advantages, 3D cell
culture has gained robust interest in drug discovery and tissue engineering. In
addition, the combination of 3D neuronal culture and microﬂuidic technology will
enable the implementation of high-throughput experiments, e.g., in drug screening
or phenotyping of novel mutations. It allows the integration of extracellular matrix
and scaffold into the culture system. This approach also is particularly useful
for continuous monitoring and feedback of the neuronal physiology, which often
alters per millisecond. Therefore, this is a superior platform for neuroscience
research.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst brieﬂy overview fundamental concepts about microﬂu-
idics and focus on discussing the choice of material and fabrication processes
for these devices (Sects. 2.1 and 2.2). More speciﬁcally, we detail the important
features of materials for producing the device and for maximizing biocompatibility.
Different fabrication processes from traditional photolithography to the cutting-
edge 3D-printing techniques will also be discussed. We also provide a broad
overview of recent applications of microﬂuidic platforms in the investigation of
the molecular and cellular networks related to neurobiology (Table 1). Then, with
the ﬂow from 2D to 3D, we update the latest designs of microﬂuidic devices and
their applications for studying axonal regeneration, NMJs, and myelination (Sects.
3.1–3.3). In particular, brain organoids studied using microﬂuidic devices, one of
the most recent approaches in neuroscience research, will be discussed in depth
(Sects. 3.4). In addition, given that the robustness of microﬂuidic culture platforms
can be augmented by electrical and optogenetic stimulation techniques, we also
update the latest studies combining these techniques with microﬂuidic devices.
Via the discussion of these microﬂuidic engineering features and their potential
applications, as well as their limitations, we expect to provide the stepping stones
for further advancement in this emerging ﬁeld of neural engineering.
2
Microﬂuidics
2.1
Brief Overview of Microﬂuidics
Microﬂuidics refers to a research ﬁeld relating to transport phenomena and ﬂuid-
based devices at microscopic length scales [42]. A microﬂuidic device contains
many microstructures capable of handling and manipulating minimal amounts of
ﬂuids. It is an interdisciplinary area with the overlap of many different advanced
areas such as micro-nanotechnology, engineering, biochemistry, and material

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
43
Table 1 Recent applications of microﬂuidic devices in neuroscience and neuroengineering
Applications
Cell types
Ref.
Axonal neurobiology
Neural stem cell collected from E14.5
Sprague-Dawley rat embryos
[18]
Process of myelination
Primary hippocampal neurons harvested from
E18–E19 embryonic rat brains
[19]
Neural progenitor cells and oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells differentiated from mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs)
[20]
Formation, stabilization,
signaling, regeneration, and
degeneration of the NMJ
Rat Schwann cells (SCs) and dorsal root ganglion
(DRG) neurons
[21]
Motor neurons (MNs) isolated from the spinal cord
of mouse embryos (E12) and SCs isolated from
sciatic nerves of mice on postnatal day 4
[22]
Skeletal muscle cultures derived from the
gastrocnemius muscle of adult mice and motor
neurons isolated from spinal cords of mice embryos
(E11–E12)
[23]
Brain and other neural
cell-related tumors
Functional myotubes obtained from myoblast cell
line cocultured with spinal cord explants from E12.5
mouse embryos
[24]
Hippocampal and cortical neurons from embryonic
rats (E18), DRG neurons from postnatal and human
cancer cells
[25]
Neuron-to-cell spread and
axonal transport of
pseudorabies virus
DRG neurons from 4- to 8-week-old mice and
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
[26]
Rat cerebral astrocytes, rat brain microvascular
endothelial cells, and various human cancer cell
types
[27]
Superior cervical ganglia isolated from rat embryos
(E18) and DRG from the cervical, thoracic, and
lumbar level of 8-week-old mice
[28–30]
Modeling blood-brain barrier
Human brain microvascular endothelial cell, human
lung ﬁbroblast, and human astrocyte
[22]
Modeling and modulating
neural circuit
Coculture of human umbilical vein endothelial cells
and rat cortical neurons harvested from E17
embryos
[31]
Coculture of rat microvascular endothelial cells and
astrocytes
[27]
Cortical neurons isolated from rat embryos
(E17–E18)
[22]
Synaptic biology
Hippocampal neurons dissociated from embryonic
mice (E18)
[32]
Rat primary hippocampal neurons derived from E17
embryonic pups
[33]
Primary hippocampal neurons were obtained from
rat embryonic day 17 (E17) pups
[34]
(continued)

44
V. M Pham et al.
Table 1 (continued)
Applications
Cell types
Ref.
Cells isolated from the superior cervical ganglia of
P5 mice
[35]
Primary neurons dissociated from the cerebral
cortex of embryonic rats (E19)
[36]
Adult female Long-Evans rats or adult male
Sprague-Dawley rats
[37]
Medium spiny neurons and dopaminergic neurons
differentiated from wild-type or mutant induced
pluripotent stem cell lines
[38]
Astrocytic biology
Commercial human-induced pluripotent stem cell
(hiPSC)-derived neurons and astrocyte progenitors
from healthy donors
[39]
Single cell electrophysiology
Primary rat cortical cells obtained from P0 rats
[40]
Commercial human cardiac myocytes and primary
rat cortex neurons
[41]
technology. By utilizing scaling laws and continuum breakdown, microﬂuidics
has new effects and better performance compared to conventional equipment [42].
In addition, microﬂuidic devices operate at low cost, utilize less reagent, and can
operate multiple reactions in parallel, be portable, and offer faster reaction times
and an enhanced analytical sensitivity [43]. Speciﬁcations for material selection and
fabrication of microﬂuidic devices will be detailed in Sects. 2.2.1 and 2.2.2.
Microﬂuidics has been developed robustly and applied extensively in many other
ﬁelds such as energy [44, 45], biomedical studies [46, 47], and high-throughput
screening [48, 49] (Fig. 1). For neural engineering applications, microﬂuidics offers
the additional advantages of providing complex compartmentalized microenviron-
ments and 3D structures mimicking closely the brain’s environments. Due to these
great beneﬁts, microﬂuidics has been intensively developed to study fundamental
neurobiology and to engineer novel diagnostic and drug screening platforms
for neurological disorders. Table 1 summarizes the most recent applications of
microﬂuidic devices in neuroscience and neuroengineering. The main applications
will be further discussed in Sect. 3.
2.2
Microﬂuidic Chamber for In Vitro Cell Culture
Due to the advantages in carrying out species-speciﬁc, simple, and more detailed
analysis, in vitro cell culture studies have held a signiﬁcant role in biomedical
research. The microenvironment surrounding neurons contains complex signals that
determine the functions and the fate of cells, of neural networks, and of the whole
brain [52]. Concentration, component, spatial and temporal distribution of signaling
molecules, and the substrate’s mechanical and chemical properties can all affect
neuronal growth and function [52–55]. In order to establish in vitro conditions

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
45
that mostly resemble the in vivo environment, one needs to consider all of the
above factors to optimize the choice of materials, fabrication process, packaging,
and sterilization technique [56]. Below we will feature the material selection
and fabrication process of microﬂuidic chambers specialized for in vitro cell
culture.
2.2.1
Choosing Materials
Materials choice is dependent on the speciﬁc aims of the studies; however, noncy-
totoxicity is the most fundamental criterion that all chosen materials are required to
meet.
Materials for microﬂuidic channels: Channels enable the diffusion of substrates,
nutrients, and reagents to provide precisely controlled environments for the studies
on interactions between cells or of cells with their extracellular matrix [57].
Microﬂuidic devices can be made from various materials such as glass, polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA), PDMS, paper, and silicon [58–60]. The elastomer PDMS
is the most widely used material for fabricating microﬂuidic culture systems due
to its properties: low cost, gas permeability, noncytotoxicity/high biocompatibility,
autoclavable to become sterile, low autoﬂuorescence, high patterning ﬁdelity, opti-
cal transparency, and being ﬂexibly integrated and patterned [56]. These qualities
make PDMS suitable for not only constructing general microﬂuidic perfusion
culture systems but also creating integrated culture platforms for ﬂuorescence
imaging applications. The ﬂexibility of PDMS also initiated a tremendous advance-
ment in microﬂuidic design, for example, the integration of pneumatically or
hydraulically controlled valves [61–63]. These valves allowed precise control of
the ﬂow rate and direction within the chambers and, hence, the regulation of the
spatiotemporal gradients of soluble signaling molecules. In turn, these gradient
generators led to the generation of a range of concentrations and allowed the parallel
examinations of multiple conditions for research involving testing dose-response
and timing of biomolecules on neuronal fate or function [64]. Controlling the
gradients also enables microﬂuidic devices to be utilized in long-term culture and
differentiation [65–67] and is especially useful for 3D culturing [9, 68]. Although
most academic laboratories have used PDMS as a material of choice, PDMS has
several disadvantages including high binding afﬁnity to protein, not enabling mass
production, risk of contamination with silicone monomer derivatives, and reversible
hydrophobicity [69–72]. Due to these properties, PDMS has limited capacity to
be utilized in commercial devices [73, 74]. Another material called FlexdymTM
(Eden Microﬂuidics, France) can be utilized for prototyping that can be translated
into mass production. FlexdymTM possesses all the good qualities of PDMS in
addition to the ability to be surface-treated to have permanent hydrophilicity, be
bonded to glass or polymers without requiring plasma treatment, and be melded
into a mastermold to get its features [75].
Materials for cell substrates/scaffolds: One aspect to consider when using
microﬂuidic devices made from PDMS for cell culture is the ability of PDMS to
absorb small fat-soluble molecules such as retinoic acid (a regulator of neuronal
activity). Thanks to intermediate peptides or protein molecules adsorbed from the

46
V. M Pham et al.
cell culture media, or pre-immobilized cell-attachment proteins such as laminin and
ﬁbronectin, substrates can support the attachment of cells in microﬂuidic culture
systems, especially for cultivations requiring serum-free media [56]. However, this
permeability characteristic of PDMS limits its use in some biological applications
such as cell culture assays examining drugs targeting intracellular pathways [76].
Certain treatments could decrease the absorption of such molecules into PDMS,
such as sol-gel and borosilicate glass coating [76–78]. While these treatments
greatly minimize the absorption of small hydrophobic molecules into PDMS,
they also modify the surface properties of the device and therefore need to be
thoroughly examined for their effect on cellular morphology and activity. Glass
Fig. 1 (continued)

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
47
is the material commonly used in the PDMS microﬂuidic culture system because
it can be permanently bonded to PDMS; however, it does not provide support
for cell attachment [56]. To accurately evaluate cellular functions, one needs to
precisely control the substrate choice and pattern since it can heavily inﬂuence cell
attachment, morphology, architecture, polarity, and migration [52, 79]. The most
widely used substrates for culturing neuron and glia include poly-D-lysine, poly-
L-lysine, Matrigel, N-cadherin, laminin, and neuron-glia cell adhesion molecule.
One advanced technology used to manipulate and deﬁne the substrates is called
micropatterning [80]. Micropatterning of adhesion molecules has greatly enhanced
our understanding of several physiological processes such as axon guidance, growth
cone behavior, and so on [81–85]. This technique allows the creation of a patterned
surface mimicking the structure of in vivo tissues, which then leads to a higher
survival rate and better function of cultured cells in vitro [79, 86]. In combination
with micropatterning, one can also optimize cellular adhesions and proliferation
by screening different surface substrates and media formulas using a 96-chamber
microﬂuidic cell culture device [76]. This device is a chip containing an 8x8 array of
perfusion chambers that can be individually surface coated with up to four different
extracellular proteins (columns) and perfused with four different media formulas
(rows). Devices such as these enable scientists to efﬁciently select the optimal
surface treatment and feeding for any neuronal cell types.
2.2.2
Fabrication of Microﬂuidic Cell Culture Chambers
The methods in microﬂuidic device fabrication are so extensive and beyond the
context of one short chapter. The readers are referred to two comprehensive
textbooks [42, 87] and recent review papers [60–62, 73, 74, 90] for further under-
standing. Among all approaches to fabricate microﬂuidic devices, photolithography
◀
Fig. 1 Example of biomedical application of microﬂuidics in neuroscience and stem cell biology.
(a–c). A novel microﬂuidic chip design applicable to structuring complex neural networks in vitro.
(a) Dimensional parameters of the microﬂuidic chip. (b) Top view image of the microﬂuidic chip
with an open area (or seeding wells) and the enclosed active areas (or the active sites that are deﬁned
as the areas where the compartments connect to the tunnels) indicated in blue. (c) Composite
image tiled from multiple confocal ﬂuorescent images of a structured dorsal root ganglion cell
network stained with anti-Tuj-1 (green) and anti-F-actin (red) antibodies (scale bar: 1000 μm). This
microﬂuidic device provides a versatile and highly relevant platform for studying neural network
dynamics applicable to developmental and regenerative neuroscience. (d–f) An application of
microﬂuidic perfusion system for studying diffusible signaling in stem cell biology. (d) Image
of the microﬂuidic perfusion device showing the upper pneumatic control layer (green) and the
two sets of triplicate culture chambers (red and blue). (e) Diagram of the perfusion device. Gray
and purple lines correspond to the ﬂuidic and control layer, respectively. (f) Schematic shows
the ability of the microﬂuidic device to tune the relative importance of convective, diffusive, and
reactive transport, thanks to microscale ﬂuid ﬂow. With this proposed microﬂuidic device, the
authors demonstrated for the ﬁrst time that ﬂow can downregulate autocrine\paracrine signaling.
The device is helpful for studies of manipulating diffusible signaling in cell systems. ((a–c) are
reproduced with permission from [50]; Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d–f) are reproduced
from [51] under Creative Commons Attribution License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license)

48
V. M Pham et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic of main fabrication steps for microﬂuidic culture chamber
is the most relevant and important technique to create the mastermold [42]. In
this approach, the geometric pattern is transferred to a light-sensitive polymer
(photoresist – PR) by exposing the PR to an ultraviolet (UV) light. The main
fabrication steps for microﬂuidic culture chamber based on this technique are
described in Fig. 2 and explained in detail below.
1. Coating. In this step, a substrate (also called “wafer”) will be coated with a
uniform, thin layer of PR using spin coating. To eliminate moisture or other
volatile substances, the wafers could be baked in an oven or on a hotplate (125–
200 ◦C). The thickness of the PR layer, ranging from 1 to 100 μm, could be
varied to ﬁt with the type of downstream applications. If the scale or features of
the ﬁnal microﬂuidic chambers do not require high precision, one can also apply
dry-ﬁlm PRs using lamination. Other options for coating include spray coating
and electrodeposition, which suit best for substrates with relatively extreme
changes in three-dimensional topography.
2. Baking. The baking steps occur at multiple points during the photolithography
processing. Using a milder postexposure bake (< 100 ◦C) is recommended for
thick resists to improve resolution, to reduce thermal stresses, and to avoid
potential failures such as cracking. While baking on a hotplate could be time-

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
49
efﬁcient if producing few numbers of mastermolds, using an oven could facilitate
batch processing. For thick resists such as SU-8, the duration of the prebake
period could also inﬂuence the resolution and the achievable aspect ratio. To
maximize the removal of solvents on PRs, the baking step needs to be combined
with proper ventilation, regardless of the baking methods. Baking can be done
pre- or postexposure. The pre one, sometimes called a soft bake, is to eliminate
any solvent from liquid PR. The post one is applied following UV exposure in
order to complete the curing progress before developing.
3. Alignment. This is a critical step involving positioning the existing features of
a wafer with respect to features of a photomask. Following the corresponding
positioning, the exposure step is conducted. If the masks of multiple photolithog-
raphy layers need to be aligned, each of them should have a typical marker (or
the so-called ﬁducial marks) to facilitate alignment. To simultaneously view a
pair of alignment targets, two microscope cameras are required in an aligner. If
the aligned features are on the same side of the wafer, the alignment process is
called front-side alignment. In contrast, back alignment is required if the features
to be aligned are located on opposite ends of a wafer.
4. Exposure. For this step, a photomask will be utilized to expose certain regions
to UV radiation from a mercury-based lamp. To achieve the highest level of
precision in the fabrication process, one needs to carefully consider the lamp
intensity (typically measured in terms of power per unit area, e.g., mW/cm2),
the exposure time, and the wavelength of the light (as narrow of a band/peak as
possible, such as the g-line at 436 nm and the i-line at 365 nm). To identify the
optimal exposure level of a PR, one can utilize the contrast curve, which could
be constructed empirically. From such a curve, information could be derived
regarding (1) the minimal amount of energy to create any photoinitiated change,
(2) the minimal amount of energy to remove all of the resists, and (3) the
sharpness of contrast. Several approaches to interface a wafer with a photomask
are contact printing, proximity printing, projecting printing, and vacuum contact
printing. In advanced lithography, reducing the wavelength can lead to ﬁner
feature dimension and resolution. For example, electron beam lithography can
be utilized to create photomasks using optical lithography. For most microﬂuidic
applications, traditional UV photolithography can already produce features in the
appropriate dimension. After exposure to UV light, chemical compositions will
be changed into negative PR and positive PR that become insoluble and soluble,
respectively, in the developer.
5. Developing. This is the step in which any uncured PR will be cleared off. For
most positive PR, using dilute solutions of tetramethylammonium hydroxide
(TMAH) is sufﬁcient. For negative PR (the regions that are exposed to UV
light and become insoluble in the developer), the options of developers are
more limited and usually based on organic solvents. For fabrication with low
quantity, the wafers could be immersed in a developer solution. Nevertheless,
to reduce waste and cross contamination, it is recommended that a limited
measured volume of developer solution be sprayed (dispensed) onto a wafer.
This method makes even more efﬁcient use of chemicals. Removal of uncured

50
V. M Pham et al.
resist for features with high aspect ratio is a challenging step, dependent
on the directionality with respect to patterned features, resist proﬁle, surface
smoothness, and developing time.
Once the photolithography completes, the mastermold is created and soft
polymer can be cast on it and be cured to form the actual device.
Even though photolithography has a wide range of applications and can produce
micron-size features, it is labor-intensive [72]. Additionally, due to the layering
process of fabrication, the possible 3D geometries of devices made using this
method are limited. Furthermore, the cost is high, and time effectiveness is low
due to the requirement of creating the mastermold for mass production [88]. Due
to these drawbacks, scientists have explored other fabrication methods. One other
technique allowing more complex geometries is micromilling [89]. Nevertheless,
this approach still needs assembly and bonding to create closed compartments,
and the milling tools are not able to make arbitrary shapes. Another emerging
technology is stereolithography (SL), which is a kind of 3D-printing allowing for the
assembly-free production of arbitrary 3D shapes. This method has recently gained
more attention as an approach for fabricating customized complex microﬂuidic
devices, thanks to its automated nature, low costs, and enhanced resolution [90–
93]. To make microﬂuidic devices compatible for neuronal culture applications,
the choice of SL resins needs to meet certain physicochemical requirements such
as biocompatibility, optical transparency, elasticity, and gas permeability. Among
various materials, polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEG-DA) and Asiga Plasclear
resin [94, 95] have been successfully applied to make 3D-printed microﬂuidic
devices to culture neuron or neuronal stem cells. Nevertheless, this approach is
relatively new, and hence most neurobiological researches still prefer microﬂuidic
devices made by photolithography.
In addition to chambers designed and fabricated at a small scale in laboratory,
several companies offer commercial products and services of microﬂuidic chambers
(Table 2).
3
Applications of Microﬂuidic System in Neuroscience
Research
3.1
Axonal Regeneration in Micro-Chambers
Axon-glia interactions have been shown to be implicated in the pathogenesis of
neuroinﬂammatory and neurodegenerative diseases that lead to axonal degeneration
[96]. Many groups have been trying to identify the underlying cellular and molecular
mechanisms of these interactions. However, due to the complexity of in vivo setting,
studies on mechanisms of axonal injuries and the involvement of glia are now
mainly based on the in vitro models.
Taking advantage of microﬂuidic technology, we have developed a circular
platform that consists of sixteen independent units of axonal (outer port) and

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
51
Table 2 Some companies offer products/services of microﬂuidic culture platform
Company name
Products/services
Key features
Merck
CellASIC® ONIX2
Microﬂuidic Plates
Many cell and multiple experiment types can
be run in parallel
Integrated gas diffusion channels
Thick glass bottom for performing high-quality
analyses
Compatible with most standard inverted
microscopes
Creative Proteomics
M-series
microﬂuidic plates
for mammalian cells
Minimize stress on cells and promote cell
health
Typical live-cell analysis experiments run for
over 72 hours on the microscope stage
Microﬂuidic
Chamber Assay
Conduct the assay with rare cells
Xona Microﬂuidics
XonaChips™
Applicable for studies on human stem
cell-derived neurons
Compatible with ﬂuorescence live imaging
Long-term culture of animal model neurons
HypOxygen
Physiochip
Supply both 2D and 3D environments with
minimal amount of medium and supplement
Gradient chip offers a long-term stable gradient
of soluble molecules and dissolved oxygen
Transﬂow chip offers permeable support with
independent perfusion channels at both sides
SynVivo
SynVivo chip
Multiple microﬂuidic-based culture platforms
available for speciﬁc studies
Custom microﬂuidic platform design
FlowJEM
Drop-seq
microﬂuidic chips
Simultaneous analysis of genome-wide RNA
expression in thousands of individual cells
Fabricate customized designs
Cellix Ltd.
Biochips and
Venaﬂux platforms
Automated microﬂuidic platform capable of
executing cell rolling, binding/adhesion,
thrombosis, and migration assay
Gradientech
CellDirector® 2D
and 3D
Possibility to analyze real-time cell responses
using live-cell imaging, with full control of the
chemotactic environment
Culture spheroids or small organs and explore
gradient responses
Mimetas
OrganoPlate
Supporting a range of cell types and many
tissue models on a single plate
Passive liquid handling technology for
membrane-free deﬁnition of tissues in
microﬂuidic chambers
Full compatibility with liquid handling and
readout equipment
somal (inner port) compartments that were physically interconnected by an array
of 90 microchannels. The master template was fabricated by using a two-layer
microfabrication process. A circular array of 1500 microchannels was deﬁned by

52
V. M Pham et al.
silicon wafers coated with a thin PR layer and exposed with a high-resolution
DPI transparency mask. A thicker PR was then used to deﬁne multiple axonal
and somal compartments. In particular, ﬂuidic access ports were punched near the
microchannels to allow direct pipetting of cells into the device [96]. This circular
platform shows outstanding beneﬁts: (1) Centrifugation of the circular platform
can make a twofold increase in axonal throughput in microchannels and provides
a new technique to establish axon-glia interactions; (2) microstencils can be used to
Fig. 3 (continued)

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
53
directly place glial cells in the interested areas; and (3) intimate axon-glia coculture
can be attained via standard pipetting techniques (Fig. 3d, e) [96]. In addition
to the two-compartment culture platform, we have recently developed a three-
compartment platform (somas, proximal, and distal axons) to study the mechanisms
governing axonal degeneration and regeneration after traumatic injury. Particularly,
a valve-based elastomeric injury pad system was integrated with the device allowing
us to observe for the ﬁrst time all events of axon deformation prior to, during, and
immediately after focal mechanical injury (Fig. 3a–c) [33]. Using such a system,
we explored that toll-like receptor 4 (one subtype of toll-like receptors) and TRIF
(a toll-like receptor adaptor protein) mediate signaling pathways in axonal debris
clearance via microglia, thereby facilitating a more permissive environment for
axonal outgrowth after injury [97, 98]. Moreover, curcumin and ﬂecainide showed
ability in protecting axons from local axon degeneration [34]. These ﬁndings open
novel regenerative and restorative strategies for many traumatic, neuroinﬂammatory,
and neurodegenerative conditions characterized by the central nervous system
(CNS) axon degeneration.
Notably, by using stem cells and several types of hydrogel, the group of
R. D. Kamm (2018) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has developed
3D models of axonal injury in microﬂuidic devices for investigations of neural
development, disease pathogenesis, and drug screening [99]. In particular, Osaki
◀
Fig. 3 Salient fabrications of microﬂuidic platforms for studying axonal injury and regeneration.
(a–c) An axon injury micro-compression (AIM) platform described by Hosmane et al. (a) The
ﬁrst and the complete deﬁnition of the compartment bases and the injury pad clearance height by
depositing a thicker resist layer (top and middle, respectively) and side view of the complete AIM
platform with three compartments for neuronal cell bodies and proximal and distal axons (bottom).
(b) The characterization of the valve-based elastomeric injury pad system of the AIM platform by
confocal imaging (top); and representative image stacks demonstrated the near-linear relationship
of the normalized input to injury pad deﬂection and close correlation to ﬁnite element modeling.
(c) Representative images of a tau-labeled (microtubule marker; red) axon that was subjected to
severe (235 kPa) compression injury. The distal segment of the transected axon underwent the
Wallerian degeneration while the axon tip (white arrows) ﬁrst retracted (30 min) and then began to
reform a growth cone (1 h 30 min) and extend past the injury site. Dotted white lines demarcate
the region of the injury pad. Scale bar: 25 mm. (d–e) A circular compartmentalized microﬂuidic
platform developed by Hosmane et al. for studying the interaction of axons and glia. (d) A 3D
schematic of the PDMS device shows the microchannels (red) and somal (blue)/axonal (green)
compartments (left); and large (>3 mm) compartments enabled pipetting close (<500 mm) to the
microchannels (right). (e) The extension of axons from soma chamber into axon chambers through
microchannels. (f–h) An engineered microﬂuidic platform for 3D vascular and neuronal networks.
(f) Schematic illustrates the multichannel microﬂuidic device consisting of 14 independent gel
channels separated by and adjacent to 15 medium channels. (g) Vascular and neuronal networks
were formed in collagen gel in the microﬂuidic device by coculturing MN spheroids and
endothelial cells. (h) Formation of iPS-EC networks in a microﬂuidic device with MN spheroids.
Magniﬁed region is indicated in the white dotted box. ((a–c) are reproduced with permission from
[33]; Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–e) are reproduced with permission from
[96]; Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f–h) are reproduced from [99] under Creative
Commons Attribution License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license)

54
V. M Pham et al.
et al. (2018) introduced a new 3D microﬂuidic device for an in vitro model of
vascular and neuronal networks consisting of 14 independent gel channels separated
by and adjacent to 15 medium channels. Inlet and outlet ports were created with
biopsy punches (Fig. 3f–h). This device could be used for a broad range of
applications, especially for studying the pathogenesis of motor neuron diseases
such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Neurospheroids, derived from neural
stem cells (NSC-MN) and motor neuron progenitor cells (MNP-MN), were created
by using a spindle-shaped bottom 96-well plate and PDMS-based spheroid array
chips. Compared with MNP-MN, NSC-MN are heterogeneous with both MNs and
glial cells and have a higher expression level of mature motor neuron marker. In
addition, the length of neurite extensions of NSC-MN was signiﬁcantly greater
than that of MNP-MN spheroids [99]. In order to establish models for studies on
the pathogenesis of ALS, his group has developed two outstanding 3D models of
neurons based on animal and human cells (see details in Sect. 2.2).
Strikingly, by coupling optogenetic technology with a 3D microﬂuidic coculture
platform of MNs and SCs as described in Sect. 3.3.2, Hyung et al. (2019)
recently showed that the extent of axon outgrowth was signiﬁcantly greater than
that of the control group [100]. Thus, the combination of microﬂuidic biochip
and optogenetic technology facilitates the establishment of feasible models for
studying the relationship of neuronal activity with regrowth and remyelination. The
augment of optogenetic technology also provides a more accurate assessment of
the mechanisms and progression of neural injuries.
3.2
Neuromuscular Junction Formation
3.2.1
Introduction
Despite only occupying less than 0.01–0.1% of the entire muscle surface, NMJs,
or motor endplates, play an essential role in animal physical mobility and daily life
[101]. Formed in the center region of muscle ﬁbers, NMJ is a highly specialized
chemical synapse functioning as a converter of a temporal sequence of action
potentials in MNs into muscle contractions [102]. NMJ formation requires close
interactions of MNs, muscles, and SCs.
3.2.2
Microﬂuidic Neuromuscular Culture System
Thanks to the ability to establish a coculture system in which MNs are morpholog-
ically separated from, but functionally connected with, muscle cells, microﬂuidic
culture identiﬁes itself as a suitable approach to investigate new treatments for
degenerative diseases of MNs and muscle.
Based on mouse embryonic stem cell-derived motor neurons and C2C12
myotubes, we have recently developed a compartmentalized PDMS microﬂuidic
device for an in vitro NMJ model [103]. Brieﬂy, the device consisted of two equal
compartments of neuron soma and muscle connected by 100 parallel microchannels
(Fig. 4a, b). To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst of its kind compartmentalized NMJ
in vitro culture model and would contribute to the studies on NMJ-related diseases

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
55
by offering a system that more faithfully mimics the isolated in vivo environment
while also allowing the site of action studies [103]. Several NMJ microﬂuidic
platforms with speciﬁc designs were then proposed. As described in Fig. 4c, d,
the device prepared by Ionescu et al. (2016) consisted of one motoneuronal or
proximal compartment and two muscle or distal compartments [104]. Particularly,
the devices by Takeuchi et al. (2011) and Santhanam et al. (2018) were designed
with the integration of electrodes to characterize the functional NMJ formation. In
the design of Takeuchi et al. (2011), the coculture device contained the following:
(1) 2 compartments for the culture of cardiomyocytes and sympathetic neurons
separately; (2) 16 microcompartments for preventing the migration of neurons and
to ﬁx the cell bodies at speciﬁc positions near the electrodes; and (3) 8 microconduits
playing a role in assisting neurite outgrowth of sympathetic neurons [105]. The
device proposed by Santhanam et al. (2018) consisted of 2 compartments and
240 microtunnels. Two silver electrodes were submerged and dipped into the MN
or muscle chamber for testing NMJ or muscle functionality, respectively [106].
In addition, many different sources of muscle cells (gastrocnemius muscle [23,
104], cardiac ventricles [105], and hind limb muscle [107]) and MNs (spinal cord
[23, 104, 106, 107], superior cervical ganglia [105], and striata [108]) have also
been introduced for these platforms. Particularly, in order to eliminate the issue of
species variability and facilitate the translation to clinical trials from in vitro works,
Santhanam et al. (2018) have developed neuromuscular culture systems in which
both MNs and myocytes were derived from human tissues [106].
To overcome the disadvantages of 2D NMJ models that do not allow the
development of muscle properties in vivo such as proliferation and contractility,
the team of Roger D. Kamm at MIT (2016) has developed 3D microﬂuidic NMJ
models to make these systems be more “physiologically relevant.” In particular,
aiming to establish a 3D NMJ model for testing drug candidates and investigating
the pathogenesis of ALS, Uzel et al. (2016) presented a microﬂuidic platform that
allows coculture of myoblast-derived muscle strips and MNs differentiated from
mESCs within a 3D hydrogel. The microﬂuidic section was patterned with three
parallel gel regions accessible by six gel ﬁlling ports and ﬂanked by two medium
channels that connected to four medium reservoirs. The left (loading neurospheres)
and middle gel regions were 0.5 mm in width, while the right gel region (loading
muscle strips) was 0.5 mm thicker in width. Three gels were separated from each
other by a row of posts, which provided conﬁnement during gel and cell injecting
while still allowing cellular interaction and nutrient supply. All gels offer a complete
3D environment to the tissue (Fig. 4e, f). The key features of this device are
establishing the spinal cord-limb physical separation by compartmentally separating
two cell types and allowing the observation of 3D neurite outgrowth and muscle
innervation [109]. In addition, Osaki et al. (2018) proposed a device consisting
of four identical sites on a single chip for a humanized NMJ platform by using
hiPSCs for both MN spheroids and 3D muscle ﬁber bundles. Each site contained
two medium reservoirs, two gel injection ports, and three compartments: MN
spheroids (left), muscle tissues (right), and neurite elongation (middle) (Fig. 4g).
In particular, iPSC-derived MNs from a patient with sporadic ALS offered an ALS

56
V. M Pham et al.
patient-speciﬁc motor unit model with an abnormal inclusion of TDP-43 and short
neurite elongation. In addition, compared to a healthy model, the ALS motor
unit showed fewer muscle contractions and increased neuronal degradation and
apoptosis in the muscle (Fig. 4h) [110]. In our literature, this model is the ﬁrst 3D
NMJ platform created by combining hiPSC and microﬂuidic technologies.
Notably, to facilitate MN excitation, optogenetic technology was applied in both
of these 3D platforms proposed above by Uzel et al. (2016) and Osaki et al.
(2018). Particularly, channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) was delivered to both mESC-
derived MNs and C2C12 cells [109] or only to NSCs [110] in platforms proposed
by Uzel et al. (2016) and Osaki et al. (2018), respectively. The optical stimulations
were then performed by using a SOLA light engine (Lumencor) excitation unit
with emission peaks of interest located at 470 and 540 to 550 nm. The results
Fig. 4 (continued)

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
57
showed that MNs expressing ChR2 can stimulate muscle contraction with light
stimulation. In addition to optical stimulation, electrical stimulation was also applied
to activate MNs by platinum electrodes positioned 3 mm away from each other
across the neuromuscular tissue. The combination of microﬂuidic and electrical and
optogenetic technologies in these studies presents a versatile and robust platform for
studying the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as ALS and for drug
screening.
3.3
Myelination
3.3.1
Myelination
Formed by SCs in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and oligodendrocytes
in the CNS, myelin is a unique plasma membrane by virtue of high lipid com-
position (∼70%) covering axons [111]. This structure provides a rapid impulse
transmission with reduced energy consumption [112, 113] that is noticed as an
extraordinary evolutionary advantage [111]. Compared with unmyelinated axons,
◀
Fig. 4 In vitro microﬂuidic NMJ systems. (a–b) A compartmentalized in vitro NMJ model
developed by us. (a) Phase contrast image of coculture shows axons stretching out from MN-
enriched embryoid bodies, across the microchannels, and into the muscle compartment with strands
of myotubes. Scale bar: 100 μm. (b) Immunostained images reveal termination of axons at various
clusters of AChRs. Arrows indicate axons terminating upon reaching myotubes (left) and axon
terminals at clusters of AchRs and axons wrapping around the myotube (right). Scale bar: 50 μm.
(c–d) A microﬂuidic chamber developed by A. Ionescu et al. for coculturing embryonic spinal
cord explant and myotubes. (c) Simple depiction of the device including one proximal 7 mm well
and a cave facing the microgrooves (red dashed line), two 1.2 mm lateral drainage holes for the
proximal channel, and two 7 mm wells on the two ends of the distal channel. (d) Prepared PDMS
microﬂuidic chamber, scale 5 mm (left); the extension and contact of spinal cord explant-derived
Hb9::GFP MNs in the proximal channel with myotubes in the distal channel via the microgrooves
(middle); and the high magniﬁcation image shows the pre- and postsynaptic structures. (e–f) A
microﬂuidic device described by Uzel et al. for the formation of 3D NMJ units. (e) The device
contains two medium channels connected to four medium reservoirs. A surrounding vacuum
channel allows for temporary bonding. Scale bar, 2 mm. (f) Representative image by day 1 of
coculture of neuron-muscle in the microﬂuidic device described in (E). Scale bar, 500 mm. (e)
Neurite extension over 4 days of coculture. Scale bar, 250 mm. (g–h) A microﬂuidic device for
3D ALS motor unit model developed by Osaki et al. (g) The microfabricated motor unit consists
of four identical sites on a single chip, each composed of a muscle ﬁber bundle, attaching pillar
structures and culture MN spheroids. Each site has two medium reservoirs, two gel injection ports,
and three compartments (top left); a photo of the microﬂuidic device (top right); and the timeline
of the formation of a human motor unit along with NMJ (bottom). (h) Representative images of
the formation of the embryonic stem cell- and ALS patient-derived motor unit at D14 in the device
described in (g). Fewer thick neural ﬁbers and less NMJ formation were seen on the ALS motor unit
model compared with the ES-derived motor unit. Scale bar: 100 μm. ((a, b) are reproduced with
permission from [103]; Copyright 2013, IEEE. (c, d) are reproduced with permission from [104];
Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e, f) are reproduced from [109] under Creative Commons Attribution
License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license. (g, h) are reproduced from [110] under Creative
Commons Attribution License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license)

58
V. M Pham et al.
the nerve conduction in myelinated axons is 20–100-fold faster [114]. In addition to
boosting the impulse conduction, other functions of myelin were also discovered. In
particular, myelin contributes to the functional architecture and electrical properties
of the axons [115]. Furthermore, evidence has accumulated that myelination during
development inﬂuences the maturation, maintenance, and survival of axons by
providing extrinsic trophic signals [116–118].
Myelination is a postnatal process. In humans, it occurs during the ﬁrst year
of age and continues into adolescence [119] to form highly specialized domains
including internode, juxtaparanode, paranode, and node of Ranvier [120]. These
domains work together to ensure the proper salutatory conduction of the action
potential and modulate network activity in the brain [119].
3.3.2
Myelination in Microﬂuidic Chambers
Many cellular- and pharmacological-based strategies have been developed to pro-
mote remyelination by recruiting or modulating endogenous precursor cells. Several
groups used the compartmentalized culture to examine the myelination process and
to promote myelination under multiple experimental conditions and approaches.
The promising ﬁndings in these recent studies may contribute to the discovery of
the fundamental mechanisms of myelination and lead to novel approaches for the
treatment of demyelinating diseases (Table 3).
In particular, combining the advances of material and stem cell technologies,
Hyung et al. (2019) introduced a microﬂuidic biochip that allows the separation
of the MN and SC cultures while maintaining the interaction between SCs and
the axons of MNs in a 3D gel environment [100]. Brieﬂy, a biochip containing
multiple microﬂuidic channels was ﬁrst fabricated by photolithography technique,
and Matrigel was then ﬁlled into central channels. Then, mouse MNs and SCs
were, respectively, injected into their channels. Further investigation showed that
the MN-SC coculture on 3D biochips survived for a long time, suggesting a feasible
3D platform for studying the relationship of neuronal activity with regrowth and
remyelination [100]. In addition, given that the evaluation of nerve conduction and
histopathology is critical for a robust preclinical model of a myelinated peripheral
nerve, Khoshakhlagh et al. (2018) presented a novel microfabricated 3D hydrogel
platform for the culture of myelinated embryonic peripheral neural tissue. The dual
hydrogel culture system fabricated by digital projection photolithography comprised
a cell-restrictive component that served as a hydrogel mold and a cell-permissive
component for neuron culture. Using explanted DRGs as the source of the PNS
nerve tissue, two parallel versions of the model were proposed: (1) DRGs and
additional SC were encapsulated in a visible-light cured, methacrylated dextran
(MeDex) gel for immunohistochemistrical and histological evaluations; (2) DRGs
were carefully inserted into a hydrogel construct in the methacrylated heparin
(MeHp) hydrogel, and endogenous SCs were stimulated to form myelin to serve

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
59
Table 3 Some recent studies on myelination in 2D microﬂuidic platforms
Engineering feature
Cell types
Biological output/ﬁndings
Ref.
One circular soma
compartment connects
with six square-shaped
satellite axon/glia
compartments via radially
positioned arrays of
axon-guiding
microchannels
Coculture of
forebrain-derived CNS
neurons and cerebral
hemisphere-derived
oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs)
and astrocytes
Evaluation of the
myelination process under
multiple experimental
coculture conditions
[87]
Two-chamber platform
connected by a set of
parallel microchannels.
The culture platform
integrates with electrodes
for electrical stimulation
performance
Coculture of DRG
neurons and cortical
OPCs
Electrical stimulation of
dorsal root ganglia resulted
in a ﬁvefold increase in the
number of myelinated
segments (Fig. 5a, b)
[121–123]
Cyclic adenosine
monophosphate is both
necessary and sufﬁcient for
electrical
stimulation-induced
myelin segment formation
Subcellular electrical
stimulation induces the
same effect on myelination
as whole-cell stimulation
(Fig. 5c)
Two-compartment
platform is composed of a
circular-shaped soma
compartment located in the
middle and one closed
co-centric ring axon/glia
compartment
Coculture of embryonic
cortical neurons and
OPCs
The circular platform with
an open access neuron
compartment shows the
capacity in achieving a
high density of axonal
network growth
[124]
Large open compartments
are interconnected via
microgrooves. The
platform increases the
cellular density
Coculture of
mESCs-based cortical
neurons and
oligodendrocytes
Imaging the myelination
process in real time
[20]
Two-chamber platform
integrated with a
multichannel optogenetic
stimulator
Coculture of DRG
neurons and OPCs
Subcellular optogenetic
stimulation has the same
effect on promoting
myelination as whole-cell
stimulation (Fig. 5d)
[125]
(continued)

60
V. M Pham et al.
Table 3 (continued)
Engineering feature
Cell types
Biological output/ﬁndings
Ref.
The platform is comprised
of one chamber connected
to eight microtunnels.
Each microtunnel is
aligned in each electrode
Coculture of DRG
neurons and
DRG-derived SCs
Recording axonal
conduction while
simultaneously controlling
the proliferation of speciﬁc
SC types
Immature unmyelinated
SCs promote axonal
conduction velocity in a
cell density-dependent
manner before the onset of
myelination
[126]
as a model for electrophysiological measurement. The key feature of this 3D
microﬂuidic system is allowing either exogenously to incorporate or endogenously
to promote SCs for 3D myelin formation. In addition, this model system presents the
ﬂexibility in manipulating the microenvironment and the ability to quantify myelin
formation by physiologically relevant methods that could be adopted for clinical
testing [127]. Sharma et al. (2019) then developed this platform to be the ﬁrst
proposed 3D human stem cell-based in vitro model of peripheral nerve by using
hiPSC-derived neurons and primary human SCs (Fig. 5e–g) [128]. Compared with
other in vitro studies on creating neuron-glia organoids by differentiating aggregates
of neural progenitor cells in situ into neural structures, this study typically attempted
to evaluate the interactions and the potential for self-assembly of two differentiated
cell types. Neuron-SC spheroids were produced by ultralow attachment plates to
enhance their communication and myelination. In particular, this system of the
myelinated human peripheral nerve was reported as the ﬁrst human nerve-on-a-chip
that can be used for performing electrophysiological and histological assessments,
thus providing a robust model for human disease or drug discovery [128].
In particular, to investigate the relationship of neuronal activity with myelination,
some groups developed integrated microﬂuidic platforms coupled with electrical
and optogenetic stimulation. Remarkably, the team of Yang at Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity proposed platforms integrated with electrodes [121–123] or a multichannel
optogenetic stimulator (Fig. 5d) [125] to study neuronal activity dependent on a
myelination mechanism. When applied either on whole cells or at a subcellular
level, these stimulations showed the promotion of myelination (see details in
Table 3). Notably, examined on a 3D microﬂuidic coculture platform of MNs and
SCs, Hyung et al. (2019) recently showed that optogenetic not only stimulated
differentiation of SCs but also promoted axon outgrowth and axon myelination
[100]. These promising results suggest that electrical and optogenetic stimulation
can be further adapted to evaluate the effects of drug treatments on diseases related
to the failure of interactions between neurons and glia.

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
61
3.4
Brain Organoids
3.4.1
Brain Organoids
Studying the central nervous system especially on humans is more challenging
compared to that in the PNS and other organs because of its complexity, poor
accessibility to all stages of development, and lack of functional tissue preparations
[129]. The technological advances such as stem cell engineering, advances in
biomaterials, CRISPR-Cas9-based genome engineering, and highly parallel single-
cell transcriptomics are now together making human brain tissue much more
accessible.
Organoids or organ spheroids are a new type of 3D in vitro tissue models which
rely on spontaneous morphogenesis in cell aggregates [129]. These 3D structures
identify themselves as useful models for disease modeling and therapy development,
especially for human diseases that cannot be established accurately in cell or animal
models. Since the ﬁrst intestinal organoids described by Sato et al. in 2009 [130],
a huge amount of attention has been focused on this technology to improve the
methodologies and expand the range of interested tissues.
Brain organoids have been derived from pluripotent stem cells, adult stem cells,
or tumor cells in suspension or embedded into extracellular matrices to mimic the
biochemical and physical cues of tissue development and homeostasis (Fig. 6) [129,
131]. Derived from pluripotent stem cells, there are two main methods that can be
applied to generate brain organoids: directed and undirected ways (Fig. 6) [132]. In
directed differentiation protocols, stem cells are instructed by small molecules and
extrinsic factors to multiple brain regions and subsequently fused into assembloids
and allowed for maturation over a long period of time [129, 133, 134]. In undirected
or whole-brain organoid ways, brain organoids are generated based on the self-
patterning ability of stem cells and grown in an extracellular matrix such as Matrigel
[135] or in spinning bioreactor [136] with minimal extrinsic differentiation cues. By
virtue of the absence of inductive signals, these organoids contain a variety of brain
region identities and nonneural cells [129].
3.4.2
Brain Organoids in Microﬂuidic Platforms
The development of microﬂuidic technology has further enabled innovative methods
to generate brain organoids. The human brain organoid developed recently by Jian-
hua Qin’s team (2018) is a robust brain organoid-on-a-chip system that may open
new horizons for applications in developmental biology and human brain disease
studies. The device comprised two layers: top and bottom. The top microﬂuidic
layer with the approximate height of 600 mm consisted of two parallel culture
chambers and three separate medium channels. The culture chambers were used for
3D culture of stem cell-derived multicellular aggregates (embryoid bodies – EBs)
with Matrigel and were separated by a central channel which served as the ﬂuid ﬂow
passageway. The medium channels at the two sides of the device were used to supply
the cell culture medium. Micropillar arrays were designed to separate the culture and
medium channels from each other and to allow the nutrient and oxygen exchange

62
V. M Pham et al.
between the two types of channels. The bottom layer of the device was the plane
PDMS layer (Fig. 7c). Human iPSCs were ﬁrst seeded in the concave well to form
the EBs and induced into neuroectoderm. The mixture of EBs and Matrigel was then
prepared and infused into the culture channels. The EBs were immobilized on chip
and further in situ differentiated into brain organoids [137]. In particular, using this
platform to model neurodevelopmental disorders under prenatal nicotine exposure at
early stages during gestation, his team found that compared with the control group,
the brain organoids exposed to nicotine exhibited premature neuronal differentiation
Fig. 5 (continued)

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
63
and disrupted the brain regionalization and cortical development. Furthermore,
the nicotine-treated brain organoids showed abnormal neuronal differentiation and
migration [138] (Fig. 7b–d).
In addition, Karzbrun et al. (2018) have introduced an organ-on-a-chip approach
that enables the development of human brain organoids in a small scale to millimeter
diameter, together with the efﬁcient nutrient exchange by diffusion, and allows
in situ whole-organ ﬂuorescent live imaging over several weeks. The device was
fabricated on a polystyrene tissue culture dish. Brieﬂy, 11 holes were drilled at
the dish bottom. A semipermeable polycarbonate membrane was then attached to
the bottom surface to cover nine drilled holes by UV-curable glue. Two uncovered
holes served as inlets. A spacer of thickness 150 μm was formed by spreading
the UV-curable adhesive between a circular PDMS stamp and was placed on a
coverslip. Human ESCs were cultured, dissociated, and dispensed into an ultralow
cell attachment 96-plate to form cell aggregates in neural induction media. Nine
human ESC aggregates were placed on top of the membrane-covered holes and
◀
Fig. 5 A selection of studies on myelination using 2D and 3D microﬂuidic systems. (a) Simple
depiction illustrates our microﬂuidic compartmentalized cell culture platform to achieve the
simultaneous segregation of neuron and oligodendrocytes and the formation of myelin sheaths.
Design and fabrication of microchannels and soma chambers on a silicon wafer by standard micro-
fabrication techniques (top left); the culture chamber was formed by PDMS-based soft lithography
(top right); compartments were manually punched out (bottom left); and the PDMS chip was
bonded onto a glass slide (bottom right). (b) Extension of axons from DRG soma chamber to the
distal compartment (top); myelin basic protein (MBP)-positive oligodendrocyte processes (green)
contact NF-positive DRG processes (red) in the distal compartment after 1 week of coculture at low
magniﬁcation (middle) and high magniﬁcation (bottom). Arrows indicate MBP-positive processes
contacting and initiating myelin formation around DRG processes. Scale bars: 100 μm (top and
middle) and 30 μm (bottom). (c and d) Integration of electrical (c) and optogenetic (d) system
for subcellular stimulation of neurons. DRG neurons and oligodendrocyte precursor cells were
cultured in microﬂuidic chambers and stimulated by electrical (c) and optogenetic (d) systems in
three different modes of electrode conﬁguration: whole-cell stimulation (WholeSTIM), somatic
compartment stimulation (SomaSTIM), and axonal compartment stimulation (AxonSTIM) (top).
Schematic of stimulation protocol (bottom). (e–g) A 3D microengineered model of myelinated
peripheral nerve that can be used for performing electrophysiological and histological assessments.
(e) The depiction of the process of fabricating a human nerve-on-a-Chip (HNoaC) and assessment
techniques used to characterize the system. F. Electrophysiological testing of HNoaC. Image
presents the placement of stimulating (right) and recording (left) electrodes placed within DRG and
dense neural growth tract in channel, respectively, for recording compound action potentials from
in vitro HNoaC samples. (g) Immunostained human SCs and growing axons for the speciﬁc marker
S100 (green) and βIII-tubulin (red), respectively, over a period of 4 weeks showing the migration
and elongation along the axons of SCs from the spheroid at low magniﬁcation (top, scale bar:
1000 μm) and high magniﬁcation image of inset (bottom left, scale bar: 25 μm); 3D ﬁgure showing
close-up of the relationship between human SCs (green) and myelinated axons (red). Slice size was
368.36 × 368.36 × 34.00 μm. ((a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from [121]; Copyright
2012, Springer Nature. (c) is reproduced from [123] under Creative Commons Attribution
License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license. (d) is reproduced with permission from [125];
Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e), (f), and (g) are reproduced with permission from
[128] under Creative Commons Attribution License/CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license)

64
V. M Pham et al.
Fig. 6 Different approaches for deriving human brain organoids. hiPS cells derived from a
blastocyst or by reprogramming of somatic cells, adult stem cells, or cancer cells derived from
primary tissue can be used to derive microﬂuidics-based organs-on-a-chip (top), undirected
organoids (middle), and region-speciﬁc brain organoids or organ spheroids (bottom). (Modiﬁed
with permission from [129]; Copyright 2018, Springer Nature)
then were covered by the fabricated coverslip (Fig. 7a). The sealed device was
inverted, and the UV-adhesive spacer was fully cured. Then, the device was ﬁlled
with media and transferred to a cell incubator. Organoids were formed in several
days containing a single or several lumens. Five days later, collagen-laminin-based
hydrogel was injected into the fabricated compartment by capillary force to embed
the aggregates in a gel environment (Fig. 7a). Using this approach to study the
cellular structure of the organoid, the authors revealed that the organoid wrinkling
was driven by mechanical instability and the wrinkling pattern emerged through
the contribution of both the increased growth in the organoid outer regions and
the actively contracting organoid inner surface. This platform offers an approach
to study cellular properties during the development of organoids, especially for the
embryonic human brain [139].
3.4.3
The Combination of Brain Organoids and Electrical and Optical
Stimulation
Human brain organoids
can be functionally characterized by applying speciﬁc
experimental approaches that have the ability to discriminate different signal
sources [140]. By coupling brain organoids to microelectrode arrays, Monzel et al.
(2017) performed functional probing at the whole network level [141]. In addition,
Rajasethupathy et al. (2016) showed that the capability to target speciﬁed regions
and circuits (but without neuron-type speciﬁcity) can be acquired by applying
local electrical stimuli and rapidly changing magnetic ﬁelds to organoids [142].

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
65
Furthermore, based on promising results of several recent studies, optogenetic
technique is predicted to be an effective tool to study neuronal circuitry. In
particular, Klapper et al. (2017) have successfully developed a methodology for
generating stable optogenetic human stem cell lines that allowed us to target speciﬁc
cell-types. This approach opens more and more applications of optogenetics in stem
cell-derived neurons and neural organoids [143]. The optogenetic technique has
also been successfully applied to hESC-derived organoids [144] and hiPSCs [145],
therefore suggesting a therapeutic approach for in vivo transplantation. Strikingly,
Quadrato et al. (2017) demonstrated the presence of light-sensitive photoreceptor-
like cells in retinal organoids and that the activity within organoids could be
controlled using light stimulation of these cells. These ﬁndings suggest that the
functionality of human neuronal circuits can be stimulated by physiological stimuli
or similar optogenetic tools [146]. In addition, Yoon et al. (2019) introduced an
approach for a highly reliable and consistent generation of cortical spheroids and
found that blue light can trigger action potentials in neurons expressing ChR2 with
high ﬁdelity. Together, these results suggest that the combination of electrical and
optogenetic stimulation and organoid systems is a powerful tool to study neuronal
circuitry in both in vitro and in vivo levels.
4
Future Directions
Microﬂuidic technology has developed robustly in the past decades and comprises
a wide variety of applications in different areas, thanks to the advantages derived
from the miniaturized devices that use scaling laws and continuum breakdown
for new effects and better performance [42]. In neuroscience studies, microﬂuidic
culture is advantageous over the conventional in vitro culture by providing cellular
microenvironments that more closely resemble those in vivo systems [147, 148].
In addition, well-established CNS disease models on microﬂuidic platforms might
be the answer to overcoming the ethical issues in using animal models [149].
Furthermore, microﬂuidic 3D cell culture has recently emerged as a powerful tool
in neural tissue engineering and supports better approaches in drug testing.
However, moving cell culture from conventional methods with dishes, ﬂasks,
and well plates to microﬂuidic chambers requires careful evaluation and revisions
of several key distinguishing factors such as different culture surfaces, reduced
media volumes, and methods for medium exchange [72]. In addition, to take full
advantage of the microﬂuidic technology for neuroscience research, overcoming
several remaining limitations and challenges is necessary. One key challenge is to
ﬁnd the material(s) that is compatible with both laboratory and industrial production
and also allows more creative design. The advancement of 3D-printing in the
past decade will facilitate faster prototyping and provide an easily accessible and
empowering tool to express higher creative level. Additionally, modulation of the
production process to allow faster creation of new designs is a must. The idea
of modulation originated from the microelectronic ﬁeld. However, due to the
highly different natures of how liquid and electrons ﬂow, this process has not

66
V. M Pham et al.
progressed much. If the goal is to grow organs or tissue, the fabrication process of
microﬂuidic devices would need specialized microengineering capabilities to avoid
bubble formation which could damage cells and hamper the fabrication and control
of chips. As PDMS is the material widely used for fabrication of microﬂuidic culture
Fig. 7 (continued)

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
67
systems, researchers interested in the microﬂuidic cell culture are recommended
the following: (1) to test the compatibility of any cell line intended to utilize for
microﬂuidic culture in PDMS-based platforms before performing the experiments;
(2) to test the leaching of toxic or other unwanted components from media or
supplement absorption into PDMS; (3) to be aware the media absorption into PDMS
results in the loss of small hydrophobic molecules and supplements in the culture
media; and (4) to pay attention to the coating materials for PDMS [72]. As the
surface of naïve PDMS is hydrophobic [72], to support long-term cell survival,
substrate choice and coating techniques need to be carefully considered to maximize
cell attachment and minimize matrix degradation or contraction over time [150].
Several key advancements in this ﬁeld converged at a combination of microﬂuidic
technology with other technologies. For example, in combination with 3D hiPSC-
derived neuronal cell culture, recent studies have successfully created outstanding
3D models of neurons for investigating axon-glia interactions, 3D NMJ platforms,
neuron-glia organoids, and mini-brain [99, 110, 151]. These models have provided,
for the ﬁrst time, a peek into the fundamental neurobiology of the human brain
[139] and related disorders such as ALS or nicotine addiction at an unforeseen
resolution [138]. In addition, future studies can develop robust and versatile devices,
thanks to the ability to incorporate analytical biosensors or to integrate with a range
of devices of microﬂuidic cell culture, to exploit the full potential of microﬂuidic
cell culture. Especially combined with genetics and iPSC techniques, it would
be possible to make models carrying patient-speciﬁc mutation for personalized
diagnoses and treatment, which would represent a major medical contribution
[149]. In addition, coupled with electrical/optogenetic stimulation, the integrated
microﬂuidic platforms facilitate a more accurate assessment of the mechanisms
◀
Fig. 7 Recently developed systems of brain organoid-on-a-chip. (a) Main steps of device
fabrication and assembly of the human brain organoid device developed by Karzbrun et al.
Device assembly includes the introduction of human ESC aggregates and formation of organoids
containing lumens. Nine aggregates were placed on top of the membrane-covered holes. The
fabricated coverslip was then placed on top of the aggregates to seal the device. The device was
inverted and placed on the UV-adhesive spacer for an UV exposure. The device was then ﬁlled
with media and transferred to a cell incubator. Organoids were formed several days after cultured
containing a single or some lumens. Hydrogel injection: Five days after device assembly, collagen-
laminin-based hydrogel (100% Matrigel) was injected into the fabricated compartment by capillary
force to embed the aggregates in a gel environment. Organoid 3D illustration: The organoid has
a spherical oblate shape containing the organoid cells (green) and cell nuclei (red). The device
membrane and coverslip bottom are illustrated, respectively, in yellow and light blue color. Arrows
indicate diffusion of nutrients. (b–d) Schematic diagram of the brain organoid-on-a-chip system
developed by Jianhua Qin’s team. (b) The process of hiPSC-based brain organoid-on-a-chip and its
use for modeling prenatal nicotine exposure. (c) The conﬁguration of the brain organoid-on-a-chip
device and the procedures for brain organoid generation on a chip. (d) Representative images of
cell spheroids taken at different stages in the device. Scale bars: 100 μm. ((a) is reproduced with
permission from [139]; Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b, c) are reproduced with permission
from [138]; Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) is reproduced with permission from
[137]; Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry)

68
V. M Pham et al.
and progress of neurodevelopment. The combination of these techniques also
suggests novel treatments of neural diseases or injuries. For example, Hyung et al.
(2019) recently showed that optogenetic not only stimulates differentiation of
SCs but also promotes axon outgrowth and axon myelination [100]. Particularly,
the combination of brain organoids and optogenetic technology can revolutionize
neuroscience research and allow us to acquire unprecedented precision about normal
and abnormal neurodevelopment [152].
In our point of view, even though microﬂuidic technology is an emerging ﬁeld
and is now more commonly referred to as a discipline in “adolescence” [2], it will
develop robustly in the future with the support from the technological advances of
other areas such as biomaterial and stem cell engineering.
References
1. Hernandez, V.M., Özdinler, P.H.: Microﬂuidics for neuroscience: novel tools and future
implications. In: Microﬂuidic technologies for human health, pp. 185–211. World Scientiﬁc
Publishing, New Jersey. https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814405522_0009
2. Convery, N., Gadegaard, N.: 30 years of microﬂuidics. Micro Nano Eng. 2, 16 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mne.2019.01.003
3. Li, X.J., Valadez, A.V., Zuo, P., Nie, Z.: Microﬂuidic 3D cell culture: potential application
for tissue-based bioassays. Bioanalysis. 4(12), 1509–1525 (2012). https://doi.org/10.4155/
bio.12.133
4. Coluccio, M.L., Perozziello, G., Malara, N., Parrotta, E., Zhang, P., Gentile, F.,
Limongi, T., Raj, P.M., Cuda, G., Candeloro, P., Fabrizio, E.D.: Microﬂuidic platforms for
cell cultures and investigations. Microelectron. Eng. 208, 15 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mee.2019.01.004
5. Carrion, B., Huang, C.P., Ghajar, C.M., Kachgal, S., Kniazeva, E., Jeon, N.L., Putnam, A.J.:
Recreating the perivascular niche ex vivo using a microﬂuidic approach. Biotechnol. Bioeng.
107(6), 1020–1028 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22891
6. Toh, Y.C., Zhang, C., Zhang, J., Khong, Y.M., Chang, S., Samper, V.D., van Noort,
D., Hutmacher, D.W., Yu, H.: A novel 3D mammalian cell perfusion-culture system in
microﬂuidic channels. Lab Chip. 7(3), 302–309 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1039/b614872g
7. Hsiao, A.Y., Torisawa, Y.S., Tung, Y.C., Sud, S., Taichman, R.S., Pienta, K.J., Takayama, S.:
Microﬂuidic system for formation of PC-3 prostate cancer co-culture spheroids. Biomaterials.
30(16), 3020–3027 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.02.047
8. Gottwald, E., Giselbrecht, S., Augspurger, C., Lahni, B., Dambrowsky, N., Truckenmuller,
R., Piotter, V., Gietzelt, T., Wendt, O., Pﬂeging, W., Welle, A., Rolletschek, A., Wobus,
A.M., Weibezahn, K.F.: A chip-based platform for the in vitro generation of tissues in three-
dimensional organization. Lab Chip. 7(6), 777–785 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1039/b618488j
9. Vukasinovic, J., Cullen, D.K., LaPlaca, M.C., Glezer, A.: A microperfused incubator for
tissue mimetic 3D cultures. Biomed. Microdevices. 11(6), 1155–1165 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10544-009-9332-6
10. Kanagasabapathi, T.T., Ciliberti, D., Martinoia, S., Wadman, W.J., Decre, M.M.: Dual-
compartment neuroﬂuidic system for electrophysiological measurements in physically seg-
regated and functionally connected neuronal cell culture. Front. Neuroeng. 4, 13 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2011.00013
11. Wan, C.-r., Chung, S., Kamm, R.D.: Differentiation of embryonic stem cells into cardiomy-
ocytes in a compliant microﬂuidic system. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 39(6), 1840–1847 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-011-0275-8

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
69
12. Figallo, E., Cannizzaro, C., Gerecht, S., Burdick, J.A., Langer, R., Elvassore, N., Vunjak-
Novakovic, G.: Micro-bioreactor array for controlling cellular microenvironments. Lab Chip.
7(6), 710–719 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1039/b700063d
13. Pampaloni, F., Reynaud, E.G., Stelzer, E.H.: The third dimension bridges the gap between
cell culture and live tissue. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8(10), 839–845 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.1038/nrm2236
14. Baker, B.M., Chen, C.S.: Deconstructing the third dimension: how 3D culture microenviron-
ments alter cellular cues. J. Cell Sci. 125(Pt 13), 3015–3024 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1242/
jcs.079509
15. Tibbitt, M.W., Anseth, K.S.: Hydrogels as extracellular matrix mimics for 3D cell culture.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 103(4), 655–663 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22361
16. Birgersdotter, A., Sandberg, R., Ernberg, I.: Gene expression perturbation in vitro – a growing
case for three-dimensional (3D) culture systems. Semin. Cancer Biol. 15(5), 405–412 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2005.06.009
17. Hongisto, V., Jernstrom, S., Fey, V., Mpindi, J.P., Kleivi Sahlberg, K., Kallioniemi, O.,
Perala, M.: High-throughput 3D screening reveals differences in drug sensitivities between
culture models of JIMT1 breast cancer cells. PLoS One. 8(10), e77232 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0077232
18. Kim, J.H., Sim, J., Kim, H.J.: Neural stem cell differentiation using microﬂuidic device-
generated growth factor gradient. Biomol. Ther. 26(4), 380–388 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.4062/biomolther.2018.001
19. Nagendran, T., Taylor, A.M.: Unique axon-to-Soma signaling pathways mediate dendritic
spine loss and hyper-excitability post-axotomy. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13, 431 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2019.00431
20. Kerman, B.E., Kim, H.J., Padmanabhan, K., Mei, A., Georges, S., Joens, M.S., Fitzpatrick,
J.A., Jappelli, R., Chandross, K.J., August, P., Gage, F.H.: In vitro myelin formation using
embryonic stem cells. Development. 142(12), 2213–2225 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1242/
dev.116517
21. Zhang, Y., Bekku, Y., Dzhashiashvili, Y., Armenti, S., Meng, X., Sasaki, Y., Milbrandt,
J., Salzer, J.L.: Assembly and maintenance of nodes of ranvier rely on distinct sources of
proteins and targeting mechanisms. Neuron. 73(1), 92–107 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuron.2011.10.016
22. Lee, S.R., Hyung, S., Bang, S., Lee, Y., Ko, J., Lee, S., Kim, H.J., Jeon, N.L.: Modeling neural
circuit, blood-brain barrier, and myelination on a microﬂuidic 96 well plate. Biofabrication.
11(3), 035013 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ab1402
23. Zahavi, E.E., Ionescu, A., Gluska, S., Gradus, T., Ben-Yaakov, K., Perlson, E.: A
compartmentalized microﬂuidic neuromuscular co-culture system reveals spatial aspects
of GDNF functions. J. Cell Sci. 128(6), 1241–1252 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.
167544
24. Sala-Jarque, J., Mesquida-Veny, F., Badiola-Mateos, M., Samitier, J., Hervera, A., Del
Rio, J.A.: Neuromuscular activity induces paracrine signaling and triggers axonal regrowth
after injury in microﬂuidic lab-on-Chip devices. Cells. 9(2) (2020). https://doi.org/10.3390/
cells9020302
25. Lei, Y., Li, J., Wang, N., Yang, X., Hamada, Y., Li, Q., Zheng, W., Jiang, X.: An on-chip model
for investigating the interaction between neurons and cancer cells. Integr. Biol. (Camb). 8(3),
359–367 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ib00309a
26. Sinha, S., Fu, Y.Y., Grimont, A., Ketcham, M., Lafaro, K., Saglimbeni, J.A., Askan, G.,
Bailey, J.M., Melchor, J.P., Zhong, Y., Joo, M.G., Grbovic-Huezo, O., Yang, I.H., Basturk,
O., Baker, L., Park, Y., Kurtz, R.C., Tuveson, D., Leach, S.D., Pasricha, P.J.: PanIN
neuroendocrine cells promote tumorigenesis via neuronal cross-talk. Cancer Res. 77(8),
1868–1879 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0899-T
27. Xu, H., Li, Z., Yu, Y., Sizdahkhani, S., Ho, W.S., Yin, F., Wang, L., Zhu, G., Zhang, M., Jiang,
L., Zhuang, Z., Qin, J.: A dynamic in vivo-like organotypic blood-brain barrier model to probe
metastatic brain tumors. Sci. Rep. 6, 36670 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep36670

70
V. M Pham et al.
28. Taylor, M.P., Kobiler, O., Enquist, L.W.: Alphaherpesvirus axon-to-cell spread involves
limited virion transmission. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109(42), 17046–17051 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1212926109
29. Bauer, D., Alt, M., Dirks, M., Buch, A., Heilingloh, C.S., Dittmer, U., Giebel, B., Gorgens,
A., Palapys, V., Kasper, M., Eis-Hubinger, A.M., Sodeik, B., Heiligenhaus, A., Roggendorf,
M., Krawczyk, A.: A therapeutic antiviral antibody inhibits the anterograde directed neuron-
to-cell spread of herpes simplex virus and protects against ocular disease. Front. Microbiol.
8, 2115 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.02115
30. Howard, P.W., Wright, C.C., Howard, T., Johnson, D.C.: Herpes simplex virus gE/gI
extracellular domains promote axonal transport and spread from neurons to epithelial cells. J.
Virol. 88(19), 11178–11186 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01627-14
31. Bang, S., Lee, S.R., Ko, J., Son, K., Tahk, D., Ahn, J., Im, C., Jeon, N.L.: A low permeability
microﬂuidic blood-brain barrier platform with direct contact between Perfusable vascular
network and astrocytes. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 8083 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-
07416-0
32. Gladkov, A., Pigareva, Y., Kutyina, D., Kolpakov, V., Bukatin, A., Mukhina, I., Kazantsev, V.,
Pimashkin, A.: Design of Cultured Neuron Networks in vitro with predeﬁned connectivity
using asymmetric microﬂuidic channels. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 15625 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-15506-2
33. Hosmane, S., Fournier, A., Wright, R., Rajbhandari, L., Siddique, R., Yang, I.H., Ramesh,
K.T., Venkatesan, A., Thakor, N.: Valve-based microﬂuidic compression platform: single
axon injury and regrowth. Lab Chip. 11(22), 3888–3895 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c1lc20549h
34. Tegenge, M.A., Rajbhandari, L., Shrestha, S., Mithal, A., Hosmane, S., Venkatesan, A.:
Curcumin protects axons from degeneration in the setting of local neuroinﬂammation. Exp.
Neurol. 253, 102–110 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.12.016
35. Mika, J.K., Schwarz, K., Wanzenboeck, H.D., Scholze, P., Bertagnolli, E.: Investigation
of neurotrophic factor concentrations with a novel in vitro concept for peripheral nerve
regeneration. J. Neurosci. Res. 93(11), 1631–1640 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.23598
36. Ren, Y., Kunze, A., Renaud, P.: Compartmentalized microﬂuidics for in vitro Alzheimer’s
disease studies. In: Bifﬁ, E. (ed.) Microﬂuidic and Compartmentalized Platforms for Neuro-
biological Research, pp. 197–215. Springer, New York (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4939-2510-0_12
37. Winter, B.M., Daniels, S.R., Salatino, J.W., Purcell, E.K.: Genetic modulation at the neural
microelectrode Interface: methods and applications. Micromachines. 9(10) (2018). https://
doi.org/10.3390/mi9100476
38. Iannielli, A., Ugolini, G.S., Cordiglieri, C., Bido, S., Rubio, A., Colasante, G., Valtorta, M.,
Cabassi, T., Rasponi, M., Broccoli, V.: Reconstitution of the human Nigro-striatal pathway
on-a-Chip reveals OPA1-dependent mitochondrial defects and loss of dopaminergic synapses.
Cell Rep. 29(13), 4646–4656.e4644 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.11.111
39. Hyvarinen, T., Hagman, S., Ristola, M., Sukki, L., Veijula, K., Kreutzer, J., Kallio, P.,
Narkilahti, S.: Co-stimulation with IL-1beta and TNF-alpha induces an inﬂammatory reactive
astrocyte phenotype with neurosupportive characteristics in a human pluripotent stem cell
model system. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 16944 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53414-9
40. Hampe, A.E., Li, Z., Sethi, S., Lein, P.J., Seker, E.: A microﬂuidic platform to study
astrocyte adhesion on Nanoporous gold thin ﬁlms. Nano. 8(7) (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano8070452
41. Ni, L., Kc, P., Zhang, G., Zhe, J.: Enabling single cell electrical stimulation and response
recording via a microﬂuidic platform. Biomicroﬂuidics. 13(6), 064126 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5128884
42. Nguyen, N.-T., Wereley, S.: Fundamentals and applications of microﬂuidics. Integrated
Microsystems, 2nd Revised edition. Artech House Publishers (2006)
43. Jiang, L., Korivi, N.S.: Microﬂuidics: technologies and applications. In: Feldman, M. (ed.)
Nanolithography – The Art of Fabricating Nanoelectronic and Nanophotonic Devices and

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
71
Systems, 1st edn, p. 20. Woodhead Publishing Limited (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-85709-500-8.50019-1
44. Mostowﬁ, F., Molla, S., Tabeling, P.: Determining phase diagrams of gas-liquid systems using
a microﬂuidic PVT. Lab Chip. 12(21), 4381–4387 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1039/c2lc40706j
45. Pierobon, S.C., Ooms, M.D., Sinton, D.: Evanescent cultivation of photosynthetic bacteria
on thin waveguides. J. Micromech. Microeng. 24(4), 8 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-
1317/24/4/045017
46. Tang, Y., Wang, Z., Li, Z., Kim, J., Deng, Y., Li, Y., Heath, J.R., Wei, W., Lu, S., Shi, Q.:
High-throughput screening of rare metabolically active tumor cells in pleural effusion and
peripheral blood of lung cancer patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114(10), 2544–2549
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1612229114
47. Han, S.J., Park, H.K., Kim, K.S.: Applications of microﬂuidic devices for urology. Int.
Neurourol. J. 21(Suppl 1), S4–S9 (2017). https://doi.org/10.5213/inj.1734838.419
48. Nichols, J.H.: Point of care testing. Clin. Lab. Med. 27(4), 893–908, viii (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cll.2007.07.003
49. Hindson, B.J., Ness, K.D., Masquelier, D.A., Belgrader, P., Heredia, N.J., Makarewicz, A.J.,
Bright, I.J., Lucero, M.Y., Hiddessen, A.L., Legler, T.C., Kitano, T.K., Hodel, M.R., Petersen,
J.F., Wyatt, P.W., Steenblock, E.R., Shah, P.H., Bousse, L.J., Troup, C.B., Mellen, J.C.,
Wittmann, D.K., Erndt, N.G., Cauley, T.H., Koehler, R.T., So, A.P., Dube, S., Rose, K.A.,
Montesclaros, L., Wang, S., Stumbo, D.P., Hodges, S.P., Romine, S., Milanovich, F.P., White,
H.E., Regan, J.F., Karlin-Neumann, G.A., Hindson, C.M., Saxonov, S., Colston, B.W.: High-
throughput droplet digital PCR system for absolute quantitation of DNA copy number. Anal.
Chem. 83(22), 8604–8610 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1021/ac202028g
50. van de Wijdeven, R., Ramstad, O.H., Bauer, U.S., Halaas, O., Sandvig, A., Sandvig, I.:
Structuring a multi-nodal neural network in vitro within a novel design microﬂuidic chip.
Biomed. Microdevices. 20(1), 9 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10544-017-0254-4
51. Blagovic, K., Kim, L.Y., Voldman, J.: Microﬂuidic perfusion for regulating dif-
fusible signaling in stem cells. PLoS One. 6(8), e22892 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0022892
52. Sackmann, E.K., Fulton, A.L., Beebe, D.J.: The present and future role of microﬂu-
idics in biomedical research. Nature. 507(7491), 181–189 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature13118
53. Folch, A., Toner, M.: Microengineering of cellular interactions. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2,
227–256 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.2.1.227
54. Meyvantsson, I., Beebe, D.J.: Cell culture models in microﬂuidic systems. Annu. Rev. Anal.
Chem. 1, 423–449 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.anchem.1.031207.113042
55. Hasan, A., Paul, A., Vrana, N.E., Zhao, X., Memic, A., Hwang, Y.S., Dokmeci, M.R.,
Khademhosseini, A.: Microﬂuidic techniques for development of 3D vascularized tis-
sue. Biomaterials. 35(26), 7308–7325 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.
04.091
56. Kim, L., Toh, Y.C., Voldman, J., Yu, H.: A practical guide to microﬂuidic perfusion culture
of adherent mammalian cells. Lab Chip. 7(6), 681–694 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1039/
b704602b
57. Tehranirokh, M., Kouzani, A.Z., Francis, P.S., Kanwar, J.R.: Microﬂuidic devices for cell
cultivation and proliferation. Biomicroﬂuidics. 7(5), 51502 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.4826935
58. Ren, K., Zhou, J., Wu, H.: Materials for microﬂuidic chip fabrication. Acc. Chem. Res.
46(11), 2396–2406 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1021/ar300314s
59. Nge, P.N., Rogers, C.I., Woolley, A.T.: Advances in microﬂuidic materials, functions,
integration, and applications. Chem. Rev. 113(4), 2550–2583 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1021/
cr300337x
60. Chen, Y., Zhang, L., Chen, G.: Fabrication, modiﬁcation, and application of poly(methyl
methacrylate) microﬂuidic chips. Electrophoresis. 29(9), 1801–1814 (2008). https://doi.org/
10.1002/elps.200700552

72
V. M Pham et al.
61. Unger, M.A., Chou, H.P., Thorsen, T., Scherer, A., Quake, S.R.: Monolithic microfabricated
valves and pumps by multilayer soft lithography. Science. 288(5463), 113–116 (2000). https:/
/doi.org/10.1126/science.288.5463.113
62. Gao, Y., Majumdar, D., Jovanovic, B., Shaifer, C., Lin, P.C., Zijlstra, A., Webb, D.J., Li,
D.: A versatile valve-enabled microﬂuidic cell co-culture platform and demonstration of
its applications to neurobiology and cancer biology. Biomed. Microdevices. 13(3), 539–548
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10544-011-9523-9
63. Brunello, C.A., Jokinen, V., Sakha, P., Terazono, H., Nomura, F., Kaneko, T., Lauri, S.E.,
Franssila, S., Rivera, C., Yasuda, K., Huttunen, H.J.: Microtechnologies to fuel neurobio-
logical research with nanometer precision. J. Nanobiotechnol. 11, 11 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1186/1477-3155-11-11
64. Taylor, A.M., Menon, S., Gupton, S.L.: Passive microﬂuidic chamber for long-term imaging
of axon guidance in response to soluble gradients. Lab Chip. 15(13), 2781–2789 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c5lc00503e
65. Li, L., Ren, L., Liu, W., Wang, J.C., Wang, Y., Tu, Q., Xu, J., Liu, R., Zhang, Y., Yuan,
M.S., Li, T., Wang, J.: Spatiotemporally controlled and multifactor involved assay of neuronal
compartment regeneration after chemical injury in an integrated microﬂuidics. Anal. Chem.
84(15), 6444–6453 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1021/ac3013708
66. Cosson, S., Lutolf, M.P.: Microﬂuidic patterning of protein gradients on biomimetic hydro-
gel substrates. Methods Cell Biol. 121, 91–102 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
800281-0.00007-5
67. Mahadik, B.P., Wheeler, T.D., Skertich, L.J., Kenis, P.J., Harley, B.A.: Microﬂuidic generation
of gradient hydrogels to modulate hematopoietic stem cell culture environment. Adv. Healthc.
Mater. 3(3), 449–458 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201300263
68. Lai, N., Sims, J.K., Jeon, N.L., Lee, K.: Adipocyte induction of preadipocyte differentiation
in a gradient chamber. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods. 18(12), 958–967 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1089/ten.TEC.2012.0168
69. Toepke, M.W., Beebe, D.J.: PDMS absorption of small molecules and consequences
in microﬂuidic applications. Lab Chip. 6(12), 1484–1486 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1039/
b612140c
70. Wang, J.D., Douville, N.J., Takayama, S., ElSayed, M.: Quantitative analysis of molecular
absorption into PDMS microﬂuidic channels. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40(9), 1862–1873 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-012-0562-z
71. Tsao, C.W.: Polymer microﬂuidics: simple, low-cost fabrication process bridging academic
lab research to commercialized production. Micromachines. 7(12) (2016). https://doi.org/
10.3390/mi7120225
72. Halldorsson, S., Lucumi, E., Gomez-Sjoberg, R., Fleming, R.M.T.: Advantages and chal-
lenges of microﬂuidic cell culture in polydimethylsiloxane devices. Biosens. Bioelectron. 63,
218–231 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2014.07.029
73. Mukhopadhyay, R.: When PDMS isn’t the best. What are its weaknesses, and which other
polymers can researchers add to their toolboxes? Anal. Chem. 79(9), 3248–3253 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1021/ac071903e
74. Gratton, S.E., Williams, S.S., Napier, M.E., Pohlhaus, P.D., Zhou, Z., Wiles, K.B., Maynor,
B.W., Shen, C., Olafsen, T., Samulski, E.T., Desimone, J.M.: The pursuit of a scalable
nanofabrication platform for use in material and life science applications. Acc. Chem. Res.
41(12), 1685–1695 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1021/ar8000348
75. Lachaux, J., Alcaine, C., Gomez-Escoda, B., Perrault, C.M., Duplan, D.O., Wu, P.J.,
Ochoa, I., Fernandez, L., Mercier, O., Coudreuse, D., Roy, E.: Thermoplastic elastomer
with advanced hydrophilization and bonding performances for rapid (30 s) and easy mold-
ing of microﬂuidic devices. Lab Chip. 17(15), 2581–2594 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c7lc00488e
76. Gomez-Sjoberg, R., Leyrat, A.A., Houseman, B.T., Shokat, K., Quake, S.R.: Biocompatibility
and reduced drug absorption of sol-gel-treated poly(dimethyl siloxane) for microﬂuidic
cell culture applications. Anal. Chem. 82(21), 8954–8960 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1021/
ac101870s

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
73
77. Abate, A.R., Lee, D., Do, T., Holtze, C., Weitz, D.A.: Glass coating for PDMS microﬂuidic
channels by sol-gel methods. Lab Chip. 8(4), 516–518 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1039/
b800001h
78. Orhan,
J.B.,
Parashar,
V.K.,
Flueckiger,
J.,
Gijs,
M.A.:
Internal
modiﬁcation
of
poly(dimethylsiloxane) microchannels with a borosilicate glass coating. Langmuir. 24(16),
9154–9161 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1021/la801317x
79. Thery, M.: Micropatterning as a tool to decipher cell morphogenesis and functions. J. Cell
Sci. 123(Pt 24), 4201–4213 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.075150
80. Behm, L.V.J., Gerike, S., Grauel, M.K., Uhlig, K., Pﬁsterer, F., Baumann, W., Bier, F.F.,
Duschl, C., Kirschbaum, M.: Micropatterned Thermoresponsive cell culture substrates for
dynamically controlling neurite outgrowth and neuronal connectivity in vitro. ACS Appl. Bio
Mater. 2(7), 2853–2861 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.9b00246
81. Shi, P., Shen, K., Kam, L.C.: Local presentation of L1 and N-cadherin in multicomponent,
microscale patterns differentially direct neuron function in vitro. Dev. Neurobiol. 67(13),
1765–1776 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1002/dneu.20553
82. Chang, J.C., Brewer, G.J., Wheeler, B.C.: A modiﬁed microstamping technique enhances
polylysine transfer and neuronal cell patterning. Biomaterials. 24(17), 2863–2870 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0142-9612(03)00116-9
83. Esch, T., Lemmon, V., Banker, G.: Local presentation of substrate molecules directs axon
speciﬁcation by cultured hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 19(15),
6417–6426 (1999)
84. Oliva Jr., A.A., James, C.D., Kingman, C.E., Craighead, H.G., Banker, G.A.: Patterning
axonal guidance molecules using a novel strategy for microcontact printing. Neurochem. Res.
28(11), 1639–1648 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1026052820129
85. Withers, G.S., James, C.D., Kingman, C.E., Craighead, H.G., Banker, G.A.: Effects of
substrate geometry on growth cone behavior and axon branching. J. Neurobiol. 66(11), 1183–
1194 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1002/neu.20298
86. McUsic, A.C., Lamba, D.A., Reh, T.A.: Guiding the morphogenesis of dissociated new-
born mouse retinal cells and hES cell-derived retinal cells by soft lithography-patterned
microchannel PLGA scaffolds. Biomaterials. 33(5), 1396–1405 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.10.083
87. Galindo-Rosales,
F.J.:
Complex
Fluid-Flows
in
Microﬂuidics.
Engineering
Fluid
Dynamics, 1st edn. Springer International Publishing (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-59593-1
88. Bhattacharjee, N., Urrios, A., Kang, S., Folch, A.: The upcoming 3D-printing revolution in
microﬂuidics. Lab Chip. 16(10), 1720–1742 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00163g
89. Guckenberger, D.J., de Groot, T.E., Wan, A.M., Beebe, D.J., Young, E.W.: Micromilling: a
method for ultra-rapid prototyping of plastic microﬂuidic devices. Lab Chip. 15(11), 2364–
2378 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1039/c5lc00234f
90. Yuen, P.K.: SmartBuild-a truly plug-n-play modular microﬂuidic system. Lab Chip. 8(8),
1374–1378 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1039/b805086d
91. Yuen, P.K., Bliss, J.T., Thompson, C.C., Peterson, R.C.: Multidimensional modular microﬂu-
idic system. Lab Chip. 9(22), 3303–3305 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1039/b912295h
92. Bhargava, K.C., Thompson, B., Malmstadt, N.: Discrete elements for 3D microﬂuidics.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111(42), 15013–15018 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1414764111
93. Au, A.K., Lee, W., Folch, A.: Mail-order microﬂuidics: evaluation of stereolithography for
the production of microﬂuidic devices. Lab Chip. 14(7), 1294–1301 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1039/c3lc51360b
94. Urrios, A., Parra-Cabrera, C., Bhattacharjee, N., Gonzalez-Suarez, A.M., Rigat-Brugarolas,
L.G., Nallapatti, U., Samitier, J., DeForest, C.A., Posas, F., Garcia-Cordero, J.L., Folch, A.:
3D-printing of transparent bio-microﬂuidic devices in PEG-DA. Lab Chip. 16(12), 2287–
2294 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00153j
95. Alessandri, K., Feyeux, M., Gurchenkov, B., Delgado, C., Trushko, A., Krause, K.H.,
Vignjevic, D., Nassoy, P., Roux, A.: A 3D printed microﬂuidic device for production of

74
V. M Pham et al.
functionalized hydrogel microcapsules for culture and differentiation of human Neuronal
Stem Cells (hNSC). Lab Chip. 16(9), 1593–1604 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00133e
96. Hosmane, S., Yang, I.H., Rufﬁn, A., Thakor, N., Venkatesan, A.: Circular compartmentalized
microﬂuidic platform: study of axon-glia interactions. Lab Chip. 10(6), 741–747 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1039/b918640a
97. Hosmane, S., Tegenge, M.A., Rajbhandari, L., Uapinyoying, P., Ganesh Kumar, N.,
Thakor, N., Venkatesan, A.: Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing
interferon-beta mediates microglial phagocytosis of degenerating axons. J. Neurosci. Off.
J. Soc. Neurosci. 32(22), 7745–7757 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0203-
12.2012
98. Rajbhandari, L., Tegenge, M.A., Shrestha, S., Ganesh Kumar, N., Malik, A., Mithal, A.,
Hosmane, S., Venkatesan, A.: Toll-like receptor 4 deﬁciency impairs microglial phagocytosis
of degenerating axons. Glia. 62(12), 1982–1991 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.22719
99. Osaki, T., Sivathanu, V., Kamm, R.D.: Engineered 3D vascular and neuronal networks in
a microﬂuidic platform. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 5168 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
23512-1
100. Hyung, S., Lee, S.R., Kim, Y.J., Bang, S., Tahk, D., Park, J.C., Suh, J.F., Jeon, N.L.:
Optogenetic neuronal stimulation promotes axon outgrowth and myelination of motor
neurons in a three-dimensional motor neuron-Schwann cell coculture model on a microﬂu-
idic biochip. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 116(10), 2425–2438 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.
27083
101. Li, L., Xiong, W.C., Mei, L.: Neuromuscular junction formation, aging, and disorders. Annu.
Rev. Physiol. 80, 159–188 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-022516-034255
102. Slater, C.R.: The structure of human neuromuscular junctions: some unanswered molecular
questions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18(10) (2017). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18102183
103. Park, H.S., Liu, S., McDonald, J., Thakor, N., Yang, I.H.: Neuromuscular junction in a
microﬂuidic device. In: Conference proceedings: Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society Annual Conference, vol. 2013, pp. 2833–2835 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610130
104. Ionescu, A., Zahavi, E.E., Gradus, T., Ben-Yaakov, K., Perlson, E.: Compartmental microﬂu-
idic system for studying muscle-neuron communication and neuromuscular junction mainte-
nance. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 95(2), 69–88 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.11.004
105. Takeuchi, A., Nakafutami, S., Tani, H., Mori, M., Takayama, Y., Moriguchi, H., Kotani, K.,
Miwa, K., Lee, J.K., Noshiro, M., Jimbo, Y.: Device for co-culture of sympathetic neurons
and cardiomyocytes using microfabrication. Lab Chip. 11(13), 2268–2275 (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1039/c0lc00327a
106. Santhanam, N., Kumanchik, L., Guo, X., Sommerhage, F., Cai, Y., Jackson, M., Martin, C.,
Saad, G., McAleer, C.W., Wang, Y., Lavado, A., Long, C.J., Hickman, J.J.: Stem cell derived
phenotypic human neuromuscular junction model for dose response evaluation of therapeu-
tics. Biomaterials. 166, 64–78 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.02.047
107. Southam, K.A., King, A.E., Blizzard, C.A., McCormack, G.H., Dickson, T.C.: Microﬂuidic
primary culture model of the lower motor neuron-neuromuscular junction circuit. J. Neurosci.
Methods. 218(2), 164–169 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.06.002
108. Morimoto, Y., Kato-Negishi, M., Onoe, H., Takeuchi, S.: Three-dimensional neuron-muscle
constructs with neuromuscular junctions. Biomaterials. 34(37), 9413–9419 (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.062
109. Uzel, S.G., Platt, R.J., Subramanian, V., Pearl, T.M., Rowlands, C.J., Chan, V., Boyer,
L.A., So, P.T., Kamm, R.D.: Microﬂuidic device for the formation of optically excitable,
three-dimensional, compartmentalized motor units. Sci. Adv. 2(8), e1501429 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1501429
110. Osaki, T., Uzel, S.G.M., Kamm, R.D.: Microphysiological 3D model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) from human iPS-derived muscle cells and optogenetic motor neurons. Sci.
Adv. 4(10), eaat5847 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat5847

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
75
111. Salzer, J.L., Zalc, B.: Myelination. Curr. Biol. 26(20), R971–R975 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.074
112. Saab, A.S., Tzvetanova, I.D., Nave, K.A.: The role of myelin and oligodendrocytes in axonal
energy metabolism. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23(6), 1065–1072 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.conb.2013.09.008
113. Stiefel, K.M., Torben-Nielsen, B., Coggan, J.S.: Proposed evolutionary changes in the role of
myelin. Front. Neurosci. 7, 202 (2013). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00202
114. Nave, K.A., Werner, H.B.: Myelination of the nervous system: mechanisms and functions.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 503–533 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-
100913-013101
115. de Waegh, S.M., Lee, V.M., Brady, S.T.: Local modulation of neuroﬁlament phosphorylation,
axonal caliber, and slow axonal transport by myelinating Schwann cells. Cell. 68(3), 451–463
(1992)
116. Mar, S., Noetzel, M.: Axonal damage in leukodystrophies. Pediatr. Neurol. 42(4), 239–242
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2009.08.011
117. Teixeira, C.A., Miranda, C.O., Sousa, V.F., Santos, T.E., Malheiro, A.R., Solomon, M.,
Maegawa, G.H., Brites, P., Sousa, M.M.: Early axonal loss accompanied by impaired
endocytosis, abnormal axonal transport, and decreased microtubule stability occur in the
model of Krabbe’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 66, 92–103 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.nbd.2014.02.012
118. Lassmann, H.: Mechanisms of demyelination and tissue destruction in multiple sclerosis.
Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 104(3), 168–171 (2002)
119. Fields, R.D.: White matter in learning, cognition and psychiatric disorders. Trends Neurosci.
31(7), 361–370 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2008.04.001
120. Alizadeh, A., Dyck, S.M., Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S.: Myelin damage and repair in pathologic
CNS: challenges and prospects. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8, 35 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnmol.2015.00035
121. Yang, I.H., Gary, D., Malone, M., Dria, S., Houdayer, T., Belegu, V., McDonald, J.W.,
Thakor, N.: Axon myelination and electrical stimulation in a microﬂuidic, compartmentalized
cell culture platform. NeuroMolecular Med. 14(2), 112–118 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12017-012-8170-5
122. Malone, M., Gary, D., Yang, I.H., Miglioretti, A., Houdayer, T., Thakor, N., McDonald, J.:
Neuronal activity promotes myelination via a cAMP pathway. Glia. 61(6), 843–854 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.22476
123. Lee, H.U., Blasiak, A., Agrawal, D.R., Loong, D.T.B., Thakor, N.V., All, A.H., Ho,
J.S., Yang, I.H.: Subcellular electrical stimulation of neurons enhances the myelination of
axons by oligodendrocytes. PLoS One. 12(7), e0179642 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0179642
124. Taylor, A.M., Blurton-Jones, M., Rhee, S.W., Cribbs, D.H., Cotman, C.W., Jeon, N.L.:
A microﬂuidic culture platform for CNS axonal injury, regeneration and transport. Nat.
Methods. 2(8), 599–605 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth777
125. Lee, H.U., Nag, S., Blasiak, A., Jin, Y., Thakor, N., Yang, I.H.: Subcellular Optogenetic
stimulation for activity-dependent myelination of axons in a novel microﬂuidic compartmen-
talized platform. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 7(10), 1317–1324 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/
acschemneuro.6b00157
126. Sakai, K., Shimba, K., Kotani, K., Jimbo, Y.: A co-culture microtunnel technique demonstrat-
ing a signiﬁcant contribution of unmyelinated Schwann cells to the acceleration of axonal
conduction in Schwann cell-regulated peripheral nerve development. Integr. Biol. (Camb).
9(8), 678–686 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ib00051k
127. Khoshakhlagh, P., Sivakumar, A., Pace, L.A., Sazer, D.W., Moore, M.J.: Methods for
fabrication and evaluation of a 3D microengineered model of myelinated peripheral nerve.
J. Neural Eng. 15(6), 064001 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aae129
128. Sharma, A.D., McCoy, L., Jacobs, E., Willey, H., Behn, J.Q., Nguyen, H., Bolon, B., Curley,
J.L., Moore, M.J.: Engineering a 3D functional human peripheral nerve in vitro using the

76
V. M Pham et al.
nerve-on-a-Chip platform. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 8921 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-
45407-5
129. Pasca, S.P.: The rise of three-dimensional human brain cultures. Nature. 553(7689), 437–445
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25032
130. Sato, T., Vries, R.G., Snippert, H.J., van de Wetering, M., Barker, N., Stange, D.E., van Es,
J.H., Abo, A., Kujala, P., Peters, P.J., Clevers, H.: Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus
structures in vitro without a mesenchymal niche. Nature. 459(7244), 262–265 (2009). https:/
/doi.org/10.1038/nature07935
131. Yin, X., Mead, B.E., Safaee, H., Langer, R., Karp, J.M., Levy, O.: Engineering stem cell
organoids. Cell Stem Cell. 18(1), 25–38 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.12.005
132. Hartlaub, A.M., McElroy, C.A., Maitre, N.L., Hester, M.E.: Modeling human brain circuitry
using pluripotent stem cell platforms. Front. Pediatr. 7, 57 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fped.2019.00057
133. Birey, F., Andersen, J., Makinson, C.D., Islam, S., Wei, W., Huber, N., Fan, H.C., Metzler,
K.R.C., Panagiotakos, G., Thom, N., O’Rourke, N.A., Steinmetz, L.M., Bernstein, J.A.,
Hallmayer, J., Huguenard, J.R., Pasca, S.P.: Assembly of functionally integrated human
forebrain spheroids. Nature. 545(7652), 54–59 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22330
134. Sloan, S.A., Darmanis, S., Huber, N., Khan, T.A., Birey, F., Caneda, C., Reimer, R., Quake,
S.R., Barres, B.A., Pasca, S.P.: Human astrocyte maturation captured in 3D cerebral cortical
spheroids derived from pluripotent stem cells. Neuron. 95(4), 779–790.e776 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.035
135. Lancaster, M.A., Renner, M., Martin, C.A., Wenzel, D., Bicknell, L.S., Hurles, M.E.,
Homfray, T., Penninger, J.M., Jackson, A.P., Knoblich, J.A.: Cerebral organoids model human
brain development and microcephaly. Nature. 501(7467), 373–379 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature12517
136. Qian, X., Jacob, F., Song, M.M., Nguyen, H.N., Song, H., Ming, G.L.: Generation of human
brain region-speciﬁc organoids using a miniaturized spinning bioreactor. Nat. Protoc. 13(3),
565–580 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2017.152
137. Wang, Y., Wang, L., Guo, Y., Zhu, Y., Qin, J.: Engineering stem cell-derived 3D brain
organoids in a perfusable organ-on-a-chip system. RSC Adv. 2018(8), 9 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1039/C7RA11714K
138. Wang, Y., Wang, L., Zhu, Y., Qin, J.: Human brain organoid-on-a-chip to model prenatal
nicotine exposure. Lab Chip. 18(6), 851–860 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1039/c7lc01084b
139. Karzbrun, E., Kshirsagar, A., Cohen, S.R., Hanna, J.H., Reiner, O.: Human brain organoids
on a Chip reveal the physics of folding. Nat. Phys. 14(5), 515–522 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41567-018-0046-7
140. Poli, D., Magliaro, C., Ahluwalia, A.: Experimental and computational methods for the study
of cerebral organoids: a review. Front. Neurosci. 13, 162 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnins.2019.00162
141. Monzel, A.S., Smits, L.M., Hemmer, K., Hachi, S., Moreno, E.L., van Wuellen, T.,
Jarazo, J., Walter, J., Bruggemann, I., Boussaad, I., Berger, E., Fleming, R.M.T., Bolognin,
S., Schwamborn, J.C.: Derivation of human midbrain-speciﬁc organoids from Neuroep-
ithelial stem cells. Stem Cell Rep. 8(5), 1144–1154 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.stemcr.2017.03.010
142. Rajasethupathy, P., Ferenczi, E., Deisseroth, K.: Targeting neural circuits. Cell. 165(3), 524–
534 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.03.047
143. Klapper, S.D., Sauter, E.J., Swiersy, A., Hyman, M.A.E., Bamann, C., Bamberg, E.,
Busskamp, V.: On-demand optogenetic activation of human stem-cell-derived neurons. Sci.
Rep. 7(1), 14450 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-14827-6
144. Steinbeck, J.A., Choi, S.J., Mrejeru, A., Ganat, Y., Deisseroth, K., Sulzer, D., Mosharov, E.V.,
Studer, L.: Optogenetics enables functional analysis of human embryonic stem cell-derived
grafts in a Parkinson’s disease model. Nat. Biotechnol. 33(2), 204–209 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1038/nbt.3124

Microﬂuidic Culture Platforms in Neuroscience Research
77
145. Lee, S.Y., George, J.H., Nagel, D.A., Ye, H., Kueberuwa, G., Seymour, L.W.: Optogenetic
control of iPS cell-derived neurons in 2D and 3D culture systems using channelrhodopsin-2
expression driven by the synapsin-1 and calcium-calmodulin kinase II promoters. J. Tissue
Eng. Regen. Med. 13(3), 369–384 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/term.2786
146. Quadrato, G., Nguyen, T., Macosko, E.Z., Sherwood, J.L., Min Yang, S., Berger, D.R., Maria,
N., Scholvin, J., Goldman, M., Kinney, J.P., Boyden, E.S., Lichtman, J.W., Williams, Z.M.,
McCarroll, S.A., Arlotta, P.: Cell diversity and network dynamics in photosensitive human
brain organoids. Nature. 545(7652), 48–53 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22047
147. Park, J.W., Vahidi, B., Taylor, A.M., Rhee, S.W., Jeon, N.L.: Microﬂuidic culture platform
for neuroscience research. Nat. Protoc. 1(4), 2128–2136 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2006.316
148. Karimi, M., Bahrami, S., Mirshekari, H., Basri, S.M., Nik, A.B., Aref, A.R., Akbari, M.,
Hamblin, M.R.: Microﬂuidic systems for stem cell-based neural tissue engineering. Lab Chip.
16(14), 2551–2571 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00489j
149. Yi, Y., Park, J., Lim, J., Lee, C.J., Lee, S.H.: Central nervous system and its disease
models on a Chip. Trends Biotechnol. 33(12), 762–776 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tibtech.2015.09.007
150. Bhatia, S.N., Ingber, D.E.: Microﬂuidic organs-on-chips. Nat. Biotechnol. 32(8), 760–772
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2989
151. Marton, R.M., Miura, Y., Sloan, S.A., Li, Q., Revah, O., Levy, R.J., Huguenard, J.R., Pasca,
S.P.: Differentiation and maturation of oligodendrocytes in human three-dimensional neural
cultures. Nat. Neurosci. 22(3), 484–491 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0316-9
152. Shiri, Z., Simorgh, S., Naderi, S., Baharvand, H.: Optogenetics in the era of cerebral
organoids. Trends Biotechnol. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2019.05.009

