C
Casimir Effect
Peter W. Milonni and Umar Mohideen
The Casimir effect is a force associated with the  zero-point energy of a ﬁeld.
The effect originally considered by Hendrik B. G. Casimir (1909–2000) is the
attraction between two uncharged, perfectly conducting plates (Fig. 1). According
to quantum theory, there is energy in the electromagnetic ﬁeld even at the absolute
zero of temperature. For a ﬁeld of frequency ν, this energy is 1
2hν, identical to
the zero-point energy of a harmonic oscillator having the same frequency. The
total zero-point energy is then 1
2h times the sum over all the ﬁeld frequencies,
these being determined by Maxwell’s equations and the boundary conditions. In
the example of Fig. 1, Maxwell’s equations allow ﬁeld modes of arbitrarily large
frequency both between the plates and outside them, and therefore the zero-point
ﬁeld energy is inﬁnite when the plates are separated by a ﬁnite distance d as well as
when they are inﬁnitely far apart. However, the difference in zero-point energy for
the two cases is ﬁnite, and its dependence on the plate separation d implies a force
F = −πhc/480d4 per unit area.
The force between conducting plates is the most widely cited Casimir effect, but
such effects can be derived – usually with considerable difﬁculty – for more com-
plicated geometries as well as for dielectric media, and more generally they appear
whenever topological constraints are imposed on quantum ﬁelds. Because of their
close association with zero-point energy in empty space, Casimir effects are often
cited as evidence of the nontrivial nature of the vacuum in quantum ﬁeld theory.
Casimir effects are generally rather weak. However, due to its inverse fourth-
order distance dependence it is a dominant effect at the nanometer scale and impacts
experimental searches for extra dimensions, new forces outside the standard model
and the design of micromachines. The ﬁrst experimental searches for the Casimir
effect were constrained by the available technology and understanding of system-
atic errors. Sparnaay, and later Overbeek and von Blokland, qualitatively showed
the attractive Casimir force using a spring balance technique but they were lim-
ited due to large experimental errors. Experimental progress accelerated in 1997
with Lamoreaux’s demonstration of the Casimir effect using the torsion pendulum.
Increasing precision has been demonstrated with techniques using the Atomic Force
Microscope and microelectromechanicaloscillators. Presently precision of the order
of a percent has been reported, restricted by both theoretical and experimental un-
certainties. Experiments with simple periodic non-planar surfaces have also been
reported. The extraordinary theoretical and experimental activity of the last few
years should lead to measurements of increased precision and demonstrations of
some of the fascinating nontrivial geometry dependences of the Casimir force.
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
87
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

88
Casimir Effect
Fig. 1 Two parallel, perfectly
conducting plates experience
an attractive Casimir force
d
Primary Literature
1. Casimir, H. B. G.: On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates. Proc. K. Ned.
Akad. Wet. 51, 793 (1948)
Secondary Literature
2. Sparnaay, M. J.: Measurement of attractive forces between ﬂat plates. Physica 24, 751 (1958)
3. Van Blokland, P. H. G. M., J. T. G. Overbeek: Van der Waals forces between objects covered
with a chromium layer. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 74, 2637 (1978)
4. Milonni, P. W.: The Quantum Vacuum: An Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics. San
Diego: Academic (1994)
5. Mostepanenko, V. M., N. N. Trunov: The Casimir Effect and its Applications. Oxford:
Clarendon Press (1997)
6. Lamoreaux, S. K.: Demonstration of the Casimir force in the 0.6 to 6 mm range. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78, 5 (1997)
7. Bordag, M., U. Mohideen, V. M. Mostepanenko: New developments in the Casimir effect. Phys.
Rep. 353, 1 (2001)
8. Milton, K. A.: The Casimir Effect. Physical Manifestations of Zero-Point Energy. Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc (2001)
9. Chan, H. B., V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman, D. J. Bishop, F. Capasso: Quantum mechanical
actuation of microelectromechanical systems by the Casimir force. Science 291, 1941 (2001)
10. Chen, F., U. Mohideen, G. L. Klimchitskaya, V. M. Mostepanenko: Demonstration of the lat-
eral Casimir force. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 101801–1 (2002)
11. Lamoreaux, S. K.: The Casimir force: background, experiments, applications. Rep. Prog. Phys.
68, 201 (2005)

