640
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
10. N. Huggett, R. Weingard: The renormalization group and effective ﬁeld theories. Synthese 102,
171–194 (1995)
11. G ’t Hooft: Renormalization of gauge theories, in: The Rise of the Standard Model. Particle
Physics in the 1960s and 1970s, ed. by L. Hoddeson, L. Brown, M. Riordan and M. Dresden
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997, 179–198)
12. D. Anselmi: A new perspective on the philosophical implications of quantum ﬁeld theory.
Synthese 135, 299–328 (2003)
13. D. J. Gross: The discovery of asymptotic freedom and the emergence of QCD. Proceedings of
the National Academy of the USA 102, 9099–9108 (2005)
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
J-P. Antoine, R. Bishop, A. Bohm, and S. Wickramasekara
Introduction
A rigged Hilbert space (RHS) is the mathematical space underlying  Dirac no-
tation of quantum mechanics. There are two versions of RHS’s used in quantum
theory, the Schwartz space version and the Hardy space version. The Schwartz space
version gives mathematical meaning to bras, kets and the Dirac basis vector expan-
sion, as well as describes the quantum mechanical  observables by an algebra of
everywhere deﬁned (continuous) operators. The Hardy space version provides the
mathematics that uniﬁes quantum scattering, resonance and decay phenomena in
an exact theory. It gives meaning to Lippmann–Schwinger kets and Gamow vec-
tors, and results in an exact lifetime-width relation τ = ℏ/, which in the Hilbert
space theory was only justiﬁed as a Weisskopf–Wigner approximation. This theory
of resonances leads to a semigroup time evolution, thus overcoming the problems
with causality and exponential catastrophe. The relativistic version of Hardy space
theory leads to semigroup representations of Poincar´e transformations into the for-
ward lightcone. These representations allow, for the ﬁrst time, the mass and width
a relativistic resonance, such as the Z◦-boson, to be unambiguously deﬁned from
fundamental principles.
Prehistory: From Matrices and Differential Operators
to Algebras of Observables and Dirac Kets
In their early work, Born and his school (Heisenberg [1], Jordan [2], Wiener [3] and
others), developed an approach to quantum mechanics using matrices for physical
observables, commonly called  matrix mechanics. Alternatively, Schr¨odinger [4]

Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
641
R
developed a wave equation for quantum mechanics using differential operators.
Dirac [5,6] realized that the algebraic relations for the “dynamical variables” were
the important features that determined the properties of the operators. This observa-
tion suggested starting with an algebra of observables represented by abstract linear
operators and then looking for a linear space in which they could act.
For certain algebras of observables, this linear space would be a ﬁnite dimen-
sional scalar product space, e.g., the (2j + 1)-dimensional space Rj for angular
momentum states. Linear operators corresponding to observables were represented
by Hermitian matrices on this scalar product space, e.g., the (2j +1)×(2j +1) an-
gular momentum matrices on Rj. Hilbert had generalized ﬁnite dimensional scalar
product spaces to inﬁnite dimensions so that the vectors φ would be represented as
linear combinations of basis vectors |n)
φ =
∞

n=1
|n)(n|φ),
(1a)
with coordinates (n|φ) that are square summable sequences:
(φ, φ) =
∞

n=1
|(n|φ)|2 < ∞.
(1b)
In this way, an inﬁnite dimensional complex vector space  with a scalar product
(ψ, φ) was introduced. Therewith, the convergence of inﬁnite sums and continuity
of linear operators in  became as important questions as the algebraic relations
between observables. The observables such as energy, momentum, position and an-
gular momentum, which were deﬁned by their algebraic (commutation) relations,
have as their mathematical image linear operators H (energy), P (momentum),
Q (position) and J (angular momentum) on this vector space . The elements
φ of  are interpreted as representing physical states, and the matrix elements
squared |(n|φ)|2 = (φ|n)(n|φ) as quantum mechanical probabilities. For instance,
if |n) = |En) is an eigenvector of the observable H with eigenvalue En, i.e.,
H|En) = En|En), then |(En|φ)|2 is the probability of obtaining the value En in
a measurement of energy H in the state φ. Once inﬁnite dimensional vector spaces
were introduced, it became evident that great care must be exercised when dealing
with linear operators. For instance, whether for a given φ ∈, the vectors such as
P φ and Qφ also fulﬁll the deﬁning condition (1b) is a subtle question that required
serious analysis.
Quantum mechanics has not only discrete eigenvalues, like the En in the compo-
nents (En|φ) of the vectors φ, but also continuous values E, 0 ⩽E < ∞, leading to
a continuum of components φ(E) = (E|φ), the energy wave functions. As another
example, the solution of the Schr¨odinger differential equation ψ(x) is a function of
continuous position x ∈R3 and its Fourier transform ˜ψ(p) is a function of momen-
tum p ∈R3.
To include continuous energies and other continuous observable values, it is nec-
essary to generalize (1a) and (1b) to continuous superpositions:

642
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
φ =

dE|E)(E|φ),
(ψ, φ) =

dE (ψ|E)(E|φ),
(2a)
In analogy to (1b), one is tempted to require that the (E|φ) are square integrable
functions
(φ, φ) =
 ∞
0
dE(φ|E)(E|φ) =
 ∞
0
dE|φ(E)|2 < ∞,
(2b)
and similarly for the position and momentum wavefunctions
(ψ, ψ) =

dxψ∗(x)ψ(x) < ∞,
( ˜ψ, ˜ψ) =

dp ˜ψ∗(p) ˜ψ(p) < ∞.
(2c)
The interpretation of |(En|φ)|2 as probability motivates the interpretation of the
quantity |(E|φ)|2 as probability density, for which, as for other densities in physics,
one expects to use a smooth function. This is the theory that Hilbert, von Neumann
and Nordheim [7] were working on in the 1926–1927 period.
If the integrands in (2) representing probability densities are smooth (or even
piecewise continunous), then the integrals (2) are the usual Riemann integrals. How-
ever, the space of Riemann square integrable functions is not topologically complete
(with respect to the norm topology deﬁned by (2b)) [8], a property that leads to
serious mathematical difﬁculties. In order to obtain a complete space (i.e., every
Cauchy sequence of vectors has a limit element in the space), von Neumann chose
for integrals of (2) Lebesgue integrals. The resulting topologically complete, in-
ﬁnite dimensional vector space is called a (realization of the) Hilbert space H,
which contains the algebraic inner product space as a (dense) subspace,  ⊂H.
This Hilbert space theory was an enormous mathematical accomplishment. It led
to a demonstration of the equivalence between the mathematical frameworks of
 matrix mechanics and  wave mechanics (in the sense that each is a concrete real-
ization of an abstract Hilbert space) and to the ﬁrst mathematical theory of quantum
physics [9].
However, there are some conceptual and computational difﬁculties with the
Hilbert space theory, of which the following two are particularly signiﬁcant. First,
with Lebesgue integrable functions, the concept of a well deﬁned value of the func-
tion φ(E) = (E|φ) at a given E does not have a meaning as it does for continuous
functions. This in turn means that the symbol |E) cannot be given a meaning at
each value of E for 0 ⩽E < ∞. Thus, in the position representation, although
Schr¨odinger had assumed that  wave function must be continuous on both phys-
ical and metaphysical grounds, the Hilbert space theory implicitly rejected these
assumptions and associated wave mechanics with the much larger space of func-
tions, which includes such pathological functions as those that are discontinuous
everywhere. Second, not all quantum mechanical observables (e.g., not both P and
Q) could be represented by continuous operators deﬁned everywhere in H.
Undisturbed by von Neumann’s arguments, Dirac proposed a formalism for
quantum physics with great computational capacity and broad predictive power. The

Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
643
R
essential features of Dirac’s formalism, often referred to as the bra-ket formalism,
are the following:
1. Physical observables are represented by linear operators in a scalar product space
 and these operators form an algebra. Therefore, it makes sense to arbitrarily
add and multiply operators to form new operators.
2. For a given quantum physical system, there exist complete systems of commuting
observables (CSCO) in the algebra of observables. The system of eigenvectors
for a chosen CSCO furnishes a basis for the space , i.e., every vector φ ∈
can be expanded with respect to the eigenvectors of the CSCO.
For instance, let H, J 2 and J3 be such a CSCO for a spherically symmetric
Hamiltonian H (where the Ji are the angular momentum operators). This CSCO
has common eigenvectors |Ejj3⟩:
H|Ejj3⟩= E|Ejj3⟩,
(3a)
J 2|Ejj3⟩= j(j + 1)|Ejj3⟩,
J3|Ejj3⟩= j3|Ejj3⟩.
(3b)
The energy eigenvalues may be discrete En so that every φ ∈ can be
expanded as
φ =

Enjj3
|Enjj3)(Enjj3|φ),
(4a)
or continuous 0 ⩽E ⩽∞so that
φ =

jj3
 ∞
0
dE|Ejj3⟩⟨Ejj3|φ⟩,
(4b)
or both so that
φ =

Enjj3
|Enjj3)(Enjj3|φ) +

jj3
 ∞
0
dE|Ejj3⟩⟨Ejj3|φ⟩.
(4c)
For discrete En, the |Enjj3) are the usual eigenvectors fulﬁlling the orthogonality
conditions
(En′j′j′
3|Enjj3) ≡

|En′j′j′
3), |Enjj3)

= δn′nδj′jδj′
3j3,
(5)
where δn′n, δj′j and δj′
3j3 are the Kronecker deltas. For continuous E, the |Ejj3⟩are
the Dirac kets. They are not in the space  or the Hilbert space H ⊃. They are
new eigenvectors which, instead of (5), fulﬁll the “Dirac orthogonality condition”
⟨E′j′j′
3|Ejj3⟩= δ(E′ −E)δj′jδj′
3j3,
(6)
where δ(E′ −E) is deﬁned as the mathematical object that fulﬁlls the identity

dE′δ(E′ −E)⟨E′jj3|φ⟩= ⟨Ejj3|φ⟩
(7)

644
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
for all “well-behaved energy wave functions” ⟨Ejj3|φ⟩= φjj3(E) ≡φ(E). The
comparison of (7) with the equation

n′
δn′n(En′jj3|φ) = (Enjj3|φ)
(8)
fulﬁlled by δn′n shows that δ(E′ −E), often called the Dirac delta function, is the
analogue of Kronnecker’s δn′n for continuous variables.
The property (7) for δ(E′ −E) cannot be fulﬁlled by any proper function of E′.
Instead, it was mathematically deﬁned by (7) for a class of functions {φ(E)} and
called a distribution by Schwartz [10]. Subsequently, this led to a new area of math-
ematics called distribution theory and ultimately to RHS’s.
From Dirac Kets to Gamow Vectors: Schwartz Space
vs. Hardy Space Triplets
Dirac’s quasi-mathematical formalism used many postulated or tacitly assumed
properties that are not deﬁnable for elements of the Hilbert space. For instance, the
eigenkets (3a) with continuous eigenvalues, introduced by Dirac in [5,6] and further
developed in his books [11] (the ﬁrst and third editions in 1930 and 1947, respec-
tively), were not mathematically well deﬁned. However, textbooks have continued
to use both Dirac delta functions and kets ever since Dirac’s bra-ket formalism.
Though it lacked a rigorous mathematical foundation, this formalism has been used
by physicists because of its many postulated features and its calculational conve-
nience: the observables are treated like an algebra of linear operators on the entire
space of physical states  and, hence, could be handled like continuous operators;
every Hermitian observable has a complete set of eigenkets (4); the wave functions
are well-behaved smooth functions; each state vector φ corresponds to one wave
function φ(E) = ⟨E|φ⟩rather than to a whole equivalence class of functions which
may differ from one another on a set of Lebesgue measure zero (for instance, on all
rational numbers). These features constitute an enormous simpliﬁcation over von
Neumann’s Hilbert space theory.
There is a wide range of choice for the set of wavefunctions {φ(E)} admissible
within the Dirac formalism. This leaves the Dirac formalism largely undeﬁned but
also ﬂexible. The standard choice, if one is at all concerned with these mathemat-
ical subtleties, is the space of inﬁnitely differentiable functions that, along with all
their derivatives, vanish at inﬁnity faster than any inverse polynomial. This func-
tion space, now called the Schwartz space S, also plays an important role in the
distribution theory of Schwartz [10]. With the development of distribution theory,
the delta symbol in (6), which was completely outside of any rigorous mathematical
framework for almost two decades after its introduction, could be given a mathemat-
ical meaning as a continuous antililear functional on the Schwartz function space S.

Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
645
R
The theory of distributions of Schwartz was an important inspiration to Gel’fand
and his collaborators for developing a new mathematical structure during 1955–
1959 [12], which they called a rigged Hilbert space (RHS). Later, along with
Maurin [13], they proved the Dirac basis vector expansion (4) as the nuclear spectral
theorem.
A rigged Hilbert space is a triplet of spaces
 ⊂H ⊂×,
(9)
where H is a Hilbert space,  is a dense subspace of H, endowed with a locally
convex topology τ that is stronger than the norm topology inherited from H (i.e.,
a stronger notion of convergence), and × is the space of continuous antilinear
functionals on . Each space in (9) is dense in the next one, and all embeddings are
linear and continuous.
The original motivation for introducing RHS’s in quantum mechanics was to
provide a rigorous formulation of Dirac formalism. This was done in the 1960s,
independently by Antoine [14–16], Bohm [17,18], Roberts [19,20], and jointly by
Kristensen, Meljbo and Poulsen [21], with many later contributions, e.g., [22–28].
The essential result of these papers was to show that, with a suitably constructed
rigged Hilbert space, physical states can be represented by elements of the space 
and observables by an algebra of continuous linear operators in . The construction
then allows basis vectors |E⟩of (2) and (6), which are undeﬁned in the Hilbert
space theory for continuous E, to be well deﬁned as elements of the dual space ×.
A detailed mathematical analysis of these developments may be found in the next
entry [29].
As mentioned above, the standard choice for allowed wavefunctions ⟨E|φ⟩are
Schwartz functions, i.e., an RHS where the space  is realized by the Schwartz
function space S. The Schwartz RHS provides the mathematical foundation of the
quantum theory that describes the structure and spectra of stationary states, and
the time symmetric evolution of states which is given by a one parameter group
U(t). With a suitable generalization of this construction, it is possible to obtain
differentiable representations of all ﬁnite dimensional compact and non-compactLie
groups [14–20,30–33]. Particularly relevant among these are the symmetry groups
of spacetime, both non-relativistic and relativistic.
However, the Schwartz RHS is not sufﬁcient for a quantum theory of scattering
and decay where one analytically continues the S-matrix into the complex en-
ergy plane [34–36]. In the empirical description of resonance phenomena, one uses
the energy (or, in the relativistic case, the invariant mass) values of the complex
plane and works with Gamow vectors [37] which are associated with the com-
plex eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. One also uses Lippmann–Schwinger kets with
±iϵ energy in the denominator [38–40]. The Schwartz RHS accommodates neither
Lippmann–Schwingerkets nor exponentially decaying Gamow kets and thus cannot
provide a relation between the lifetime of decay τ and the width  (or, the complex
pole position) of a resonance.

646
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
To obtain a mathematical theory that uniﬁes quantum resonance and decay
phenomena, one needs to take a step beyond the conﬁnes of Dirac’s formalism
or the Schwartz RHS theory. What is remarkable is that this step beyond the
Schwartz space theory can be taken within the general mathematical framework of
RHS’s. Speciﬁcally, this theory requires a careful mathematical distinction between
the set of prepared in-states and the set of observed out-states (more precisely,
out-observables). In the discussions on the foundations of quantum theory, a distinc-
tion is made between the notions of states φ, which are prepared by a preparation
apparatus, and observables & = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, which are registered by a detector. In
terms of these states and observables, the theory predicts the Born probabilities
|(φ, &(t)φ)|2 for an observable & in a state φ. These probabilities are to be com-
pared with the normalized detector counts of events N(t)
N . In scattering theory, one
makes a distinction between in-states φ+ and out-states ψ−for which one uses
separate basis vector expansions:
φ+ =
 ∞
0
dE |E+⟩⟨+E|φ+⟩
and
ψ−=
 ∞
0
dE |E−⟩⟨−E|ψ−⟩,
(10)
where |E±⟩= |E ± iϵ⟩are considered to be two different Lippmann–Schwinger
kets fulﬁlling the two different Lippmann–Schwinger equations.
However, in the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, the set of state
vectors {φ} is identiﬁed with the set of observable vectors {ψ}, usually by associ-
ating both with the same Hilbert space H. Similarly in scattering theory, the kets
|E±⟩of expansions (10) are thought of as two sets of basis vectors for the same
vector space. In contrast, in the RHS’s theory of scattering and decay phenomena,
one generalizes the Schwartz RHS theory of Dirac’s formalism to a theory with two
RHS’s, one for the set of prepared in-states {φ+},
{φ+} = −⊂H ⊂×
−∋|E+⟩
(11+)
and the other for the set of detected out-observable vectors {ψ−},
{ψ−} = + ⊂H ⊂×
+ ∋|E−⟩
(11−)
where H is the same Hilbert space. One now distinguishes mathematically between
states {φ+} = −and observables {ψ−} = + and relates them to Lippmann–
Schwinger kets |E+⟩∈×
−and |E−⟩∈×
+, respectively. Thus, the RHS theory
elevates the physical content of the notions of state and observable vectors into a
mathematical principle.
From this pair of RHS’s for state and observable vectors, a mathematically
consistent theory of resonance scattering and decay phenomena can be obtained
by letting the spaces −and + to be deﬁned in their energy representation by
Hardy spaces on the lower and upper complex semiplanes, respectively [41–44]. In
particular, the energy wavefunctions ⟨+E|φ+⟩= φ+(E) and ⟨−E|ψ−⟩= ψ−(E)
in (10) are smooth, rapidly decreasing Hardy functions on the lower and upper com-

Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
647
R
plex semiplanes. The basis kets |E±⟩can now be well-deﬁned as elements of the
dual spaces ×
∓, and therewith Dirac-type basis vector expansions (10) of φ+ and
ψ−can be rigorously obtained in terms of |E±⟩by way of the nuclear spectral
theorem. The theory based on RHS’s (11) also contains exponentially decaying
Gamow vectors and Breit–Wigner resonance amplitudes as well-deﬁned mathe-
matical concepts [45]. This Hardy space theory has been subsequently extended
to relativistic resonances and decaying states [46]. One of the important outcomes
of the relativistic extension is the unique and unambiguous deﬁnition it provides for
the mass and width of a relativistic resonance, a much debated problem since the
early 1990s.
One particularly important aspect in which the Hardy-type RHS’s differ from
the Schwartz-type RHS’s entails the class of allowed representations of symmetry
groups, including non-compact spacetime symmetry groups. In the Schwartz-type
construction, the unitary representations of Lie groups in the Hilbert space H can be
restricted to  and extended to × to obtain differentiable representations in these
spaces [33]. Thus, quantum mechanical symmetry transformations represented by
groups can be well accommodated in the Schwartz-type RHS’s, and many of the el-
ements of the algebra of observables arise as the derivatives of these representations
in  and ×. In contrast, Hardy-type RHS’s do not furnish representations of the
spacetime symmetry groups. In particular, in the non-relativistic version, the time
evolution in ± is given by one parameter semigroups U±(t) with t ⩾0. In the rel-
ativistic version, the spacetime evolution in ± is given by semigroups U±(I, a),
where a are spacetime four vectors with a0 ⩾0 and a2 ⩾0, i.e., by representations
of the Poincar´e semigroup into the forward lightcone [46, 47]. These semigroup
representations encode the fundamental causal structure of physics. The search for
a consistent mathematical theory that uniﬁes resonance and decay phenomena un-
wittingly leads to quantum mechanical causality.
Summary and Conclusion
Originally, the RHS was an offspring of the Dirac formalism of quantum me-
chanics. After the pioneers of quantum physics had arrived at an algebra of
observables [1–5], von Neumann was the ﬁrst to give a rigorous mathematical
meaning to quantum theoretical notions, such as states and observables [9], using
the Hilbert space of Lebesgue square integrable functions and self-adjoint opera-
tors in it [7, 9]. This was a monumental achievement of the human intellect, but it
resulted in a rather complicated mathematical structure mainly because it involved
physically unintuitive Lebesgue integration and unbounded operators. The vast
majority of practicing physicists remained unaware of these mathematical subtleties
and complications. In their practical calculations, physicists treated the Hilbert
space theory of quantum physics like a theory of continuous (bounded) operators
in a linear scalar product space and carried out all integrals as Riemann integrals.
Although most physicists were not using the full mathematical formalism of the

648
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
Hilbert space, some properties that could not be derived without the precise math-
ematics of the Hilbert space did enter the standard body of knowledge. One such
example is the unitary (hence reversible) time evolution that could be derived as the
solution to the dynamical Schr¨odinger equation only under the precise Hilbert space
structure. Nevertheless, physicists took this to be universally true and incorporated
it into their practical calculations.
Irrespective of von Neumann’s Hilbert space theory, Dirac [5, 11] proposed and
developed (in two stages, in the ﬁrst edition of [11] in 1930 and the third edition
in 1947) his bra-ket formalism. In this formalism, every physical observable is rep-
resented by an everywhere deﬁned “Hermitian” operator that has a complete set
of eigenvectors with discrete or continuous eigenvalues, and every state vector is
a (discrete and/or continuous) superposition of these eigenvectors (4). For contin-
uous eigenvalues, in analogy to the Kronecker-δ, Dirac introduced the δ symbol
that bears his name today. Ever since its introduction, most physicists have used the
Dirac formalism as their theory of quantum mechanics.
Schwartz (1950) gave a proper mathematical content to the Dirac-δ and other
similiar “generalized functions” with his theory of distributions [10]. Later,
Grothendieck (1966) introduced a speciﬁc topological vector space called nu-
clear vector space [48]. On this basis, Gel’fand and his school [12] and Maurin [13]
developed the Rigged Hilbert Space. The main mathematical purpose of these
Schwartz-type RHS’s (9) was to provide a theory of unitary representations of
non-compact Lie groups. The generator of each non-compact subgroup of such
a representation has continuous eigenvalues of the type envisioned by Dirac, and
RHS’s provide the tools to handle the eigenvalue problem for these generators. In
particular, with RHS’s, Dirac kets could be deﬁned as elements of ×, i.e., con-
tinuous antilinear functionals on , and Dirac’s basis vector expansion (2) and (4)
could be proved as the nuclear spectral theorem. Within the Schwartz-type RHS’s
(9), the Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg dynamical equations can be solved as vector
valued differential equations in  (or in ×). The resulting time evolution of states
and observables is given by a continuous one parameter group of operators, just as
in the Hilbert space.
Going from the one parameter time evolution group to more general non-compact
Lie groups, the topology (the meaning of convergence)of the space  is deﬁned by a
countable family of scalar products (φ, ψ)n = (φ, nψ), where  is the Laplacian
of the group, also known as the Nelson operator [49], and (φ, ψ)n=0 = (φ, ψ)
is the Hilbert space inner product [44]. This topology is stronger than the Hilbert
space topology, and with respect to it, the generators of the group, and therefore the
enveloping algebra, are represented by continuous operators in . By duality, there
is also a representation of the enveloping algebra as well as the group by continuous
operators in the space ×, where the topology is the weak-* topology. Eigenkets of
the generators of non-compact subgroups of these representations exist as elements
of the space ×, e.g., the eigenkets |x⟩of position operators Q, or |p⟩of the
momentum operators P with eigenvalues x ∈R3 and p ∈R3, respectively. In
contrast, it is not possible to obtain a representation of the enveloping algebra of a
non-compact group by continuous operators in a Hilbert space.

Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
649
R
Structure and spectra of microphysical systems is one aspect of quantum theory
for which the Schwartz-type RHS’s provide a complete solution. The other aspect
of quantum theory is scattering, resonance and decay phenomena along with the
dynamics governing their evolution. In heuristic treatments of scattering, the mathe-
matical subtleties of the Hilbert space theory were ignored. Instead, solutions of the
Schr¨odinger equation with purely outgoing boundary conditions were advocated
[50,51]. Mathematically undeﬁned kets |E±⟩with inﬁnitesimal imaginary part ±iϵ
of energy were used to obtain, respectively, the incoming and outgoing solutions
of Lippmann–Schwinger equations [38–40]. Resonance and decaying states were
intuitively associated with an asymmetric “irreversible” time evolution [52–54].
While these heuristic methods were adequate for some physical applications,
when they were compared with the precise mathematical consequences of the
Hilbert space, one was necessarily led to contradictions. For instance, heuristic
Gamow vectors [37] and rigorous unitary time evolution are mutually contradic-
tory, as exempliﬁed by the exponential catastrophe [55]. Furthermore, the deviations
from the exponential decay law [56, 57], another mathematical consequence of the
structure of the Hilbert space, leads to inconsistencies with Einstein causality [58].
Thus it was clear that for a description of resonance and decay phenomena, it
was necessary to go beyond the time symmetric mathematical theory based on the
Hilbert space, or on the Schwartz-type RHS theory. But many of the empirical no-
tions, like Gamow states and Lippmann–Schwinger kets, have been very successful
for the description of scattering and decay. Therefore, what was needed was a math-
ematical structure that incorporated and legitimized these useful heuristic notions
of resonance scattering and decay. Hardy-type RHS’s precisely provide this math-
ematical framework in the same way as the Schwartz-type RHS’s had provided the
framework for Dirac’s formalism.
With the Hardy RHS’s (11±), it is possible to deﬁne mathematical entities
having the same useful properties as the heuristic Gamow vectors and Lippmann–
Schwinger kets. Because of shared characteristics, the new entities were called by
the same names. In the Hardy RHS’s, these new mathematically well deﬁned entities
provide a rigorous mathematical theory that uniﬁes resonance scattering and decay
phenomena and predicts the lifetime-width relation τ = ℏ
 as an exact identity, not
just as an approximation based on the Weisskopf–Wigner methods. In the relativis-
tic version, the theory provides a unique, unambiguous, gauge invariant deﬁnition
of mass and width of a resonance [46].
The new theory of Hardy-type RHS’s retains the useful heuristic features of pre-
vious descriptions of resonance scattering and decay phenomena and eliminates the
contradictory mathematical consequences based on the Hilbert space theory. Salient
among the latter is unitary evolution, which is now replaced by an asymmetric, semi-
group evolution. Though it emerges in the mathematical theory as a consequence of
the axioms suggested by the experimental and phenomenological properties of res-
onances and decaying states, the semigroup evolution can be looked at primarily as
a manifestation of the fundamental causal structure of the physical world [59–61].
See also  Time in quantum mechanics.

650
Rigged Hilbert Spaces in Quantum Physics
Literature
1. W. Heisenberg: Z. Phys. 33, 879 (1925)
2. M. Born, W. Heisenberg, P. Jordan: Z. Phys. 35, 557 (1926)
3. M. Born, N. Wiener: Z. Phys. 36, 174 (1926)
4. E. Schr¨odinger: Ann. Phys. 81, 109 (1926) and references
5. P. A. M. Dirac: Proc. R. Soc. 109, 642 (1926)
6. P. A. M. Dirac: Proc. R. Soc. 110, 561 (1926)
7. D. Hilbert, J. von Neumann, L. Nordheim: Math. Ann. 98, 1 (1927)
8. The word topology has two different meanings (Webster’s dictionary): (1.) The study of those
properties of geometric forms that remain invariant under certain transformations. (2.) The
study of limits in sets considered as collections of points, and related to it, the collection of
open sets making a topological space, i.e., a space in which a meaning of convergence of
inﬁnite sequences is deﬁned. Physicists usually associate the ﬁrst meaning with the word. In
this paper, we use the second meaning.
9. J. von Neumann: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Springer, Berlin, 1932),
Princeton University Press (1955)
10. L. Schwartz: Th´eorie des Distributions, I–II, (Hermann, Paris, 1957, 1959). New edition,
revised and augmented [First published in 1950–1951]
11. P. A. M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1930), 3rd
edn. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1947)
12. I. M. Gel’fand, N. Y. Vilenkin: Generalized Functions IV: Applications of Harmonic Analysis
(Academic Press, New York, 1964). [Translation of the 1961 Russian edition]
13. K. Maurin: General Eigenfunction Expansions and Unitary Representations of Topological
Groups. (Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers, Warsaw, 1968)
14. J-P. Antoine: Formalisme de Dirac et probl`emes de sym´etrie en M´ecanique Quantique, Th`ese
de doctorat, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain (1966)
15. J-P. Antoine: J. Math. Phys. 10, 53 (1969)
16. J-P. Antoine: J. Math. Phys. 10, 2276 (1969)
17. A. B¨ohm: Rigged Hilbert Spaces, Int. Centre for Phys. Bult. 9 (1964)
18. A. Bohm:
in Boulder Lectures in Theoretical Physics IX A: Mathematical Methods of
Theoretical Physics (Wiley, New York, 1967)
19. J. E. Roberts: J. Math. Phys. 7, 1097 (1966)
20. J. E. Roberts: Commun. Math. Phys. 3, 98 (1966)
21. P. Kristensen, L. Meljbo, E. Thue Poulsen: Commun. Math. Phys. 1, 175 (1965)
22. D. Babbitt: Rep. Math. Phys. 3, 37 (1972)
23. D. Fredricks: Rep. Math. Phys. 8, 277 (1975)
24. K. Napiorkowski: Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci. 22, 1215 (1974)
25. K. Napiorkowski: Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci. 23, 251 (1975)
26. S. J. L. van Eijndhoven, J. de Graaf: A Mathematical Introduction to Dirac’s Formalism (North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1986)
27. O. Melsheimer: J. Math. Phys. 15, 902 (1974)
28. O. Melsheimer: J. Math. Phys. 15, 917 (1974)
29. J-P. Antoine, A. Bohm, S. Wickramasekara: Rigged Hilbert Spaces for the Dirac formalism of
quantum mechanics, this volume.
30. A. Bohm: J. Math. Phys. 8, 1551 (1967), Appendix B.
31. B. Nagel: in Studies in Mathematical Physics (Proc. Istanbul 1970), ed. by A. O. Barut. (Reidel,
Dordrecht and Boston, 1970), pp. 135–54
32. G. Lindblad, B. Nagel: Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e 13, 27 (1970)
33. S. Wickramasekara, A. Bohm: J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35, 807 (2002)
34. See, for example, M. L. Goldberger, K. M. Watson: Collision Theory (Wiley, New York, 1964)
35. R. J. Eden, P. V. Landshoff, P. J. Olive, J. C. Polkinghorne: The Analytic S-Matrix, Cambridge
U.P., Cambridge, 1966
36. R. G. Newton: Scattering Theory of Waves Particles, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin, 1982)

Rigged Hilbert Spaces for the Dirac Formalism of Quantum Mechanics
651
R
37. G. Gamow: Z. Phys. 51, 204 (1928)
38. B. A. Lippmann, J. Schwinger: Phys. Rev. 79, 469 (1950)
39. M. Gell-Mann, H. L. Goldberger: Phys. Rev. 91, 398 (1953)
40. W. Brenig, R. Haag: Fortschr. Phys. 7, 183 (1959)
41. A. Bohm: Lett. Math. Phys. 3, 455 (1978)
42. A. Bohm: J. Math. Phys. 33, 2813 (1981)
43. M. Gadella: J. Math. Phys. 24, 1462 (1983)
44. A. Bohm, M. Gadella: Dirac Kets, Gamow Vectors and Gel’fand Triplets, Springer Lecture
Notes in Physics, vol. 348 (Springer, Berlin, 1989)
45. A. Bohm, N. L. Harshman: Rigged Hilbert spaces and time asymmetric quantum theory, this
volume.
46. A. Bohm, H. Kaldass, S. Wickramasekara: Fortschr. Phys. 51, 569 (2003); 51, 604 (2003)
47. L. S. Schulman: Ann. Phys. 59, 201 (1970)
48. A. Grothendieck: Memoirs Am. Math. Soc., Nr. 16, Providence, RI, 1966
49. E. Nelson: Ann. Math. 70, 572 (1959)
50. R. Peierls: Proc. R. Soc. Lond., Series A, 166, 277 (1938), In Proc. 1954 Glasgow Conf. on
Nuclear and Hadron Physics (Pergamon Press, New York, 1959)
51. E. Hernandez, A. Mondragon: Phys. Rev. C 29, 722 (1984)
52. E. Merzbacher: Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1970) Chap. 18
53. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1977) Vol. II,
p. 1345, pp. 1353–354
54. T. D. Lee: Particle Physics and Introduction to Field Theory (Harwood Academic, New York,
1981), Chap. 13. [The irreversible nature of quantum mechanical decay has been mentioned in
these and other textbooks and volumes of lecture notes.]
55. A. Bohm, M. Gadella, G. B. Mainland: Am. J. Phys. 57, 1103 (1989)
56. L. A. Khalﬁn: Sov. Phys. JETP 6 1063 (1958)
57. L. Fonda, G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini: Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 589 (1978)
58. E. Fermi: Rev. Mod. Phys. 4, 87 (1932); M. I. Shirokov: Yad. Fiz. 4, 1077 (1966);
G. C. Hegerfeldt: Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 596 (1994); A. Bohm, N. L. Harshman, H. Walther:
Phys. Rev. A. 66, 01207 (2002)
59. J. J. Halliwell, J. P´erez-Mercader, W. H. Zurek (eds.): Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry
(Cambridge University, London, 1994)
60. In particular, see M. Gell-Mann, J. B. Hartle: Time Symmetry and Asymmetry in Quantum
Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology, [58], pp. 311–45
61. A. Bohm, H.-D. Doebner, P. Kielanowski (eds.): Irreversibility and Causality: Semigroups and
Rigged Hilbert Spaces, LNP 504 (Springer, Berlin, 1998)
Rigged Hilbert Spaces for the Dirac Formalism
of Quantum Mechanics
J-P. Antoine, A. Bohm, and S. Wickramasekara
Introduction
As explained in the preceding entry [1], the original motivation for introducing
Rigged Hilbert Spaces (RHS) in quantum mechanics was to provide a rigorous for-
mulation of the  Dirac notation. This was done in the 1960s, independently by

