Structural 
Genomics
Yu Wai Chen Editor
General Applications
Methods in 
Molecular Biology   1091

 M E T H O D S I N M O L E C U L A R B I O LO G Y™
Series Editor
John M. Walker
School of Life Sciences
University of Hertfordshire
Hat ﬁ eld, Hertfordshire, AL10 9AB, UK 
 For further volumes:
  http://www.springer.com/series/7651  

      

 Structural Genomics 
 General Applications 
 Edited by 
 Yu Wai  Chen
Randall Division of Cell & Molecular Biophysics, King’s College London, London, UK 

 ISSN 1064-3745 
ISSN 1940-6029 (electronic)
ISBN 978-1-62703-690-0     ISBN 978-1-62703-691-7 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7 
 Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2013950895 
 © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC   2014 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is 
concerned, speciﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction 
on microﬁ lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, 
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this 
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁ cally for 
the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 
Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the 
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions 
for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution 
under the respective Copyright Law. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not 
imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁ c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and 
regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, neither 
the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be 
made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 Humana Press is a brand of Springer
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com) 
 Editor 
 Yu Wai  Chen  
 Randall Division of Cell 
& Molecular Biophysics 
 King’s College London 
 London ,  UK 

v
 More than a decade has lapsed since the ambitious Protein Structure Initiative (PSI) was 
launched by the U.S. National Institute of General Medical Sciences in 2000. With the 
initial enthusiasm curbed, the outcome of Structural Genomics (SG) can now be more 
proportionally assessed within an established context. To the researchers who are not 
directly involved in SG projects, they have been observing with sceptical eyes, pondering on 
the justiﬁ cation of these expensive endeavours. While the grand objective of populating the 
“protein structure universe” is yet far from completed, it is undeniable that alongside the 
course of pursuing this goal, the ﬁ eld of SG has produced many technological advances that 
transform and accelerate protein production, structural determination and analysis (refer to 
PSI-Nature StructuralBiology Knowledgebase Technology Portal;   http://technology.lbl.gov  ). 
In this “yet another” SG-themed book, I steered clear of collecting interim reports of SG 
centres, as these are regularly updated in the literature. While staying close to the spirit of 
SG, this volume uniquely emphasises on the beneﬁ ts to the wider structural research com-
munity. It is meant to strike a balance and ﬁ ll some gaps—the target reader is an “average” 
structural biologist in a small or medium-sized laboratory. 
 The topics are grouped under three parts: (I) the cloning and production of proteins 
for structural studies, (II) experimental methods and (III) computational methods and data 
analysis. Half of this book is devoted to the ﬁ rst part, as recombinant protein production 
remains a major bottleneck in many structural projects. For experimental methods, I inten-
tionally brought in a range of complementary technologies. As a result of high-throughput 
practices, structural data is generated at an ever-increasing rate. This calls for improved 
quality control and creative computational tools for data interpretation and visualisation—
these topics are grouped into the third part. Overall, the spectrum of topics reﬂ ects the 
trend towards tackling more ambitious challenges of studying macromolecular machineries 
and complexes. 
 In compiling this volume, I witnessed the generosity of the SG community to share 
experiences and methods. Some authors were keen to make their work more readily acces-
sible beyond this book. In the end, the outcome is most satisfactory: it represents a global 
effort with a shared vision. I would like to thank all the authors for their contributions. 
There are a few who were eager to contribute but were not able to; to those I express my 
gratitude all the same.  
 London ,  UK 
  Yu   Wai   Chen 
 Pref ace  

      

vii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
v
Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
xi
PART I CLONING, EXPRESSION AND PROTEIN PRODUCTION
 1 DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design 
and Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3
Yuanpeng Janet Huang, Thomas B. Acton, and Gaetano T. Montelione
 2 Stable Expression Clones and Auto-Induction 
for Protein Production in E. coli  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
17
F. William Studier
 3 High-Throughput Expression Screening and Purification 
of Recombinant Proteins in E. coli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
33
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli
 4 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human Proteins: 
Ligation-Independent Cloning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
55
Claire Strain-Damerell, Pravin Mahajan, Opher Gileadi, 
and Nicola A. Burgess-Brown
 5 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human Proteins: 
Protein Production in E. coli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
73
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown, Pravin Mahajan, Claire Strain-Damerell, 
Opher Gileadi, and Susanne Gräslund
 6 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human Proteins: 
Protein Production in Insect Cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
95
Pravin Mahajan, Claire Strain-Damerell, Opher Gileadi, 
and Nicola A. Burgess-Brown
 7 OmniBac: Universal Multigene Transfer Plasmids 
for Baculovirus Expression Vector Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  123
Deepak B. Thimiri Govinda Raj, Lakshmi S. Vijayachandran, 
and Imre Berger
 8 Multiprotein Complex Production in Insect Cells by Using Polyproteins. . . . .  131
Yan Nie, Itxaso Bellon-Echeverria, Simon Trowitzsch, 
Christoph Bieniossek, and Imre Berger
 9 Expression Screening in Mammalian Suspension Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
Susan D. Chapple and Michael R. Dyson
10 Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes for Structural Biology. . . . . . . . . .  151
Takaho Terada, Takeshi Murata, Mikako Shirouzu, 
and Shigeyuki Yokoyama
 Contents

viii
11 Cell-Free Protein Synthesis for Functional and Structural Studies  . . . . . . . . . .  161
Shin-ichi Makino, Emily T. Beebe, John L. Markley, and Brian G. Fox
12 Insoluble Protein Purification with Sarkosyl: Facts and Precautions  . . . . . . . . .  179
Ben Chisnall, Courtney Johnson, Yavuz Kulaberoglu, 
and Yu Wai Chen
PART II EXPERIMENTAL STRUCTURE DETERMINATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
13 Estimation of Crystallization Likelihood Through 
a Fluorimetric Thermal Stability Assay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
Vincent Mariaule, Florine Dupeux, and José A. Márquez
14 CrystalDirect™: A Novel Approach for Automated Crystal Harvesting 
Based on Photoablation of Thin Films. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
José A. Márquez and Florent Cipriani
15 Methods to Refine Macromolecular Structures 
in Cases of Severe Diffraction Anisotropy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205
Michael R. Sawaya
16 Applications of NMR-Based PRE and EPR-Based 
DEER Spectroscopy to Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization 
and Structure Determination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  215
Yunhuang Yang, Theresa A. Ramelot, Shuisong Ni, 
Robert M. McCarrick, and Michael A. Kennedy
17 A Cost-Effective Protocol for the Parallel Production of Libraries 
of 13CH3-Specifically Labeled Mutants for NMR Studies 
of High Molecular Weight Proteins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  229
Elodie Crublet, Rime Kerfah, Guillaume Mas, 
Marjolaine Noirclerc- Savoye, Violaine Lantez, Thierry Vernet, 
and Jerome Boisbouvier
18 High-Throughput SAXS for the Characterization of Biomolecules 
in Solution: A Practical Approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  245
Kevin N. Dyer, Michal Hammel, Robert P. Rambo, Susan E. Tsutakawa, 
Ivan Rodic, Scott Classen, John A. Tainer, and Greg L. Hura
19 Measuring Spatial Restraints on Native Protein Complexes 
Using Isotope-Tagged Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry  . . . . .  259
Franz Herzog
PART III COMPUTATIONAL METHODS AND STRUCTURAL DATA ANALYSES
20 Modeling of Proteins and Their Assemblies 
with the Integrative Modeling Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  277
Benjamin Webb, Keren Lasker, Javier Velázquez-Muriel, 
Dina Schneidman-Duhovny, Riccardo Pellarin, Massimiliano Bonomi, 
Charles Greenberg, Barak Raveh, Elina Tjioe, Daniel Russel, 
and Andrej Sali
21 The Quality and Validation of Structures from Structural Genomics  . . . . . . . .  297
Marcin J. Domagalski, Heping Zheng, Matthew D. Zimmerman, 
Zbigniew Dauter, Alexander Wlodawer, and Wladek Minor
Contents

ix
22 Navigating the Global Protein–Protein Interaction Landscape 
Using iRefWeb  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  315
Andrei L. Turinsky, Sabry Razick, Brian Turner, 
Ian M. Donaldson, and Shoshana J. Wodak
23 Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  333
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin
24 High-Quality Macromolecular Graphics on Mobile Devices: 
A Quick Starter’s Guide  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  343
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  353 
Contents

      

xi
 THOMAS  B.  ACTON • Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Rutgers University  ,  Piscataway ,  NJ ,  USA 
 EMILY  T.  BEEBE • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  ,  Madison , 
 WI ,  USA  
 ITXASO  BELLON-ECHEVERRIA • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble 
Outstation  ,  Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 IMRE  BERGER • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  ,  Grenoble ,  France 
 CHRISTOPH  BIENIOSSEK • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  ,  Grenoble , 
 France 
 JEROME  BOISBOUVIER • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 MASSIMILIANO  BONOMI • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 NICOLA  A.  BURGESS-BROWN • Structural Genomics Consortium ,  University of Oxford  , 
 Oxford ,  UK 
 SUSAN  D.  CHAPPLE • Iontas Ltd.  ,  Cambridge ,  UK  
 YU  WAI  CHEN • Randall Division of Cell & Molecular Biophysics ,  King’s College London  , 
 London ,  UK 
 BEN  CHISNALL • King’s College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 FLORENT  CIPRIANI • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 SCOTT  CLASSEN • Physcial Bioscience Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 ELODIE  CRUBLET • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France  ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 ZBIGNIEW  DAUTER • Synchrotron Radiation Research Section, Argonne National 
Laboratory ,  National Cancer Institute  ,  Argonne ,  IL ,  USA 
 MARCIN  J.  DOMAGALSKI • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  
 Contributors 

xii
 IAN  M.  DONALDSON • The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo ,  University of Oslo  ,  Oslo ,  Norway  ; 
 Department of Molecular Biosciences ,  University of Oslo  ,  Oslo ,  Norway  
 FLORINE  DUPEUX • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  ,  Grenoble ,  France 
 KEVIN  N.  DYER • Physcial Bioscience Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 MICHAEL  R.  DYSON • Iontas Ltd.  ,  Cambridge ,  UK  
 BRIAN  G.   FOX • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  ,  Madison , 
 WI ,  USA  
 OPHER  GILEADI • Structural Genomics Consortium ,  University of Oxford  ,  Oxford ,  UK  
 SUSANNE  GRÄSLUND • Structural Genomics Consortium ,  University of Toronto  ,  Toronto , 
 Ontario ,  Canada  
 CHARLES  GREENBERG • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 MICHAL  HAMMEL • Physcial Bioscience Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 MARJORIE  M.  HARDING • Centre for Translational and Chemical Biology ,  University of 
Edinburgh  ,  Edinburgh ,  UK 
 FRANZ  HERZOG • Department of Biochemistry and Gene Center ,  Ludwig-Maximilians- 
Universität München  ,  Munich ,  Germany  
 KUN-YI  HSIN • Open Biology Unit ,  Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University  ,  Okinawa ,  Japan  
 YUANPENG  JANET  HUANG • Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Rutgers University  ,  Piscataway ,  NJ ,  USA 
 GREG  L.  HURA • Physcial Bioscience Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 COURTNEY  JOHNSON • King’s College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 MICHAEL  A.  KENNEDY • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Miami University  ,  Oxford ,  OH ,  USA 
 RIME  KERFAH • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble ,  France ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France ;   Institut de 
Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 YAVUZ  KULABEROGLU • King’s College London  ,  London ,  UK  
 VIOLAINE  LANTEZ • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France  ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 KEREN  LASKER • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) , 
 University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 PRAVIN  MAHAJAN • Structural Genomics Consortium ,  University of Oxford  ,  Oxford ,  UK  
 SHIN-ICHI  MAKINO • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  , 
 Madison ,  WI ,  USA  
 VINCENT  MARIAULE • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
Contributors

xiii
 JOHN  L.   MARKLEY • Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Wisconsin-Madison  , 
 Madison ,  WI ,  USA  
 JOSÉ  A.  MÁRQUEZ • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   UJF-EMBL-CNRS ,  Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 GUILLAUME  MAS • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 ROBERT  M.  MCCARRICK • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ,  Miami University  , 
 Oxford ,  OH ,  USA 
 WLADEK  MINOR • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  
 GAETANO  T.  MONTELIONE • Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Rutgers University  ,  Piscataway ,  NJ ,  USA  
 TAKESHI  MURATA • RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan;  
 JST, PRESTO  ,  Chiba ,  Japan  
 SHUISONG  NI • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ,  Miami University  ,  Oxford , 
 OH ,  USA  
 YAN  NIE • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  ,  Grenoble ,  France ; 
 Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  ,  Grenoble ,  France 
 MARJOLAINE  NOIRCLERC-SAVOYE • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – 
Grenoble 1  ,  Grenoble ,  France  
 RICCARDO  PELLARIN • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA  
 ROBERT  P.   RAMBO • Life Science Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 THERESA  A.  RAMELOT • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Miami University, Oxford  ,  OH ,  USA 
 BARAK  RAVEH • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) , 
 University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 SABRY  RAZICK • The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo ,  University of Oslo  ,  Oslo ,  Norway  ; 
 Biomedical Research Group, Department of Informatics ,  University of Oslo  ,  Oslo ,  Norway  
 IVAN  RODIC • Physcial Bioscience Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 DANIEL  RUSSEL • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) , 
 University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 NATALIE  J.  SAEZ  • Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques ,  Aix Marseille 
Université  ,  Marseille ,  France  
 ANDREJ  SALI • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) , 
 University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA  
Contributors

xiv
 MICHAEL  R.  SAWAYA • UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and Proteomics ,  University of 
California  ,  Los Angeles ,  CA ,  USA  
 DINA  SCHNEIDMAN-DUHOVNY • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 MIKAKO  SHIROUZU • RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  ; 
 Division of Structural and Synthetic Biology ,  RIKEN Center for Life Science 
Technologies  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  
 CLAIRE  STRAIN-DAMERELL • Structural Genomics Consortium ,  University of Oxford  , 
 Oxford ,  UK 
 F.  WILLIAM  STUDIER • Biosciences Department ,  Brookhaven National Laboratory  ,  Upton , 
 NY ,  USA  
 JOHN  A.  TAINER • Life Science Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  ,  Berkeley , 
 CA ,  USA  
 TAKAHO  TERADA • RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  ; 
 RIKEN Structural Biology Laboratory  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  
 DEEPAK  B.  THIMIRI GOVINDA RAJ • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble 
Outstation  ,  Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 ELINA  TJIOE • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) , 
 University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 SIMON  TROWITZSCH • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble Outstation  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 SUSAN  E.  TSUTAKAWA • Life Science Division ,  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  , 
 Berkeley ,  CA ,  USA  
 ANDREI  L.   TURINSKY • Molecular Structure and Function program ,  Hospital for Sick 
Children ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 BRIAN  TURNER • Molecular Structure and Function program ,  Hospital for Sick Children  , 
 Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 JAVIER  VELÁZQUEZ-MURIEL • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA 
 THIERRY  VERNET • Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CEA ,  Grenoble , 
 France ;   Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  CNRS ,  Grenoble ,  France ; 
 Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel ,  Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble 1  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  
 LAKSHMI  S.  VIJAYACHANDRAN • European Molecular Biology Laboratory ,  Grenoble 
Outstation  ,  Grenoble ,  France  ;   Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions ,  UJF-EMBL-CNRS  , 
 Grenoble ,  France  ;   Amrita Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita 
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre ,  Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham 
University  ,  Kochi ,  India 
 RENAUD  VINCENTELLI • Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques , 
 Aix Marseille Université  ,  Marseille ,  France  
 BENJAMIN  WEBB • Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and California Institute for Quanstitative Biosciences 
(QB3) ,  University of California San Francisco  ,  San Francisco ,  CA ,  USA  
Contributors

xv
 ALEXANDER  WLODAWER • Protein Structure Section, Macromolecular Crystallography 
Laboratory ,  NCI at Frederick  ,  Frederick ,  MD ,  USA 
 SHOSHANA  J.  WODAK • Molecular Structure and Function program ,  Hospital for Sick 
Children ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  ;   Department of Molecular Genetics ,  University of 
Toronto  ,  Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  ;   Department of Biochemistry ,  University of Toronto  , 
 Toronto ,  ON ,  Canada  
 YUNHUANG  YANG • Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Northeast 
Structural Genomics Consortium ,  Miami University  ,  Oxford ,  OH ,  USA 
 CHIN-PANG  BENNY  YIU • 33/F, Shui On Centre  ,  Wan Chai ,  Hong Kong  
 SHIGEYUKI  YOKOYAMA • RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  ; 
 RIKEN Structural Biology Laboratory  ,  Yokohama ,  Japan  
 HEPING  ZHENG • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics ,  University of 
Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  
 MATTHEW  D.  ZIMMERMAN • Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics , 
 University of Virginia  ,  Charlottesville ,  VA ,  USA  
Contributors

 Part I 
 Cloning, Expression and Protein Production  

3
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_1, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 1  
 DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design 
and Optimization 
 Yuanpeng  Janet  Huang ,  Thomas  B.  Acton , and  Gaetano  T.  Montelione 
 Abstract 
 Intrinsically disordered or unstructured regions in proteins are both common and biologically important, 
particularly in regulation, signaling, and modulating intermolecular recognition processes. From a practical 
point of view, however, such disordered regions often can pose signiﬁ cant challenges for crystallization. 
Disordered regions are also detrimental to NMR spectral quality, complicating the analysis of resonance 
assignments and three-dimensional protein structures by NMR methods. The DisMeta Server has been 
used by Northeastern Structural Genomics (NESG) consortium as a primary tool for construct design and 
optimization in preparing samples for both NMR and crystallization studies. It is a meta-server that gener-
ates a consensus analysis of eight different sequence-based disorder predictors to identify regions that are 
likely to be disordered. DisMeta also identiﬁ es predicted secretion signal peptides, transmembrane 
segments, and low-complexity regions. Identiﬁ cation of disordered regions, by either experimental or 
computational methods, is an important step in the NESG structure production pipeline, allowing the 
rational design of protein constructs that have improved expression and solubility, improved crystallization, 
and better quality NMR spectra.  
 Key words   Intrinsically disorder protein prediction  ,   Construct design  ,   Construct optimization  , 
 Hydrogen–deuterium exchange with mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)  
1  Introduction 
 Intrinsically disordered or unstructured regions in proteins are 
both common and biologically important, particularly in modulating 
intermolecular recognition processes in cellular regulation and 
signaling. Intrinsically disordered proteins also have broad associa-
tions with human diseases [ 1 – 4 ]. Intrinsic disorder, and or 
disorder- to-order structural transitions, is an important feature of 
many transcription factors [ 5 ,  6 ], signaling scaffold proteins [ 7 ,  8 ], 
stress-related proteins including protein chaperones [ 9 ], and hub 
proteins involved in protein–protein interactions [ 10 ,  11 ]. 
 From a practical point of view, highly homogeneous protein 
samples with minimal amounts of intrinsic disorder are generally 
more amenable for successful protein crystallization and structure 

4
determination by X-ray crystallography [ 12 – 14 ]. While NMR can 
often be used successfully to study even fully disordered proteins, 
disordered segments of proteins can promote aggregation and 
deleteriously affect NMR spectral quality. In addition, a large 
percentage of targets for NMR studies, particularly human and 
other eukaryotic proteins, are multidomain proteins, which often 
misfold in prokaryotic systems [ 15 ]. Such multi-domain proteins 
also often exceed the size limitations for NMR structure determi-
nation techniques. Domain parsing can be used to circumvent 
these signiﬁ cant issues. 
 It can be extremely challenging to predict the protein subse-
quence that will produce a soluble well-behaved protein, particularly 
in studies of domains for which the three-dimensional structure is 
not yet known. In particular, it can be challenging to accurately 
predict domain boundaries and locations of disordered residues. 
This information is critical for identifying open reading frames that 
can be expressed in soluble form in bacterial or even in eukaryotic 
expression systems. 
 The DisMeta Server has been developed by the Northeast 
Structural Genomics (NESG) consortium as our primary tool for 
design and optimization of protein constructs expressed for both 
NMR and crystallization studies (  http://www-nmr.cabm.rutgers.
edu/bioinformatics/disorder/   , Fig.  1 ). It is a meta-server that 
generates a consensus analysis of eight sequence-based disorder 
predictors to identify regions of the protein that are likely to be 
disordered (Fig.  2b ). The DisMeta server uses a consensus approach 
for disorder prediction. The consensus analysis is conservative in 
identifying disordered regions, minimizing the possibility of cut-
ting into an ordered region of the protein due to an inaccurate 
prediction that it is disorder, i.e., low false-positive rates. The server 
also identiﬁ es predicted secretion signal peptides using SignalP 
[ 16 ], transmembrane segments by TMHMM [ 17 ], low- complexity 
SEG regions [ 18 ], secondary structure by PROFsec [ 19 ] and 
PSIPred [ 20 ], and ANCHOR [ 21 ] (Fig.  2a ).
 The data from these disorder consensus of prediction servers, 
along with multiple sequence alignments of homologous proteins 
and hidden Markov models characteristic of the targeted protein 
domain families [ 22 ,  23 ], are used to predict possible structural 
domain boundaries. Based on this information, the user can generate 
nested sets of alternative constructs for full-length proteins, multi-
domain constructs, and single-domain constructs. These alternative 
constructs often possess signiﬁ cantly better expression, solubility, 
and biophysical behavior than their full-length parent sequences, 
increasing the likelihood of success in crystallization and the efﬁ -
ciency of structure production. The success of this multiple construct 
strategy has been reported by the NESG and others [ 24 – 27 ]. 
NESG has developed an automated construct design software, 
which generates nested sets of constructs based on the DisMeta 
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

5
report, to assist this construct design process for large- scale protein 
sample production (unpublished results) [ 27 ]. In addition, the 
server identiﬁ es domain-sized regions of the protein that are ame-
nable to high-throughput NMR studies, allowing structural stud-
ies of proteins that would otherwise be too large to study by NMR. 
 The results from the DisMeta Server have been compared with 
biophysical data on protein disorder, including HSQC NMR,  15 N 
nuclear relaxation rate, and hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass 
spectroscopy (HDX-MS) data [ 14 ] for many NESG protein targets. 
We have found that consensus disordered region, regions predicted 
to be signal peptide, and/or transmembrane regions and low-
complexity regions identiﬁ ed by DisMeta are often disordered in 
these experimental studies of protein samples. As shown in some 
examples in Subheading  3 , truncated constructs lacking residues 
from these disordered regions have been successfully generated and 
used to provide diffraction quality crystals and/or good NMR spectra 
suitable for determining the 3D protein structure [ 14 ,  26 – 29 ].  
 Fig. 1   The DisMeta Web server interface. The interface is designed to be simple and easy to use. All tools use 
default setup parameters. The programs DISOPRED2, DISpro, VSL2, coils, SignlP, TMHMM, SEG, PROFphd, and 
PSIPred are installed locally and run on DisMeta server site. Other results are retrieved over the Internet from 
the corresponding Web servers 
 
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

6
2  Materials 
 The DisMeta Server runs several different disorder prediction 
software, including DISEMBL [ 30 ], DISOPRED2 [ 31 ], DISPro 
[ 32 ], FoldIndex [ 33 ], GlobPlot2 [ 34 ], IUPred [ 35 ], RONN [ 36 ], 
and VL2 [ 37 ]. For more detailed reviews on disorder prediction 
methods,  see ref.  3 . 
 The DisMeta Server also provides sequence-based structural 
prediction results from other bioinformatics software, including 
PROF [ 19 ], PSIPred [ 20 ], SignalP [ 16 ], TMHMM [ 17 ], Coils [ 38 ], 
2.1  Software Used 
by the DisMeta Server
 Fig. 2   The DisMeta report for the  Escherichia coli Spr lipoprotein, NESG target ER541. The full-length protein 
provided NMR data of marginal quality and no crystals in HTP crystallization screens. The DisMeta report 
contains two parts: ( a ) sequence-based bioinformatic prediction for construct design and ( b ) disorder predic-
tions from eight different servers. In this case, the disorder prediction programs provide a clear consensus 
result, with strong evidence for disorder in the N-terminal region of the protein ( red double-head arrow ). On 
the basis of the disorder consensus results and secondary structure prediction, several truncated constructs 
lacking residues from this region were generated, ultimately leading to the production of construct Spr 
(37–162) ( green double-headed arrow ) whose solution NMR structure was solved in NESG consortium (PDB 
ID, 2K1G) [ 28 ]. Sample preparation and NMR data collection for NESG target ER541 are described in ref.  28 
 
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

7
SEG [ 18 ], and ANCHOR [ 21 ]. This information is used together 
with the disorder predictions for construct design and optimiza-
tion for both NMR and crystallization studies.  
 HDX-MS measurements are based on the concept that backbone 
amide protons in disordered regions are solvent accessible and 
therefore exchange with solvent deuterium ( 2 H 2 O) at a faster rate 
than backbone amide protons in less solvent-accessible ordered 
regions where they are generally involved in hydrogen bonds. The 
degree of exchange over various time intervals is assessed by 
quenching the exchange kinetics by lowering the pH and tempera-
ture, fragmenting the protein by pepsin proteolysis, and measuring 
the mass of the resulting fragments by mass spectrometry. Peptides 
with greater mass (higher deuterium exchange) compared to the 
fully protonated control are identiﬁ ed. The protocols used in this 
work for HDX-MS studies have been described in detail elsewhere 
[ 14 ]. The results are depicted graphically as a heat map (an exam-
ple is shown in   Fig.  4b ); residues in peptides with the greatest 
amount of mass increase (disordered regions) are represented with 
red boxes. Residues in peptides showing little or no mass increase 
(ordered regions) are represented by blue boxes.  
3  Methods 
 Identiﬁ cation of disordered regions of the protein by the DisMeta 
server, and elimination of these residues from the protein con-
struct, is one of the keys to the NESG construct design and opti-
mization process. Over the past decade, the use of DisMeta for 
construct design and optimization has greatly increased the efﬁ -
ciency of protein sample and structure production for this large- 
scale structural genomics project. 
 
 Figure  2 shows the DisMeta report for the  Escherichia coli Spr lipo-
protein (NESG target ER541), which originally provided NMR 
data of marginal quality and no crystals in HPT crystal screens. 
The DisMeta report contains two parts: (A) sequence- based bioin-
formatics prediction for construct design and (B) disorder predic-
tions from eight different servers. In this case, the disorder 
prediction programs provide a clear consensus result, namely, 
strong evidence for disorder in the N-terminal region of the pro-
tein (red double-head arrow). On the basis of the disorder consen-
sus results and secondary structure prediction, several truncated 
constructs lacking residues from this region were generated, ulti-
mately leading to the production of Spr(37–162) (green double- 
headed arrow) whose solution NMR structure was subsequently 
determined by the NESG consortium (PDB ID, 2K1G) [ 28 ].  
2.2  Amide 
Hydrogen–Deuterium 
Exchange with Mass 
Spectrometry 
Detection
3.1  Excluding 
Consensus Disorder 
Regions from 
Construct Design
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

8
 
 The TMHMM and SignalP regions are often disordered for pro-
teins expressed and puriﬁ ed in bacterial expression systems, 
although they are ordered based on disorder consensus prediction. 
For example, NESG target SyR11(full length 155, PDB ID: 2K3A) 
[ 29 ] is a bacteria putative secretory antigen. Both SignalP_nn and 
SignalP_hmm methods [ 16 ] predict polypeptide segment 1–29 to 
be a signal peptide. Disorder consensus predicts that the region of 
residues 1–29 is ordered and the region around 25–49 is disor-
dered (Fig.  3a ). The NMR  1 H– 15 N HSQC spectra are shown for 
the full-length 1–155 protein construct (Fig.  3b ) and truncated 
(residues 50–155) protein construct (Fig.  3c ). The truncated (resi-
dues 50–155) construct was selected by removing both the signal 
peptide and the disorder consensus regions. Figure  3d shows the 
differences of two HSQC spectra (Fig.  3b, c ). Many overlapping 
peaks in the full-length protein with chemical shift values typical of 
3.2  Excluding the 
TMHMM and SignalP 
Regions from 
Construct Design
 Fig. 3   ( a ) The DisMeta report for NESG target SyR11(full length 155), a bacterial secretory antigen. Both 
SignalP_nn and SignalP_hmm methods predict residues 1–29 to be a signal peptide. Disorder consensus 
predicts that the polypeptide segment region 1–29 is ordered and the region around 25–49 is disordered. 
( b ) The NMR  1 H– 15 N HSQC spectra are shown for the full-length 1–155 protein construct and ( c ) truncated 
(50–155) protein construct. ( d ) The differences between the two HSQC spectra ( b ) and ( c ). Sample preparation 
and NMR data collection for NESG target SyR11 are described in ref.  29 
 
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

9
 Fig. 4   ( a ) The DisMeta report for  E .  coli inner membrane lipoprotein YiaD (NESG target ER553). It has two 
TMHMM regions: 13–32 and 42–63. The disorder consensus predicts that the polypeptide segment region 
1–13 is disordered and the TMHMM regions 13–32 and 42–63 are ordered. ( b ) HDX-MS analysis [ 14 ] shows 
that polypeptide segment region ~1–59 is in fact disordered. This is consistent with the DisMeta results com-
bining predictions of the TMHMM regions and the disorder consensus region  
 
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

10
disordered residues are absent in the truncated protein construct 
(Fig.  3d ). The amide  15 N and  1 H resonance frequencies for the 
remaining ordered residues are identical in both spectra, conﬁ rm-
ing that the SignalP region 1–29 is disordered and deletion of the 
disordered region 1–49 does not disturb the structure of the 
remaining protein.
 E .  coli inner membrane lipoprotein YiaD (NESG target 
ER553) has two TMHMM regions: 13–32 and 42–63. The 
DisMeta disorder consensus predicts that the region around poly-
peptide segment 1–13 is disordered and the TMHMM regions 
13–32 and 42–63 are ordered (Fig.  4a ). HDX-MS analysis [ 14 ] 
shows that region ~1–59 is in fact disordered, which is consistent 
with the DisMeta prediction by combining both the TMHMM 
regions and the disorder consensus regions.
 
 Studies have shown that sequence regions with low complexity 
nearly always correspond to polypeptide segments that do not fold 
into ordered structures or to regions of proteins that form ﬁ brous 
or extended structures [ 39 ], whereas intrinsically disordered 
regions do not always possess low sequence complexity [ 39 ,  40 ]. 
Both SEG analysis [ 18 ] for complexity and order–disorder predic-
tion are useful and complementary in the analysis of protein 
sequences [ 41 ] and in construct design and optimization. 
 In our experience, many low-complexity SEG regions are next 
to or overlapped with disorder consensus regions, and those SEG 
regions next to the disorder consensus regions in the sequence are 
often indeed disordered. Examples are shown in Figs.  3 ,  4 , and  5 . 
In Fig.  3a , the low-complexity regions are in polypeptide segments 
4–21, 32–48, and 73–87. Except for polypeptide segment 73–87, 
the two other low-complexity regions are overlapped with either 
the SignalP region or the disorder consensus regions. Figure  4a 
shows that the low-complexity region polypeptide segment 40–58 
overlaps with the TMHMM region, which is disordered in protein 
samples produced in our  E .  coli expression system, as shown by the 
HDX-MS [ 14 ]. The low-complexity region polypeptide segment 
202–207 also overlaps with disorder consensus region at the 
C-terminal.
 C .  elegans TPPP family protein CE32E8.3 (NESG target 
WR33) has been solved by the NESG consortium. It consists of 
ﬁ ve helices with an intrinsically disordered region in the C-terminal 
one-third of the protein sequence. HDX-MS data [ 14 ] (Fig.  5b ) 
shows that regions ~1–12 (6× His tag) and ~121–190 are disor-
dered. Figure  5a shows that polypeptide segments 3–25 and 125–
136 are low-complexity regions. The region polypeptide segment 
3–15 is overlapped with the disorder consensus. The region poly-
peptide segment 125–136 is very close to the C-terminal disorder 
consensus. Combing the SEG prediction with the disorder con-
sensus agrees well with the HDX-MS data, which shows that the 
3.3  Low-Complexity 
SEG Regions, When 
Used Together with 
the Disorder 
Consensus Prediction, 
Are Good Disorder 
Indicators
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

11
region of polypeptide segment 121–190 is disordered (Fig.  5b ) 
[ 14 ]. Figure  5c compares the NMR  1 H– 15 N HSQC spectra for the 
full-length CE32E8.3 protein 1–190 and the truncated protein 
construct residues 1–125 that was used for the solution structure 
determination. This comparison shows the presence of many 
overlapping peaks in the full-length protein with chemical shift 
values typical of disordered residues. These peaks are absent in the 
truncated protein construct. The amide  15 N and  1 H resonance 
frequencies for the remaining ordered residues are identical in 
both spectra, conﬁ rming that deletion of the disordered sequence 
does not disturb the structure of the remaining protein [ 14 ].  
 Fig. 5   ( a ) The DisMeta report for  C .  elegans TPPP family protein CE32E8.3 (NESG target WR33), whose struc-
ture has been solved by the NESG consortium (PDB ID 1PUL). It consists of ﬁ ve helices with an intrinsically 
disordered region in the C-terminal one-third of the protein sequence. The regions 3–25 and 125–136 are 
identiﬁ ed as the SEG regions. ( b ) The HDX-MS data [ 14 ] shows that regions ~1–12 (6× His tag) and ~121–190 
are disordered. The region 3–15 is overlapped with the disorder consensus. The region 125–136 is very close 
to the C-terminal disorder consensus. The combined result of the low-complexity SEG regions and the disorder 
consensus agrees well with the HDX-MS data, which shows that the polypeptide region 121–190 is disordered 
[ 14 ]. ( c ) Comparison of the NMR  1 H– 15 N HSQC spectra for the full-length CE32E8.3 protein, residues 1–190, 
and the truncated protein construct used for the solution structure determination, residues 1–125. This com-
parison shows the presence of many overlapping peaks in the full-length protein with chemical shift values 
typical of disordered residues. These peaks are absent in the truncated protein construct. The amide  15 N and 
 1 H resonance frequencies for the remaining ordered residues are identical in both spectra, conﬁ rming that 
deletion of the disordered sequence does not disturb the structure of the remaining protein. Sample prepara-
tion, NMR data collection, and HDX-MS data collection for NESG target WR33 are described in ref.  14 
 
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

12
 
 Multi-domain proteins often misfold in prokaryotic system [ 15 ] 
and also often exceed the size limitations for high-throughput 
NMR structure determination techniques. Domain parsing can be 
used to circumvent these signiﬁ cant issues. The data from these 
disorder consensus of prediction servers, along with multiple 
sequence alignments of homologous proteins and hidden Markov 
models characteristic of the targeted protein domain families [ 22 , 
 23 ], are used to predict possible structural domain boundaries. 
 Disorder consensus prediction can be used alone to predict the 
domain boundary in some cases. An example is shown in Fig.  6 . 
The C-terminal part of the DisMeta report of gamma-interferon- 
inducible protein 16 (NESG target HR4626) from  Homo sapiens 
is shown in Fig.  6 . There are two ordered regions, corresponding 
approximately to polypeptide segments 206–385 and 577–768 
(double-headed arrows), linked by a ﬂ exible disordered linker. The 
DisMeta consensus ordered regions are consistent with the domain 
constructs that provided these 3D structures (i.e., HR4626A, 
PDB 2OQ0, 200–390 and HR4626B, PDB 3B6Y, 576–761). 
Indeed, the DisMeta predictions are in better agreement with the 
experimentally determined domain parsing than the domain region 
polypeptide segments of residues 201–370 and 575–740 predicted 
by PFAM [ 42 ].
3.4  Domain Parsing 
Based on the Disorder 
Consensus Prediction
 Fig. 6   Domain parsing based on disorder consensus prediction. The C-terminal part of the DisMeta report of 
gamma-interferon-inducible protein 16 (NESG target HR4626) from  Homo sapiens is shown. There are two 
ordered regions, corresponding to residues ~206–385 and 577–768 ( double-headed arrows ), linked by a ﬂ ex-
ible disordered linker. The DisMeta consensus ordered regions are consistent with the domain constructs for 
which structures were determined and deposited in the PDB (i.e., HR4626A, PDB 2OQ0, 200–390 and 
HR4626B, PDB 3B6Y, 576–761). Indeed, the ordered regions identiﬁ ed by DisMeta have better agreement with 
the domain boundaries revealed by these experimental structures than the domains predicted by PFAM [ 42 ], 
polypeptide segments 201–370 and 575–740 
 
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

13
 
 It is extremely challenging to predict the protein subsequence that 
will produce a soluble well-behaved protein, particularly for pro-
tein containing domains for which the three-dimensional structure 
is not yet known. This arises from problems with accurately pre-
dicting the domain boundaries and locations of disordered resi-
dues, as this information is critical for designing an open reading 
frame that results in high-level expression and solubility in bacterial 
expression system. Currently, our approach is to take advantage of 
our high-throughput cloning and expression platform [ 26 ,  27 ] 
and produce several alternative constructs, varying the termini of a 
targeted domain based on the DisMeta predictions, followed by 
small-scale expression and solubility screening as well as NMR and 
crystallization screening to identify the protein subsequence with 
the best behavior [ 24 – 27 ]. 
 An example of our domain parsing and multiple construct 
approach is shown in Fig.  7a . Consensus analysis of several disor-
der prediction algorithms ( see Disorder Consensus panel) suggests 
that the C-terminal half of the 434-residue protein from 
 Porphyromonas gingivalis Q7MX54 (NESG ID: PgR37) contains 
disordered regions. Cloning and expression analysis of the 
3.5  Multiple 
Constructs as a 
Strategy for Obtaining 
Samples Suitable for 
Structural Analysis
 Fig. 7   ( a ) The DisMeta report for the  Porphyromonas gingivalis protein Q7MX54 (NESG ID: PgR37). ( b ) Schematic 
representation of construct optimization for NESG protein target PgR37 from PFAM domain family DUF477, 
including full-length, residues 54–187, 59–182, and 35–182. Only the 35–182 construct produced a soluble- 
expressed protein and ultimately an NMR structure (Protein Data Bank ID: 2KW7) 
 
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

14
full- length protein in our bacterial expression system result in no 
detectable expression, supporting the disorder prediction based 
on the fact that proteins with signiﬁ cant disorder are often 
degraded in the  E .  coli cell. DisMeta analysis was then used for 
construct optimization, and alternative constructs were designed 
using these data together with information for the database of 
protein families that includes their annotations and multiple 
sequence alignments (DUF477 region 60–179). These alternative 
constructs are depicted schematically in Fig.  7b . The two expres-
sion constructs comprising residues 54–187 and 59–182 also did 
not express at detectable levels. However, a slightly longer con-
struct (residues 35–182) was highly expressed and soluble and 
ultimately allowed the structure of this targeted domain to be 
solved by NMR (Protein Data Bank ID: 2KW7). Interestingly, the 
three-dimensional structure reveals the presence of two short 
helical regions between residues 38–48 and a β-strand for residues 
54–56. These helices and the β-strand are tightly packed against 
each other and to other regions of the protein. The loss of these 
interactions in the shorter constructs likely destabilizes the pro-
tein, leading to degradation in the expression host [ 27 ].
4  Conclusion 
 The DisMeta server provides a consensus analysis of eight disorder 
predictors as well as predictions of secondary structure, signal pep-
tides, transmembrane helical regions, and low-complexity regions 
of the protein sequence using publicly available servers. These data 
are combined into a single simple to read report. DisMeta analyses 
have been used for protein construct design and optimization in 
the large-scale sample and structure production pipeline of the 
NESG consortium of the Protein Structure Initiative. These disor-
der predictions have allowed production of many protein samples 
that have been used in many successful NMR and X-ray crystal-
lography studies, some examples of which are illustrated in this 
chapter. The server is freely available online to the scientiﬁ c com-
munity and should be useful both to small laboratories focused on 
speciﬁ c biological problems and to large-scale protein sample pro-
duction efforts, including antigen sample production projects.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We thank H. Zheng, S. Sharma, A. Ertekin, and R. Xiao for pro-
viding the HDX-MS data illustrated in this chapter and J. Aramini 
for providing the NMR spectrum shown in Fig.  5 . The NMR data 
shown in Fig.  3 were recorded by P. Rossi. This work was sup-
ported by a grant from the National Institute of General Medical 
Sciences Protein Structure Initiative U54-GM074958 (to G.T.M.).  
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

15
 References 
  1.  Dyson HJ, Wright PE (2002) Coupling of 
folding and binding for unstructured proteins. 
Curr Opin Struct Biol 12:54–60  
  2.  Iakoucheva LM, Brown CJ, Lawson JD et al 
(2002) Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling and 
cancer-associated 
proteins. 
J 
Mol 
Biol 
323:573–584  
  3.  Radivojac P, Iakoucheva LM, Oldﬁ eld CJ et al 
(2007) Intrinsic disorder and functional pro-
teomics. Biophys J 92:1439–1456  
  4.  Kovacs D, Szabo B, Pancsa R et al (2012) 
Intrinsically disordered proteins undergo and 
assist folding transitions in the proteome. Arch 
Biochem Biophys 531:80–89  
  5.  Liu J, Perumal NB, Oldﬁ eld CJ et al (2006) 
Intrinsic disorder in transcription factors. 
Biochemistry 45:6873–6888  
  6.  Minezaki Y, Homma K, Kinjo AR et al (2006) 
Human transcription factors contain a high 
fraction of intrinsically disordered regions 
essential for transcriptional regulation. J Mol 
Biol 359:1137–1149  
  7.  Balazs A, Csizmok V, Buday L et al (2009) 
High levels of structural disorder in scaffold 
proteins as exempliﬁ ed by a novel neuronal 
protein, CASK-interactive protein1. FEBS J 
276:3744–3756 
  8.  Buday L, Tompa P (2010) Functional classiﬁ -
cation of scaffold proteins and related mole-
cules. FEBS J 277:4348–4355  
  9.  Tompa P, Csermely P (2004) The role of 
structural disorder in the function of RNA and 
protein chaperones. FASEB J 18:1169–1175  
  10.  Dosztanyi Z, Chen J, Dunker AK et al (2006) 
Disorder and sequence repeats in hub proteins 
and their implications for network evolution. J 
Proteome Res 5:2985–2995  
  11.  Haynes C, Oldﬁ eld CJ, Ji F et al (2006) 
Intrinsic disorder is a common feature of hub 
proteins from four eukaryotic interactomes. 
PLoS Comput Biol 2:e100  
  12.  Pantazatos D, Kim JS, Klock HE et al (2004) 
Rapid reﬁ nement of crystallographic protein 
construct deﬁ nition employing enhanced 
hydrogen/deuterium exchange MS. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 101:751–756  
  13.  Spraggon G, Pantazatos D, Klock HE et al 
(2004) On the use of DXMS to produce more 
crystallizable proteins: structures of the T. 
maritima proteins TM0160 and TM1171. 
Protein Sci 13:3187–3199  
  14.  Sharma S, Zheng H, Huang YJ et al (2009) 
Construct optimization for protein NMR 
structure analysis using amide hydrogen/
deuterium 
exchange 
mass 
spectrometry. 
Proteins 76:882–894  
  15.  Netzer WJ, Hartl FU (1997) Recombination 
of 
protein 
domains 
facilitated 
by 
co- 
translational folding in eukaryotes. Nature 
388:343–349  
  16.  Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G et al 
(2007) Locating proteins in the cell using 
TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 
2:953–971  
  17.  Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G et al (2001) 
Predicting transmembrane protein topology 
with a hidden Markov model: application to 
complete genomes. J Mol Biol 305:567–580  
  18.  Wootton JC, Federhen S (1996) Analysis of 
compositionally biased regions in sequence 
databases. Methods Enzymol 266:554–571  
  19.  Rost B, Yachdav G, Liu J (2004) The 
PredictProtein server. Nucleic Acids Res 
32:W321–W326  
  20.  McGufﬁ n LJ, Bryson K, Jones DT (2000) The 
PSIPRED protein structure prediction server. 
Bioinformatics 16:404–405  
  21.  Dosztanyi Z, Meszaros B, Simon I (2009) 
ANCHOR: web server for predicting protein 
binding regions in disordered proteins. 
Bioinformatics 25:2745–2746  
  22.  Dessailly BH, Nair R, Jaroszewski L et al 
(2009) PSI-2: structural genomics to cover 
protein 
domain 
family 
space. 
Structure 
17:869–881  
  23.   Hunter S, Jones P, Mitchell A et al (2012) 
InterPro in 2011: new developments in the 
family and domain prediction database. Nucleic 
Acids Res 40:D306–D312  
  24.  Graslund S, Sagemark J, Berglund H et al 
(2008) The use of systematic N- and 
C-terminal deletions to promote production 
and structural studies of recombinant proteins. 
Protein Expr Purif 58:210–221  
  25.  Chikayama E, Kurotani A, Tanaka T et al 
(2010) Mathematical model for empirically 
optimizing large scale production of soluble 
protein domains. BMC Bioinformatics 11:113  
  26.  Xiao R, Anderson S, Aramini J et al (2010) 
The high-throughput protein sample produc-
tion platform of the Northeast Structural 
Genomics 
Consortium. 
J 
Struct 
Biol 
172:21–33  
  27.  Acton TB, Xiao R, Anderson S et al (2011) 
Preparation of protein samples for NMR struc-
ture, function, and small-molecule screening 
studies. Methods Enzymol 493:21–60  
  28.   Aramini JM, Rossi P, Huang YJ et al (2008) 
Solution NMR structure of the NlpC/P60 
domain of lipoprotein Spr from Escherichia coli: 
structural evidence for a novel cysteine peptidase 
catalytic triad. Biochemistry 47:9715–9717  
DisMeta: A Meta Server for Construct Design and Optimization 

16
  29.  Rossi P, Aramini JM, Xiao R et al (2009) Structural 
elucidation of the Cys-His-Glu-Asn proteolytic 
relay in the secreted CHAP domain enzyme from 
the human pathogen Staphylococcus saprophyti-
cus. Proteins 74:515–519  
  30.  Linding R, Jensen LJ, Diella F et al (2003) 
Protein disorder prediction: implications for 
structural 
proteomics. 
Structure 
11:1453–1459 
  31.  Ward JJ, Sodhi JS, McGufﬁ n LJ et al (2004) 
Prediction and functional analysis of native dis-
order in proteins from the three kingdoms of 
life. J Mol Biol 337:635–645  
  32.  Cheng JSM, Baldi P (2005) Accurate predic-
tion of protein disordered regions by mining 
protein structure data. Data Min Knowl 
Discov 11:213–222  
  33.  Prilusky J, Felder CE, Zeev-Ben-Mordehai T 
et al (2005) FoldIndex: a simple tool to pre-
dict whether a given protein sequence is intrin-
sically 
unfolded. 
Bioinformatics 
21:3435–3438 
  34.  Linding R, Russell RB, Neduva V et al (2003) 
GlobPlot: Exploring protein sequences for 
globularity and disorder. Nucleic Acids Res 
31:3701–3708 
  35.  Dosztanyi Z, Csizmok V, Tompa P et al (2005) 
The pairwise energy content estimated from 
amino acid composition discriminates between 
folded and intrinsically unstructured proteins. 
J Mol Biol 347:827–839  
  36.  Yang ZR, Thomson R, McNeil P et al (2005) 
RONN: the bio-basis function neural network 
technique applied to the detection of natively 
disordered regions in proteins. Bioinformatics 
21:3369–3376  
  37.  Vucetic S, Brown CJ, Dunker AK et al (2003) 
Flavors 
of 
protein 
disorder. 
Proteins 
52:573–584  
  38.  Lupas A, Van Dyke M, Stock J (1991) 
Predicting coiled coils from protein sequences. 
Science 252:1162–1164  
  39.  Romero P, Obradovic Z, Li X et al (2001) 
Sequence complexity of disordered protein. 
Proteins 42:38–48  
  40.  Romero P, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK (1999) 
Folding minimal sequences: the lower bound 
for sequence complexity of globular proteins. 
FEBS Lett 462:363–367  
  41.  Weathers EA, Paulaitis ME, Woolf TB et al 
(2007) Insights into protein structure and 
function from disorder-complexity space. 
Proteins 66:16–28  
  42.  Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J et al (2010) The 
Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids 
Res 38:D211–D222  
Yuanpeng Janet Huang et al.

17
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_2, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 2  
 Stable Expression Clones and Auto-Induction for Protein 
Production in  E .  coli 
 F.  William  Studier 
 Abstract 
 Inducible production of proteins from cloned genes in  E .  coli is widely used, economical, and effective. 
However, common practices can result in unintended induction, inadvertently generating cultures that 
give poor or variable yields in protein production. Recipes are provided for (1) deﬁ ned culture media in 
which expression strains grow to saturation without induction, thereby ensuring stable frozen stocks and 
seed cultures with high fractions of fully inducible cells, and (2) deﬁ ned or complex media that maintain 
the same high fraction of inducible cells until auto-induction in late log phase to produce fully induced 
high-density cultures at saturation. Simply inoculating a suitable auto-inducing medium from such a seed 
culture and growing to saturation generally produces much higher levels of target protein per volume of 
culture than monitoring culture growth and adding IPTG or other inducer at the appropriate cell density. 
Many strains may be conveniently screened in parallel, and burdensome inoculation with fresh colonies, 
sometimes employed in hopes of assuring high yields, is entirely unnecessary. These media were developed 
for the T7 expression system using pET vectors in BL21(DE3) but are suitable or adaptable for other 
inducible expression systems in  E .  coli and for labeling proteins with selenomethionine for X-ray crystallo-
graphy or with stable isotopes for NMR.  
 Key words   Auto-induction  ,   T7 expression system  ,   Stable inducible cultures  ,  Protein production  , 
 Protein labeling  
1  Introduction 
 The T7 expression system is widely used for inducible produc-
tion of target proteins from cloned genes in  E .  coli . The gene for 
T7 RNA polymerase in the chromosome of BL21(DE3) under 
the control of the  lacUV5 promoter is induced to express the 
target gene under the control of a T7 promoter and strong T7 
translation start in a multi-copy plasmid. T7 polymerase is so 
selective, active, and processive that most resources of the cell 
can become directed to producing a great variety of target pro-
teins [ 1 ]. From the ﬁ rst use, instability of inducible strains was 
encountered as a problem, because even slight basal expression 

18
of T7 RNA polymerase can generate enough basal expression of 
some target proteins to stress uninduced cells. Reduction of 
basal expression by supplying small amounts of T7 lysozyme, 
which inhibits transcription by binding T7 RNA polymerase [ 2 ] 
or, more effectively, reducing transcription of the target gene by 
placing a binding site for  lac repressor immediately after the T7 
promoter (referred to as a T7 lac promoter) [ 3 ], allows mainte-
nance and expression of clones for expressing a wide variety of 
target proteins [ 4 ]. A more recent strategy is to place the gene 
for T7 RNA polymerase in the chromosome of BL21 under the 
control of the pBAD promoter, which is inducible by arabinose 
and is thought to have very low basal expression (BL21-AI from 
Life Technologies). When the target gene is controlled by a 
T7 lac promoter, both arabinose and a  lac inducer are required 
for production of the target protein in BL21-AI. 
 It was also recognized early on that strains capable of express-
ing target proteins that stress the host cell should not be grown to 
saturation, because expression-competent cells could become 
overgrown by cells that had lost plasmid or mutants that were 
poorly inducible [ 1 – 4 ]. An explanation for why this precaution was 
advisable became apparent with the discovery that growth of 
expression strains in some complex media (but not others) pro-
duced high-level induction of target protein upon approach to 
saturation [ 5 ]. Investigation of how composition of the growth 
medium affects growth, saturation cell density, and expression of 
target protein produced a likely explanation for this unintended 
induction and a rationale for developing deﬁ ned, non-inducing 
growth media and high-density auto-inducing media [ 6 ]. 
 Amino acids and small peptides provide the primary carbon and 
energy sources in commonly used complex media such as LB, which 
contains enzymatic digests of the milk protein casein (e.g., tryptone 
or N-Z-amine) and yeast extract. Since milk is rich in lactose, an 
inducer of the T7 expression system, variable amounts of residual 
lactose may be present in different lots of these enzymatic digests. 
These small amounts of lactose do not promote appreciable induc-
tion during log-phase growth, but even minute amounts are sufﬁ -
cient to cause induction on approach to saturation, particularly at 
lower rates of aeration, which allow induction at lower lactose con-
centration and promote higher levels of induction [ 6 ]. The pres-
ence of glucose prevents such induction [ 5 ], but ﬁ nding a 
concentration of glucose that reliably prevents induction in com-
plex media without also causing cultures to become undesirably 
acidic at saturation proved to be difﬁ cult if not impossible [ 6 ]. 
Recent work found that small amounts of galactose present in com-
plex media derived from plant sources also cause unintended induc-
tion in BL21(DE3) [ 7 ]. This can happen because BL21 strains lack 
galactokinase [ 8 ], thereby preventing galactose from being metabolized 
F. William Studier

19
and allowing the intracellular galactose  concentration to reach 
levels high enough for robust induction of the  lac operon by this 
weak inducer. However, the galactose transporters necessary for 
such induction are also strongly inhibited by glucose [ 9 ]. 
 Formulation of non-inducing and auto-inducing media is based 
on experimentation reported in [ 6 ]. Non-inducing media are made 
entirely from puriﬁ ed ingredients to minimize potential contamina-
tion by inducing agents. Glucose is the primary carbon and energy 
source because it is highly effective at preventing induction of oper-
ons responsible for metabolizing sugars such as lactose, galactose, 
and arabinose by a combination of catabolite repression and inducer 
exclusion. However, to grow cultures to high cell densities (OD 600nm 
~10 and cell concentrations greater than 10 10 /ml), glucose concen-
tration must be adjusted so that the pH of the culture does not fall 
much below ~6 before metabolism of another component of the 
deﬁ ned medium (typically aspartate, succinate, and/or a mixture of 
amino acids) increases the ﬁ nal pH at saturation to ~7. This meta-
bolic balancing of pH requires that the culture be well aerated. 
Even expression strains that produce target proteins highly toxic to 
the host cell retain plasmid and remain viable when grown to satu-
ration in these non-inducing media, indicating that little expression 
of target protein occurs at any stage of growth. 
 Auto-inducing media can be made either with puriﬁ ed or com-
plex ingredients, because the inducing sugar is intentionally pres-
ent in the medium throughout growth. The principle of 
auto-induction is that glucose in the growth medium completely 
prevents uptake and metabolism of inducing sugar also present in 
the growth medium. However, if the glucose concentration is such 
that all of the glucose is metabolized before saturation of the cul-
ture, other sugars present in the medium can be transported into 
the cell and induce the operons for metabolizing them. Lactose, 
arabinose, and galactose are all subject to this glucose effect, and 
auto-inducing media have been formulated for protein expression 
systems induced by them. Auto-induction is potentially applicable 
for any expression system having an inducer that is subject to this 
type of regulation. 
 Expression strains suitable for auto-induction must have func-
tional transporters for the appropriate sugar. Induction by lactose 
requires active β-galactosidase to convert lactose to allolactose, the 
actual inducer, and a functional LacY transporter. Induction by 
galactose would not require active β-galactosidase, but the host 
strain must lack galactokinase activity and transport galactose well 
enough to achieve an intracellular concentration sufﬁ cient for 
inducing promoters blocked by  lac repressor. IPTG is not suitable 
for use in auto-induction because it can enter the cell and induce 
expression without a speciﬁ c transporter, and cultures cannot grow 
uninduced in the presence of IPTG. 
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

20
 A reliable carbon and energy source in addition to amino 
acids is needed to maintain metabolic activities in support of 
high-level expression of target protein when glucose becomes 
depleted during growth in auto-inducing media. Metabolism of 
the inducing sugar may not be sufﬁ cient because the operon for 
metabolism of that sugar may not be well induced in competi-
tion with the highly active T7 RNA polymerase-directed expres-
sion of target mRNA and protein. Furthermore, galactose cannot 
be metabolized at all in BL21 strains. Therefore, glycerol is pro-
vided in auto-inducing media as a good carbon and energy 
source that does not prevent glucose depletion during growth, 
glucose exclusion of inducing sugars, or the uptake of inducing 
sugars upon glucose depletion. 
 A glucose concentration is chosen so that its depletion causes 
auto-induction to begin in the mid-to-late log phase of growth, as 
aeration is diminishing and induction of target protein is robust. 
Glucose is highly effective at preventing induction by other sugars 
present in the medium, and even strains that express highly toxic 
target proteins grow well and maintain a high fraction of inducible 
cells before induction begins. Our comparisons using stained 
SDS- PAGE gels to detect target protein found auto-induction to 
comparable levels by lactose or galactose at the same molar con-
centration in MDA-505: no target protein was detected at 10 μM 
but detectable accumulation began around 20–50 μM and 
increased with inducer concentration to a maximum accumulation 
between about 1 and 10 mM. The standard 0.2 % lactose selected 
initially for auto-inducing media [ 6 ] corresponds to 5.6 mM, 
which equates to 0.1 % galactose. Induction of the pBAD pro-
moter in these media is effective at 0.05 % arabinose. 
 Non-inducing and auto-inducing media make production of 
proteins from cloned genes in  E .  coli reliable and convenient and are 
adaptable for applications from small-scale laboratory testing to 
large-scale screening and protein production. These growth media 
and protocols were developed for use with the T7 expression system, 
but the same methods are applicable to existing expression systems 
inducible by IPTG or arabinose and potentially to any expression 
system with an inducer whose action is blocked by glucose.  
2  Materials 
 Stock solutions are autoclaved for 15 min and stored at room tem-
perature unless speciﬁ ed otherwise. Deionized distilled water is 
used for all solutions. If the ﬁ nal solution is not to be autoclaved, 
sterile water (autoclaved for 15 min) is used in making the solution 
and the ﬁ nal solution is ﬁ lter sterilized. Dissolve components 
sequentially in the order given, usually in water stirred in a beaker. 
2.1  Stock Solutions
F. William Studier

21
Brief heating in a microwave oven can be effective in speeding up 
the process (plastic-covered magnetic stirring bars need not be 
removed in the microwave). High concentrations of sugars usually 
have to be heated to dissolve in a reasonable time.
  1.  50× M: 80 ml water, 17.75 g Na 2 HPO 4 , 17.0 g KH 2 PO 4 , 
13.4 g NH 4 Cl, 3.55 g Na 2 SO 4 . 1× concentration: 25 mM 
Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 
pH ~6.7 ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.  40 % glucose: 74 ml water, 40 g glucose.  
  3.   80 % glycerol (v/v) = 100 % (w/v): 100 g glycerol (weigh in 
beaker), 20 ml water.  
  4.  50× 5052: 25 g glycerol (weigh in beaker), 73 ml water, 2.5 g 
glucose, 10 g α-lactose monohydrate. 1× concentration: 0.5 % 
glycerol, 0.05 % glucose, 0.2 % α-lactose.  
  5.   50× 5051: 25 g glycerol (weigh in beaker), 73 ml water, 2.5 g 
glucose, 5 g galactose. 1× concentration: 0.5 % glycerol, 
0.05 % glucose, 0.1 % galactose.  
  6.  100× 505: 50 g glycerol (weigh in beaker), 57 ml water, 5 g 
glucose. 1× concentration: 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % glucose.  
  7.  25 % aspartate: 84 ml water, 25 g aspartic acid, 8 g NaOH 
(pH should be near neutral).  
  8.   17aa (no C,Y,M) (10 mg/ml each): 90 ml water stirred in 
beaker, add 1 g of each pure amino acid in the order NaGlu, 
Asp, Lys-HCl, Arg-HCl, His-HCl-H 2 O, Ala, Pro, Gly, Thr, 
Ser, Gln, Asn-H 2 O, Val, Leu, Ile, Phe, Trp. Stir until everything 
dissolves, and heat in microwave if necessary. Filter sterilize 
rather than autoclave. Keep working stock in refrigerator, and 
store aliquots in −20 °C freezer ( see  Note 2 ). 
  9.   18aa (no C,Y) (7.14 mg/ml each): 10 ml 17aa (10 mg/ml 
each), 4 ml methionine (25 mg/ml, autoclaved). Do not 
autoclave the ﬁ nal mixture. Keep working stock in refrigera-
tor, and store aliquots in −20 °C freezer. Incorporating 280 μl 
of 18aa in a total of 10 ml of medium gives 200   μg/ml of each 
amino acid for a total mixed concentration of 0.36 % ( see 
 Notes 2 and  3 ).  
 10.   1 M MgSO 4 : 87 ml water, 24.65 g MgSO 4 –7H 2 O. 
  11.   0.1 M FeCl 3 in ~0.12 M HCl: 99 ml water, 1 ml concentrated 
HCl (~12 M), 2.7 g FeCl 3 –6H 2 O, do not autoclave ( see  Note 4 ). 
 12.   1,000× metals: 50 mM FeCl 3 , 20 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM MnCl 2 , 
10 mM ZnSO 4 , 2 mM CoCl 2 , 2 mM CuCl 2 , 2 mM NiCl 2 , 
2 mM Na 2 MoO 4 , 2 mM Na 2 SeO 3 , 2 mM H 3 BO 3 , do not 
autoclave ( see  Note 4 ). 
  13.   ZY: 1 l water, 10 g N-Z-amine AS, 5 g yeast extract ( see  Note 5 ). 
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

22
 Recipes are given for a total volume of 500 ml for ~25 agar plates, 
800 ml for labeling with selenomethionine (SeMet), and 10 ml for 
other growth media to give convenient multiples for scaling up or 
down. Growth media contain 50 mM phosphate, which provides 
signiﬁ cant buffering and supports growth to high densities. As lit-
tle as 25 mM phosphate is sufﬁ cient if a lower concentration is 
desirable. The effectiveness of kanamycin as a selective agent 
against the growth of BL21(DE3) decreases with increasing con-
centration of phosphate in rich media [ 6 ]: 100 μg/ml of kanamy-
cin is needed to assure killing in the media given here. BL21(DE3) 
and BL21-AI grow well in these media. The recipes generally do 
not contain selective antibiotics or nutrients that may be essential 
for growth of other hosts, which must be added as appropriate. 
  1.   MDAG-11 non-inducing agar plates for isolating transfor-
mants ( see  Note 6 ): 5 g agar, 475 ml H 2 O, autoclave for 
15 min, mix well, let cool for ~10 min on bench or equilibrate 
in a 50 °C water bath. Add 1 ml 1 M MgSO 4 , 100 μl 1,000× 
metals, 1.25 ml 40 % glucose, 2 ml 25 % aspartate, 10 ml 50× 
M, 14 ml 18aa, and any nutrients required by the host cell 
(e.g., 50 μl 10 mM thiamine for XL1Blue-MR) or selective 
antibiotics (e.g., 2 ml of kanamycin stock solution, 25 mg/ml). 
Mix well, and pour ~20 ml per standard plastic Petri plate 
(pouring slowly until liquid just covers the bottom usually 
gives about the right amount per plate). This recipe makes 
~25 plates with ﬁ nal composition of 1 % agar, 25 mM 
Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 
2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.1 % glucose, 0.1 % aspartate, 
200 μg/ml of each of 18 amino acids (no C,Y) and optionally 
1 μM thiamine, and 100 μg/ml kanamycin ( see  Note 7 ). 
  2.   MDAG-11, non-inducing growth medium for suspending 
colonies, making dilutions or growing standing cultures ( see 
 Note 8 ): 9.43 ml water, 20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 , 2 μl 1,000× met-
als, 25 μl 40 % glucose, 40 μl 25 % aspartate, 200 μl 50× M, 
280 μl 18aa. Final composition: 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM 
KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× 
metals, 0.1 % glucose, 0.1 % aspartate, 200 μg/ml of each of 
18 amino acids (no C,Y).  
  3.  MDAG-135, non-inducing medium for growing high-density 
freezer stocks, working or seed cultures, or cultures for isolat-
ing plasmids ( see  Note 9 ): 9.37 ml water, 20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 , 
2 μl 1,000× metals, 87.5 μl 40 % glucose, 40 μl 25 % aspartate, 
200 μl 50× M, 280 μl 18aa. Final composition: 25 mM 
Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 
2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.35 % glucose, 0.1 % aspartate, 
200 μg/ml of each of 18 amino acids (no C,Y).  
2.2  Growth Media
2.2.1  Non-
inducing Media
F. William Studier

23
  4.  MDA-505, non-inducing medium for testing auto-induction 
by different concentrations of inducers ( see  Note 10 ): 9.36 ml 
water, 20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 , 2 μl 1,000× metals, 100 μl 100× 
505, 40 μl 25 % aspartate, 200 μl 50× M, 280 μl 18aa. Final 
composition: 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM 
NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.5 % 
glycerol, 0.05 % glucose, 0.1 % aspartate, 200 μg/ml of each 
of 18 amino acids (no C,Y).  
  5.  MDG, non-inducing minimal medium ( see  Note 11 ): 9.55 ml 
water, 20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 , 2 μl 1,000× metals, 125 μl 40 % 
glucose, 100 μl 25 % aspartate, 200 μl 50× M. Final composi-
tion: 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 
5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.5 % glucose, 
0.25 % aspartate.  
 All of these recipes except MD-5051 are formulated for auto- 
induction with 0.2 % lactose, which can be replaced for auto- induction 
with 0.1 % galactose, 0.05 % arabinose, or other sugars subject to 
glucose inhibition, as appropriate. Lactose and galactose can be 
exchanged by exchanging 50× 5052 (which provides 0.2 % lactose) 
and 50× 5051 (which provides 0.1 % galactose) in the recipes for 
auto-inducing media. Auto-induction of target genes under the con-
trol of the T7 lac promoter in BL21-AI requires both arabinose, to 
induce production of T7 RNA polymerase, and either lactose or 
galactose, to unblock the T7 lac promoter in the expression plasmid.
  1.   ZYM-5052 complex auto-inducing medium: 9.57 ml ZY, 
20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 (2 μl 1,000× metals, optional), 200 μl 50× 
5052, 200 μl 50× M. Final composition: 1 % N-Z-amine AS, 
0.5 % yeast extract, 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 
50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 (0.2× metals, 
optional), 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % glucose, 0.2 % α-lactose.  
  2.  MDA-5052 deﬁ ned auto-inducing medium: 9.26 ml water, 
20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 , 2 μl 1,000× metals, 200 μl 50× 5052, 40 μl 
25 % aspartate, 200 μl 50× M, 280 μl 18aa. Final composition: 
25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM 
Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % 
glucose, 0.2 % α-lactose, 0.1 % aspartate, 200 μg/ml of each 
of 18 amino acids (no C,Y).  
  3.  MD-5051 minimal auto-inducing medium for ﬂ exible label-
ing of target proteins ( see  Note 12 ): 9.48 ml water, 20 μl 1 M 
MgSO 4 , 2 μl 1,000× metals, 200 μl 5051, 100 μl 25 % aspar-
tate, 200 μl 50× M. Final composition: 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 
25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM 
MgSO 4 , 0.2× metals, 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % glucose, 0.1 % 
galactose, 0.25 % aspartate.  
2.2.2  Auto-
Inducing Media
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

24
  4.  MDASM-5052 for labeling proteins with SeMet, 800 ml ( see 
 Note 13 ): 746 ml sterile water, 1.6 ml 1 M MgSO 4 , 160 μl 
1,000× metals, 16 ml 50× 5052, 3.2 ml 25 % aspartate, 16 ml 
50× M, 16 ml 17aa (no C,Y,M), 320 μl Met (25 μg/ml), entire 
100 mg bottle of SeMet, 800 μl 1 mM vitamin B 12 . Do not auto-
clave but use immediately. Final composition: 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 
25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 
0.2× metals, 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % glucose, 0.2 % α-lactose, 0.1 % 
aspartate, 200 μg/ml of each of 17 amino acids (no C,Y,M), 
10 μg/ml Met, 125 μg/ml SeMet, 1 μM vitamin B 12 .  
  1.  ZYM-505: 9.68 ml ZY, 20 μl 1 M MgSO 4 (2 μl 1,000× metals, 
optional), 100 μl 100× 505, 200 μl 50× M. Final composition: 
1 % N-Z-amine AS, 0.5 % yeast extract, 25 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 
25 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM NH 4 Cl, 5 mM Na 2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 
(0.2× metals, optional), 0.5 % glycerol, 0.05 % glucose.  
3  Methods 
 Stock solutions were designed for convenience and ﬂ exibility in 
assembling different growth media and to avoid combining com-
ponents that are incompatible upon autoclaving. Media are usually 
assembled from stock solutions immediately before use. However, 
the growth media can be stable for extended periods in the refrig-
erator if not contaminated.  
  1.  MDAG-11 non-inducing plates are used for transformation to 
isolate clones. Transformants of some clones that express target 
genes highly toxic to the host have been obtained on MDAG- 11 
plates but only poorly or not at all on plates containing complex 
media (which may also differ from lot to lot). Liquid culture is 
used to make dilutions for colony PCR or to titer cultures.  
  2.  MDAG-135 non-inducing medium is used for growing cul-
tures for temporary or long-term storage at −70 °C, for grow-
ing working or seed cultures, or for isolating plasmids ( see 
 Notes 9 and  14 ). 
  3.  ZYM-5052 is the auto-inducing medium used routinely for 
screening pET clones for expression and solubility of target 
proteins in BL21(DE3) and for producing target protein for 
puriﬁ cation.  
  4.  ZYM-505 is used for rapid growth of high-density cultures 
and for isolating plasmids from strains that do not supply T7 
RNA polymerase. Because of the potential for unintended 
induction in this medium, plasmids from BL21(DE3) and 
BL21-AI are usually isolated from cultures grown on the non-
inducing MDAG-135.  
2.2.3  General-Purpose 
Complex Medium for Rapid 
Growth to High Density
3.1  Assembly and 
Storage of Growth 
Media
3.2  Media in 
Routine Use
F. William Studier

25
  1.  MDA-505 is used to test auto-induction as a function of 
inducer concentration ( see  Note 10 ). 
  2.  MDA-5052 auto-inducing medium is used instead of ZYM- 
5052 when a deﬁ ned medium is desired. The two media typi-
cally produce comparable levels of target protein.  
  3.   MDASM-5052 is designed for labeling proteins with SeMet 
for crystallography ( see  Note 13 ). 
  4.   The MD-5051 auto-inducing minimal medium is designed to 
be useful for speciﬁ c labeling of target proteins for NMR anal-
ysis ( see  Note 12 ). 
  5.  The MDG non-inducing minimal medium may be useful in 
labeling experiments and for deﬁ ning nutritional requirements 
( see  Note 11 ).  
 Reasonably good aeration is important for maintaining meta-
bolically balanced pH near neutral and obtaining growth to 
high cell densities. We typically grow cultures in a temperature-
controlled rotary shaker at ~350 rpm, using vessels and volumes 
of culture that give approximately equivalent levels of aeration. 
For auto- induction of many cultures in parallel to test expres-
sion and solubility, we grow 0.5 ml cultures in 13 × 100 mm 
glass culture tubes with plastic caps in the rotary shaker-incubator 
upright in plastic racks that hold up to 72 tubes. At the scale we 
work, this is much more convenient and controllable than using 
multi-well microtiter plates. However, microtiter plates can be 
used in high-throughput automation if aeration is properly 
addressed. Usually only a few microliters from such cultures are 
needed for reading densities ( see  Note 15 ), analysis by gel elec-
trophoresis ( see  Note 16 ), and any other likely testing. Up to 
2.5 ml of culture in non-inducing media is grown in 
18 × 150 mm glass culture tubes in the same way to make 
freezer stocks, plasmid preps, or seed stocks for moderate- scale 
auto-induction ( see  Note 14 ). Seed stocks for larger scale auto-
induction are grown in Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks, the culture occupying 
approximately 5–10 % of the flask volume. Moderate-scale 
auto-induction can use 400–500 ml of culture in 1.8-l baffled 
Fernbach flasks (Bellco). 
 In general, auto-inducing cultures are inoculated with 
 one- thousandth volume from a culture grown to saturation in 
non- inducing MDAG-135 from a freezer stock. The high dilu-
tion allows the entire culture to be growing uniformly by the 
time auto- induction begins. Cultures grown at 37 °C are typi-
cally grown overnight for 12–16 h, well past saturation. Saturation 
in ZYM- 5052 at 37 °C typically reaches an OD 600nm around 7–10 
but can reach 20–30 in some highly expressing strains. Incubation 
for several hours at saturation after auto-induction usually has 
little effect on accumulation or solubility of target proteins. 
3.3  Special-
Purpose Media
3.4  Growth of 
Cultures, Aeration, 
and Scale-Up
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

26
 Auto-induction works over the entire temperature range from 
18 to 37 °C, an advantage because some target proteins are sub-
stantially more soluble when expressed at lower temperatures. 
However, care must be taken to ensure that auto-induction is complete 
before harvesting cultures grown at the lower temperatures. 
Saturation densities are usually signiﬁ cantly higher than at 37 °C, 
presumably because of the higher solubility of oxygen at the lower 
temperatures. To shorten the total incubation time, we typically 
grow cultures for a few hours at 37 °C until they become lightly 
turbid (less than OD 600nm ~1) and then transfer them to the lower 
temperature. It is a good idea to continue incubation of cultures 
grown overnight at low temperature and to read the culture density 
a few hours apart to be sure that they are saturated. I learned this 
lesson when a colleague harvested a low-temperature culture 
because it had reached a high density overnight only to ﬁ nd that it 
actually saturates at a considerably higher density and had not yet 
induced. Sometimes incubation over two nights may be required. 
 In general, increasing the rate of aeration increases the density 
at which auto-induction begins and the density at which the cul-
ture saturates. Higher aeration also increases the minimum con-
centration of lactose needed for good induction. The standard 
0.2 % lactose was chosen to be well in excess of that needed for 
good auto-induction over the range of conditions tested. Auto- 
induced culture densities greater than OD 600nm ~50 have been 
attained by using higher levels of glycerol, higher levels of aeration, 
and appropriate metabolic balancing of pH with aspartate or suc-
cinate. Properly constituted auto-inducing media should be capa-
ble of producing even higher densities of fully induced cells in 
batch culture in fermentors, where high levels of oxygenation and 
near-neutral pH can be maintained to even higher densities.  
 We use expression clones made by inserting the coding sequence 
for the target protein in a pET vector plasmid under the control of 
a T7 lac promoter and the strong upstream translation signals for 
the T7 major capsid protein (Novagen), but clones in any of a wide 
range of vectors inducible by IPTG or arabinose are suitable. Initial 
clones are isolated by transformation into a host that does not sup-
ply T7 RNA polymerase (XL1Blue-MR in our work), and clones 
are usually veriﬁ ed by DNA sequencing. Expression plasmids are 
then transformed into BL21(DE3) or BL21-AI (usually selected on 
MDAG-11 plates), freezer stocks and working cultures are grown 
in MDAG-135, and target proteins are produced by auto- induction, 
usually in ZYM-5052 or MDA-5052 ( see  Notes 6 ,  7 , and  14 ). 
Compatible plasmids that supply rare tRNAs are also included in 
the expression strain if there are likely to be issues with codon usage. 
 Plasmids used to clone and express target genes usually carry a 
gene that confers resistance to an antibiotic to allow selection of the 
3.5  Expression 
Clones, Selective 
Antibiotics, and Toxic 
Target Proteins
F. William Studier

27
desired clones in transformation and to help maintain cultures in 
which the vast majority of cells are capable of inducing production 
of the target protein. However, proper practice is important if cul-
tures are not to become overgrown by cells that have lost plasmid. 
If basal expression is sufﬁ cient to stress the cell or if unintended 
induction occurs, the unwary can end up trying to produce target 
protein from cultures in which only a small fraction of cells remain 
competent to express it. Clones in some early vectors for expression 
by T7 RNA polymerase had signiﬁ cant basal expression and the 
problem was discussed in some detail [ 1 – 4 ]. The antibiotic ampicil-
lin is degraded by a secreted enzyme, β-lactamase, and is usually 
destroyed by the time turbidity becomes apparent in a culture, at 
which point cells that have lost plasmid can begin to overgrow the 
culture. Furthermore, enough β-lactamase can be produced and 
secreted that even a 200-fold dilution to grow a subculture can 
bring along enough enzyme to destroy the ampicillin present in the 
fresh medium and allow continued overgrowth of the culture. 
Kanamycin also had unanticipated problems. As pointed out in the 
ﬁ rst paragraph of Subheading  2.2 , kanamycin loses the ability to 
restrict the growth of BL21(DE3) (and presumably other  E .  coli 
strains as well) in rich media with commonly used phosphate con-
centrations. Once recognized, such problems can be avoided. 
 Problems due to basal expression of target protein are much 
reduced for the great majority of proteins when expressed from a 
T7 lac promoter. In the few cases we have examined, equivalently 
high accumulation of target protein was obtained in MDA-5052 
auto-inducing medium whether selective antibiotic was present in 
the medium or not, indicating that basal expression of target pro-
tein in the early stage of growth in auto-inducing media is low 
enough not to stress the cell signiﬁ cantly. 
 However, occasional target proteins are highly toxic to the cell 
at extremely low concentrations. In the limit case where a single 
transcript of the target gene can generate enough protein to kill 
the cell, an expression plasmid could not be maintained in a culture 
unless the stochastic bursts of target protein from all the plasmids 
in the cell occurred at a frequency signiﬁ cantly lower than an aver-
age of once per cell division. Basal expression of target protein will 
be reduced if basal expression of T7 RNA polymerase is reduced. 
This seems to be the case for BL21-AI, where T7 RNA polymerase 
appears to be produced from the uninduced pBAD promoter at a 
lower rate than in BL21(DE3) from the uninduced  lacUV5 pro-
moter. Indeed, some toxic target genes we have worked with were 
easier to establish and maintain in BL21-AI than in BL21(DE3), 
although both hosts showed signs of stress. 
 Some tools are available to help in trying to obtain, maintain, 
and express clones that express highly toxic target proteins. As 
pointed out in  Note 6 , some clones that cannot be obtained on 
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

28
commonly used plates containing complex media such as LB can 
be obtained by selection on non-inducing MDAG-11 plates. 
Colony PCR with appropriate primers is a rapid way to screen 
many colonies from a transformation plate for the presence of 
inserts. Touching a colony with a sterile pipettor tip and dispersing 
the cells in 0.5 ml MDAG-11 non-inducing medium by vortexing 
produces a suspension that can be used directly for PCR (1 μl in a 
25 μl PCR reaction) or after further dilution. The composition of 
a culture at any point in growth can also be determined by titering 
on four different plates [ 1 ,  4 ]: (1) all viable cells will form colonies 
on an appropriate nutrient plate; (2) only cells that retain plasmid 
will form colonies on a plate containing the selective antibiotic; (3) 
cells that have lost plasmid or that cannot induce the target protein 
will give colonies on a plate with strong inducing capacity, such as 
an inducing concentration of IPTG where repression is maintained 
by  lac repressor; and (4) mutant cells that retain plasmid but can-
not induce target protein will give colonies on plates containing 
both the selective antibiotic and the inducing capacity. Using such 
a plating assay can help to determine where problems lie.  
4  Notes 
  1.  Occasionally 50× M has showered crystals upon standing at 
room temperature. They can be redissolved in the microwave.  
  2.  The mixture of 17 amino acids is quite acidic and may have to 
be neutralized when using ﬁ nal concentrations greater than 
200 μg/ml of each. The effect of neutralizing the stock solution 
has not been explored. Trp and His slowly oxidize, producing a 
slightly yellow color with time. Tyr and Cys are not included 
because Tyr has low solubility and Cys oxidizes with time to 
precipitate as insoluble cystine. Met is not included so that 
SeMet can be used for labeling proteins for crystallography.  
  3.  All 18 amino acids could be dissolved together at 10 mg/ml 
of each, but the solution did not remain soluble upon storage 
in the refrigerator.  
  4.   The trace metal mix was assembled from autoclaved stock 
solutions of the individual components except for FeCl 3 , 
which was added from the 0.1 M solution in ~0.12 M HCl. 
Deﬁ ned media made with puriﬁ ed components usually will 
not have a sufﬁ cient supply of trace metals for growth to 
high density and auto-induction. The trace metal mix was 
designed to supply all of the trace metals known to be 
needed:   0.2× metals is sufﬁ cient for growth to high density 
and auto-induction in the media we use, and 1× metals 
attempts to supply sufﬁ cient amounts to saturate most 
metal-binding target proteins whose metal requirements may 
F. William Studier

29
not be known. As much as 5× metals in the growth medium 
can be tolerated with little effect on saturation density. The 
most critical need is for iron: less than 5 μM limited growth 
in minimal media and less than 10 μM limited growth in 
deﬁ ned media containing amino acids. If a trace metal mix-
ture is not available, 100 μM FeCl 3 supported growth in a 
deﬁ ned medium almost as well as the total metal mix. The 
highest iron concentration tested, 800 μM, remained soluble 
in 1 mM citrate and was well tolerated. Citrate at a con-
centration of 1 mM in growth media may prevent a light 
turbidity due to added iron or metal mix but is not neces-
sary for their beneﬁ cial effects. Trace metals are generally 
not needed in complex media, but 0.2× metals could be 
added to ensure that metal requirements are met.  
  5.  N-Z-amine AS, a soluble enzymatic digest of casein in 100-lb 
barrels, and yeast extract (HY-YEST 444 in a 55-lb barrel) 
were obtained from Quest International, 5515 Sedge Blvd., 
Hoffman Estates, IL 60192, telephone 800-833-8308. These 
or equivalent materials (e.g., tryptone) are also available in 
various quantities from Difco, Sigma, Fisher, or other bio-
chemical and chemical suppliers.  
  6.  MDAG-11 plates are used for transformation of clones into 
BL21(DE3) (competent cells from Novagen), BL21-AI (com-
petent cells from Life Technologies), or XL1Blue-MR, a host 
that does not supply T7 RNA polymerase and which requires 
thiamine for growth in minimal media (competent cells from 
Stratagene). Colonies appear after overnight incubation at 37 °C 
almost as rapidly on plates containing MDAG-11 as on plates 
containing complex media. Transformants of some clones that 
express target genes highly toxic to the host have been obtained 
on MDAG-11 plates but only poorly or not at all on plates con-
taining complex media (which may also differ from lot to lot).  
  7.   Plates should dry at room temperature for a day or two before 
using them or placing in a sealed plastic bag and storing in the 
refrigerator. Remove condensed moisture inside the lids with 
a Kimwipe. For use on the same day as pouring, allow the 
agar to set and then place in a 37 °C incubator with lids 
removed for 30–60 min or until the agar surface begins to 
show the ﬁ ne lines or creases that indicate drying. To prevent 
small bubbles from appearing, plates that have been stored in 
the refrigerator should be separated on a bench top and 
allowed to warm gradually to room temperature for several 
hours before incubating at 37 °C.  
  8.   The lower concentration of glucose in MDAG-11 is to pre-
vent standing cultures or colonies on agar plates from becom-
ing too acidic from metabolism of excess glucose at low 
dissolved oxygen concentration.  
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

30
  9.  The combination of 0.35 % glucose, 0.1 % aspartate, and 
200 μg/ml of each of 18 amino acids (0.36 %) in MDAG-
135 was arrived at experimentally to provide metabolic bal-
ancing of pH at relatively high aeration so that cultures grow 
to high cell density and arrive at saturation near-neutral pH. 
Poor aeration should be avoided, as such cultures may 
become quite acidic.  
  10.  The fully deﬁ ned non-inducing MDA-505 contains the same 
mixture of carbon and energy sources as the fully deﬁ ned auto-
inducing MDA-5052 except for lack of an inducing sugar. An 
expression strain capable of producing large amounts of target 
protein grows to saturation in MDA-505 with no detectable 
induction, making this medium suitable for testing the effec-
tiveness of different concentrations of inducing sugars.  
  11.  The only carbon and energy sources in MDG are 0.5 % glucose 
and 0.25 % aspartate for metabolic balancing of pH. Succinate 
can replace aspartate to make NH 4 the only source of nitrogen 
in this medium, and glycerol could replace glucose if desirable 
for labeling. BL21(DE3) grows well in this minimal medium.  
 12.    The only carbon and energy sources available to BL21(DE3) 
in the minimal auto-inducing MD-5051 are 0.5 % glycerol, 
0.05 % glucose, and 0.25 % aspartate for metabolic balancing 
of pH, since galactose cannot be metabolized by BL21 strains. 
Succinate can replace aspartate to make NH 4 the only source 
of nitrogen in this medium, and glucose should have been 
exhausted when production of target protein gets under way. 
BL21(DE3) grows well in this medium, which could be 
adapted as needed for labeling target proteins with various 
stable isotopes for NMR analysis.  
 13.    MDASM-5052 is a reformulation of PASM-5052, previously 
used for SeMet labeling of target proteins in BL21(DE3) with 
greater than 90 % replacement of Met by SeMet [ 6 ], to reduce 
the phosphate concentration from 100 to 50 mM. Methionine 
at 10 μg/ml facilitates growth and auto-induction in 125  µg/
ml SeMet, which would otherwise be too toxic. Vitamin B 12 
stimulates the  metH enzyme, which should regenerate SeMet 
from selenohomocysteine generated in methylation reactions 
and thereby help to make efﬁ cient use of SeMet. Vitamin B 12 
is present at the relatively high concentration of 1 μM so as to 
be taken up in spite of the BL21 deﬁ ciency in the  btuB trans-
porter [ 8 ]. Cultures grown well aerated from a 1,000-fold 
dilution of uninduced expression strain should reach satura-
tion fully induced in 14–16 h at 37 °C. We use 400 ml of 
medium in a 1.8-l bafﬂ ed ﬂ ask (Bellco) in a rotary shaker at 
~350 rpm. Yields of SeMet-labeled target protein have been 
comparable to yields of unlabeled target protein obtained in 
the absence of SeMet.  
F. William Studier

31
 14.   Freezer stocks for storage at −70 °C are typically made by plac-
ing in a 2-ml plastic freezer tube 1 ml of fresh overnight cul-
ture grown at 37 °C in non-inducing MDAG-135, adding 
0.1 ml of 80 % glycerol, mixing well by vortexing, and placing 
the tube directly in a storage box in a −70 °C freezer. Working 
cultures or seed cultures are inoculated from the frozen stock 
as needed by scraping material from the frozen surface with a 
sterile pipettor tip without thawing the remainder. An advan-
tage of these deﬁ ned, pH-balanced, non-inducing media is 
that working cultures and colonies on plates retain plasmid 
and high viability when stored for weeks in the refrigerator, 
much longer than is typical in complex media.  
 15.   Cultures grow to such high densities in these media that satu-
rated cultures are routinely diluted 100-fold to read an accu-
rate OD 600nm in a spectrophotometer with a 1 cm path length. 
Because the reading is due to light scattering, an accurate 
reading requires dilution to an OD lower than ~0.200.  
 16.   Protein patterns of whole-cell lysates, soluble portion, and 
pelleted fraction are analyzed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis. Cells pelleted from a sample of culture in a 1.5-ml 
microcentrifuge tube are resuspended in 40 μl of lysis solution 
at a concentration equivalent to OD 600nm ~5 (the volume of 
culture centrifuged, in microliters, equals 200/OD 600nm ). The 
lysis solution is Bugbuster Protein Extraction Reagent con-
taining 25 units/ml Benzonase Nuclease and 3 KU/ml 
recombinant lysozyme, all from Novagen. After allowing lysis 
for at least 30 min at room temperature, 20 μl is removed to a 
second tube and centrifuged for 1 min to separate soluble and 
pellet fractions, and the supernatant is carefully removed from 
the pellet with a pipettor and deposited in a new tube. Samples 
for electrophoresis are made by adding 10 μl of 3× SDS load-
ing buffer to the 20 μl whole-cell lysate and supernatant sam-
ples, and the lysate pellet is suspended in 30 μl of 1× SDS 
sample buffer, all three being well mixed by vortexing. The 
three  samples are heated for 2 min in a boiling water bath, and 
10 μl of each is resolved by electrophoresis on a 4–20 % gradi-
ent gel, which is then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue.  
 Acknowledgements 
 Work was supported by the Ofﬁ ce of Biological and Environmental 
Research of the US Department of Energy, the Protein Structure 
Initiative of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of 
the National Institutes of Health, as part of the New York Structural 
Genomics Research Consortium, and by internal research funding 
from Brookhaven National Laboratory.  
Reliable Auto-Induction for Protein Production

32
 References 
  1.  Studier FW, Moffatt BA (1986) Use of bacte-
riophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective 
high-level expression of cloned genes. J Mol 
Biol 189:113–130  
  2.  Studier FW (1991) Use of bacteriophage T7 
lysozyme to improve an inducible T7 expression 
system. J Mol Biol 219:37–44  
  3.  Dubendorff JW, Studier FW (1991) Controlling 
basal expression in an inducible T7 expression 
system by blocking the target T7 promoter with 
lac repressor. J Mol Biol 219:45–59  
  4.  Studier 
FW, 
Rosenberg 
AH, 
Dunn 
JJ, 
Dubendorff JW (1990) Use of T7 RNA poly-
merase to direct expression of cloned genes. 
Methods Enzymol 185:60–89  
  5.  Grossman TH, Kawasaki ES, Punreddy SR, 
Osburne MS (1998) Spontaneous cAMP- 
dependent derepression of gene expression in 
stationary phase plays a role in recombinant 
expression instability. Gene 209:95–103  
  6.  Studier FW (2005) Protein production by auto- 
induction in high-density shaking cultures. 
Protein Expr Purif 41:207–234  
  7.  Xu J, Banerjee A, Pan S-H, Li ZJ (2012) 
Galactose can be an inducer for production of 
therapeutic proteins by auto-induction using  E . 
 coli BL21 strains. Protein Expr Purif 83:30–36  
  8.  Studier FW, Daegelen P, Lenski RE, Maslov S, Kim 
JF (2009) Understanding the differences between 
genome sequences of  Escherichia coli B strains 
REL606 and BL21(DE3) and comparison of the  E . 
 coli B and K-12 genomes. J Mol Biol 394:653–680  
  9.  Adhya S, Echols H (1966) Glucose effect and 
the galactose enzymes of  E .  coli : Correlation 
between glucose inhibition of induction and 
inducer transport. J Bacteriol 92:601–608  
F. William Studier

33
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_3, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 3  
 High-Throughput Expression Screening and Puriﬁ cation 
of Recombinant Proteins in  E .  coli 
 Natalie  J.  Saez and  Renaud  Vincentelli 
 Abstract 
 The protocols outlined in this chapter allow for the small-scale test expression of a single or multiple 
proteins concurrently using several expression conditions to identify optimal strategies for producing soluble, 
stable proteins. The protocols can be performed manually without the need for specialized equipment, or can 
be translated to robotic platforms. The high-throughput protocols begin with transformation in a 96-well 
format, followed by small-scale test expression using auto-induction medium in a 24-well format, ﬁ nishing 
with puriﬁ cation in a 96-well format. Even from such a small scale, there is the potential to use the puriﬁ ed 
proteins for characterization in pilot studies, for sensitive micro-assays, or for the quick detection of and dif-
ferentiation of the expected size and oxidation state of the protein by mass spectrometry.  
 Key words   E .  coli ,  Bacteria  ,  Expression  ,   Recombinant  ,   High-throughput  ,   Puriﬁ cation ,   Auto- 
induction ,   Immobilized metal afﬁ nity chromatography (IMAC)  ,   TEV cleavage  
1  Introduction 
 Traditionally, protein production approaches have centered on the 
case-by-case exploration of proteins of particular interest. With 
advances in genomics and thousands of novel and interesting pro-
teins being discovered at such an accelerated rate, these production 
strategies have become outdated, causing a bottleneck in structural 
and functional studies. Parallelization of these traditional approaches 
into high-throughput pipelines at a small scale allows the screening 
for optimal expression conditions, enabling the testing of various 
parameters on soluble expression levels. This may include, but is 
not limited to, using varying expression strains [ 1 ,  2 ], temperature 
[ 3 ,  4 ], media [ 2 ,  3 ], target variants [ 5 ], fusion partners [ 6 – 12 ], co-
expression with chaperones [ 13 ,  14 ], cytoplasmic or periplasmic 
expression [ 15 ], and puriﬁ cation buffer components [ 3 ]. Testing all 
of these variables using traditional methods would be highly inefﬁ -
cient. However, by implementing high- throughput approaches, 

34
up to 96 expressions and puriﬁ cations can be tested in parallel, and 
multiple can be performed in any 1 week. This means that many 
variables can be tested on a few targets or a few variables can be 
tested on many targets with a high level of efﬁ ciency. The strategy 
also provides good reproducibility upon scale-up as the same cul-
ture and puriﬁ cation conditions are utilized at both stages. 
 Our high-throughput strategy utilizes  E .  coli , taking advantage 
of its ease of use, fast growth rates, relatively low cost of produc-
tion, and adaptability to scaling up cultures for large-scale expres-
sion once optimal conditions are identiﬁ ed. With the range of 
 E .  coli strains available, the system is also applicable to a wide range 
of targets, even those that are not codon optimized for expression 
in  E .  coli (using strains that compensate for rare codons) or for 
targets with complex folds, containing multiple disulﬁ de bonds 
(using strains that modify the reducing environment of the cyto-
plasm). Given that a large proportion of constructs are generally 
cloned directly without codon optimization, for the protocol 
described herein we have chosen to utilize the Rosetta 2 (DE3) 
pLysS strain, which carries tRNAs for rare codons that are not 
highly expressed in  E .  coli . However, it is possible for the high-
throughput protocol to be trialled using different strains to check 
for variances in the soluble expression levels of target proteins and 
to continue optimization on the most desirable strain. We also use 
auto-induction [ 16 ], which simpliﬁ es expression, eliminating the 
need for manual induction. One downfall of expression in  E .  coli is 
that it does not allow for posttranslational modiﬁ cations, other than 
disulﬁ de bonding, and for these types of targets alternative produc-
tion methods need to be sought (either by expression in eukaryotes 
or by chemical synthesis for small proteins (<70 residues)). 
 Apart from the expression strain, several other factors are 
important for the optimization of expression. Temperature is also 
a factor that inﬂ uences the rate of expression, and may affect the 
solubility levels of the target protein. For poorly soluble proteins it 
may be beneﬁ cial to reduce the rate of expression by decreasing the 
temperature in order to prevent aggregation issues arising from 
too high a rate of expression [ 3 ,  4 ]. While there is evidence that 
auto-induction medium can give higher or equivalent levels of 
expression than standard media (e.g., LB, TB, 2YT) with IPTG 
induction [ 6 ], for cases where soluble expression is low or not 
detected, alternative media can also be trialled during screening as 
it may have an inﬂ uence on soluble expression for particular pro-
teins. The choice of fusion partner is another important factor in 
protein expression. Various fusion tags can be used to aid in the 
solubilization or proper folding of the targets (e.g., thioredoxin 
(TRX) [ 9 ], small ubiquitin-like modiﬁ er (SUMO) [ 6 ,  10 ], maltose 
binding protein (MBP) [ 8 ,  11 ], N-utilizing substance A (NusA) 
[ 7 ], and glutathione  S -transferase (GST) [ 12 ]). Several tags should 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

35
be tested for each target as their effect on expression levels may be 
target-dependent. For example, tags with some redox activity may 
be more beneﬁ cial for target proteins containing multiple disulﬁ de 
bonds [ 17 ]. For proteins containing complex folds, other strate-
gies to be considered include the effect of periplasmic expression 
[ 18 ] compared to cytoplasmic expression and the effect of co- 
expression of chaperones to assist folding [ 13 ,  14 ]. For targets 
composed of individual domains from larger proteins, different 
constructs with variable N- and C-termini could be tested to deter-
mine the optimal domain boundaries (the multi-construct approach) 
[ 5 ]. For puriﬁ cation, there are several important factors to be taken 
into consideration including ionic strength (by varying salt con-
centration) and incorporation of protein structure stabilizing 
agents such as glycerol (for proteins with poor stability). A detailed 
review of all potential variables is out of the scope of this commu-
nication, but has been analyzed in further detail previously [ 2 ,  3 ]. 
 The high-throughput strategy is also desirable for reasons 
other than efﬁ ciency. Cultures are grown in deep well 24 (DW24) 
format, which means that they can be grown using regular shaking 
incubators, in contrast to cultures grown in deep well 96 (DW96) 
format which require the use of speciﬁ c, shaking incubators with a 
high speed of shaking to allow for reasonable culture aeration. The 
handling of cultures in this side-by-side manner also minimizes the 
variables involved in expression and puriﬁ cation, allowing for a 
more effective and simpliﬁ ed comparison of results. Speciﬁ cally, 
because only one variable is changed well-to-well (such as the type 
of fusion partner), all the other parameters remain strictly the same 
(temperature, shaking, aeration, medium) preventing artiﬁ cial 
batch-to-batch variations. Even for laboratories with deﬁ ned 
expression and puriﬁ cation conditions in place, it is possible to 
move directly into this system to aid side-by-side comparison of 
individual variables or in order to simply increase throughput, 
without needing to completely change their methods. 
 The strategy utilized at AFMB [ 19 ] is simple and generally 
applicable to a wide range of targets. We use these expression 
screening pipelines and high-throughput protocols in a semi- 
automated way (using a Tecan liquid handling robot and Caliper 
GXII LabChip system for analysis of results) for up to 1,152 
(12 × 96) cultures in parallel over 1 week [ 19 ,  20 ]. However, it is 
important to note that the same methods are suitable for a high- 
throughput manual approach. This means that these protocols can 
be used in laboratories with a basic setup and without the need of 
expensive equipment. In fact, depending on the detection system 
used for analyzing solubility, the procedure can be done manually 
with a throughput of 96 (using SDS-PAGE detection) or 384 
(4 × 96; using dot blot and SDS-PAGE [ 20 ]) cultures per week. 
Using the recommended protocol ( see Fig.  1 ), there is a reasonable 
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

36
chance that sufﬁ cient quantities of soluble proteins will be obtained 
for the majority of targets in the time frame of 1 week. For further 
details regarding the choice of conditions in this strategy  see ref.  19 .
 Using this strategy there are two possible pipelines to be con-
sidered, the choice of which depends on the number of targets to 
be tested. For optimal plate layout, the number of targets should 
be restricted to 8, 16, 24, 32, 48 or 96 (one column, one sixth, a 
quarter, a third, half or a full plate, respectively). For 48 targets and 
above Pipeline 1 is recommended, while for 1–24 targets Pipeline 
2 is recommended ( see Fig.  2a, b , respectively, explained in further 
detail below). In both cases, for a new project, expression screening 
is initially carried out in only one culture condition. The cultures are 
grown in ZYP5052 auto-induction medium [ 16 ] at 37 °C for 4 h, 
at which point the temperature is then dropped to 17 °C and left 
overnight for another 18–20 h. The change in temperature corre-
sponds to the glucose depletion time and the induction of expres-
sion by lactose. Because we usually produce several proteins 
concurrently, we use the Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS strain as the 
default strain without considering the protein origin or codon 
optimization, however, if codon optimization has been per-
formed then BL21 (DE3) pLysS is also suitable. For cloning, all 
 Fig. 1    Schematic representation of the high-throughput expression screening protocol. The variables to be tested in 
the expression screening protocols (culture conditions: strain, temperature, medium; and constructs: fusion partner, 
target construct, tag position, co-expression, periplasmic expression) are discussed further in the Introduction text 
and in Pipeline 1 and 2 (Fig.  2a, b , respectively). Using this protocol, 96–384 conditions can be tested in 1 week using 
manual methods [ 19 ], or up to 1,152 conditions can be tested in an automated manner [ 19 ]  
 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

37
 Fig. 2    Constructs are initially expressed in Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS at 37/17 °C. Puriﬁ cation is performed on nickel 
resin followed by detection of soluble constructs via SDS-PAGE (or dot-blot then SDS-PAGE or on a Caliper Lab Chip). 
If the ﬁ rst round of expression screening is unsuccessful, alternative culture conditions are trialled. If constructs 
produce soluble proteins in high enough yields, microassays and quality control can be performed and, if required, 
large-scale production can be pursued. Cleavage of the tag and large-scale production are optional steps. ( a ) Pipeline 
1 is recommended for 48 or more constructs, where initially only HIS and HIS-TRX constructs are trialled. If Pipeline 
1 is not successful, expression screening is resumed at Pipeline 2. ( b ) Pipeline 2 is recommended for 1–24 targets, 
where up to 6 expression constructs are trialled in parallel. Note, if Pipeline 1 has already been trialled, the HIS tag 
and HIS-TRX constructs (marked with an  asterisk (*)) can be removed in Pipeline 2  
 
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

38
proteins are directly preceded by a TEV protease cleavage site 
(ENLYFQ/[G or S]) to produce native protein (with a single ves-
tigial glycine or serine) after cleavage (Fig.  3 ). While not essential 
for this protocol, we utilize the Gateway system for cloning [ 21 ]. 
This system is very efﬁ cient and gives us access to numerous clone 
collections from private or public libraries. Furthermore, with its 
versatility and the hundreds of vectors available, it allows us to 
work on the same clones as collaborators that may be working with 
divergent techniques, some examples being expression in eukary-
otic cells, yeast two hybrid or in vivo localization.
 For Pipeline 1 (suitable for 48 or more constructs; Fig.  2a ) all 
proteins are cloned directly into two plasmids [ 19 ] containing an 
N-terminal HIS-tag (pDEST17OI) [ 22 ] or a HIS-TRX fusion- tag 
[ 9 ]. If the HIS-tag construct is soluble (above 2 mg/L), then pro-
duction is carried out with this construct. Alternatively, if the HIS-
tag construct is not soluble or produces less than 2 mg/L of 
protein, and if the TRX construct is soluble above 2 mg/L, pro-
duction is carried out using this construct. In all other cases, con-
structs are screened using 3 alternative strains (BL21 (DE3) pLysS, 
Origami (DE3) pLysS, and C41 (DE3) pRos) at three induction 
temperatures (37/25/17 °C) in ZYP5052. The same thresholds 
are applied and for recalcitrant targets alternative fusion partners 
are pursued as in Pipeline 2. 
 Fig. 3    Constructs used in Pipeline 1 and Pipeline 2 (Fig.  2a, b , respectively). The 
HIS tag is used for nickel afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation. The fusion partner is used to 
increase solubility and/or aid folding of the target protein. The fusion partners 
suggested in this protocol are thioredoxin (TRX) [ 9 ], small ubiquitin-like modiﬁ er 
(SUMO) [ 6 ,  10 ], maltose binding protein (MBP) [ 8 ,  11 ], N-utilizing substance A 
(NusA) [ 7 ], and glutathione  S -transferase (GST) [ 12 ], however alternative fusion 
partners, or a different number of fusion partners, can be selected at the user’s 
discretion. The TEV site enables cleavage of the HIS tag and fusion partner if 
required, leaving only a single glycine or serine residue at the N-terminus of the 
native target protein. In these constructs the target protein does not need to be 
codon optimized as expression is generally performed in Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS, 
however, if the target protein is codon-optimized expression can be performed in 
BL21 (DE3) pLysS instead. Stop codons should be added after the target protein 
sequence prior to cloning into the expression vectors  
 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

39
 Due to the fewer number of targets in Pipeline 2 (1–24 targets; 
Fig.  2b ), more fusion partners can be tested initially to identify 
those that produce higher soluble yields. In this case the targets are 
cloned in up to six vectors: one containing an N-terminal HIS-tag 
[ 22 ], and the others containing a HIS-tag with additional fusion 
partner. The recommended fusion partners in this case are: thiore-
doxin (TRX) [ 9 ], small ubiquitin-like modiﬁ er (SUMO) [ 6 ,  10 ], 
maltose binding protein (MBP) [ 8 ,  11 ], N-utilizing substance A 
(NusA) [ 7 ], and glutathione  S -transferase (GST) [ 12 ], however 
alternative fusion partners, or a different number of fusion partners, 
can be selected at the user’s discretion. As in Pipeline 1, if the HIS-
tag construct is soluble (above 2 mg/L), then production is carried 
out with this construct. Alternatively, if the HIS-tag construct is not 
soluble or produces less than 2 mg/L of protein, and if at least one 
of the fusion constructs is soluble above 2 mg/L, production is car-
ried out using the construct producing the highest yield. In all 
other cases, constructs are screened using 3 alternative strains 
(BL21 (DE3) pLysS, Origami (DE3) pLysS, and C41 (DE3) pRos) 
at three induction temperatures (37/25/17 °C) in ZYP5052. The 
same thresholds are applied at this stage. For recalcitrant targets, 
the next step would be to purify the insoluble HIS- tagged target 
from inclusion bodies, solubilize, and refold (this is out of the scope 
of this protocol and will not be discussed here,  see ref.  23 ). 
 The amount of resin used in the puriﬁ cation steps can be adjusted 
(either 50 or 200 μL, as discussed further in Subheadings  3 and  4 ) 
allowing simple high-throughput screening useful for the quick 
comparison of expression conditions [ 17 ], or (with the larger amount 
of resin) there is even the potential to purify tagged proteins directly 
from small-scale expressions for characterization by sensitive func-
tional assays, binding assays (e.g., Systematic Evolution of Ligands 
by Exponential Enrichment (SELEX) for DNA-binding proteins 
[ 19 ,  24 ]) or in pilot studies where tens of micrograms of sample is 
sufﬁ cient. Yields are also generally sufﬁ cient for the quick detection of 
and differentiation of the expected size and oxidation state of the 
protein by mass spectrometry or to conﬁ rm homogeneity by chro-
matographic methods [ 25 ]. In many cases it is unnecessary or even 
undesirable to cleave the fusion tag. Cleavage can be a limiting step 
in terms of yield, due to suboptimal cleavage efﬁ ciency, and poor 
recovery after further puriﬁ cation, therefore if the tag does not inter-
fere with the structure or function of the target it is advisable to leave 
the fusion protein intact. For proteins that are poorly soluble and 
prone to aggregation, often the fusion protein is used to maintain 
solubility and should not be removed, for example during crystalliza-
tion in structural studies [ 26 ,  27 ]. If cleavage of the fusion tag is 
desired, it is also possible to perform TEV cleavage from the small-
scale puriﬁ cation to analyze the efﬁ ciency of cleavage, optimize cleav-
age conditions if necessary and obtain a reliable estimate of yields 
for future scale- up experiments, at which time the native protein can 
be puriﬁ ed. 
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

40
 Once the optimal conditions for soluble expression have been 
deﬁ ned (for example strain, temperature, media and fusion part-
ner), production can be scaled up for the production of milligram 
quantities of puriﬁ ed proteins for further structural and functional 
studies. By extrapolating the yield from small-scale expression, the 
culture volume required at large scale can be inferred (typically 
1–5 L). When growing scale-up culture, in auto-induction medium, 
to get optimal aeration we limit the volume of medium to 800 mL 
in a 2 L ﬂ ask. For 800 mL of culture, a 20 mL preculture is gener-
ally inoculated from the glycerol stock or LB agar plate produced 
at expression screening (of the best fusion in the best cell line). The 
culture is grown at the same temperature and in the same medium 
as the optimal condition from expression screening. Lysis is 
achieved in the same way as at the small scale, but in the presence 
of a suitable protease inhibitor (e.g., PMSF). The whole cell lysate 
is ﬁ rst clariﬁ ed by centrifugation to obtain the soluble cell lysate. 
 The general large-scale strategy employed at AFMB [ 28 ] is to 
purify the protein in a semi-automated manner on an AKTA Express. 
In the ﬁ rst step nickel afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation is performed on the solu-
ble cell lysate using the same buffers as in the test puriﬁ cation with a 
HisTrap FF Crude column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Product 
code: 17–5286). After this step we have our target protein puriﬁ ed 
in a high concentration of imidazole. The next step is dependent on 
whether tag cleavage is required. If the HIS- tagged version is solu-
ble or the fusion is more stable, there is no need to remove the tag 
and the second step is gel ﬁ ltration (on a Superdex 200 preparative 
grade column, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Product code: 28-9893-
35) for the purposes of oligomeric state characterization as well as 
buffer exchange into an appropriate buffer for subsequent applica-
tions. If the tag is to be removed, desalting must be performed ﬁ rst. 
Here, the protein is desalted (on a HiPrep 26/10 desalting column, 
GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Product code: 17-5087-01) into a 
buffer with no imidazole. Tag cleavage is then performed using the 
same conditions identiﬁ ed at small scale. The tag and protease 
(which also carries a HIS-tag) are removed by reapplying the cleav-
age mixture over the regenerated and re-equilibrated nickel column. 
This time the column ﬂ owthrough, containing the puriﬁ ed target 
protein, is collected. An additional gel ﬁ ltration step, as described 
above for tagged protein, can be performed to assess oligomeriza-
tion and for buffer exchange into an appropriate buffer for subse-
quent applications. Quality control by LC-MS can be performed at 
various stages during the puriﬁ cation in order to conﬁ rm the integ-
rity of the protein produced. Alternatively, puriﬁ cation can be per-
formed manually with gravity ﬂ ow nickel columns followed by buffer 
exchange using desalting columns (such as PD-10 desalting  columns, 
GE Healthcare Life Sciences, reference 17-0851-01) if an AKTA 
express is not available. 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

41
 A case study utilizing the high-throughput screening approach 
for the expression of DNA-binding domains from  Ciona intestinalis 
transcription factors and the subsequent Systematic Evolution of 
Ligands by Exponential Enrichment (SELEX) DNA-binding assay 
is given in [ 19 ,  24 ] and these protocols have continued to be used 
successfully for various other projects since their publication.  
2  Materials 
 Material quantities are given for one set of 96 transformations, 
cultures and puriﬁ cations. If more than 96 are being performed at 
one time, please adjust the values accordingly. Reference numbers 
for the author’s preferred choice of materials are provided where 
relevant, however equivalent products may also be suitable. A reg-
ular shaking incubator can be used for all culture steps (at a speed 
of 200 rpm) for DW96 (LB preculture only) and DW24 and will 
provide sufﬁ cient aeration, however if a short orbital specialized 
incubator for higher speeds is available (such as an Infors Incubation 
Multitron Shaker with 3 mm throw, model number AJ103) this 
can be used at a speed of 800 rpm for DW96 and 400 rpm for 
DW24. The procedures are most efﬁ cient when using multichan-
nel pipettes with variable span such as Matrix Equalizer Pipettes, 
Thermo Scientiﬁ c. If there are none already available and the 
equipment budget is limited, it is possible to limit the purchase of 
these pipettes to the 15–1,250 μL pipette only (reference 2034), 
which is the most versatile pipette for these techniques. 
  1.   4 × 24-well sterile tissue culture (TC24) plates (Greiner Bio- 
One, reference 662160).   
  2.  Antibiotics: 
Ampicillin 
(100 
mg/mL 
in 
water), 
Chloramphenicol (34 mg/mL in ethanol), store stocks at 
−20 °C and use a 1 in 1,000 dilution.  
  3.   (a)   LB agar: Dissolve 10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract, and 
10 g NaCl in ~950 mL water. Adjust the pH of the medium 
to 7.0 using 1 M NaOH. Add 15 g of agar and make up to 
1 L. Dispense into 500 mL Schott bottles containing no 
more than 450 mL of LB agar each. Autoclave.    
 
 (b)   Preparation of agar plates: Melt a bottle of LB agar in a 
microwave set to low (ensuring that it does not boil over). 
Once thoroughly melted, allow it to cool to approximately 
45 °C and add the required antibiotics. Pour onto plates 
immediately. The 24-well tissue culture plates should con-
tain 2 mL of LB agar per well ( see  Note 1 ).  
  4.   Chemically competent Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS  E. coli strain 
(Novagen, Millipore).  
2.1  Transformation 
Materials
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

42
 After the initial purchase of competent cells, the cells are cultivated 
and made competent in-house, in order to be more cost-efﬁ cient. 
New batches of chemically competent cells are shock frozen (using 
liquid nitrogen) in 1 mL aliquots and stored at −80 °C.  
  5.  96-well PCR (PCR96) plate (Greiner Bio-One, reference 
652270).  
  6.  Multichannel pipettes with variable span (suitable for dispens-
ing 1, 25, 60 and 100 μL volumes) to dispense reagents into a 
96- and 24-well format (Matrix Equalizer Pipettes, Thermo 
Scientiﬁ c: 1–30 μL, reference 2130-11 and 5–250 μL, refer-
ence 2032-11) and 100 mL disposable reagent reservoirs, 
sterile (Thermo Scientiﬁ c, reference 8085).  
  7.   Expression plasmids.  
  8.  Adhesive tape pads (Qiagen, reference 19570).  
  9.   PCR machine suitable for 96-well PCR plates.  
 10.   Deep-well 96 (DW96) plate, autoclaved for sterility, with 
2 mL volume capacity (Greiner Bio-One, reference 780270).  
 11.   LB medium: Prepare in advance and store at room tempera-
ture. Dissolve 10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract, and 10 g NaCl 
in ~950 mL water. Adjust the pH of the medium to 7.0 using 
1 M NaOH and make up to 1 L. Autoclave in volumes of less 
than 500 mL.  
 12.   Repeat pipettor (Eppendorf, reference 22 26 020-1) and 
50 mL Combitips (Eppendorf, reference 22 26 660-8).  
 13.   Shaking incubator set to 37 °C.  
 14.   Plate incubator set to 37 °C.  
 15.   Breathseal breathable adhesive ﬁ lm (Greiner Bio-One, refer-
ence 676050).  
  1.   ZY medium: Dissolve 10 g of N-Z-amine AS (or any tryptic 
digest of casein, e.g., tryptone) and 5 g of yeast extract in 
925 mL of water and autoclave. A ﬁ nal volume of 1 L ZYP- 
5052 medium will be achieved with the addition of the remain-
ing components (MgSO 4 , 5052, and NPS, provided in  no. 2 , 
 3 , and  4 , respectively).  
  2.  2 M MgSO 4 stock: Dissolve 49.3 g of MgSO4 · 7H2O in water 
to a ﬁ nal volume of 100 mL. Autoclave.  
  3.   5052 50× stock: In a beaker weigh out 250 g of glycerol. To 
this, add 730 mL water, and while stirring, add 25 g of glucose 
and 100 g of α-lactose. Lactose dissolves slowly; stirring over 
low heat will hasten the process. Autoclave once dissolved.  
  4.  NPS 20× stock: To 900 mL of water in a beaker, add (in the 
following order) 66 g of (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 136 g of KH 2 PO 4 , and 
142 g of Na 2 HPO 4 . Stir until dissolved, then autoclave. 
A 20-fold dilution in water should have a pH of around 6.75.  
2.2  Test Expression 
Materials
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

43
  5.  Antibiotics: 
Ampicillin 
(100 
mg/mL 
in 
water), 
Chloramphenicol (34 mg/mL in ethanol), store stocks at 
−20 °C and use a 1 in 1,000 dilution.  
  6.  4× Deep well 24 (DW24) plates autoclaved for sterility, with 
10 mL volume capacity (Whatman UNIPLATE, reference 
7701–5102).  
  7.  Repeat pipettor (Eppendorf, reference 22 26 020–1) and 
50 mL Combitips (Eppendorf, reference 22 26 660–8).  
  8.  Multichannel pipettes with variable span (suitable for dispens-
ing 50, 100, 150 μL and 1 mL volumes) (Matrix Equalizer 
Pipettes, Thermo Scientiﬁ c: 5–250 μL reference 2032–11, 
15–1,250 μL reference 2034) and 1,250 μL pipette tips 
(Matrix, Thermo Scientiﬁ c, reference 8041–11).  
  9.  Breathseal breathable adhesive ﬁ lm (Greiner Bio-One, refer-
ence 676050).  
 10.   Shaking incubator set to 37 °C that can be adjusted to 17 °C.  
 11.   Flat-bottomed, clear microtiter plate (Greiner Bio-One, refer-
ence 655101).  
 12.   96-well plate reading spectrophotometer for measuring 
OD 600nm (optical density) of bacterial cultures.  
 13.   Centrifuge with rotor for deep well plates (3,800 ×  g ). 
 14.   Bactinyl (Orapi Group) or equivalent microbial disinfectant.  
  15.  Lysozyme stock (50 mg/mL): Dissolve 0.5 g lysozyme in water 
to a ﬁ nal volume of 10 mL. Store in 0.5 mL aliquots at −20 °C.  
 16.   Imidazole ACS grade (Merck, reference 104716). A high 
quality grade of imidazole must be used so that it will not 
interfere with  A 280nm readings for calculating protein yield.  
 17.   Lysis/binding buffer 10× stock ( see  Note 2 ): Prepare 1 L of 
buffer containing 500 mM Tris pH 8, 3 M NaCl and 100 mM 
Imidazole ACS grade (Merck, reference 104716) in advance, 
ﬁ lter through a 0.22 μm ﬁ lter and store at 4 °C. 
 Preparation of lysis buffer : On the day of use, dilute 10 mL of 
10× stock into a ﬁ nal volume of 100 mL. Add lysozyme stock 
to a ﬁ nal concentration of 0.25 mg/mL.  
 18.   Deep-well 96 (DW96) plate, with 2 mL volume capacity 
(Greiner Bio-One, reference 780270).  
  1.   Water bath.  
  2.  Shaking incubator.  
  3.  DNase stock (2 mg/mL): Dissolve 100 mg of DNase in 
50 mL of water. Filter-sterilize and divide into 1 mL aliquots. 
Store aliquots at −20 °C.  
2.3  Test Puriﬁ cation 
Components
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

44
  4.  2 M MgSO 4 stock: Dissolve 49.3 g of MgSO4 · 7H2O in water 
to a ﬁ nal volume of 100 mL. Autoclave.  
  5.   Multichannel pipettes with variable span (suitable for dispens-
ing 5, 10, 15, 25 and 200 or 600 μL and 1.2 mL volumes) 
(Matrix Equalizer Pipettes, Thermo Scientiﬁ c: 5–250 μL ref-
erence 2032–11, 15–1,250 μL reference 2034), 1,250 μL 
pipette tips (Matrix, Thermo Scientiﬁ c, reference 8041–11), 
and 100 mL disposable reagent reservoirs (Thermo Scientiﬁ c, 
reference 8085).  
  6.  Adhesive tape pads (Qiagen, reference 19570).  
  7.   4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer ( see  Note 3 ): Prepare 10 mL of 
250 mM Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 8 % SDS, 300 mM DTT, 30 % 
glycerol, 0.02 % bromophenol blue. Divide into 1 mL aliquots 
and store at −20 °C.  
  8.  4× 96-well PCR (PCR96) plates (Greiner Bio-One, reference 
652270).  
  9.  Ni Sepharose 6 Fast Flow resin (GE Healthcare, reference 
17-5318-02): The resin is supplied in 20 % ethanol. Put ali-
quots of the resin in 15 mL falcon tubes. To equilibrate the 
resin, wash twice in water and then twice in binding buffer ( no. 
10 ). This is done by ﬁ rst centrifuging at 500 ×  g for 1 min, dis-
carding the supernatant by inverting the tubes and resuspend-
ing in water or buffer. Repeat at each step of equilibration. After 
the ﬁ nal wash, resuspend in binding buffer as a 25 % (v/v) 
(25:75 mL) or 33 % (v/v) (35:70 mL) (resin–buffer) slurry 
( see  Note 4 ). Store the equilibrated resin at 4 °C when not in use.  
 10.   Lysis/binding buffer 10× stock ( see  Note 2 ): Prepare 1 L of 
buffer containing 500 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 3 M NaCl and 
100 mM Imidazole ACS grade (Merck, reference 104716) in 
advance, ﬁ lter through a 0.22 μm ﬁ lter and store at 4 °C. 
 Preparation of binding buffer : On the day of use, dilute 20 mL 
of 10× stock into a ﬁ nal volume of 200 mL.  
 11.   Wash buffer 10× stock ( see  Note 2 ): Prepare 1 L of buffer 
containing 500 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 3 M NaCl and 500 mM 
Imidazole ACS grade (Merck, reference 104716) in advance, 
ﬁ lter through a 0.22 μm ﬁ lter and store at 4 °C. 
 Preparation of wash buffer : On the day of use, dilute 25 mL of 
10× stock into a ﬁ nal volume of 250 mL.  
 12.   Elution buffer 5× stock ( see  Note 2 ): Prepare 1 L of buffer 
containing 250 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 1.5 M NaCl and 1.25 M 
Imidazole ACS grade (Merck, reference 104716) in advance, 
ﬁ lter through a 0.22 μm ﬁ lter and store at 4 °C. 
 Preparation of wash buffer : On the day of use, dilute 20 mL of 
5× stock into a ﬁ nal volume of 100 mL.  
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

45
 13.   CHROMABOND® MULTI 96 vacuum manifold (Macherey- 
Nagel, reference 738630.M) and vacuum pump.  
 14.   Macherey-Nagel 96-well Receiver/Filter Plate 20 μm, 1.5 mL 
capacity (Macherey-Nagel, reference 740686.4).  
 15.   4× Deep-well 96 (DW96) plates, with 2 mL volume capacity 
(Greiner Bio-One, reference 780270).  
 16.   PCR machine suitable for 96-well PCR plates for boiling SDS- 
PAGE or Caliper samples.  
 17.   SDS-PAGE Equipment ( see  Note 3 ): Electrophoresis appara-
tus and choice of gel type is at the user’s discretion.  
 18.   Spectrophotometer and cuvettes for measuring absorbance at 
280 nm ( A 280nm ) to calculate yield of soluble proteins.  
 19.    Optional: Deep-well 96 (DW96) plates, with 2 mL volume 
capacity (Greiner Bio-One, reference 780270) for elution 2 
and collecting the soluble fraction after cleavage. 96-well PCR 
(PCR96) plates (Greiner Bio-One, reference 652270) for 
SDS-PAGE samples of elution 2, cleavage mixture and soluble 
fraction after cleavage. Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease, 
2 mg/mL. A 96-well 0.22 μm ﬁ lter plate (Millipore, reference 
MSGV N22 10) to ﬁ lter the soluble fraction after cleavage.  
3  Methods 
 NB: All the steps below have been performed manually as described 
here or with slight variations in a fully automated manner using a 
liquid handling robot (TECAN Freedom EVO series) [ 19 ,  28 ]. 
A regular shaking incubator can be used for all culture steps (at a 
speed of 200 rpm) for DW96 (LB preculture only) and DW24 and 
will provide sufﬁ cient aeration, however if a short orbital special-
ized incubator for higher speeds is available (such as an Infors 
Incubation Multitron Shaker with 3 mm throw, model number 
AJ103) this can be used at a speed of 800 rpm for DW96 and 
400 rpm for DW24. For simplicity, only the speed for a regular 
shaker is given in the protocols. If a high-speed shaker is used, 
please adjust the shaking speed accordingly. 
  1.   For each set of 96 constructs to be transformed, prepare four 
TC24 plates containing 2 mL of LB agar supplemented with 
100 μg/mL ampicillin (or an alternative antibiotic that the 
expression vector is resistant to) and 34 μg/mL chloramphen-
icol (for pLysS strains). Allow to set and dry ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.   Thaw 3 × 1 mL of competent Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS strain on 
ice then aliquot 25 μL of competent cells into each well of a 
PCR96 plate using a multichannel pipette. Keep the plate on 
ice until the thermal shock in  step 4 . 
3.1  Transformation 
into  E .  coli Rosetta 2 
(DE3) pLysS
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

46
  3.   Add 1 μL of the expression plasmids (at a concentration of 
~10 ng/μL for pure plasmids) with a multichannel pipette ( see 
 Note 5 ). Ensure that the plasmid is dispensed into the cells 
but do not mix by pipetting. Cover the plate with plastic ﬁ lm 
to avoid contamination.  
  4.  Incubate on ice for 30 min, then place the plate at 42 °C for 45 s 
(thermal shock), then transfer back to ice for 3 min ( see  Note 6 ). 
Add 100 μL of LB medium using a multichannel pipette and a 
reagent reservoir and incubate for 60 min at 37 °C.  
  5.  In the meantime, prepare a sterile DW96 containing 1 mL LB 
(with the appropriate antibiotic(s)) in each well using a repeat 
pipettor and seal with plastic adhesive to prevent 
contamination.  
  6.  At the end of the transformation, dispense 60 μL of trans-
formed cells onto the pre-prepared 24-well LB agar plates ( see 
 Note 7 and Fig.  4 ). Place in a shaker for 10 min to spread and 
leave plates open to dry for 10 min under a hood (or in the 
incubator). Close the plates and leave them inverted at 37 °C, 
overnight.  See  Note 8 .
  7.   Dilute 60 μL of transformed cells into the DW96 containing 
the medium ( see  Note 7 ). Seal the deep well plate with a 
breathable ﬁ lm to allow culture aeration. Place in a 37 °C 
shaking incubator at maximum speed overnight (200 rpm). 
This is the preculture for the expression screening.  
 Fig. 4  Schematic for transferring from a single 96-well plate into four 24-well plates 
 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

47
  8.   The next day, the preculture is used to inoculate the test 
expression in auto-induction medium ( see  Note 9 ). The 
remaining preculture is used to prepare glycerol stocks if 
desired ( see  Note 10 ). 
  1.   Make up 500 mL ZYP-5052 auto-induction medium (464 mL 
ZY medium, 250 μL 2 M MgSO 4 , 10 mL 50× 5052, 25 mL 
20× NPS, in that order) supplemented with the appropriate 
antibiotics. Dispense 4 mL into each well of 4× DW24 plates 
with a repeat pipettor.  
  2.   Use 100 μL of preculture (1 in 40 dilution) to inoculate the 
test expression cultures (using a multichannel pipette with 
variable span to transfer the preculture from the DW96 into 
DW24) using the scheme provided in Fig.  4 . Incubate at 
37 °C with shaking (200 rpm) for 4 h (the growth phase, dur-
ing which time glucose from the medium will preferentially be 
depleted) before reducing the temperature to 17 °C (after the 
4 h the glucose will have been depleted and lactose will start 
to be metabolized, leading to induction of expression). Leave 
the cells to express overnight.  See  Note 9 .  
  3.   To determine the OD 600nm take 50 μL of each culture and dis-
pense into a ﬂ at-bottomed, clear microtiter plate containing 
150 μL of medium. Measure the OD 600nm , taking into account 
the 4-fold dilution.  
  4.  Centrifuge the 4× DW24 plates at 3,800 ×  g for 10 min then dis-
card the supernatant into a waste container with diluted Bactinyl 
for decontamination before disposal. Tap the plates, upside-
down, onto absorbent paper to remove any excess medium.  
  5.   In the meantime, prepare 100 mL of lysis buffer containing 
lysozyme ( see  Note 11 ). 
  6.  Add 1 mL of lysis buffer to each well and resuspend the pellets 
by shaking them at 17 °C and 200 rpm for 15 min.  See  Note 
12 . For puriﬁ cation on the same day or short-term freezing, 
store at −80 °C for a minimum of 1 h, otherwise store at −20 °C.  
  1.   Thaw the frozen cell suspensions in a water bath (at room 
temperature) for approximately 15 min and if any pelleting has 
occurred resuspend in the shaking incubator for an additional 
10 min ( see  Note 12 ). The cultures should become viscous 
( see  Note 11 ). 
  2.   Take 500 μL of DNase stock and mix it with 1 mL of MgSO 4 
stock. Dispense 15 μL into each well of the DW96, to give a 
ﬁ nal concentration of 10 μg/mL of DNase and 20 mM 
MgSO 4 . Re-seal the plate with plastic tape and shake for a fur-
ther 15 min, after which stage the cultures should be non- 
viscous ( see  Note 13 ). Check carefully (by visual examination) 
3.2  Test Expression
3.3  Test Puriﬁ cation
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

48
that all the cultures are no longer viscous. This is the most 
critical point of the whole procedure, if some cultures are still 
viscous (for example, if the DNase was accidentally forgotten 
in some wells), the ﬁ lter will clog, generating an uneven pres-
sure on the samples and contamination or total clogging of 
the ﬁ lter plate could happen during the puriﬁ cation. 
  3.   Aspirate 10 μL of the whole cell lysate and dispense into a 
96-well PCR plate containing 10 μL of 4× SDS-PAGE sample 
buffer ( see  Note 3 ) and 20 μL of water. Denature for 3 min at 
95 °C and freeze until analysis (Total fraction).  
  4.  Add 600 μL of 33 % (v/v) Ni sepharose resin/binding buffer 
suspension (or 200 μL of 25 % (v/v) Ni sepharose resin/
binding buffer suspension;  see  Notes 4 and  14 ) to each well of 
lysate, mixing before aspiration to ensure that the resin is sus-
pended evenly and an equal amount of resin is dispensed into 
each well. Seal the plate with plastic tape.  
  5.  Incubate with shaking for 10 min to allow for optimal 
binding.  
  6.   In the meantime, assemble the vacuum manifold according to 
the Manufacturer’s instructions.  
  7.   Place the ﬁ lter plate on top of the vacuum manifold, with a 
DW96 below to collect the ﬂ owthrough. Transfer the lysate/
bead mixture to the Macherey-Nagel ﬁ lter/receiver plate 
(20 μm) using a multichannel pipette, mixing before aspira-
tion otherwise the resin will be retained at the bottom of the 
DW96 ( see  Note 14 ). 
  8.  Turn the vacuum on for approximately 60 s to ﬁ lter the lysate 
through the plate into the DW96 to collect the ﬂ owthrough, 
taking care not to dry out the resin ( see  Note 15 ). Turn the 
vacuum off. 
  9.  Remove the DW96 containing the ﬂ owthrough and replace it 
with the waste reservoir. Keep the ﬂ owthrough aside until the 
end of the puriﬁ cation.  
 10.   Wash the resin with 1 mL of binding buffer, turn the vacuum 
on until the buffer has passed through. Switch the vacuum off. 
Repeat once more.  
 11.   Remove the waste reservoir, discarding the waste and replace 
with a fresh DW96 to collect the 50 mM imidazole wash.  
 12.   Add 150 μL of wash buffer, turn the vacuum on until the buf-
fer has passed through. Switch the vacuum off. Remove the 
DW96 containing the wash sample and replace it with the 
waste reservoir. Keep the wash sample aside until the end of 
the puriﬁ cation.  
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

49
 13.   Wash the resin with 1 mL of wash buffer, turn the vacuum on 
until the buffer has passed through. Switch the vacuum off. 
Repeat once more.  
 14.   Remove the waste reservoir, discarding the waste and replace 
with a fresh DW96 to collect the elution.  
 15.   Add 500 μL of elution buffer (for 200 μL resin; or 150 μL 
buffer for 50 μL resin;  see  Note 4 ) and incubate in situ for 
3 min. Turn on the vacuum until all buffer has passed through.  
 16.   Optional: A second elution can be performed into a fresh 
DW96 as in  step 15 . 
 17.   Take samples of the ﬂ owthrough, wash and elutions for SDS- 
PAGE analysis ( see  Note 3 ). For the ﬂ owthrough dispense 
10 μL into a 96-well PCR plate containing 10 μL of 4× SDS- 
PAGE sample buffer and 20 μL of water. For the wash and 
elutions dispense 30 μL into PCR plates containing 10 μL of 
4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Denature for 3 min at 95 °C 
and freeze until analysis.  
 18.   Identify the constructs expressing soluble protein by analyzing 
the elution samples on SDS-PAGE ( see  Note 16 ). 
 19.   Quantiﬁ cation can be performed for positive samples by mea-
suring the absorbance at 280 nm ( A 280nm ), taking the extinc-
tion co-efﬁ cient of the protein into account and using the 
elution buffer as a blank, to provide an estimate of protein 
yield ( see  Note 17 ) in order to identify the highest expressing 
soluble constructs.  
 20.   Optional: If tag cleavage is desired, TEV protease should be 
added to the eluted protein in a ratio of 1:10 (w/w, after 
measurement of the  A 280nm , or alternatively v/v) ( see  Note 2 ). 
The TEV cleavage is, to an extent, construct-dependent, 
however initial attempts should be performed for a duration 
ranging from overnight to two nights and at room tempera-
ture or at 4 °C, depending on the stability of the protein (the 
colder the temperature, the longer the incubation should be). 
At the end of cleavage dispense 30 μL into a PCR plate con-
taining 10 μL of 4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer. The remaining 
cleavage mixture can be ﬁ ltered through a 96-well 0.22 μm 
ﬁ lter plate on the vacuum manifold to collect the soluble pro-
tein after cleavage in DW96 and remove any precipitated pro-
tein. After ﬁ ltration, dispense 30 μL into a PCR plate 
containing 10 μL of 4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer. This allows 
the comparison of the protein before cleavage, the mixture 
after cleavage and the soluble protein remaining after cleav-
age and gives good indications of the expected results in sub-
sequent scale-up experiments.  
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

50
 We recommend performing an additional quality control step after 
soluble constructs have been identiﬁ ed. This allows conﬁ rmation 
of the expected size and oxidation state of the target protein. 
Samples can be analyzed directly from the elution or cleavage sam-
ple by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC/MS), or 
they can be desalted ﬁ rst, to remove imidazole, using ZipTip 
pipette tips (Millipore) followed by analysis using matrix-assisted 
laser desorption/ionization time-of-ﬂ ight (MALDI-TOF) or elec-
trospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry.  
4  Notes 
  1.   Plates can be made ahead of time and stored for up to 2 weeks 
at 4 °C. They should be pre-warmed and dried to room tem-
perature or 37 °C prior to use. This can be done during the 
1-h incubation of the transformations. To dry the plates, leave 
them inside a hood (or in a plate incubator) with their lids off 
until all moisture has evaporated. 
  2.   These buffers can be replaced by your usual buffers for expres-
sion screening and scale-up. Hydrophobic or membrane pro-
teins may also require the addition of detergents or other 
solubilizing agents. Unstable proteins may beneﬁ t from the 
addition of 10 % glycerol to buffers. Reducing agents can be 
added for proteins that need to stay in their reduced form. 
Ensure that all buffer additives are compatible with the puriﬁ -
cation resin (check the Manufacturer’s instructions for buffer 
additive compatibility). For TEV cleavage, the addition of 
reducing agents is often recommended. We have found these 
to be unnecessary and they are often incompatible with subse-
quent puriﬁ cation steps. If they are used, a buffer exchange 
step may be required before further puriﬁ cation. 
  3.  If a Caliper LabChip system is available, the samples can be 
analyzed on the Caliper instead. In this case, follow the 
Manufacturer’s recommended protocol for sample prepara-
tion. Alternatively, to increase throughput over SDS-PAGE 
alone, samples can ﬁ rst be run on a dot blot, and then only the 
positive samples can be selected to be run on SDS-PAGE.  
  4.   If the aim of the experiment is only detection of soluble pro-
tein then a 25 % resin slurry is suitable, so that the ﬁ nal vol-
ume of resin in the puriﬁ cation is 50 μL (this protocol has 
been successfully used previously for the high-throughput 
screening of recombinant expression conditions for small 
disulﬁ de-rich peptides in  E .  coli [ 17 ]). However, if you want 
to be able to capture as much protein as possible (to purify 
for pilot assays or MS, or to extrapolate for scale-up yields) 
then a 33 % resin slurry should be used so that the ﬁ nal 
volume of resin in the puriﬁ cation is 200 μL. The downside 
3.4  Quality Control
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

51
to using the larger volume of resin is that vacuum steps dur-
ing the puriﬁ cation may take slightly longer than when using 
the smaller volume of resin.  
  5.  A positive and negative control should be included in order to 
assess the success of the transformation. These can be per-
formed in separate individual PCR tubes if there is no addi-
tional room on the 96-well plate. A positive control would be 
a plasmid that is known to have worked successfully in the 
past, while a negative control would be a lack of plasmid. If the 
positive control transformation does not work, or if the nega-
tive control does work, the transformation should be repeated.  
  6.  For 96 samples (or less), the whole transformation protocol 
(incubation on ice, heat shock and 37 °C growth) is always 
done on a PCR machine (with 96 block) with one manual step 
(addition of LB medium). This gives more consistent results 
than the water bath. For more than 96 samples (up to 1,152 
transformations; 12 plates) we incubate on ice, then use the 
PCR machine only for the heat-shock step and a 37 °C incu-
bator for the 1-h incubation. All 1,152 transformations can be 
done in one afternoon.  
  7.   This is most easily done using a multichannel pipette with vari-
able span, using only four consecutive pipette tips at a time. 
Four transformations can be aspirated at once from the 96-well 
PCR plate, then the pipette span can be extended to ﬁ t over 
the 24-well plate and the culture dispensed. If the pipette has 
step-based programming (as for the Matrix Equalizer Pipettes, 
Thermo Scientiﬁ c), then  steps 6 and  7 can be performed in 
one step by aspirating 120 μL and dispensing 60 μL onto the 
LB agar plate and 60 μL into the medium, changing the tip 
span between each dispensing step.  
  8.   The agar plates are only back-ups. They can be stored at 4 °C 
for the scale-up production or for any cases where the liquid 
preculture does not grow but there are colonies on the plates. 
In that case the expression screening is postponed 24 h and 
the precultures are redone by a dilution in fresh medium of 
the original preculture and the picking of colonies for the few 
missing precultures to complete the plate.  
  9.  If less than 80 % of the precultures and LB agar plates grow 
the transformation should be started again. If less than 80 % of 
the test expression cultures grow they should be done again 
starting from the preculture step, either directly from the LB 
agar plates or from the glycerol stocks.  
 10.   Glycerol stocks can be stored at −80 °C and used to inoculate 
precultures for subsequent rounds of expression. Glycerol 
stocks should be made in replicates. 
 Preparation of glycerol stocks : Dispense 30 μL of 100 % glycerol 
using a multidispensing pipette set to slow speed into each 
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

52
well of a 96-well microtiter plate. Transfer 120 μL of each 
culture into the corresponding well of the microtiter plate and 
mix by pipetting slowly and gently. Seal with plastic adhesive 
tape and store at −80 °C.  
  11.  While it is possible to include DNase and MgSO 4 in the lysis 
buffer, we recommend not to. That way when the cells are 
thawed the lysis will be visible because the cell suspension will 
be viscous. If the lysozyme was accidentally omitted and DNase 
and MgSO 4 are also present in the lysis buffer then it will be 
impossible to discriminate whether the lysis was successful.  
 12.    When only working on 96 proteins at a time, the samples can 
be frozen in DW24 format as they will be quicker to thaw on 
the day of lysis. In that case, once thawed on the day of lysis, 
the lysate should be transferred back to DW96 using a multi-
channel pipette with variable span. When working on multiple 
lots of 96, to save freezer space, transfer back into DW96 after 
resuspension on the day of harvesting, before freezing.  
 13.    With this protocol, depending of the time of incubation, 
approximately 80–100 % of the cells are lysed. To speed up the 
process and achieve 100 % lysis an additional sonication step 
can be performed if desired using a plate sonicator (Ultrasonic 
processor XL, Misonix Inc., USA).  
 14.    A slow aspiration speed should be used for pipetting all resin 
suspensions, as the suspensions are quite thick. In the protocol 
with 600 μL of 33 % (v/v) beads, the volume of lysate/resin 
has to be transferred in two steps, so as not to cause an over-
ﬂ ow on the ﬁ lter plate (using vacuum to remove the ﬁ rst lot of 
ﬂ owthrough between the two transfers).  
 15.    Take care not to over-dry the resin, which will result in a 
reduction in binding capacity and viability. However, some 
wells may empty faster than others.  
 16.    Elution samples can be run on SDS-PAGE ﬁ rst to identify 
constructs producing soluble protein. Only for constructs 
where no soluble protein can be detected is it necessary to 
then run the whole cell lysate to see if the protein was 
expressed. If the protein was not expressed but the cells did 
grow (reached an OD 600nm ≥ 6.0 at Subheading  3.2 ,  step 3 ) a 
new expression strategy must be pursued, or if the OD 600nm 
was not high enough the culture can be regrown and reana-
lyzed. If the protein was expressed it is advisable to run the 
ﬂ owthrough and wash samples on SDS-PAGE to see if it was 
insoluble or did not bind to the resin.  
 17.   For the most reliable comparison of soluble yields, it is recom-
mended to normalize the yields by the density of the culture 
(using the OD 600nm measurement), which was taken at 
Subheading  3.2 ,  step 3 . 
Natalie J. Saez and Renaud Vincentelli

53
 References 
  1.  Berrow NS, Bussow K, Coutard B et al (2006) 
Recombinant protein expression and solubility 
screening in Escherichia coli: a comparative 
study. Acta Crystallogr D 62:1218–1226  
  2.  Correa A, Oppezzo P (2011) Tuning different 
expression parameters to achieve soluble 
recombinant proteins in E. coli: advantages of 
high-throughput 
screening. 
Biotechnol 
J 
6:715–730 
  3.  Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Protein production and puriﬁ cation. Nat 
Methods 5:135–146  
  4.  Vera A, Gonzalez-Montalban N, Aris A et al 
(2007) The conformational quality of insolu-
ble recombinant proteins is enhanced at low 
growth 
temperatures. 
Biotechnol 
Bioeng 
96:1101–1106  
  5.  Graslund S, Sagemark J, Berglund H et al 
(2008) The use of systematic N- and C-terminal 
deletions to promote production and struc-
tural studies of recombinant proteins. Protein 
Expr Purif 58:210–221  
  6.  Bird LE (2011) High throughput construction 
and small scale expression screening of multi- 
tag vectors in Escherichia coli. Methods 
55:29–37  
  7.  Davis GD, Elisee C, Newham DM et al (1999) 
New fusion protein systems designed to give 
soluble 
expression 
in 
Escherichia 
coli. 
Biotechnol Bioeng 65:382–388  
  8.  Kapust RB, Waugh DS (1999) Escherichia 
coli maltose-binding protein is uncommonly 
effective at promoting the solubility of poly-
peptides to which it is fused. Protein Sci 
8:1668–1674  
  9.  LaVallie ER, Lu Z, Diblasio-Smith EA et al (2000) 
Thioredoxin as a fusion partner for production of 
soluble recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. 
Methods Enzymol 326:322–340  
  10.  Marblestone JG, Edavettal SC, Lim Y et al 
(2006) Comparison of SUMO fusion technol-
ogy with traditional gene fusion systems: 
enhanced expression and solubility with 
SUMO. Protein Sci 15:182–189  
  11.  Sachdev D, Chirgwin JM (2000) Fusions to 
maltose-binding protein: control of folding 
and solubility in protein puriﬁ cation. Methods 
Enzymol 326:312–321  
  12.  Smith DB (2000) Generating fusions to gluta-
thione S-transferase for protein studies. 
Methods Enzymol 326:254–270  
  13.  de Marco A, Deuerling E, Mogk A et al (2007) 
Chaperone-based procedure to increase yields 
of soluble recombinant proteins produced in 
E. coli. BMC Biotechnol 7:32  
  14.  Hatahet F, Nguyen VD, Salo KE et al (2010) 
Disruption of reducing pathways is not essen-
tial for efﬁ cient disulﬁ de bond formation in the 
cytoplasm of E. coli. Microb Cell Fact 9:67  
  15.  Katzen F, Beckwith J (2002) Disulﬁ de bond 
formation in periplasm of Escherichia coli. 
Methods Enzymol 348:54–66  
  16.  Studier FW (2005) Protein production by 
auto-induction in high density shaking cul-
tures. Protein Expr Purif 41:207–234  
  17.  Nozach H, Fruchart-Gaillard C, Fenaille F 
et al (2013) High throughput screening identi-
ﬁ es disulﬁ de isomerase DsbC as a very efﬁ cient 
partner for recombinant expression of small 
disulﬁ de-rich proteins in E. coli. Microb Cell 
Fact 12:37  
  18.  Klint JK, Senff S, Saez NJ et al (2013) 
Recombinant production of disulﬁ de-rich pep-
tides in the periplasm of E. coli for structural 
and functional analysis. PLoS One 8(5):e63865  
  19.  Vincentelli R, Cimino A, Geerlof A et al (2011) 
High-throughput protein expression screening 
and puriﬁ cation in Escherichia coli. Methods 
55:65–72  
  20.  Vincentelli R, Canaan S, Offant J et al (2005) 
Automated expression and solubility screening 
of His-tagged proteins in 96-well format. Anal 
Biochem 346:77–84  
  21.  Katzen F (2007) Gateway (R) recombinational 
cloning: a biological operating system. Expert 
Opin Drug Discov 2:571–589 
  22.  Bornhorst JA, Falke JJ (2000) Puriﬁ cation of 
proteins using polyhistidine afﬁ nity tags. 
Methods Enzymol 326:245–254  
  23.  Vincentelli R, Canaan S, Campanacci V et al 
(2004) High-throughput automated refolding 
screening of inclusion bodies. Protein Sci 
13:2782–2792  
  24.  Jolma A, Yan J, Whitington T et al (2013) 
DNA-binding speciﬁ cities of human transcrip-
tion factors. Cell 152:327–339  
  25.  Sala E, de Marco A (2010) Screening opti-
mized protein puriﬁ cation protocols by cou-
pling small-scale expression and mini-size 
exclusion chromatography. Protein Expr Purif 
74:231–235  
   26.  Moon AF, Mueller GA, Zhong X et al (2010) 
A synergistic approach to protein crystalliza-
tion: combination of a ﬁ xed-arm carrier with 
surface 
entropy 
reduction. 
Protein 
Sci 
19:901–913  
  27.  Zanier K, Charbonnier S, Sidi AO et al (2013) 
Structural basis for hijacking of cellular LxxLL 
motifs by papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins. 
Science 339:694–698  
  28.  Vincentelli R, Bignon C, Gruez A et al (2003) 
Medium-scale structural genomics: strategies 
for protein expression and crystallization. Acc 
Chem Res 36:165–172  
High-Throughput Screening in E. coli

55
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_4, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 4  
 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human 
Proteins: Ligation-Independent Cloning 
 Claire  Strain-Damerell ,  Pravin  Mahajan , 
 Opher  Gileadi , and  Nicola A.  Burgess-Brown 
 Abstract 
 Structural genomics groups have identiﬁ ed the need to generate multiple truncated versions of each target 
to improve their success in producing a well-expressed, soluble, and stable protein and one that crystallizes 
and diffracts to a sufﬁ cient resolution for structural determination. At the SGC, we opted for the Ligation- 
Independent Cloning (LIC) method which provides the medium throughput we desire to produce and 
screen many proteins in a parallel process. Here, we describe our LIC protocol for generating constructs 
in a 96-well format and provide a choice of vectors suitable for expressing proteins in both  E .  coli and the 
baculovirus expression vector system (BEVS).  
 Key words   PCR  ,  Gene ,   Ligation-independent cloning (LIC)  ,   Construct  ,   Protein  ,   Crystallography  
1  Introduction 
 The knowledge base resulting from sequencing of the human 
genome has provided a strong foundation for identifying and 
understanding the role of genes encoding various proteins involved 
in health and disease as well as in physiological processes. 
Determining three-dimensional (3D) structures of the proteins is 
important to understand the biochemical reactions they catalyze at 
the molecular level. According to the latest estimate by the 
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, the 
human genome seems to encode 20,000–25,000 proteins [ 1 ]. 
However, there is a major gap between the number of protein 
sequences and experimentally determined 3D protein structures. 
The Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) is a not-for-proﬁ t 
organization that is addressing this gap by solving the structures of 
medically relevant proteins and placing them into the public 
domain without restriction (  http://www.thesgc.org/   ). 

56
 Determining protein structures by X-ray crystallography on 
the genome scale creates a number of bottlenecks, the ﬁ rst being 
expression and puriﬁ cation of the large number of soluble, homo-
geneous, and stable proteins in heterologous systems. We have 
developed robust protocols for medium-throughput cloning, 
expression testing, and protein production in  E .  coli and in insect 
cells which have resulted in a portfolio of hundreds of protein 
domains. We have used  E .  coli as the primary expression system for 
producing our soluble target proteins; however, for expression of 
more challenging proteins such as kinases and integral membrane 
proteins (IMPs), the baculovirus expression system is our ﬁ rst 
choice. The recombinant proteins expressed globally at SGC have 
yielded more than 1,400 protein structures, but in addition, these 
proteins have provided a rich resource for functional genomics, 
small molecule inhibitor screens, and generation of antibodies. 
 Ligation-independent cloning (LIC) [ 2 ] was our method of 
choice as it provided a simple and cost effective tool for producing 
many constructs of a single target or multiple targets in parallel 
without the need to select speciﬁ c restriction enzymes for each 
gene. Brieﬂ y, the process involves T4 DNA polymerase treatment of 
linearized vectors in the presence of a single deoxynucleotide 
(dNTP). PCR fragments of the gene of interest (GOI) with com-
plementary overhangs are generated by adding appropriate 5′ 
extensions into the primers (LIC sequences) and treating the frag-
ments with T4 DNA polymerase in the presence of the paired 
dNTP ( see Fig.  1 ). At the SGC we have engineered many of our 
vectors to share the same LIC site which allows one LIC-prepared 
PCR fragment to be cloned into a range of vectors within the same 
and across different expression systems. Alternative efﬁ cient cloning 
methods are available including Gateway ® [ 3 – 5 ], MAGIC [ 6 ], and 
In-Fusion ® [ 7 ], the latter being the method preferred by our SGC 
node in Toronto. More recently, the LIC method has evolved to 
SLIC [ 8 ,  9 ] which removes sequence constraints. In this chapter, 
we begin the process of medium-throughput screening by describ-
ing in detail our methods for (1) identifying domain boundaries to 
increase the likelihood of producing a stable and correctly folded 
protein, (2) primer design, PCR, and vector preparation, (3) anneal-
ing and transformation into  E .  coli , and (4) conﬁ rmation of cloning 
success by colony PCR screening. In Chapters   5  and   6  , we provide 
detailed protocols for expression testing using  E .  coli and baculovirus/
insect cells and producing milligram quantities of protein of sufﬁ -
cient quality and purity for crystallization and functional screening. 
Although our cloning and expression testing protocols are described 
for a 96-well format, the whole process can easily be applied to 
generate and screen a smaller number of proteins. Handling 24 or 
more samples should be performed in block format rather than in 
individual tubes as described in the methods.
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

57
 Fig. 1  Overview of the Ligation Independent Cloning (LIC) Process. The gene of interest (GOI) is ampliﬁ ed with 
primers that include the LIC sequence speciﬁ c to the target vector. The vector is linearized by restriction digest, 
removing the  sacB gene. Both insert and vector are then T4 DNA polymerase treated to resect 3′ ends, 
creating large overhangs, promoting efﬁ cient circularization without the need for T4 DNA ligase 
2  Materials 
 Unless otherwise stated, molecular biology grade water (Thermo 
Scientiﬁ c HyClone) is used for all dilutions and reactions set out 
below. Where ultrapure water is instead speciﬁ ed, it is prepared by 
purifying deionized water to reach a resistivity of 18 MΩ cm at 
25 °C. All reagents should be of analytical grade or higher and all 
plasticware should be DNase-free. 
 
Ligation Independent Cloning

58
  1.  Primers: Primers are supplied by either MWG-Biotech or 
Sigma-Aldrich and are HPSF puriﬁ ed at 0.01 μmol scale or 
DST puriﬁ ed at 0.025 μmol scale, respectively. Primer stocks 
are either supplied at or diluted (in 10 mM Tris–HCl buffer, 
pH 8.0) to 100 μM and stored at −20 °C.  
  2.  Template library: Human cDNA clones were obtained from 
the IMAGE cDNA collection (currently distributed by Source 
BioScience, UK), from other commercial providers (OriGene, 
Invitrogen, FivePrime), or isolated in-house by PCR from 
human cDNA. Synthetic DNA clones, including either the 
natural cDNA or codon-optimized sequences, were synthe-
sized to order by GenScript or Codon Devices.  
  3.  Enzymes: Platinum Pfx DNA polymerase (2.5 units/μl, 
Invitrogen), alternatively Herculase II Fusion DNA poly-
merase (Agilent Technologies) for difﬁ cult to amplify targets, 
and BIOTAQ™ Red DNA polymerase (1 unit/μl, Bioline) for 
colony PCR screening. DpnI (20 units/μl, New England 
BioLabs (NEB)).  
  4.  10 mM dNTP solution: 10 mM dATP, 10 mM dTTP, 10 mM 
dGTP, and 10 mM dCTP (prepared from 100 mM dNTP set, 
Invitrogen) and stored at −20 °C.  
  5.   TE Buffer: 10 mM Tris–HCl and 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. 
Filtered through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored 
at room temperature (RT).  
  6.  50× TAE buffer (1 L): 242 g Tris base, 57.1 ml glacial acetic acid, 
and 100 ml of 0.5 M EDTA, pH 8.0, pH adjusted to 8.5. Filtered 
through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and used as a 1× solution.  
  7.  96-well 1.5 % TAE-agarose gels: 3 g agarose powder 
(Invitrogen), 200 ml of 1× TAE buffer, and 8 μl of SYBR-safe 
DNA gel stain (Invitrogen), cast in a Sub-cell Model 96 (Bio- 
Rad or similar) gel cast.  
  8.  DNA ladders: For the E-Gel ® system, the Low Range 
Quantitative DNA Ladder (Invitrogen), and for the colony 
PCR screen, the 1 kb Plus DNA ladder (Invitrogen) prepared 
in 1× BlueJuice™ (Invitrogen) are used.  
  9.  QIAquick PCR puriﬁ cation kit (Qiagen).  
 10.   MultiScreen PCR 96 ﬁ lter plate (Millipore).  
 11.   96-Well PCR plates (4titude Ltd. or similar).  
 12.   Adhesive PCR seals (ABgene).  
 13.   Adhesive tape pads (Qiagen).  
 14.   V-bottomed microtiter plates.  
 15.   Minisart syringe ﬁ lters, 0.20 μm (Sartorius).  
 16.   Express™ PLUS ﬁ lter unit, 0.22 μm (Millipore).  
2.1  PCR
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

59
 17.   Membrane ﬁ lters, 0.2 μm and unit.  
 18.   Reagent reservoirs for multichannel pipetting (Fisher).  
 19.   Multichannel pipettes and repeat pipettors are used to dis-
pense reagents into a 96-well format.  
 20.   96-Well PCR thermocycler with heated lid.  
 21.   E-Gel ® 96 Mother base and E-Gel ® 96 1 % Agarose Gels 
(Invitrogen).  
  22.   96-Well gel cast and tank (Subcell Model 96 Bio-Rad or similar).  
 23.    Centrifuge suitable for 96-well PCR plates (150 ×  g ). 
 24.   Microcentrifuge.  
 25.   MultiScreen HTS Vacuum Manifold (Millipore).  
 26.    Gel Logic 200 Imaging System (Kodak).  
 27.    Water bath set at 37 °C.  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.   Competent cells: All cloning is performed in Mach1™ cells 
(originally purchased from Invitrogen), with chemically com-
petent cells produced in-house using the RbCl method [ 10 ]. 
Other cell lines are suitable for cloning but we recommend 
using a  recA − phage resistant strain, to promote plasmid stabil-
ity and to reduce the risk of bacteriophage infection during 
 E .  coli expression, respectively.  
  2.   All enzymes and their associated buffers are supplied by NEB; 
including T4 DNA Polymerase (3 units/μl), BsaI (10 units/μl), 
BfuAI (5 units/μl), and BseRI (4 units/μl). 
  3.   25 mM dGTP and 25 mM dCTP (prepared from 100 mM 
dNTP set, Invitrogen) and stored at −20 °C.  
  4.   100 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol): ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 μm 
syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored as 1 ml aliquots at −20 °C.  
  5.   Bovine serum albumin (BSA) (100× supplied with most NEB 
enzymes).  
  6.   25 % (w/v) sucrose: 250 g sucrose dissolved in 1 l of ultrapure 
water and ﬁ ltered through a 0.22 μm ﬁ lter unit (Millipore).  
  7.   60 % (v/v) glycerol autoclaved to sterilize.  
  8.   Antibiotic stocks: Ampicillin (50 mg/ml); Kanamycin 
(50 mg/ml), ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter 
(Sartorius) and stored at −20 °C.  
  9.   LB-agar: 22.5 g premixed LB-broth and 13.5 g agar dissolved 
in 800 ml of ultrapure water. Volume adjusted to 900 ml and 
autoclaved on the same day.  
2.2  Cloning
Ligation Independent Cloning

60
  10.   LB-agar plates: LB-agar melted slowly in a microwave and 
sucrose added to a ﬁ nal concentration of 5 % (w/v) ( see  Note 1 ). 
Once cooled to hand-hot, the appropriate antibiotic ( see Table  1 ) 
is added and swirled vigorously to mix. 10 ml of the molten agar 
is poured into each 50 mm petri dish and once set, upturned and 
left open to dry. These can be prepared ahead of time and stored 
at 4 °C sealed in a plastic bag to prevent over-drying.
 11.   1× LB: 22.5 g premixed LB-broth dissolved in 800 ml of 
ultrapure water. Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on 
the same day.  
 12.   SOC medium: 18 g tryptone, 4.5 g yeast extract, 0.45 g NaCl, 
and 2.25 ml of 1 M KCl dissolved in 800 ml of ultrapure 
water. Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same 
day. Once cooled, 9 ml of 2 M MgCl 2 hexahydrate, and 18 ml 
of 1 M (18 %) glucose are added; both solutions are ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) prior to use ( see 
 Note 2 ).  
 13.   Virkon (Appleton Woods).  
 14.    Montage Plasmid Miniprep HTS 96 Kit (Millipore).  
 15.   50 mm petri dishes.  
 16.   Disposable sterile spreaders or 2 mm autoclaved glass beads 
(e.g., Sigma-Aldrich) for spreading as these are reusable and 
allow faster plating for the medium-throughput scale.  
 17.   Disposable sterile inoculation loops (1 μl). 
 18.   96-Deep-well blocks (Thomson).  
 19.   AirOtop porous seals (Thomson).  
 20.   Centrifuge suitable for 96-deep-well blocks (3,000 ×  g ). 
 21.   Micro-Express Glas-Col shaker (Glas-Col, Indiana, USA) or 
similar set to 37 °C.  
 22.   Water bath set at 42 °C.  
 23.   Incubator set at 37 °C.  
 24.   Heated block set at 50 °C.  
3  Methods 
 In order to give the best possible chance of producing soluble 
protein with a high propensity for crystallization we opt for a 
 multi- construct design approach [ 11 – 13 ]. Whilst we do include 
the full length protein in the initial target screen, only 8.6 % of our 
solved structures have arisen from such constructs. By reposition-
ing the start and stop boundaries of our constructs by only ﬁ ve 
amino acids either side, our success increases to 13.3 % (unpub-
lished data). By expanding the design out to include only certain 
domains of the protein, our success rate improves further meaning 
that structures that would have otherwise been missed make it 
3.1  Construct Design
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

61
 Table 1 
 LIC-adapted vectors for bacterial and baculovirus expression which are freely available from the SGC on request 
 Vector name 
 Antibiotic 
resistance 
marker 
 Tags for 
puriﬁ cation 
 Restriction 
site for LIC 
 dNTP 
for 
vector 
 dNTP 
for 
insert 
 5′ LIC primer 
extension 
 3′ LIC primer 
extension 
 Screening 
primers 
 Bacterial expression vectors 
 pNIC28-Bsa4 
 Kanamycin 
 N-terminal His 6 
 BsaI 
 dGTP 
 dCTP 
 TACTTCCAATCC ATG 
 TATCCACCTTTACTG TCA 
 pLIC- F+R 
 pGTVL2 
 Kanamycin 
 N-terminal 
His 6 +GST 
 BsaI 
 dGTP 
 dCTP 
 TACTTCCAATCC ATG 
 TATCCACCTTTACTG TCA 
 pLIC- F+R 
 pNH- TrxT 
 Kanamycin 
 N-terminal 
His 6 +Trx 
 BsaI 
 dGTP 
 dCTP 
 TACTTCCAATCC ATG 
 TATCCACCTTTACTG TCA 
 pLIC- F+R 
 pNIC- CTH0 
 Kanamycin 
 C-terminal His 6 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATAT
ACT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 pLIC- F+R 
 pNIC- CTHF 
 Kanamycin 
 C-terminal 
His 6 +Flag 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATAT
ACT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 pLIC- F+R 
 pNIC- CT10HF 
 Kanamycin 
 C-terminal 
His 10 +Flag 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATAT
ACT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 pLIC- F+R 
 Baculovirus transfer vectors 
 pFB-LIC- Bse 
 Ampicillin 
 N-terminal His 6 
 BseRI 
 dGTP 
 dCTP 
 TACTTCCAATCC ATG 
 TATCCACCTTTACTG TCA 
 FBac- 1+2 
 pFB-HGT- LIC 
 Ampicillin 
 N-terminal 
His 6 +GST 
 BseRI 
 dGTP 
 dCTP 
 TACTTCCAATCC ATG 
 TATCCACCTTTACTG TCA 
 FBac- 1+2 
 pFB-CT6H- LIC 
 Ampicillin 
 C-terminal His 6 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATATA
CT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 FBac- 3+1 
 pFB-CT6HF- LIC 
 Ampicillin 
 C-terminal 
His 6 +Flag 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATATA
CT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 FBac- 3+1 
 pFB-CT10HF- LIC 
 Ampicillin 
 C-terminal 
His 10 +Flag 
 BfuAI 
 dCTP 
 dGTP 
 TTAAGAAGGAGATATA
CT ATG 
 GATTGGAAGTAGAGGTTC
TCTGC 
 FBac- 3+1 
 The antibiotic resistance cassette and puriﬁ cation tags are indicated, along with the details required for LIC: forward and reverse primer extension required to LIC-adapt the GOI, 
restriction enzyme to cut the vector with, and the dNTP required for the T4-treatment step of either vector or PCR product. Note that the start codon included by the 5′ LIC sequence 
is underlined and the stop codon included by the 3′ LIC sequence is italicized  
Ligation Independent Cloning

62
through to Protein Data Bank (PDB) submission using the multi-
construct approach. Constructs are therefore designed based on 
available protein domain information, secondary structure predic-
tions, and sequence alignments, as well as taking account of disor-
dered regions to try to produce more stable proteins at the 
expression stage. Due to uncertainty in predictive methods and in 
our understanding of factors affecting protein behavior, we test a 
number of construct endpoints (2–5 on either end) closely spaced 
around the predicted domain boundaries.  
 Having identiﬁ ed appropriate construct boundaries in the previous 
step, we design primers for PCR ampliﬁ cation of the desired DNA 
segments. The primer sequences themselves typically include the 
appropriate LIC sequence ( see Table  1 ) followed by ~20 bp from 
the construct sequence. In each case, the ATG underlined in 
Table  1 should be in-frame with the target sequence. Where the 
construct includes an N-terminal puriﬁ cation tag, the stop codon 
is incorporated by the 3′ LIC sequence marked in italics ( see 
Table  1 ). For C-terminally tagged constructs, the reverse primer 
must not include a stop codon but must be in-frame with the 3′ 
LIC sequence, i.e., do not include additional nucleotides between 
the 3′ of the reverse LIC site and the codon encoding the 
C-terminal amino acid. As the primer sequences are dictated by the 
desired boundaries in the protein sequence, the corresponding 
DNA sequences may have properties (e.g., repetitions or biased 
nucleotide composition) that make it difﬁ cult to design optimal 
primers. Primers are thus designed with care to avoid mispriming 
or primer-dimers and to ensure compatible T m  values, determining 
the lengths and base composition accordingly. The arrangement of 
constructs in a 96-well format is done with the following con-
straints for ease of cloning: (1) constructs from the same entry 
clone are kept together, (2) constructs are arranged in order of 
size, (3) where possible, only one vector and or T4-treatment con-
dition is used per plate, and (4) if the plate is mixed then like- 
vectors and T4-treatment conditions are kept together on the 
plate. Arrangement in this manner enables easy identiﬁ cation of 
correctly sized products and limits mistakes caused by erroneous 
pipetting. Once you have designed the plate format keep a record 
of what primers, template, and vector will be associated with each 
well and use this for all subsequent steps.  
  1.   Using a multichannel pipette and reagent reservoir, add 180 μl 
of water to each well of a 96-well PCR plate. To this, add 10 μl 
each of the 100 μM forward and reverse primers ( see 
Subheading  3.2 ) and mix well.  
  2.  For each template ( see Subheading  2.1 ,  step 2 ) prepare a 
2.5 ng/μl dilution in a 1.5 ml eppendorf tube, mix well, and 
3.2  Primer and 
Plate Design
3.3  PCR
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

63
aliquot 20 μl of this into the appropriate wells of a second 
96-well PCR plate.  
  3.   Prepare a PCR master mix as follows: 250 μl of 10× Pfx reac-
tion buffer (Invitrogen), 50 μl of 50 mM MgSO 4 , 75 μl of 
10 mM dNTP mixture, 20 μl of Platinum Pfx (Invitrogen), 
and 1.705 ml of water. Mix the solution well. Using a multi-
channel pipette or repeat pipettor, aliquot 21 μl into each well 
of a third 96-well PCR plate ( see  Note 3 ). 
  4.   Using a multichannel pipette, transfer 1.5 μl of the diluted 
primers ( step 1 ), followed by 2.5 μl of diluted template DNA 
( step 2 ), into the corresponding wells of the reaction plate 
( step 3 ). Mix well then seal the plate using an adhesive PCR 
seal, making sure to press down well in order to limit evapora-
tion ( see  Note 4 ). 
  5.   Place the reaction plate into the thermocycler and cycle with 
the following conditions—touchdown PCR ( see  Note 5 ):
 95 °C, 10 min.  
 (95 °C, 30 s; 68 °C, 30 s; 68 °C, 1–3 min*) × 5 cycles.  
 (95 °C, 30 s; 60 °C, 30 s; 68 °C, 1–3 min*) × 5 cycles.  
 (95 °C, 30 s; 55 °C, 30 s; 68 °C, 1–3 min*) × 5 cycles.  
 (95 °C, 30 s; 50 °C, 30 s; 68 °C, 1–3 min*) × 20 cycles.  
 68 °C, 10 min.  
 15 °C hold. 
 *Extension time dependent on length of PCR product—e.g., 
1 min per 1 kb.  
  6.   Remove 3 μl of each reaction and dilute with 12 μl of water. 
Run on an E-Gel ® (Invitrogen) against 20 μl of 2× diluted 
Low Range Quantitative DNA Ladder (Invitrogen) (Fig.  2 ).
  7.   Transfer the successful reactions into the corresponding wells of 
a fresh PCR plate and repeat any failed reactions using different 
cycling conditions or with additives such as the PCR enhancer 
supplied with the Platinum Pfx (Invitrogen) kit ( see  Note 6 ).  
  8.   Any products ampliﬁ ed from templates containing the same 
antibiotic resistance cassette as the target vector, require DpnI- 
treatment to limit template carryover ( see  Note 7 ). Prepare a 
1 in 20 dilution of DpnI (20 units/μl, NEB) in NEB buffer 2 
and aliquot 1 μl into the appropriate wells of the PCR reaction 
plate. Incubate the plate in a 37 °C water bath for 1 h.  
  9.   Purify the products ( see  Note 8 ) using a MultiScreen PCR 96 
puriﬁ cation plate (Millipore) following the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Recover the DNA from the plate in 50 μl of TE 
buffer, transferring into a V-bottomed microtiter plate and 
store at −20 °C.  
Ligation Independent Cloning

64
  1.   Digest the target vector using the restriction enzyme indicated 
in Table  1 ( see  Note 9 for alternative restriction enzymes), for 
example for BsaI vectors ( see Fig.  3 for example vector) pre-
pare the digest as follows: 5 μg vector, 10 μl of 10× NEB buf-
fer 3, 1 μl of 100× BSA, 3 μl of BsaI (10 units/μl, NEB), make 
up to 100 μl with water and incubate at 50 °C for 2 h.
  2.  Mix 3 μl of the digested vector with 3 μl of 2× BlueJuice™ 
(Invitrogen) and analyze on a 1.5 % TAE-agarose gel to con-
ﬁ rm complete digestion ( see  Note 10 ).  
  3.  Purify the digested vector using a QIAquick PCR puriﬁ cation 
spin column (Qiagen), following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions, and elute in 50 μl.  
3.4  Vector 
Preparation
 Fig. 2  Image of an initial PCR performed in 96-well format, analyzed using the E-Gel ® system and Low Range 
Quantitative DNA Ladder. The sizes of the ladder are indicated. Due to the low resolution of these gels the 
products are judged based on the sizing of neighboring bands, e.g., the products of E5 to E8 should be in 
decreasing size order, which can be observed on the gel 
 
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

65
  1.   To the puriﬁ ed vector (50 μl) add 21.5 μl of water, 10 μl of 
10× NEB buffer 2, 10 μl of 25 mM dCTP or dGTP ( see 
Table  1 ), 5 μl of 100 mM DTT, 1 μl of 100× BSA (NEB), and 
2.5 μl of T4 DNA polymerase (3 units/μl, NEB). Place in a 
thermocycler with the following conditions: 22 °C for 30 min, 
75 °C for 20 min, 15 °C hold ( see  Note 11 ). 
  2.   For T4-treament of the PCR products prepare a master mix as 
follows: 215 μl of water, 100 μl of 10× NEB buffer 2, 100 μl 
of 25 mM dCTP or dGTP ( see Table  1 ), 50 μl of 100 mM 
DTT, 10 μl of 100× BSA, and 25 μl of T4 DNA polymerase 
(3 units/μl, NEB). Using a repeat pipettor aliquot 5 μl into 
each well of a PCR plate. Using a multichannel pipette, trans-
fer 5 μl of the puriﬁ ed PCR product (Subheading  3.3 ,  step 9 ) 
into the corresponding wells of the T4 reaction mix, mixing as 
you dispense. Place in a thermocycler with the following con-
ditions: 22 °C for 30 min, 75 °C for 20 min, 15 °C hold.  
3.5  T4 DNA 
Polymerase Treatment
 Fig. 3    Vector map of standard bacterial expression vector pNIC28-Bsa4. 
Digestion with BsaI excises the  sacB  gene and T4-treatment resects the 3 ′ ends 
of the LIC sites to provide complementary cohesive ends to the PCR products. 
The vector incorporates a His 6  tag at the N-terminus followed by TEV cleavage 
site in frame with the PCR product. This vector also includes the T7 promoter 
and terminator sequences for expression in the BL21 (DE3) strain and is under 
the control of the lac repressor for induction with IPTG during the expression 
stage ( see  Chapter   5    )       
 
Ligation Independent Cloning

66
  1.   Using a repeat pipettor, aliquot 1 μl of the T4-treated vector 
into each well of a 96-well PCR plate and centrifuge brieﬂ y at 
150 ×  g . Conﬁ rm that there is liquid in each well before pro-
gressing to  step 2 . 
  2.   Using a multichannel pipette, transfer 2 μl of T4-treated insert 
into the corresponding wells of the plate from  step 1 . Spin 
brieﬂ y and incubate the reaction at RT for at least 20 min 
before placing on ice ( see  Note 12 ). 
  3.  Take two 1.5 ml eppendorf tubes, label one with “vector-only 
control” and the other with “insert-only control” ( see  Note 
13 ). To the ﬁ rst add 1 μl of the T4-treated vector and to the 
other 2 μl of T4-treated insert from a well that has under-
gone DpnI-treatment ( see Subheading  3.3 ,  step 8 ). Place 
both tubes on ice.  
  4.  Using a repeat pipettor, aliquot 50 μl of chemically competent 
sub-cloning efﬁ ciency cells ( see  Notes 14 and  15 ) into each 
well of the plate from  steps 1 and  2 and into the two tubes 
from  step 3 . Incubate on ice for 30 min.  
  5.   Heat-shock the cells at 42 °C for 45 s, then return to ice 
briefly.  
  6.   Using a multichannel, pipette 100 μl of SOC medium ( see 
 Note 16 ) into each well, seal with a porous seal and incubate 
at 37 °C for 1.5 h in a stationary incubator.  
  7.   Plate 100 μl of the transformation mixture onto LB-agar plates 
containing 5 % sucrose ( see  Note 1 ) supplemented with either 
50 μg/ml kanamycin or 200 μg/ml ampicillin ( see Table  1 ). 
Spread the sample across the plate using either sterile spread-
ers or glass beads ( see  Note 17 ). 
  8.   Incubate the plates at 37 °C for ~16 h, then store at 4 °C until 
the colony PCR screening step is complete.  
  1.   Prepare a 96-deep well block containing 1 ml of LB and the 
appropriate antibiotic selection ( see Table  1 ). 
  2.   Set up a PCR master mix as follows: 200 μl of 10× NH 4 
Reaction Buffer (Bioline), 60 μl of 50 mM MgCl 2 , 60 μl of 
100 % DMSO, 1.24 ml of water, 200 μl of 2 mM dNTPs, 
200 μl of 10 μM screening primers ( see Tables  1 and  2 ), and 
40 μl of BIOTAQ™ Red DNA polymerase (1 unit/μl, Bioline). 
Using a repeat pipettor or a multichannel pipette, aliquot 
20 μl into each well of a 96-well PCR plate.
  3.   Using a 1 μl sterile loop, pick one colony from each transfor-
mation plate and inoculate into the corresponding well of the 
PCR reaction plate ( step 2 ) followed by the corresponding 
well of the deep-well block ( step 1 ) ( see  Note 18 ).  
  4.   Once all of the wells have been inoculated, seal the deep-well 
block with a porous seal and incubate at 37 °C overnight in a 
Glas-Col with shaking at 700 rpm, then store at 4 °C.  
3.6  Annealing and 
Transformation
3.7  Colony PCR 
Screening
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

67
  5.   Seal the PCR reaction plate with a adhesive PCR seal and set 
a thermocycler with the following conditions, making sure 
that the block is up to temperature before placing your sample 
plate in the instrument ( see  Note 19 ):
 95 °C, 10 min.  
 (95 °C, 30 s; 50 °C, 30 s; 72 °C, 1–3 min*) × 25 cycles.  
 72 °C, 5 min.  
 15 °C hold. 
 *Extension time dependent on length of PCR product—e.g., 
1 min per 1 kb. Please note that ~200 bp will be added to your 
products due to the positioning of the screening primers.  
  6.   Whilst the cycle is running, prepare a 96-well 1.5 % TAE- 
agarose gel.  
  7.   Using a multichannel pipette, load 10 μl of the PCR reaction 
mixtures directly onto the gel. Note that the spacing of the 
wells means that samples will be interleaved (Fig.  4 ). Load 6 μl 
of 1 kb DNA ladder and run the gel at 150 V for 1 h.
  8.   Conﬁ rm the sizing of the products and repeat the screen for 
additional clones if necessary ( see  Note 20 ). 
  1.  Combine the correct clones into a single block by inoculating 
20 μl of each culture ( see Subheading  3.7 ,  step 4 ) into 1 ml of 
LB ( see  Note 21 ) in a new 96-deep-well block, containing the 
same antibiotic selection as above. Grow overnight at 37 °C in 
a Glas-Col with shaking at 700 rpm.  
  2.   To each well of a V-bottomed microtiter plate, add 30 μl of 
60 % (v/v) glycerol, followed by 120 μl of culture. Mix well as 
you add the culture ( see  Note 22 ). Seal this with an adhesive 
tape pad and store at −80 °C.  
3.8  Preparation of 
Glycerol Stocks and 
96-Well Miniprep
 Table 2 
 Colony PCR screening primers for SGC vectors 
 Primer name 
 Primer sequence 
 pLIC-F 
 TGTGAGCGGATAACAATTCC 
 pLIC-R 
 AGCAGCCAACTCAGCTTCC 
 FBac-1 
 TATTCATACCGTCCCACCA 
 FBac-2 
 GGGAGGTTTTTTAAAGCAAGTAAA 
 FBac-3 
 TTAAAATGATAACCATCTCG 
 The screening primers are situated upstream of the LIC sites, allowing full sequencing of the puriﬁ cation tags incorpo-
rated by the vector sequence. The pLIC primers are for the bacterial expression vectors, whereas the FBac primers are 
for the baculovirus expression vectors (BEVs). Note that FBac-1 and -2 may be used to screen all BEVs but that FBac-1 
is located too close to the start codon of the C-terminally tagged vectors to allow complete coverage during sequencing; 
FBac-3 is recommended for this purpose  
Ligation Independent Cloning

68
  3.   Centrifuge the remaining culture at 3,000 ×  g for 20 min.  
  4.   Discard the supernatant into a waste pot containing 1 % Virkon 
and blot the excess liquid onto a clean paper towel.  
  5.   Use a 96-well plasmid puriﬁ cation kit (Millipore) to purify the 
plasmids from these cell pellets following the manufacturer’s 
instructions, with a few modiﬁ cations ( see  Note 23 ). 
  6.   Recover the DNA in 50 μl of Solution 5 (Millipore) and trans-
fer into a V-bottomed microtiter plate. Seal with an adhesive 
tape pad and store at −20 °C.  
4  Notes 
  1.   The  sacB gene product, expressed from our LIC-adapted vec-
tors (Fig.  3 ), is capable of converting sucrose to a toxic by- 
product. By adding sucrose to the LB-agar plates we select for 
recombinant plasmids only, as these will lack the  sacB gene, 
having been replaced by our GOI (Fig.  1 ). 
  2.   It is advisable to prepare small volumes of SOC medium at a 
time as it is prone to contamination.  
  3.   Note that if using the repeat pipettor to aliquot the PCR mas-
ter mix, the volume added will actually be 20 μl (not 21 μl) 
but this will not affect the reaction.  
  4.  Spend plenty of time sealing your PCR plate, applying a lot of 
pressure around the wells to ensure efﬁ cient adherence to pre-
vent evaporation. It is important that your thermal cycler has a 
heated lid as this will again limit the amount of evaporation.  
 Fig. 4  Image of a colony PCR screen performed in a 96-well format, analyzed on a 1.5 % TAE agarose gel. The 
samples are interleaved, e.g., A1, B1, A2, B2. Note that the products are larger (~200 bp) at the colony screen-
ing stage due to the positioning of the screening primers  
 
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

69
  5.   When dealing with a mixture of targets and primers on one 
96-well plate, it is not always possible to optimize each reac-
tion, therefore the best approach is to perform touchdown 
PCR as a ﬁ rst pass and then use a more tailored cycle for any 
missing products. As touchdown cycles through a range of 
annealing temperatures, it will cover the differences in melting 
temperatures of your primers across the plate.  
  6.   If you get multiple bands from your PCR, try using a ﬁ xed 
annealing temperature instead which should be ~5 °C lower 
than the melting temperature of your primers. If you get no 
bands, try using additives such as the enhancer supplied with 
the Platinum Pfx kit (Invitrogen) or DMSO at a ﬁ nal concen-
tration of 3 %, or test higher concentrations of MgSO 4 
(1.5–3 mM). If all of the reactions for a certain target have 
failed, you can try an alternative polymerase such as Herculase 
II (Agilent Technologies); however, you may also want to 
sequence your template to check that it is what you think it is.  
  7.   DpnI is a restriction endonuclease that can only cleave at its rec-
ognition sites when they have been methylated. Standard strains 
of  E .  coli (including Mach1™, Invitrogen) methylate their DNA, 
thus any entry clones propagated in them will be methylated. By 
DpnI-treating a PCR product, we speciﬁ cally cleave the template 
DNA leaving only the product intact. This limits the chance of 
template carryover when the entry clone carries the same antibi-
otic resistance marker as the cloning vector.  
  8.   It is important to purify the PCR products away from any unin-
corporated dNTPs in the reaction mixture as these will inhibit 
resection of the 3′ ends during the T4 DNA polymerase step.  
  9.   Alternative restriction digest conditions are as follows:  BfuAI 
vectors : 5 μg vector, 5 μl 10× NEB buffer 3, 1 μl BfuAI (5 units/μl, 
NEB), make up to 50 μl with water and incubate at 50 °C for 
2 h.  BseRI vectors : 5 μg vector, 10 μl 10× NEB buffer 2, 1 μl 
100× BSA (NEB), 6.25 μl BseRI (4 units/μl, NEB), make up 
to 100 μl with water and incubate at 37 °C for 2 h. Add a 
further 20 μl of water, 2.5 μl 10× NEB buffer 2, 2.5 μl BseRI 
(4 units/μl, NEB) and incubate for an additional 1 h at 37 °C.  
 10.   Check by agarose gel analysis that your vector has two clearly 
distinct bands; the top one is the vector backbone that you will 
ligate your fragment into and the lower band is the  sacB frag-
ment (~2 kb). You do not need to purify the lower fragment 
away from the top fragment as self-ligation is selected against 
by using sucrose in the medium ( see  Note 1 ). 
 11.   It is important that you only add one dNTP to your reaction 
as this will determine the stop position of the 3′ resection 
(Fig.  1 ). For this reason it is also important that your dNTP 
stock is stored at −20 °C when not in use to ensure that it 
remains fresh. The same rule applies to the DTT.  
Ligation Independent Cloning

70
 12.   The longer you give the annealing step the more successful 
your transformation will be. Give your samples no less than 
20 min but give them longer whenever possible.  
  13.  It is important to include a vector-only control during the trans-
formation to check that the rate of insert-independent colonies 
is low. The sucrose will select against reinsertion of the  sacB 
fragment and uncut vector but the vector backbone can occa-
sionally close on itself. If there are many colonies on this plate 
then there may be an issue with your sucrose selection or with 
your T4-treatment step as self-ligation should be rare. Note that 
these will be distinguishable at the PCR screen step as they will 
produce a ~200 bp product. You should also include an insert-
only control at the transformation step when your PCR prod-
ucts have required DpnI-treatment as this will indicate any 
template carryover from insufﬁ cient Dpn-I treatment.  
 14.   When using a repeat pipettor to aliquot your cells, care should 
be taken to prevent cross-contamination between wells caused 
by splash-back.  
 15.   It is important to use high cloning efﬁ ciency cells for the trans-
formation; if you fail to get colonies this is normally the reason 
why. If you prepare your cells in-house, then check the efﬁ -
ciency is on the order of 1 × 10 6 CFU per μg by transforming 
0.5 ng of vector. This test should be done every time new 
competent cells are prepared. You should also test for con-
tamination by plating 50 μl of untransformed cells on plates 
containing either ampicillin or kanamycin. This test should be 
performed using aseptic techniques to ensure that the cells are 
the only potential source of contamination.  
 16.   Other media can be used during this step (e.g., 1× or 2× LB); 
however, SOC gives a higher transformation efﬁ ciency when 
dealing with the low DNA concentrations that are used in this 
protocol.  
 17.   To plate using sterile glass beads: Stack the plates, agar-side 
down, in order of row (e.g., A1 to A12) and add ~5 beads per 
plate. Working from one side of the transformation plate to 
the other transfer 100 μl of the culture to the relevant agar 
plate. When each row is completed, split the stack into two 
blocks of six and shake the plates from side to side to spread 
the culture. Once all wells have been plated, shake the plates 
once more and upturn to move the beads onto the lid. The 
beads can then be disposed of into a beaker containing 1 % 
(w/v) Virkon to be cleaned, autoclaved, and reused.  
 18.   Give the inoculation loop a twirl in both the PCR mixture and 
the LB to transfer more material for the PCR and growth, 
respectively.  
 19.   We have found BIOTAQ™ Red DNA polymerase (Bioline) 
reactions to be more successful when the samples are placed in 
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

71
a thermocycler preheated to 95 °C, rather than allowing the 
enzyme to heat up to 95 °C. If using an alternative screening 
polymerase, check the conditions speciﬁ ed by the manufac-
turer; however, note that Bioline do not specify preheating 
with their product.  
  20.  If your colony screen is not working there may be several rea-
sons: If you get a smear on your agarose gels then it can often 
be remedied by cleaning your pipettes and gel tank before 
starting the screen. If you get no product, then check that your 
reagents and cycling conditions are working by including a 
small sample of your uncut vector (use 2 μl of a 2.5 ng/μl dilu-
tion for a 20 μl reaction) to act as a positive control. If this 
works but your screen does not, then there may be an issue 
with your cells ( see  Note 15 ). If the positive control fails, then 
you may want to try alternative reagents and/or cycling condi-
tions, and if the initial PCR required speciﬁ c conditions, then 
try these for the screen as well. When using ampicillin as the 
selectable marker, we have found that colonies with lots of sat-
ellites surrounding them tend not to yield products during the 
PCR screen. If this is the case, try retransforming and always 
store the plates at 4 °C when you are not screening them.  
 21.   For the plasmid miniprep, we have found that any media richer 
than LB yields pellets too large for efﬁ cient clearing during the 
miniprep process.  
  22.   It is important to mix your cells when preparing glycerol stocks 
to ensure the viability of the stock—should you need to go back 
to it.  
 23.   The volume of each buffer used to isolate the plasmid DNA is 
100 μl instead of 150 μl which is recommended in the manu-
facturer’s instruction booklet. In addition, we assemble our 
clearing plate above the manifold, with the plasmid plate inside 
the manifold, and apply ~300 mbar pressure. This is contrary 
to the manufacturer’s instructions due to risk of cross- 
contamination; however, we ﬁ nd this to be more effective and 
have had no issue with samples missing wells when this level of 
pressure is applied.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We would like to thank all the SGC scientists (past and present) 
who contributed towards the development of the method. The 
SGC is a registered charity (number 1097737) that receives funds 
from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Genome 
Canada, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly Canada, the Novartis Research 
Foundation, Pﬁ zer, Takeda, AbbVie, the Canada Foundation for 
Innovation, the Ontario Ministry of Economic Development and 
Innovation, and the Wellcome Trust.  
Ligation Independent Cloning

72
 References 
  1.  Abdellah Z, Ahmadi A, Ahmed S et al (2004) 
Finishing the euchromatic sequence of the 
human genome. Nature 431:931–945  
  2.  Haun RS, Serventi IM, Moss J (1992) Rapid, 
reliable ligation-independent cloning of PCR 
products using modiﬁ ed plasmid vectors. 
Biotechniques 13:515–518  
  3.  Hartley JL, Temple GF, Brasch MA (2000) 
DNA cloning using in vitro site-speciﬁ c recom-
bination. Genome Res 10:1788–1795  
  4.  Invitrogen (2010) Gateway ® Technology: a uni-
versal technology to clone DNA sequences for 
functional analysis and expression in multiple 
systems. Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad  
  5.  Walhout AJ, Temple GF, Brasch MA et al 
(2000) GATEWAY recombinational cloning: 
application to the cloning of large numbers of 
open reading frames or ORFeomes. Methods 
Enzymol 328:575–592  
  6.  Li MZ, Elledge SJ (2005) MAGIC, an in vivo 
genetic method for the rapid construction of 
recombinant DNA molecules. Nat Genet 
37:311–319 
  7.  Clontech (2012) In-Fusion ® HD cloning kit 
user manual. Clontech, Mountain View  
  8.  Li MZ, Elledge SJ (2007) Harnessing homol-
ogous recombination in vitro to generate 
recombinant DNA via SLIC. Nat Methods 
4:251–256  
  9.  Li MZ, Elledge SJ (2012) SLIC: a method for 
sequence- and ligation-independent cloning. 
Methods Mol Biol 852:51–59  
 10.  Hanahan D, Jessee J, Bloom FR et al (1991) 
Plasmid transformation of Escherichia coli 
and other bacteria. Methods Enzymol 
204:63–113  
  11.  Graslund S, Sagemark J, Berglund H et al 
(2008) The use of systematic N- and C-terminal 
deletions to promote production and struc-
tural studies of recombinant proteins. Protein 
Expr Purif 58:210–221  
  12.  Bray JE (2012) Target selection for structural 
genomics based on combining fold recognition 
and crystallisation prediction methods: applica-
tion to the human proteome. J Struct Funct 
Genomics 13:37–46  
  13.  Savitsky P, Bray J, Cooper CD et al (2010) 
High-throughput production of human pro-
teins for crystallization: the SGC experience. 
J Struct Biol 172:3–13 
Claire Strain-Damerell et al.

73
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_5, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 5  
 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human 
Proteins: Protein Production in  E .  coli 
 Nicola  A.  Burgess-Brown ,  Pravin  Mahajan ,  Claire  Strain-Damerell , 
 Opher  Gileadi , and  Susanne  Gräslund 
 Abstract 
 In Chapter   4 we described the SGC process for generating multiple constructs of truncated versions of 
each protein using LIC. In this chapter we provide a step-by-step procedure of our  E .  coli system for test 
expressing intracellular (soluble) proteins in a 96-well format that enables us to identify which proteins or 
truncated versions are expressed in a soluble and stable form suitable for structural studies. In addition, we 
detail the process for scaling up cultures for large-scale protein puriﬁ cation. This level of production is 
required to obtain sufﬁ cient quantities (i.e., milligram amounts) of protein for further characterization 
and/or crystallization experiments. Our standard process is puriﬁ cation by immobilized metal afﬁ nity 
chromatography (IMAC) using nickel resin followed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC), with addi-
tional procedures arising from the complexity of the protein itself.  
 Key words   E .  coli ,   Bacteria  ,   Expression  ,  Recombinant    Protein  ,   Puriﬁ cation  ,   Immobilized metal 
afﬁ nity chromatography (IMAC)  ,   Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)  ,   Gel ﬁ ltration  
1  Introduction 
 Choosing from which expression system to produce your pro-
tein can depend on many different factors such as its size, loca-
tion within the cell and the requirement for posttranslational 
modiﬁ cations (PTMs) [ 1 ]. To provide a starting point for 
researchers, structural genomics groups collectively identiﬁ ed 
trends and common strategies for producing proteins for struc-
tural determination [ 2 ]. At the SGC, we preferentially start with 
 E .  coli for testing and producing human intracellular proteins, 
speciﬁ cally a tRNA- enhanced strain of BL21(DE3) which often 
compensates for codon bias [ 3 ,  4 ]. This low-cost prokaryotic 
expression system is easy to use, is suitable for increasing through-
put, and has a high success rate for many targets, particularly when 
truncated or mutated versions of the protein are screened [ 5 ,  6 ]. 

74
In 2010, we showed that 48 % of the human proteins attempted 
in  E .  coli were successfully puriﬁ ed, and of those, the structures 
of approximately 40 % were solved by X-ray crystallography [ 7 ]. 
Protein crystallization demands availability of soluble, pure, 
monodisperse, and homogeneous proteins in sufﬁ cient quanti-
ties (usually in milligram quantities). Nevertheless, the limited 
amount of protein obtained from initial small-scale expression 
testing can provide valuable information on protein solubility, 
expression level, molecular weight, and PTMs of target proteins. 
In addition to our standard histidine (His)-tagged vectors, we have 
engineered a number of other vectors harboring different tags and/
or fusion partners (some of which are listed in Chapter   4  , table   1  ) 
and a variety of  E .  coli host strains [ 7 ]. All of these vectors also contain 
a six or ten His tag enabling the use of IMAC puriﬁ cation for fast 
and efﬁ cient capture of recombinant proteins from cell lysates. 
 A version of the bacterial methods from expression testing to 
large-scale protein production has been published previously. The 
method presented here has been modiﬁ ed, in particular, the changes 
in the method used to test protein expression in small- scale (1 ml) 
cultures has provided better correlation with the results of large-
scale expression. We found that using  n -Dodecyl β-D - maltoside 
(DDM) to lyse the bacterial membranes gave hits most comparable 
to those from large-scale cultures lysed by sonication or homogeni-
zation. The previous method we employed, extracting the protein 
with BugBuster ® , produced many false negative results (unpub-
lished data) and often required puriﬁ cation from a 50 ml culture to 
distinguish the true positives from the false hits. Since we imple-
mented this change in procedure, our false negative rate has declined 
substantially. Although we screen for expression in a 96-well for-
mat, the methods do not require expensive or specialized equip-
ment and are easily adaptable to lower throughput in individual 
tubes and ﬂ asks. As a consequence, they can be performed in any 
lab, with minimal equipment, at whatever scale is required. 
 The methods for large-scale protein expression and puriﬁ ca-
tion are also described in this chapter to provide the researcher 
with a complete process for obtaining quality protein in quantities 
sufﬁ cient for crystallization experiments or developing assays for 
functional screening. The generic methods described here are rou-
tinely used in our laboratory for expression and puriﬁ cation of a 
large number of proteins. Following the standard IMAC puriﬁ ca-
tion, many highly expressed proteins only require one additional 
step of SEC to yield pure protein, but for difﬁ cult to purify pro-
teins, additional steps such as His tag cleavage using TEV protease 
and rebinding to nickel resin or ion exchange chromatography are 
often required. Moreover, occasionally variations in the methodol-
ogy are incorporated to address the need arising from complexity 
of the proteins, by introducing changes such as buffer type, pH, 
ionic strength, and use of additives to the buffer in order to stabilize 
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

75
the proteins. The pipeline from cloning to expression testing 
through to large-scale protein expression and puriﬁ cation is out-
lined in Fig.  1 . The process that we use for screening and produc-
ing proteins in the baculovirus expression vector system (BEVS) is 
described in the subsequent chapter.
2  Materials 
 Unless otherwise stated, all solutions are prepared using ultrapure 
water (prepared by purifying deionized water to reach a resistivity 
of 18 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and analytical grade reagents. 
  1.   BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2  E .  coli strain: Phage resistant deriv-
ative of BL21(DE3) isolated in-house containing the pRARE2 
plasmid which was extracted from the strain Rosetta2 from 
Novagen. This strain supplies tRNAs for seven rare codons 
(AGA, AGG, AUA, CUA, GGA, CCC, and CGG) on a com-
patible chloramphenicol-resistant plasmid. Chemically compe-
tent bacterial cells are prepared in-house as described [ 8 ]. 
  2.   60 % (v/v) glycerol: autoclaved to sterilize.  
  3.   1,000× Antibiotic stocks: Kanamycin (50 mg/ml), ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius); Chloramphenicol 
(34 mg/ml in ethanol), both stored at −20 °C.  
  4.   1 M IPTG (Isopropyl β- D -1-thiogalactopyranoside): ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored at 
−20 °C.  
2.1  Transformation 
and Test Expression
 Fig. 1  Overview of the bacterial expression pipeline. The process takes ~3–4 
weeks from LIC to scale up  
 
Protein Production in E. coli

76
  5.  LB-agar: 22.5 g premixed LB-broth and 13.5 g agar dissolved 
in 800 ml of water. Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved 
on the same day.  
  6.   LB-agar plates: LB-agar melted slowly in a microwave. Once 
cooled to hand-hot, the appropriate antibiotic is added and 
swirled vigorously to mix. 10 ml of the molten agar is poured 
into each 50 mm petri dish and once set, upturned and left 
open to dry. These can be prepared ahead of time and stored 
at 4 °C sealed in a plastic bag to prevent over-drying.  
  7.  1× LB: 22.5 g premixed LB-broth dissolved in 800 ml of water. 
Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same day.  
  8.  2× LB: 45 g premixed LB-broth dissolved in 800 ml of water. 
Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same day.  
  9.  SOC medium: 18 g tryptone, 4.5 g yeast extract, 0.45 g NaCl, 
and 2.25 ml of 1 M KCl dissolved in 800 ml of water. Volume 
adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same day. Once 
cooled, 9 ml of 2 M MgCl 2 hexahydrate and 18 ml of 1 M 
(18 %) glucose are added; both solutions are ﬁ ltered through 
a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) prior to use ( see  Note 1 ). 
 10.   TB (Terriﬁ c Broth) medium: 12 g of tryptone, 24 g of yeast 
extract, and 4 ml of glycerol dissolved in 800 ml of water. 
Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same day. 
Once cooled to room temperature (RT), volume adjusted to 
1 l with 100 ml of a separately autoclaved solution of 0.17 M 
KH 2 PO 4 and 0.72 M K 2 HPO 4 . 
 11.   Virkon (Appleton Woods).  
 12.   24-Well tissue culture (TC) plates (Corning).  
 13.   96-Well PCR plates.  
 14.   96-Well microtiter plates.  
 15.   96-Deep-well blocks (Thomson or similar).  
 16.   Disposable sterile spreaders.  
 17.   Disposable sterile inoculation loops, 1 μl. 
 18.   AirOtop porous seals (Thomson).  
 19.   Adhesive tape pads (Qiagen).  
 20.   Disposable Cuvettes (Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
 21.   Reagent reservoir for multichannel pipetting (Fisher).  
 22.   Multichannel pipettes and repeat pipettors are used to dis-
pense reagents into a 96-well format.  
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

77
 23.   Micro-Express Glas-Col shaker (Glas-Col, Indiana, USA) or 
alternative that ranges in temperature from 18 to 37 °C and 
shakes up to 800 rpm.  
 24.   Water bath set at 42 °C.  
 25.   Incubator set at 37 °C.  
 26.   96-Well block mixer (eppendorf MixMate or similar).  
 27.   A visible light spectrophotometer for measuring OD 600nm  
(optical density) of bacterial cultures (for individual cuvettes).  
 28.   A 96-well plate reader is also useful but not essential.  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.  Benzonase (Novagen, HC, 250 units/μl). 
  2.   Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set VII (Calbiochem).  
  3.  10 mg/ml Lysozyme (Sigma-Aldrich), prepared fresh.  
  4.  10 % (w/v) DDM, Sol-grade (Anatrace or Glykon), ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.20 µm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored at 
−20 °C.  
  5.   1 M TCEP (Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine Hydrochloride), 
ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 µm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored 
at −20 °C.  
  6.  1 M DTT (Dithiothreitol), ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 µm syringe 
ﬁ lter (Sartorius) and stored as 1 ml aliquots at −20 °C.  
  7.  SeeBlue Plus2 (Invitrogen).  
  8.   InstantBlue™ (Expedeon Protein Solutions).  
  9.  20× XT Mes running buffer (Bio-Rad).  
 10.   Stock solutions: 1 M HEPES, pH 7.5; 5 M NaCl; 3 M imid-
azole, pH 8.0; 200 mM MgSO 4 (all ﬁ ltered through a 0.2 µm 
membrane ﬁ lter and stored at RT); 50 % (v/v) glycerol (auto-
claved and stored at RT).  
  11.   Lysis buffer (1 l): 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 
10 % (v/v) glycerol, and 10 mM imidazole, ﬁ ltered through a 
0.2 µm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the day of puri-
ﬁ cation, Lysozyme (50 µl/ml), Benzonase (0.2 µl/ml), Protease 
inhibitor cocktail (1 µl/ml), DDM (10 µl/ml), MgSO 4 (5 µl/
ml), and TCEP (0.5 µl/ml) are added ( see  Note 2 ).  
 12.   Wash buffer (1 l): 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 
10 % (v/v) glycerol, 25 mM imidazole, ﬁ ltered through a 
0.2 µm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM TCEP 
added on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
2.2  Test Puriﬁ cation
Protein Production in E. coli

78
 13.   Elution buffer (0.1 l): 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM 
NaCl, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 500 mM imidazole, ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.2 µm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM 
TCEP added on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
 14.   Afﬁ nity buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 10 mM imidazole.  
  15.  50 % Ni-IDA Metal Chelate Resin (Generon) or Ni-NTA-
agarose (Qiagen): IMAC resin is generally supplied in 20 % 
ethanol. To equilibrate, the resin is washed twice in water and 
then three times in Afﬁ nity buffer in a 50 ml tube, by inverting 
to resuspend the resin and centrifuging at 500 ×  g for 1 min. 
After the ﬁ nal wash, the resin is resuspended in Afﬁ nity buffer as 
50 % slurry and stored at 4 °C when not in use.  
 16.   SB: Stock of NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) con-
taining DTT (1:4 dilution of 1 M DTT in NuPAGE LDS 
sample buffer) and stored at −20 °C.  
 17.   MultiScreen ® Filter Plates, 1.2 µm (Millipore).  
 18.   MultiScreen HTS Vacuum Manifold (Millipore).  
 19.   Pre-cast 26-Lane SDS-PAGE gradient gels (4–20 %) 
(Bio-Rad).  
 20.   Protein gel electrophoresis apparatus (Bio-Rad).  
 21.   96-Well thermocycler with heated lid.  
 22.   All gels are imaged on a Gel Logic 200 Imaging System 
(Kodak).  
 23.   Centrifuge suitable for 96-deep-well blocks (3,000 ×  g ). 
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.  Glycerol stocks of transformed expression strain.  
  2.  2.5 l Ultra Yield bafﬂ ed ﬂ asks (Thomson) or glass ﬂ asks.  
   3.  Shaker-incubators with cooling capacity: Innova 44R (New 
Brunswick) or Multitron (Infors HT).  
  4.   Avanti J-20XP or Avanti J-26XP centrifuge or similar 
(Beckman Coulter) with a JLA 8.1000 rotor for harvesting 
large volumes of cells.  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.  5 % (w/v) Polyethyleneimine (PEI): The 50 % solution 
(Sigma-Aldrich, P3143) is diluted tenfold then adjusted to 
pH 7.5 with HCl.  
2.3  Large-Scale 
Expression
2.4  Protein 
Extraction and 
Large-Scale 
Puriﬁ cation
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

79
  2.  2× Lysis buffer: 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl, 20 % 
(v/v) glycerol, 20 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 µm 
membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the day of puriﬁ cation, 
Benzonase (0.2 µl/ml of cell lysate), 2 µl of Protease inhibitor 
cocktail (1 µl/ml of cell lysate), and 1 mM TCEP are added.  
  3.  Lysis buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 µm 
membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the day of puriﬁ cation, 
Benzonase (0.1 µl/ml of cell lysate), Protease inhibitor cock-
tail (1 µl/ml cell lysate) or Complete EDTA-free protease 
inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/25 ml cell lysate), and 0.5 mM 
TCEP are added. 
  4.  Afﬁ nity buffer: 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, 500 mM 
NaCl, 10 % glycerol, 10 mM imidazole. 0.5 mM TCEP added 
on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
  5.  Wash buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 30 mM imidazole. 0.5 mM TCEP added on the day 
of puriﬁ cation.  
  6.   Elution buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 300 mM imidazole. 0.5 mM TCEP added on the day 
of puriﬁ cation.  
  7.   Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) buffer: 20 mM 
HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol. Filtered 
through a 0.2 µm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM 
TCEP added on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
  8.   Minisart syringe ﬁ lters, 0.20, 0.45, and 0.80 µm (Sartorius).  
  9.  Millex ® -GV Low Protein Binding Filter, 0.22 µm (Millipore).  
 10.   Amicon Ultra protein concentrators (Millipore).  
 11.   Sonicator (Sonics Vibra-Cell, VCX 750, Sonics & Materials 
INC) or basic Z model cell disruptor (Constant Systems Ltd.) 
or EmulsiFlex-C5 high-pressure homogenizer (Avestin).  
 12.   Econo-Columns (Bio-Rad or similar).  
 13.   ÄKTA-Xpress or ÄKTA-Puriﬁ er liquid chromatography sys-
tem (GE).  
 14.   HiTrap 5 ml FF columns (GE) for His-tagged protein 
puriﬁ cation.  
  15.   Ion exchange chromatography columns such as HiTrap 5 ml 
Q FF and SP FF (GE).  
 16.   HiLoad Superdex columns (GE) for preparative size exclusion 
chromatography such as HiLoad 16/60 Superdex S75 or 
Superdex S200.  
Protein Production in E. coli

80
 17.   UV-spectrophotometer for measuring DNA and protein con-
centration (e.g., The NanoDrop spectrophotometer allows 
measurements from as low as 1.5 µl volumes).  
 18.   General purpose benchtop centrifuge (Sorvall Legend RT, 
Kendro).  
 19.   JA-17 rotor for centrifugation of cell lysates.  
 20.   Microcentrifuge.  
3  Methods 
  1.   Prepare four 24-well tissue culture plates containing 1 ml of 
LB-agar, supplemented with 50 μg/ml kanamycin and 34 μg/
ml chloramphenicol and once set allow to dry, inverted at RT.  
  2.  Using a multichannel pipette, add 3 µl of recombinant DNA 
( see Chapter   4 , Subheading   3.8  ,  step 6 ) to a 96-well PCR 
plate. Place on ice and add 30 μl of chemically competent 
 E .  coli BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 cells using a repeat pipettor 
( see  Note 3 ). Cover with an adhesive tape pad and incubate for 
30 min on ice. It is advisable to include a positive control 
 protein (i.e., a protein that has previously shown soluble 
expression in  E .  coli ) in position H12 of the 96-well plate.  
  3.   Heat shock in a water bath at 42 °C for 45 s, return to ice 
brieﬂ y then add 100 μl of SOC (or 2× LB) medium ( see  Note 
4 ). Cover with a porous seal and incubate for 1 h at 37 °C.  
  4.  Pipette 30 µl of the transformation mixture onto the agar in the 
24-well TC plates according to the format presented (Fig.  2 ). 
Gently rock the plates to cover the surface and allow them to 
dry before incubating at 37 °C inverted overnight ( see  Note 5 ).
  5.  Inoculate three colonies or a streak of colonies from each well 
( see  Note 6 ) into the corresponding well of a 96-deep-well 
block containing 1 ml of LB (or 2× LB) medium supplemented 
with 50 µg/ml kanamycin and 34 µg/ml chloramphenicol.  
  6.   Cover the block with porous ﬁ lm and place in the Glas-Col 
shaker in the afternoon at 37 °C, with shaking at 700 rpm.  
  7.  The following morning, prepare four replicate glycerol stocks. 
Dispense 30 µl of 60 % (v/v) glycerol into 96-well microtiter 
plates. Transfer 120 µl of each culture into the corresponding 
wells of the microtiter plates and mix by pipetting. Seal the plate 
with an adhesive tape pad and store at −80 °C. Keep the remain-
der of the overnight culture for setting up the test expression.  
3.1  Transformation 
into  E .  coli 
BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

81
  1.  Inoculate 20 μl of the overnight culture (or thawed glycerol 
stock) into each well of two 96-deep-well blocks containing 1 ml 
of fresh TB medium, supplemented with 50 µg/ml kanamycin 
( see  Note 7 ) and grow to an OD 600nm  of 2–3 (approximately 5 h) 
in a Glas-Col shaker set at 37 °C and 700 rpm. Label one block 
as “OD measurement block” and the other as “test block.”  
  2.  Determine the OD measurement for a few wells (at least one 
appearing visually to have low density and one high density) 
by diluting 1 in 4 in TB medium and using a visible light spec-
trophotometer. If the OD 600nm  is between 2–3, and you have 
available a 96-well plate reader, dilute aliquots of the test block 
1 in 4 (in a total of 200 µl) in a ﬂ at- bottomed clear microtiter 
plate for OD measurement using the plate reader ( see  Note 8 ). 
  3.  Leave the cultures to cool down at RT for 30 min and change 
the temperature setting of the shaker to 18 °C.  
  4.   Induce expression by adding 0.1 mM IPTG (10 mM stock 
prepared in TB medium and 10 μl added to the block) and 
incubating in the Glas-Col shaker overnight at 18 °C and 
700 rpm.  
3.2  Test Expression
 Fig. 2  Format for plating cultures grown in a 96-well block onto four 24-well agar 
plates. This template can be printed out to scale and placed underneath the 
24-well plates when plating 
 
Protein Production in E. coli

82
  1.  Centrifuge the 96-deep-well block at 3,000 ×  g for 20 min, 
pour off the medium into a waste pot containing 1 % Virkon 
and tap the block on absorbent paper ( see  Notes 9 and  10 ). 
  2.  Add 200 µl of Lysis buffer ( see  Note 2 ) and resuspend the pel-
lets either using the Glas- Col shaker at 18 °C and 700 rpm or 
a 96-well block mixer (Eppendorf) at 1,000–2,000 rpm. Use 
a multichannel pipette to resuspend any remaining solid pel-
lets and store the block at −80 °C for at least 20 min, until all 
pellets are completely frozen.  
  3.  Thaw the pellets in a shallow water bath (at RT) for approxi-
mately 15 min and resuspend in the Glas-Col shaker for 
10 min. Remove 3 µl (Total fraction) and pipette into a PCR 
plate containing 27 µl of water and 10 µl of SB for storage at 
4 °C until required.  
  4.  Centrifuge the block at 3,000 ×  g for 10 min.  
  5.   Meanwhile, add 50 µl of a 50 % slurry of Ni-IDA (or Ni-NTA) 
resin to each well of a MultiScreen ® Filter Plate, 1.2 µm 
(Millipore).  
  6.   Transfer the clariﬁ ed lysate ( see  Note 11 ) using a 1 ml capac-
ity multichannel pipette, to the ﬁ lter plate containing the 
resin, taking care to avoid transferring any pelleted material 
( see  Note 12 ).  
  7.  Place an adhesive tape pad on top and incubate the plate in the 
Glas-Col shaker at 18 °C for 1 h at 400 rpm ( see  Note 13 ). 
  8.  Assemble the vacuum manifold according to the Manufacturer’s 
instructions and then ﬁ lter the contents through the plate into 
waste for approximately 20 s, taking care not to dry out the 
resin ( see  Note 14 ). Turn off the vacuum.  
  9.  Add 200 μl of Wash buffer and ﬁ lter quickly. Repeat this step 
three more times, turning the vacuum off after each step to 
prevent over-drying, and then place the ﬁ lter plate on top of a 
waste block and centrifuge for 2 min at 300 ×  g to remove all 
trace of the Wash buffer ( see  Note 15 ). 
 10.  Place a fresh 96-well microtiter plate under the ﬁ lter plate, 
add 40 µl of Elution buffer and seal the plate with an adhe-
sive tape pad.  
 11.   Incubate the plate in the Glas-Col shaker for 10–20 min at 
400 rpm and 18 °C (or at RT on a shaking platform).  
 12.   Elute the protein by centrifugation at 300 ×  g for 3 min.  
 13.   Store the eluate (Puriﬁ ed fraction) at 4 °C until required (or 
−20 °C for long term storage).  
3.3  Test Puriﬁ cation
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

83
 14.   Dispense 5 µl of SB in all wells of a 96-well PCR plate, add 
15 µl of each Puriﬁ ed fraction, denature by heating at 80 °C 
for 10 min and load 15 µl samples into each lane of the SDS-
PAGE gels using a multichannel pipette, by alternating rows 
(e.g., A1, B1, A2, B2,  see  Note 16 ). Include a marker in the 
ﬁ rst lane (e.g., SeeBlue Plus2, Invitrogen).  
  15.  Run the gels at 150 V for approximately 1 h or until the ﬁ rst dye 
front has reached the bottom of the gel, then stain with 
InstantBlue™ (Expedeon Protein Solutions) or similar to identify 
which constructs are positive for soluble expression ( see Fig.  3 ).
  1.  After identifying the positive constructs from the test expres-
sion and puriﬁ cation, prepare a starter culture by inoculating a 
loop of the glycerol stock into 10 ml of TB medium contain-
ing 50 µg/ml kanamycin and 34 µg/ml chloramphenicol in a 
50 ml tube ( see  Notes 17 and  18 ). Grow the starter culture 
overnight at 37 °C in a shaker incubator.  
  2.   The next morning, inoculate 10 ml of the starter culture into 
a 2.5 l Ultra Yield or bafﬂ ed glass ﬂ ask containing 1 l of sterile 
TB medium, freshly supplemented with 50 µg/ml kanamycin 
only ( see  Note 7 ). Cover the ﬂ ask with a porous seal and incu-
bate at 37 °C, with shaking at 200 rpm ( see  Note 19 ). 
  3.   Monitor OD 600nm  by taking 1 ml of the sample every hour and 
continue the incubation at 37 °C until the OD 600nm  reaches 
2.00 ± 1 ( see  Note 20 ). 
  4.  Reduce the temperature of the incubator to 18 °C and after 
approximately 30 min, induce protein expression by adding IPTG 
(from a 1 M stock solution) to a ﬁ nal concentration of 0.1 mM ( see 
 Note 21 ), then continue the incubation overnight at 18 °C.  
3.4  Large-Scale 
Expression
 Fig. 3  Image showing the Coomassie SDS-PAGE result of a test puriﬁ cation from 
 E .  coli . The gel shows a range of high, medium and low expressing proteins of 
different molecular weights. Note that samples loaded using a multichannel 
pipette are interleaved 
 
Protein Production in E. coli

84
  5.  Measure OD 600nm  by diluting 25 µl of the culture into 1 ml of 
the TB medium ( see  Note 22 ) and harvest the remaining cells 
by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm (~9,000 ×  g ) for 20 min using a 
JLA-8.1000 rotor or similar. Pour the supernatant back into 
the original culture ﬂ ask and decontaminate using Virkon.  
  6.  Remove traces of the medium from the cell pellet using a 1 ml 
pipette and transfer the cell pellet to a 50 ml tube. Record the wet-
weight of the cells (generally 12–30 g from 1 l of culture) and 
store the pellets at −80 °C until required for puriﬁ cation. The cell 
pellets can be stored at −80 °C for many months ( see  Note 23 ).  
 All the following steps of protein extraction and puriﬁ cation are 
performed at 4 °C or on ice. Prechill all buffers and centrifuges.
  1.  If protein puriﬁ cation is performed straight after harvesting 
the cells, transfer the cell pellets to ice or if the cells were fro-
zen, thaw the pellets in a water bath set at 37 °C for as long as 
required to thaw, then immediately transfer to ice.  
  2.   Resuspend the cells in 1 volume of 2× Lysis buffer (1 ml/g 
wet-weight) and mix thoroughly using a glass rod or serologi-
cal pipette. Add 2–3 more volumes of 1× Lysis buffer until the 
sample is manageably ﬂ uid with no cell lumps.  
  3.  Prechill the cell disruptor and lyse the cells resuspended in 
 step 2  above. Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions of the 
instrument that is used (e.g., for the basic Z model cell disrup-
tor, two to three rounds at ~15,000 psi are sufﬁ cient for cell 
lysis). Recover the lysate in the disruptor by ﬂ ushing it with 
Lysis buffer (20–40 ml). Save 10 µl of the lysate which repre-
sents the Total fraction ( see  Note 24 ). 
  4  Add PEI to the cell lysate to a ﬁ nal concentration of 0.15 % and 
mix thoroughly by inverting the tube several times or using a 
pipette. At this stage the lysates turn milky ( see  Note 25 ).  
  5  Transfer the lysates to centrifuge tubes, balance the tubes pair-
wise and centrifuge at 17,000 rpm (~39,000 ×  g ) in a JA-17 
rotor (or similar) for at least 30 min at 4 °C.  
  6  Transfer the clear supernatant into a clean tube taking care to 
avoid transferring any pelleted material. This clariﬁ ed superna-
tant represents the Soluble fraction ( see  Note 26 ). 
 The puriﬁ cation scheme described here for His-tagged proteins 
is generic and applied to a diverse set of proteins; however, it 
may not be applicable to every individual protein. Other buffer 
compositions may be substituted to address issues such as protein 
instability and requirements of ﬁ nal applications. Careful optimi-
zation of the buffer composition with respect to the buffering 
3.5  Protein 
Extraction
3.6  Large-Scale 
Protein Puriﬁ cation
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

85
system, pH, salt concentrations and additives is particularly critical 
for difﬁ cult to purify proteins ( see  Note 27 ). The protein puriﬁ ca-
tion scheme described here is a two-step procedure (1) IMAC and 
(2) SEC. Manual IMAC provides the ﬂ exibility to use a speciﬁ c 
volume of resin to the amount of lysate and collection of several 
elutions with gradual increase in imidazole concentration. 
Automated protein puriﬁ cation systems allow rapid puriﬁ cation of 
target proteins while using multiple chromatography steps with 
minimal intervention. An important point to mention when work-
ing with large culture volumes is the problems associated with 
applying large volumes of lysate to small IMAC columns which 
can result in reduced protein binding capacity due to depletion of 
nickel ions from the column [ 9 ].
  1.   To perform manual IMAC, prepare the Ni-IDA (or Ni-NTA) 
resin as described in Subheading  2.2 ,  step 15 . 
  2.   Add the resin to the clariﬁ ed cell lysate in a 50 ml tube. Depending 
on the estimated protein expression level, add 0.5–2 ml of the 
50 % (w/v) resin to the clariﬁ ed lysate obtained per liter of cul-
ture and rotate the tubes gently for 30 min to 1 h at 4 °C.  
  3.   Centrifuge at 500 ×  g for 10 min, remove, and save the superna-
tant in a fresh tube which represents the Unbound fraction, taking 
care not to disturb the resin while removing the supernatant.  
  4.   Resuspend the resin in 2–3 column volumes (CV) of Afﬁ nity 
buffer and transfer to an empty chromatography column (such 
as an Econo-Column, Bio-Rad). Alternatively, prepare a pro-
portionate resin bed in an empty column, apply the clariﬁ ed 
cell lysate, and collect the Unbound fraction by gravity ﬂ ow 
through the column.  
  5.   Wash the resin in the column with 10 CV of Afﬁ nity buffer 
and save the ﬂ ow through for SDS-PAGE analysis.  
  6.   Wash the resin with 20 CV of Wash buffer, again saving the 
ﬂ ow through for gel analysis.  
  7.  Elute the bound protein in fractions of at least ﬁ ve elutions 
of 2 CV of Elution buffer, generally a total of 10–15 CV. 
Analyze 15 µl of each elution by SDS-PAGE ( see  Fig.  4a ) prior 
to proceeding to the next step ( see  Note 28 ).
  8.   To prepare the sample for SEC, pool the fractions and concen-
trate using an Amicon Ultra protein concentrator (Millipore) 
according to the Manufacturer’s instructions. Transfer the 
concentrated sample into a 50 ml tube and centrifuge at 
4,000 ×  g for 10 min or ﬁ lter through a 0.22 μm low protein 
binding ﬁ lter (Millipore) to remove aggregates and particu-
lates before loading onto the SEC column.  
Protein Production in E. coli

86
 Fig. 4  Image showing quality assurance measures in protein puriﬁ cation. ( a ) The initial IMAC elutions are 
analyzed by SDS-PAGE to determine approximate size and yield. In the example shown, gel A  lane 3 shows the 
product of TEV-mediated cleavage of the His-tag following IMAC puriﬁ cation. ( b ) The cleaved protein is then 
puriﬁ ed by SEC. ( d ) The resulting fractions from SEC are assessed for purity by SDS-PAGE before pooling and 
concentrating the protein. ( c ) The identity of the puriﬁ ed protein is then conﬁ rmed by intact mass spectrom-
etry (MS) analysis. Note that in the example shown the expected mass of the protein is 38.8 kDa, as conﬁ rmed 
by MS analysis. The size discrepancy shown in  inserts  a and  d is due to the inaccuracy of size determination 
by SDS-PAGE 
  9.  To perform SEC, follow the method from  step 16  onwards; 
however, the protein sample will have to be injected onto the 
SEC column manually ( see  Note 29 ). 
 10.   To perform automated IMAC and SEC using an ÄKTA-Xpress 
chromatography system, prepare the system in a cold cabinet 
or cold room in advance by employing the desired number of 
IMAC columns (e.g., HisTrap FF crude) and a SEC column 
 
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

87
(e.g., HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 prep grade or HiLoad 
16/60 Superdex 200 prep grade).  
 11.   Prepare the HisTrap columns by washing ﬁ rst with 10 CV of 
water and then by equilibrating with 10 CV of Afﬁ nity buffer 
at 0.8 ml/min ﬂ ow rate.  
 12.    Prepare the SEC column by washing ﬁ rst with 2 CV of water 
(inlet A5) and then with 2 CV of SEC buffer (inlet A4).  
 13.    Set up an IMAC and SEC puriﬁ cation method. Change the 
default parameters as described in the notes ( see  Note 30 ). 
Steps 
14–17 
are 
performed 
automatically 
on 
the 
ÄKTA-Xpress.  
  14.   Apply the clariﬁ ed and ﬁ ltered cell lysate to the pre-equilibrated 
IMAC column at 0.8 ml/min ﬂ ow rate.  
  15.   Wash the IMAC column with 5–10 CV of Afﬁ nity buffer using 
inlet A1 until the  A 280nm  stabilizes. Wash with 10 CV of Wash 
buffer using inlet B1. Elute with 5 CV of Elution buffer using 
inlet A3. The eluted peak is automatically identiﬁ ed by detection 
of an increased  A 280nm  and is collected into the reinjection loop.  
 16.    The eluted peak is automatically injected onto the SEC col-
umn at a ﬂ ow rate of 1.2 ml/min, followed by running 1.2 CV 
of SEC buffer at the same ﬂ ow rate using inlet A4.  
 17.    Collect 2 ml fractions based on the  A 280nm  peak ( see  Fig.  4b ) 
into a 96-deep-well block.  
 18.   Analyze the fractions by SDS-PAGE for purity and homoge-
neity ( see Fig.  4d ). Avoid high molecular weight aggregates 
and pool peaks corresponding to different oligomeric forms, 
e.g., monomers, dimers, separately ( see  Note 31 ). 
 19.   If the puriﬁ ed protein is to be used at a later date, concentrate 
the protein using an Amicon Ultra protein concentrator 
(Millipore) and aliquot in small volumes, ﬂ ash- freeze in liquid 
nitrogen, and store at −80 °C until needed. To prevent dam-
age to the protein during freezing and thawing add glycerol, if 
not already included in the buffer ( see  Note 32 ). 
 20.    If required purity is not achieved in this two-step puriﬁ cation 
scheme, additional steps such tag removal followed by IMAC 
puriﬁ cation or ion exchange chromatography may be included 
to obtain pure and homogeneous protein ( see  Note 33 ). 
 In addition to SDS-PAGE and SEC, if available, mass spectrom-
etry analysis of every puriﬁ ed protein is highly recommended ( see 
Fig.  4c ). This conﬁ rms the molecular weight of the protein, with 
mass discrepancies indicating mutations or cloning artifacts and 
potential PTMs. The protein is loaded into a small C3 HPLC 
3.7  Quality 
Assurance
Protein Production in E. coli

88
 column for de-salting and eluted onto an in-line electrospray 
 ionization time-of-ﬂ ight analyser (Agilent). Any discrepancy needs 
to be explained, either by sequencing the DNA or by enzymatic 
removal of suspected modiﬁ cations or by MS/MS analysis of 
 proteolytic fragments.  
4  Notes 
  1.  It is advisable to prepare small batches (10–100 ml) of SOC 
medium as this can become contaminated very quickly.  
  2.  On the day of puriﬁ cation, only prepare the required amount 
of buffer for the number of samples to be puriﬁ ed, e.g., for 
one 96-well plate you will need about 25 ml of Lysis buffer, 
70 ml of Wash buffer, and 5 ml of Elution buffer. The stock 
buffers can be stored at 4 °C for at least 1 month.  
  3.   Be careful not to splash the cells up the sides of the wells whilst 
using the repeat pipettor and also check that the cells are at the 
bottom of the well before continuing. This step can also be 
done using a single channel pipette but will take more time.  
  4.  The SOC medium can be added using a multichannel pipette 
with the medium in a reagent reservoir.  
  5.  The transformation can be performed for individual clones. In 
this case, plate 80 µl of the transformation mixture onto a 
50 mm petri dish and spread with a sterile spreader.  
  6.  Multiple colonies are selected at this stage in order to account 
for clone to clone variation in expression levels of the protein.  
  7.  We recommend not adding chloramphenicol at this stage as 
the pRARE2 plasmid is not lost during expression; however, 
its addition may signiﬁ cantly slow down the bacterial growth.  
  8.  Using the 96-well plate reader to determine the OD 600nm  of 
the cultures across the whole 96-well block indicates any 
inconsistencies with growth for particular targets, or con-
structs, and can therefore be used to identify proteins which 
failed to express because of a lack of proper growth.  
  9.   The cell pellets can also be stored at −80 °C for 1–2 weeks if 
necessary.  
 10.   It is useful to set up two 96-well plates of test proteins in paral-
lel to provide a balance for the centrifugation steps; however, 
a balance block can be used containing water instead.  
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

89
 11.   At this point, you can remove 15 µl of clariﬁ ed lysate (as the 
Soluble fraction) and mix with 5 µl of SB in a PCR plate before 
transferring to the ﬁ lter plate.  
 12.   Take care to avoid transferring insoluble material to the resin 
as it may block the ﬁ lter plate in subsequent steps. To avoid 
disturbing the Insoluble fraction tilt the plate and drive the 
tips down the side of the wells at an angle. Stop just above the 
pellet, on most plates there is a ridge just off the bottom—feel 
for this with the tips. Gently pipette up the supernatant and 
then transfer to the new plate. Do not go back into the wells 
as this will resuspend the pellets, if this happens then re-spin 
the sample and try again.  
 13.   Alternatively, incubate at RT on a shaking platform. It is advis-
able to place the ﬁ lter plate on top of a 96-well microtiter plate 
to avoid any drips coming through onto the shaker.  
 14.   This step can also be done using centrifugation (200 ×  g  for 
1 min).  
 15.   Removing all trace of Wash buffer is essential to ensure that 
the subsequent elution step does not become diluted with 
Wash buffer.  
 16.   As standard, we only run the Puriﬁ ed fractions on gels to iden-
tify which proteins are expressed, soluble, and puriﬁ ed. We 
will only analyze the Total and Soluble fractions if we want to 
determine whether or not a protein has been expressed but is 
insoluble or if the control protein has failed to purify.  
 17.   Alternatively, retransform the expression plasmid into 
BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 as described in Subheading  3.1 , 
except plate 80 µl of the transformation mixture onto a 50 mm 
petri dish and spread with a sterile spreader.  
 18.    One 10 ml starter culture is required per L of culture scaled 
up. If you are planning to scale up more than 1 l, prepare 
starter cultures proportionately. We generally ﬁ nd that 1 l scale 
is sufﬁ cient to obtain milligram quantities of highly expressed 
proteins, i.e., those having large visible bands on Coomassie 
SDS-PAGE after test puriﬁ cation ( see  Fig.  3 ). If the bands are 
weak, you may need to scale up to 3 l of culture or more.  
 19.    The ﬂ asks can be autoclaved with the media in them but do 
not use porous seals during autoclaving, instead cover the 
ﬂ asks with a piece of aluminum foil and use porous seals only 
during cell growth. The bacterial growth is an important 
determinant for protein expression and is mainly affected by 
aeration, stirring, and temperature. Efﬁ cient aeration in shaker 
ﬂ asks can be achieved by optimizing the ratio of culture 
Protein Production in E. coli

90
volume to the total capacity of ﬂ ask and shaking speed. The 
wide mouth design of the 2.5 l Ultra Yield ﬂ asks with straight 
walls and bafﬂ es at the bottom of the ﬂ asks facilitate good 
oxygenation for culture volumes up to 1 l. Conventional baf-
ﬂ ed Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks provide comparable aeration but with 
lower culture to vessel ratios (typically 1:4).  
 20.   Using a 5 ml serological pipette, remove 1 ml of sample and 
measure OD 600nm . OD measurements above 0.5 are not linear, 
dilute the culture if it is at higher OD before measurement and 
use the corrected value to obtain the precise OD. When cells 
are grown in TB medium, induction at an OD 600nm  value of 
1–3, followed by overnight growth at reduced temperature is 
optimum for protein expression. However, this may need to 
be optimized for individual proteins.  
  21.   A concentration of 0.1 mM IPTG is sufﬁ cient for most strains; 
however, others such as pLysS may require higher concentra-
tions in the range of 1–2 mM for efﬁ cient induction. We ﬁ nd 
that the optimum temperature of induction for the majority of 
the human proteins that we express in  E .  coli is 18–25 °C. It may 
be beneﬁ cial to test a number of temperatures (ranging from 15 
to 37 °C) at the test expression stage for speciﬁ c proteins.  
 22.   At this stage you can remove a 5 ml sample and harvest the cell 
pellet by centrifugation in a 15 ml tube to perform a test puri-
ﬁ cation which will conﬁ rm if the scale up expression has been 
successful, before proceeding to large-scale puriﬁ cation. 
 23.   If the cell pellets are not used for protein puriﬁ cation immedi-
ately, they can be frozen directly or after resuspension in a 
small volume of Lysis buffer at −80 °C. If the cells are frozen 
after resuspension in buffer, thawing may result in a very vis-
cous solution because of cell lysis and release of nucleic acids. 
Viscosity can be reduced by the addition of Benzonase nucle-
ase to the cell lysate at a concentration of 25–50 U/ml. The 
addition of protease inhibitors is important when freezing pel-
lets in Lysis buffer to reduce protein degradation. However, it 
is advisable to test your protein by puriﬁ cation in small scale 
ﬁ rst to determine how sensitive it is to degradation. Some 
proteins require puriﬁ cation immediately from cell harvesting 
to prevent them from proteolytic degradation.  
 24.   Although many methods are available to lyse cells, high-pres-
sure cell disruption is a very efﬁ cient way of lysing large vol-
umes of cell suspensions. For smaller volumes (<100 ml) 
sonication can be used effectively. However, both methods 
can cause localized heating which can result in protein precipi-
tation or denaturation; therefore, it is important to keep sam-
ples on ice at all times and prechill the cell disruptor. 
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

91
Cell disruption by sonication can also help in reducing viscos-
ity by shearing nucleic acids. Use of detergents should be 
avoided for cell lysis if its presence will interfere with the 
downstream applications such as protein crystallization. To 
lyse your cells by sonication, transfer the cell suspension to a 
50 ml conical tube or a beaker depending on the volume and 
place the container on ice. Sonicate the cell suspension using 
10–15 bursts of 10 s on, 10 s off. Generally, an amplitude of 
35 % using a 750 W Sonics Vibra-Cell sonicator is sufﬁ cient 
for lysis of a 50 ml cell suspension. The sonication time may 
need to be adjusted depending on the volume of the cell sus-
pension. Avoid excessive foaming and heating of the suspen-
sion by keeping the cell suspension on ice at all times.  
 25.   Polyethyleneimine (PEI) is a highly positively charged poly-
mer at neutral pH and can be used to remove negatively 
charged nucleic acids from cell lysates by precipitation in the 
presence of high salt. At lower ionic strength, nucleic acid 
binding proteins may remain bound to the nucleic acid and 
the use of PEI may precipitate proteins of interest along with 
the nucleic acid. Therefore, it is crucial to maintain a high salt 
concentration (>0.5 M NaCl) during this step. Alternatively, a 
pre-equilibrated anion exchange column such as DEAE-
cellulose (DE52) may be used prior to IMAC puriﬁ cation. 
 26.   If the supernatant is still turbid after centrifugation or if the 
pellet dislodges, add additional PEI to a ﬁ nal concentration of 
0.05 % and repeat the centrifugation step to obtain clear super-
natant. If the lysate is still turbid, before proceeding to the 
IMAC step, ﬁ lter the supernatant using a 0.80 µm syringe ﬁ l-
ter (Sartorius) ﬁ rst, followed by a 0.45 µm syringe ﬁ lter 
(Sartorius) to remove large particulates and cell debris which 
can delay the binding, washing and elution steps in the chro-
matography procedure.  
  27.  Phosphate and HEPES buffers with 0.5 M NaCl concentration 
work equally well for the IMAC; HEPES is preferred, as diva-
lent ions (e.g., Mg 2+ , Ca 2+ , or Zn 2+ ) are included to avoid 
precipitation. If the puriﬁ ed protein is to be used for crystalliza-
tion, care must be taken to exchange the buffer from phos-
phate to HEPES during later stages of puriﬁ cation (such as 
SEC) because phosphates may form salt crystals with many of 
the crystallization solutions. A commonly observed problem in 
IMAC is co-puriﬁ cation of intrinsic proteins from host cells 
due to afﬁ nity of exposed histidines or metal binding moieties 
towards immobilized metal ions. Success of the technique 
depends on buffer composition, pH, and ionic strength. The 
binding of His-tagged proteins to the resin is optimal at physi-
ological pH; therefore, it is important to keep the Lysis buffer 
Protein Production in E. coli

92
pH close to 7.5–8.0. Higher salt concentration (>0.5 M NaCl) 
is also responsible for avoiding nonspeciﬁ c binding of proteins 
to IMAC resin. Salt concentration also plays an important role 
in protein stability in solution; therefore, it is crucial that the 
ionic strength of the buffers should not be reduced too far as 
this may promote protein precipitation. The presence of 
5–10 % glycerol is useful to promote protein stability; however, 
it may inhibit protein crystallization in some cases.  
  28.  It is important to collect the eluates in fractions and analyze 
them on SDS-PAGE before pooling them together. Pooling the 
fractions together before SDS-PAGE analysis can result in mix-
ing of the puriﬁ ed sample with other contaminated fractions or 
dilution of concentrated fractions. Protein puriﬁ ed through 
IMAC may be pure enough for some functional studies but it is 
rarely pure enough for crystallization. Many host proteins bind 
nonspeciﬁ cally during afﬁ nity chromatography which can be 
separated from the target protein by introducing a size exclu-
sion chromatography step. This step also gives important infor-
mation on oligomeric state of the protein and is useful in 
separating any contaminant proteins as well as aggregates.  
 29.   To obtain high resolution separation on the SEC column, load 
a maximum volume of 5 ml. It may be necessary to concen-
trate your protein before applying to the SEC column to 
reduce the volume, and remember to ﬁ lter the sample before 
loading to remove any precipitated protein.  
 30.   If using an ÄKTA-Xpress system for puriﬁ cation, the detection 
parameters should be changed to accommodate varying pro-
tein loads. We recommend using the default parameters with 
the following changes:
 Afﬁ nity Peak Collection 
 Start: Watch level greater than 20 mAU, slope greater 
than 25 mAU/min.  
 Stop: Peak max factor 0.5, watch level less than 20 mAU, 
watch stable plateau for 0.5 min.  
 Delta plateau 5 mAU/min.  
 Gel Filtration Peak Collection 
 Elution volume before fractionation: 0.3 CV  
 Elution volume with fractionation: 0.8 CV  
 Peak fractionation algorithm: level_OR_slope  
 Start level 10 mAU, start slope 5 mAU/min  
 Peak max factor 0.5, minimum peak width 0.5 min  
 Stop level 10 mAU, slope 5 mAU/min  
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

93
 31.   Care must be taken while pooling protein fractions. Pay spe-
cial attention to the concentration of the target protein and 
the level of contaminant proteins on the gel, analyze the SEC 
spectra and compare with molecular weight standards (which 
have been separated on the same column). Eliminate aggre-
gated proteins (eluted in the void volume of SEC) and pool 
together fractions corresponding to monomer or oligomer 
peaks separately. Pool fractions from well-formed and sym-
metrical peaks and avoid mixing fractions from long tails which 
may represent some heterogeneity.  
  32.  Protein aggregation can occur at any stage of the expression/
puriﬁ cation procedure, but is very common during the process 
of concentration. This becomes clearly apparent when attempt-
ing to concentrate by ultraﬁ ltration as protein aggregates rap-
idly block the ﬁ lter and it becomes impossible to further 
concentrate the protein. Therefore, it is important to test a 
small volume of protein for its ability to concentrate before 
committing to concentrate the whole protein sample. Measure 
the protein concentration using a NanoDrop or similar before 
starting to concentrate. Choose an appropriate protein concen-
trator with molecular weight cutoff size that is two times 
smaller than the protein molecular weight. Transfer 200–500 μl 
of the sample to a concentrator that ﬁ ts into a 1.5 ml microcen-
trifuge tube. Centrifuge according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions at 4–15 °C. Check the volume every 10–15 min 
and more regularly when the volume is low. The sample should 
concentrate quite rapidly to a protein concentration of at least 
5–10 mg/ml. If the process is stuck with no apparent reduc-
tion in volume, it is likely that the protein is aggregating. The 
aggregates can be detected by analytical SEC or light scatter-
ing. If the protein aggregates easily, change in buffer pH, NaCl 
concentration or use of additives should be considered. Once 
the concentration conditions are established, the remaining 
protein can be concentrated using those parameters.  
 33.   Impurity can be a result of co-puriﬁ cation of contaminant pro-
teins. To improve the purity of such samples, additional chro-
matographic steps can be employed. An effective general 
puriﬁ cation step is removal of the tag by cleavage with TEV 
protease followed by rebinding to Ni-IDA resin which is an 
efﬁ cient way to remove contaminants. An overnight digestion 
with TEV protease at 4 °C removes the His tag ( see Fig.  4a ), 
the cleaved protein is then applied to Ni-IDA resin, which will 
isolate the cleaved His tag as well as other contaminant pro-
teins by their afﬁ nity for the beads and the target protein is 
collected in the ﬂ ow through. In order for this protocol to 
work, the protein solution must not contain more than 25 mM 
Protein Production in E. coli

94
imidazole; this can be achieved by SEC (before or after cleav-
age), or by performing the TEV cleavage during dialysis of the 
protein. Further puriﬁ cation can be achieved using ion 
exchange and other chromatographic methods that need to be 
speciﬁ cally tailored for each protein.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We would like to thank all the SGC scientists (past and present) 
who contributed towards the development of the methods. The 
SGC is a registered charity (number 1097737) that receives funds 
from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Genome 
Canada, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly Canada, the Novartis Research 
Foundation, Pﬁ zer, Takeda, AbbVie, the Canada Foundation for 
Innovation, the Ontario Ministry of Economic Development and 
Innovation, and the Wellcome Trust.  
 References 
  1.  Sorensen HP (2010) Towards universal systems for 
recombinant gene expression. Microb Cell Fact 9:27  
  2.  Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Protein production and puriﬁ cation. Nat 
Methods 5:135–146  
  3.  Burgess-Brown NA, Sharma S, Sobott F et al 
(2008) Codon optimization can improve expres-
sion of human genes in Escherichia coli: a multi-
gene study. Protein Expr Purif 59:94–102  
  4.  Tegel H, Tourle S, Ottosson J et al (2010) 
Increased levels of recombinant human proteins 
with the  Escherichia coli strain Rosetta (DE3). 
Protein Expr Purif 69:159–167  
  5.  Cornvik T, Dahlroth SL, Magnusdottir A et al 
(2005) Colony ﬁ ltration blot: a new screening 
method for soluble protein expression in 
 Escherichia coli . Nat Methods 2:507–509  
  6.  Cornvik T, Dahlroth SL, Magnusdottir A et al 
(2006) An efﬁ cient and generic strategy for pro-
ducing soluble human proteins and domains in 
 E .  coli by screening construct libraries. Proteins 
65:266–273  
  7.  Savitsky P, Bray J, Cooper CD et al (2010) 
High-throughput production of human pro-
teins for crystallization: the SGC experience. 
J Struct Biol 172:3–13 
  8.  Hanahan D, Jessee J, Bloom FR (1991) Plasmid 
transformation of Escherichia coli and other 
bacteria. Methods Enzymol 204:63–113  
  9.  Magnusdottir A, Johansson I, Dahlgren LG 
et al (2009) Enabling IMAC puriﬁ cation of low 
abundance recombinant proteins from  E .  coli 
lysates. Nat Methods 6:477–478  
Nicola A. Burgess-Brown et al.

95
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_6, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 6  
 Medium-Throughput Production of Recombinant Human 
Proteins: Protein Production in Insect Cells 
 Pravin  Mahajan ,  Claire  Strain-Damerell , 
 Opher  Gileadi , and  Nicola A.  Burgess-Brown 
 Abstract 
 This chapter describes the step-by-step methods employed by the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) 
for screening and producing proteins in the baculovirus expression vector system (BEVS). This eukaryotic 
expression system was selected and a screening process established in 2007 as a measure to tackle the more 
challenging kinase, RNA–DNA processing and integral membrane protein families on our target list. Here, 
we discuss our platform for identifying soluble proteins from 3 ml of insect cell culture and describe the 
procedures involved in producing protein from liter-scale cultures. Although not discussed in this chapter, 
the same process can also be applied to integral membrane proteins (IMPs) with slight adaptations to the 
puriﬁ cation procedure.  
 Key words   Insect cells  ,  Baculovirus  ,   BEVS ,  Expression  ,   Recombinant   Protein  ,   Puriﬁ cation ,   IMAC  , 
 SEC ,  Gel ﬁ ltration  
1  Introduction 
 Availability of a pure protein is essential for obtaining information 
on protein structure and function. Heterologous protein produc-
tion in  Escherichia coli has remained the preferred system for many 
research laboratories as it is low-cost, fast, and easy to handle. 
However, there is no guarantee that  E. coli cells will produce eukary-
otic proteins in a soluble and biologically active form because of a 
number of limitations such as codon bias, lack of posttranslational 
modiﬁ cations (PTMs), or disulﬁ de bond formation. Exploring other 
protein expression hosts such as mammalian cells, yeast, and insect 
cells is often required if  E. coli fails to produce soluble protein after 
attempting different strains, solubility enhancing tags, etc. Among 
the alternatives available, the baculovirus expression vector system 
(BEVS) is increasingly becoming popular for expression of recombi-
nant proteins as it is non-pathogenic to humans [ 1 ], capable of 

96
producing high levels of soluble proteins with PTMs similar to those 
observed in mammalian cells and easily scalable in suspension cul-
ture [ 2 ]. This system is also proving popular for the production of 
large protein complexes, production of virus like particles, gene 
delivery, viral vector vaccines, expression of proteins in mammalian 
cells, and display of proteins and peptides on the baculovirus enve-
lope [ 3 ]. Baculoviruses are double- stranded DNA viruses [ 4 ] most 
of which infect insects of the order Lepidoptera [ 5 ]. The most widely 
used baculovirus used as a BEVS is  Autographa californica multiple 
nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV). Two major genes that 
express in the very late phase of baculovirus infection of insects are 
p10 and polyhedrin which are strong expressers but dispensable for 
viral replication. This discovery has allowed exploitation of the p10 
and polyhedrin promoters to be used for driving recombinant pro-
tein expression in BEVS; the polyhedrin promoter in particular has 
been described as a workhorse promoter of BEVS [ 6 ]. The most 
common insect cell lines utilized as hosts of BEVS are Sf9 and Sf21, 
derived from pupal ovarian tissue of the fall army worm,  Spodoptera 
frugiperda [ 7 ] and High Five cells (BTI-Tn-5B1-4) derived from 
ovarian cells of the cabbage looper,  Trichoplusia ni [ 8 ]. 
 Since the ﬁ rst use of baculoviruses for protein expression in 
1983 [ 9 ], the system has gone through numerous technological 
advances that have allowed it to be widely accessible. Various bacu-
lovirus expression systems are commercially available to produce 
baculoviruses, most notably Bac-to-Bac ® (Invitrogen), ﬂ ashBAC 
(Oxford Expression Technologies), BaculoDirect™ (Invitrogen), 
BacVector ® -3000 (Novagen), BacPAK (Clontech), Bac-n-Blue™ 
(Invitrogen), etc. About 5 years ago, it became evident in our labo-
ratory that the bacterial expression system was unable to cope with 
more challenging proteins on our target list such as many protein 
kinases, RNA-DNA processing proteins and integral membrane 
proteins (IMPs). To address this issue, we established an efﬁ cient 
process based on the Bac-to-Bac ® system [ 10 ] for screening mul-
tiple versions of each protein in insect cells to identify those that 
were amenable to puriﬁ cation and crystallization. The 96-well 
cloning procedure is described in detail in Chapter   4 . In this chap-
ter we continue the methodologies for expression screening and 
scaling up expression of proteins in suspension culture. To describe 
our series of standardized protocols for protein production in 
insect cells, this chapter is broadly divided into the following stages: 
(1) transposition, bacmid production, and PCR screen, (2) growth 
and maintenance of insect cell lines in adherent and suspension 
culture, (3) transfection into Sf9 cells, baculovirus generation and 
small-scale test expression/puriﬁ cation, and (4) large-scale protein 
expression and puriﬁ cation. The screening process has been minia-
turized to 24-well format. The steps involved in the pipeline from 
cloning to large-scale expression are outlined in Fig.  1 .
Pravin Mahajan et al.

97
2  Materials 
 Unless otherwise stated, all solutions are prepared using ultrapure 
water (prepared by purifying deionized water to reach a resistivity 
of 18 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and analytical grade reagents. 
  1.   E. coli DH10Bac (Invitrogen). Chemically competent bacte-
rial cells are prepared in house as described [ 11 ].  
  2.   Primers: Primers are supplied by either MWG-Biotech or 
Sigma-Aldrich and are HPSF puriﬁ ed at 0.01 μmol scale or 
DST puriﬁ ed at 0.025 μmol scale, respectively. Primer stocks 
are either supplied at or diluted (in 10 mM Tris–HCl buffer, 
pH 8.0) to 100 μM and stored at −20 °C.  
  3.   BIOTAQ™ Red DNA polymerase (1 U/μl, Bioline).  
  4.   Molecular biology grade water (Thermo Scientiﬁ c HyClone).  
  5.   2 mM dNTP solution: 2 mM dATP, 2 mM dTTP, 2 mM 
dGTP, and 2 mM dCTP (prepared from 100 mM dNTP set, 
Invitrogen) diluted in molecular biology grade water and 
stored at −20 °C.  
  6.  50× TAE buffer (1 l): 242 g Tris base, 57.1 ml glacial acetic acid 
and 100 ml of 0.5 M EDTA, pH 8.0, pH adjusted to 8.5. Filtered 
through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and used as a 1× solution.  
2.1  Transposition 
and Bacmid 
Preparation
 Fig. 1  Overview of the baculovirus expression process. The process takes ~6–8 
weeks from LIC to scale up  
 
Protein Production in Insect Cells

98
  7.  96-Well 1.5 % TAE-agarose gels: 3 g agarose powder 
(Invitrogen), 200 ml of 1× TAE buffer, and 8 μl of SYBR-safe 
DNA gel stain (Invitrogen), cast in a Sub-cell Model 96 (Bio- 
Rad or similar) gel cast.  
  8.  DNA ladder: For the bacmid screen, the 1 kb Plus DNA lad-
der (Invitrogen) prepared in 1× BlueJuice™ (Invitrogen) 
diluted in molecular biology grade water.  
  9.   TE (Tris-EDTA) Buffer (50 ml): 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0 
and 1 mM EDTA ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter 
(Sartorius) to sterilize and stored at RT.  
 10.   60 % (v/v) Glycerol autoclaved to sterilize.  
 11.   70 % (v/v) Ethanol.  
 12.   1,000× Antibiotic stocks: Kanamycin (50 mg/ml); Tetracycline 
(10 mg/ml in ethanol); Gentamycin (7 mg/ml), stored at 
−20 °C. All stocks prepared in water are ﬁ ltered through a 
0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter (Sartorius).  
 13.   1,000× Selection reagents: Blue-gal (Glycosynth, 100 mg/ml 
in DMSO); IPTG (40 mg/ml) stored at −20 °C. All stocks 
prepared in water are ﬁ ltered through a 0.20 μm syringe ﬁ lter 
(Sartorius).  
 14.   LB-agar: 22.5 g premixed LB-broth and 13.5 g agar dissolved 
in 800 ml of water. Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved 
on the same day.  
 15.   Recombinant bacmid selection plates: LB-agar melted slowly 
in a microwave. Once cooled to hand-hot, the appropriate 
antibiotic/reagent is added and swirled vigorously to mix. 
10 ml of the molten agar is poured into each 50 mm petri dish 
and once set, upturned and left open to dry. These can be 
prepared ahead of time and stored at 4 °C in the dark sealed in 
a plastic bag to prevent over-drying.  
 16.   2× LB: 45 g premixed LB-broth dissolved in 800 ml of water. 
Volume adjusted to 900 ml and autoclaved on the same day.  
 17.   Virkon (Appleton Woods).  
 18.   Montage Plasmid Miniprep HTS 96 Kit (Millipore,  see  Note 6 ). 
 19.   50 mm Petri dishes.  
 20.   96-Well PCR plates.  
 21.   96-Well microtiter plates that can hold up to 200 μl of sample 
(Sterilin Ltd. UK or similar).  
 22.   24-Well blocks (Microplate Devices Uniplate ® , GE Healthcare, 
or similar).  
 23.   96-Deep-well blocks (Thomson or similar).  
 24.   Adhesive tape pads (Qiagen).  
Pravin Mahajan et al.

99
 25.   Adhesive PCR seals (ABgene).  
 26.   AirOtop porous seals (Thomson).  
 27.   Silicone 96 Square Well AxyMat (Axygen).  
 28.   Disposable sterile spreaders (Fisher).  
 29.   Disposable sterile inoculation loops (1 μl). 
 30.   Reagent reservoirs for multichannel pipetting (Fisher).  
 31.   Minisart syringe ﬁ lters, 0.20 μm (Sartorius). 
 32.   Membrane ﬁ lters, 0.2 μm and unit.  
 33.   Multichannel pipettes and repeat pipettors are used to dis-
pense reagents into a 96-well format.  
 34.   96-Well PCR thermocycler with heated lid.  
  35.  96-Well gel cast and tank (Subcell Model 96 Bio-Rad or similar).  
 36.   All gels are imaged on a Gel Logic 200 Imaging System 
(Kodak).  
 37.   A UV-spectrophotometer for measuring DNA and protein 
concentration (e.g., The NanoDrop spectrophotometer allows 
measurements from as low as 1.5 μl volumes).  
 38.   Scanlaf Mars recirculating class II biological safety cabinet (or 
similar laminar airﬂ ow (LAF) workstation).  
 39.   Micro-Express Glas-Col shaker (Glas-Col, IN, USA) or alter-
native that ranges in temperature from 18 to 37 °C and shakes 
up to 800 rpm.  
 40.   96-Well block mixer (Eppendorf MixMate or similar).  
 41.   Water bath set at 42 °C.  
 42.   Incubator set at 37 °C.  
 43.   Centrifuge suitable for 96-deep-well blocks (3,000 ×  g ). 
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.  Cell lines: Sf9 insect cells, SFM adapted (Invitrogen). High 
Five cells, SFM adapted (Invitrogen).  
  2.   Media: Sf-900™ II SFM (1×) (Invitrogen). Unsupplemented 
Grace’s Insect Medium (1×) (Invitrogen).  
  3.   Reagents: Fetal bovine serum (FBS), insect cell culture tested 
(Invitrogen). Cellfectin reagent (Invitrogen). Pen/Strep (used 
at 50 U penicillin and 50 µg streptomycin per ml medium) 
(Gibco). 0.4 % Trypan Blue Stain (Invitrogen).  
  4.  Cryo-vials.  
  5.   24-Well tissue culture (TC) plates (Corning).  
  6.   250, 500, and 1,000 ml ﬂ asks with vented cap (Corning).  
2.2  Test Expression
Protein Production in Insect Cells

100
  7.   Inverted light microscope (Axiovert 25, CarlZeiss).  
  8.   Hemocytometer, improved Neubauer (VWR International).  
  9.   Shaker-incubators with cooling capacity: Multitron (Infors 
HT).  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.   Benzonase (Novagen, HC, 250 U/μl). 
  2.   Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III (Calbiochem).  
  3.   1 M TCEP (Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine Hydrochloride), 
stored as 1 ml aliquots at −20 °C.  
  4.   1 M DTT (Dithiothreitol), stored as 1 ml aliquots at −20 °C.  
  5.  SeeBlue Plus2 (Invitrogen).  
  6.  InstantBlue™ (Expedeon Protein Solutions).  
  7.  XT Mes running buffer (20×) (Bio-Rad).  
  8.  PBS: Five tablets of PBS (Sigma) dissolved in 1 l of water, ﬁ l-
tered through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C.  
  9.   Stock solutions: 1 M HEPES, pH 7.5; 5 M NaCl; 3 M imid-
azole, pH 8.0; 200 mM MgSO 4 (all ﬁ ltered through a 0.2 μm 
membrane ﬁ lter and stored at RT); 50 % (v/v) glycerol (auto-
claved and stored at RT).  
 10.   Lysis buffer (1 l): 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 
5 % (v/v) glycerol, and 10 mM imidazole in advance, ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the 
day of puriﬁ cation, Benzonase (0.2 μl/ml), Protease inhibitor 
cocktail (1 μl/ml), and TCEP (0.5 μl/ml) are added. 
 11.    Wash buffer (1 l): 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 
5 % (v/v) glycerol, 30 mM imidazole in advance, ﬁ ltered 
through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM 
TCEP added on the day of puriﬁ cation.  
 12.   Elution buffer (0.1 l): 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM 
NaCl, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, 500 mM imidazole in advance, ﬁ l-
tered through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 
0.5 mM TCEP added on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
  13.   50 % Ni-IDA Metal Chelate Resin (Generon) (or Ni-NTA-
agarose (Qiagen): The IMAC resins are generally supplied in 
20 % ethanol. To equilibrate, the resin is washed twice in water 
and then three times in Afﬁ nity buffer (see Subheading   2.5   , 
step 4) in a 50 ml tube, by inverting to resuspend the resin and 
centrifuging at 500 ×  g for 1 min. After the ﬁ nal wash, the resin 
is resuspended in Afﬁ nity buffer as 50 % slurry and stored at 4 °C 
when not in use.  
2.3  Test Puriﬁ cation
Pravin Mahajan et al.

101
 14.   SB: Stock of NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) 
containing DTT (1:4 dilution of 1 M DTT in NuPAGE LDS 
sample buffer) and stored at −20 °C.  
 15.   96-Well ﬁ lter plates (Thomson).  
  16.  Pre-cast 26-Lane SDS-PAGE gradient gels (4-20 %) (Bio-Rad).  
 17.   Protein gel electrophoresis apparatus (Bio-Rad).  
 18.   Vibra-Cell Sonicator with 24-well probe (Sonics ® ). 
 19.    General purpose benchtop centrifuge (Sorvall Legend RT, 
Kendro).  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above:
  1.   Media: Insect-XPRESS serum-free and protein-free medium 
(Lonza). 
  2.   Non-bafﬂ ed Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks: glass or polycarbonate in vari-
ous sizes 250 ml, 500 ml, and 1 l and glass ﬂ asks of 3 l capacity 
for large-scale expression.  
  3.   Cell freezing container: Mr. Frosty (Nalgene).  
  4.   Avanti J-20XP or Avanti J-26XP centrifuge or similar 
(Beckman Coulter) with a JLA 8.1000 rotor for harvesting 
large volumes of cells.  
 The following reagents, consumables, and equipment are required 
in addition to those listed above; however, the majority of materi-
als required for these procedures are the same as in Chapter   5  , 
Subheading   2.4   :
  1.   Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche).  
  2.   2× Lysis buffer: 100 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl, 
20 % (v/v) glycerol, 20 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 
0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the day of 
puriﬁ cation, Benzonase (0.2 μl/ml of cell lysate), Protease 
inhibitor cocktail (2 μl/ml of cell lysate) or Complete EDTA- 
free protease inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/25 ml of cell lysate), 
and 1 mM TCEP are added.  
  3.   Lysis buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 μm 
membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. On the day of puriﬁ cation, 
Benzonase (0.1 μl/ml of cell lysate), Protease inhibitor cock-
tail (1 μl/ml of cell lysate) or Complete EDTA-free protease 
inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/50 ml of cell lysate), and 0.5 mM 
TCEP are added.  
  4.   Afﬁ nity buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 10 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 μm mem-
brane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM TCEP added on the 
day of puriﬁ cation. 
2.4  Large-Scale 
Expression
2.5  Protein 
Extraction and 
Large-Scale 
Puriﬁ cation
Protein Production in Insect Cells

102
  5.   Wash buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 30 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 μm mem-
brane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM TCEP added on the 
day of puriﬁ cation. 
  6.   Elution buffer: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 10 % 
glycerol, 300 mM imidazole. Filtered through a 0.2 μm mem-
brane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM TCEP added on the 
day of puriﬁ cation. 
  7.   Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) buffer: 20 mM 
HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol. Filtered 
through a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter and stored at 4 °C. 0.5 mM 
TCEP added on the day of puriﬁ cation. 
  8.  Minisart syringe ﬁ lters, 0.20, 0.45, and 0.80 μm (Sartorius). 
  9.  Amicon Ultra protein concentrators (Millipore).  
 10.    Sonicator (Sonics Vibra-Cell, VCX 750, Sonics & Materials 
INC) or basic Z model cell disruptor (Constant Systems Ltd).  
 11.   ÄKTA-Xpress or ÄKTA-Puriﬁ er liquid chromatography sys-
tem (GE).  
 12.   HiTrap 5 ml FF columns (GE) for His-tagged protein 
puriﬁ cation.  
 13.   Ion exchange chromatography columns such as HiTrap 5 ml 
Q FF and SP FF (GE).  
 14.   HiLoad Superdex columns (GE) for preparative size exclusion 
chromatography such as HiLoad 16/60 Superdex S75 or 
Superdex S200).  
 15.   JA-25.50 rotor for centrifugation of cell lysates.  
3  Methods 
 The transposition process is outlined in Fig.  2 .
  1.   Prepare at least 100 petri dishes (50 mm) containing approxi-
mately 10 ml of LB-agar, supplemented with 50 µg/ml kana-
mycin, 7 µg/ml gentamycin, 10 µg/ml tetracycline, 40 µg/
ml IPTG and 100 µg/ml Blue-gal ( see  Note 1 ) and once 
set allow to dry, inverted at RT.  
  2.  Using a multichannel pipette, add 3 µl of recombinant DNA 
( see  Chapter   4 , Subheading   3.8   ,  step 6 ) to a 96-well PCR plate.  
  3.   On ice, add 20 μl of chemically competent  E. coli DH10Bac 
cells using a repeat pipettor ( see  Note 2 ), cover with an adhe-
sive tape pad and incubate for 30 min. It is advisable to include 
a positive control (i.e., a construct that has previously shown 
soluble protein expression in BEVS) in position H12 of the 
96-well plate.  
3.1  Transposition 
in  E. coli DH10Bac
Pravin Mahajan et al.

103
 Fig. 2    Diagram describing the transposition process. The construct DNA is trans-
formed into the DH10Bac  E. coli strain, which contains both bacmid DNA and a 
helper plasmid. The transposase, expressed from the helper plasmid, will facili-
tate transfer of the transposable element including the gene of interest (GOI) 
into the bacmid. The recombinant bacmid DNA can then be puriﬁ ed and used 
directly to transfect Sf9 insect cells  
 

104
  4.   In the meantime, add 900 µl of pre-warmed 2× LB medium to 
each well of a 96-deep-well block using a reagent reservoir.  
  5.  Heat shock the cells in the PCR plate for 45 s in a 42 °C water 
bath and return brieﬂ y to ice.  
  6.  Transfer the bacterial suspension into the pre-warmed medium 
block ( step 4 ), cover with a porous seal and incubate in a Glas- 
Col shaker (or equivalent) at 37 °C with shaking at 700 rpm 
for 5 h.  
  7.  Dilute the culture (10 µl into 90 µl) into LB (or 2× LB) 
medium in a 96-well microtiter plate and spread 50 µl onto 
the recombinant bacmid selection plates ( see  Note 3 ).  
  8.  Incubate the plates at 37 °C for 48 h, covered with foil 
( see  Note 4 ). 
  9.  White colonies contain the recombinant bacmid DNA and the 
blue ones do not ( see  Fig.  2 ). To ensure that the colonies are 
white, divide a selective plate into six or eight sectors using a 
marker pen and label with the well position (e.g., A1). Pick 
single colonies, streak to dilution using a sterile loop and incu-
bate at 37 °C overnight.  
  1.   Using a multichannel pipette and a reagent reservoir, dispense 
50 μl of 2× LB medium into each well of a 96-well PCR plate.  
  2.   Inoculate the recombinant white colonies (isolated from the 
restreaked plates) into the corresponding wells, then transfer 
20 μl of this cell suspension into two 96-deep-well blocks, 
each containing 1 ml of 2× LB medium per well, supplemented 
with 50 μg/ml kanamycin, 7 μg/ml gentamycin and 10 μg/ml 
tetracycline ( see  Note 5 ). 
  3.   Cover with a porous seal and incubate at 37 °C overnight at 
700 rpm in a Glas-Col shaker.  
  4.   The following morning, prepare one or two 96-well microtiter 
plates containing 120 μl of culture and 30 μl of 60 % (v/v) 
glycerol and store at −80 °C.  
  5.   Centrifuge the deep-well blocks at 3,000 ×  g for 30 min. Decant 
the supernatant into a suitable container for Virkon decontami-
nation. Invert the blocks and tap gently on absorbent paper.  
  6.   Add 250 μl of the Solution 1 from the 96-well miniprep kit 
(Millipore) ( see  Note 6 ) to each well of one block using a mul-
tichannel pipette.  
  7.   Seal the block with a silicone sealing mat ( see  Note 7 ) and mix 
in the Glas-Col incubator for 2 min at 700 rpm or a 96-well 
block mixer (Eppendorf) at 1,000–2,000 rpm  . If necessary, 
resuspend using a multichannel pipette.  
  8.   Transfer the suspension to the corresponding wells of the sec-
ond block. Seal and repeat the mixing process.  
3.2  Bacmid 
Production
Pravin Mahajan et al.

105
  9.   Add 250 μl of Solution 2 (Millipore) to each well, seal with a 
silicone sealing mat, invert gently ﬁ ve times and incubate at 
RT for 5–10 min.  
 10.   Add 300 μl of Solution 3 (Millipore), seal with a silicone seal-
ing mat and mix gently but thoroughly by inverting ﬁ ve times.  
 11.   Place the sample on ice for 20 min then centrifuge at 3,000 ×  g 
for 30 min at 4 °C.  
 12.   Transfer the clear supernatant to a fresh 96-deep-well block, 
cover with an adhesive tape pad and centrifuge again at 
3,000 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C ( see  Note 8 ).  
 13.   In another fresh 96-deep-well block, dispense 0.8 ml of iso-
propanol into each well and add 0.8 ml of the clariﬁ ed super-
natant to the corresponding wells ( see  Note 9 ). 
 14.   Using a 1 ml capacity multichannel pipette, gently mix up and 
down, cover with an adhesive tape pad and then incubate on 
ice for 30 min ( see  Note 10 ). 
 15.   Centrifuge at 3,000 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C.  
  16.  Spray the outside of the 96-deep-well block with 70 % (v/v) 
ethanol ( see  Note 11 ) and inside the LAF workstation, remove 
the cover from the block and discard the supernatant by decant-
ing into a suitable container and blotting on absorbent paper.  
 17.   Add 500 μl of 70 % (v/v) ethanol to each well and tap the 
block gently to wash the pellets. Cover with an adhesive tape 
pad and then centrifuge at 3,000 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C.  
 18.   Inside the LAF workstation, open the block and discard the 
supernatant by decanting. Tap the block very gently on absor-
bent paper to remove the ethanol. Allow the block to dry 
inside the hood for approximately 2 h ( see  Note 12 ).  
 19.    Inside the LAF workstation, add 50 μl of sterile TE buffer, 
cover with an adhesive tape pad and allow to stand for about 
1 h. Very gently resuspend the bacmid DNA using a multi-
channel pipette ( see  Note 13 ) and transfer to a 96-well microti-
ter plate. Remove a couple of microliters of DNA from a few 
wells 
to 
measure 
the 
concentration 
using 
a 
UV-spectrophotometer and also pipette 1 μl of each DNA 
into a PCR plate for the bacmid PCR screen as described in 
Subheading  3.3 , then seal with a fresh adhesive tape pad.  
 20.   Store bacmid DNA at 4 °C until the test puriﬁ cation is com-
plete, then store at −20 °C.  
  1.   Prepare a 10 μM primer stock (50 μl each of the 100 μM for-
ward and reverse primers added to 400 µl of molecular biol-
ogy grade water) of the bacmid screening primers (Table  1 ). 
Store at −20 °C.
3.3  Bacmid 
PCR Screen
Protein Production in Insect Cells

106
  2.   Dilute the bacmid DNA 1 in 50 in molecular biology grade 
water in a 96-well PCR plate ( see  Note 14 ). 
  3.   Set up a PCR master mix as follows: 200 µl of 10× NH4 
Reaction Buffer (Bioline), 60 µl of 50 mM MgCl 2 , 60 µl of 
100 % DMSO, 1.24 ml of molecular biology grade water, 
200 µl of 2 mM dNTPs, 200 µl of 10 µM bacmid screening 
primers ( step 1 ), and 40 µl of BIOTAQ™ Red DNA poly-
merase (1 U/µl, Bioline). Using a repeat pipettor or a multi-
channel pipette, pipette 20 µl into each well of a 96-well PCR 
plate.  
  4.   Transfer 1 µl of the diluted bacmid ( step 2 ) to the PCR plate 
( step 3 ) and mix well.  
  5.   Seal the PCR reaction plate with an adhesive PCR seal and set 
a thermocycler with the following conditions making sure that 
the block is up to 95 °C before placing your sample plate in 
the instrument:
 95 °C, 5 min.  
 (95 °C, 45 s; 50 °C, 45 s; 72 °C, 5 min) ×25 cycles.  
 72 °C, 7 min.  
 15 °C hold.  
  6.   Whilst the PCR cycle is running, prepare a 96-well 1.5 % TAE- 
agarose gel.  
  7.   Using a multichannel pipette, load 10 μl of the PCR reaction 
mixtures directly onto the gel. Note that the spacing of the 
wells means that samples will be interleaved ( see Chapter   4 , 
Fig.  4 ). Load 6 µl of 1 kb Plus DNA ladder and run the gel at 
150 V for 1 h.  
  8.   Conﬁ rm the sizing of the products and repeat the screen for 
any constructs that do not produce a band of the correct size 
in the ﬁ rst screen ( see  Note 14 ). The size of the PCR frag-
ments should be 700 bp larger than the cloned insert.  
 Insect cell lines can be maintained in adherent culture as well as in 
suspension culture. Their ability to grow in suspension at high 
densities allows expression of recombinant proteins in large scale; 
however, their ability to grow in monolayers can be utilized for the 
3.4  Growth and 
Maintenance of Insect 
Cell Lines
 Table 1 
 Primers used to conﬁ rm correct insertions at the bacmid PCR screen 
stage 
 Primer name 
 Primer sequence 
 Fbac-1 
 TATTCATACCGTCCCACCA 
 M13-rev 
 CAGGAAACAGCTATGAC 
Pravin Mahajan et al.

107
initial stage of transfection to generate baculoviruses. The most 
widely used insect cell lines for BEVS-based protein expression are 
Sf9, Sf21, and High Five, all of which are adaptable to serum-free, 
protein-free medium. We routinely use Sf9 cells for all the steps 
from transfection to large-scale protein expression simply because 
of their robustness and ease in manipulation; however, occasionally 
High Five cells are used for large-scale expression of proteins. Use 
of Sf9 cells for all steps in routine protocols ensures that uniform 
parameters are applied to a number of protein targets initially and 
if needed other cell lines can be tested later on to improve protein 
expression. Insect cell culture methods are described previously [ 6 , 
 12 ,  13 ] in detail. Some important points when working with insect 
cells are mentioned in  Note 15 . 
 Sf9 cells can be revived straight into suspension culture without ﬁ rst 
reviving them into adherent culture, provided there are sufﬁ cient 
cryo-vials of cells available in liquid nitrogen. Alternatively revive 
cells into adherent culture using T-ﬂ asks, then transfer to suspension 
culture at a density of 1 × 10 6 cells/ml. Cells can be kept in suspen-
sion culture for 6–8 weeks, after which time a new stock should be 
revived as older cells may show a decline in protein expression. There 
are different commercial formulations of serum- free insect cell media 
available; however, we use Sf-900 II SFM (Invitrogen) mainly for 
initial revival of cells, transfection, expression testing, and virus 
ampliﬁ cation and Insect-XPRESS (Lonza) mainly for large-scale 
protein expression. Sf9 cells adapt quickly from one medium to 
another. All the cell culture steps described below are performed in 
aseptic conditions inside a LAF workstation.
  1.   Bring Sf-900 II medium to RT and pipette 15 ml of the 
medium into a T-75 ﬂ ask. 
  2.    Remove a cryo-vial containing the cells from liquid nitrogen and 
thaw rapidly in a 37 °C water bath (~1.5 min), making sure not 
to leave the cells at 37 °C after they have thawed ( see  Note 16 ).  
  3.   Decontaminate the outside of the vial by wiping with 70 % 
(v/v) ethanol.  
  4.   Transfer the thawed cells immediately into the T-75 ﬂ ask con-
taining the medium.  
  5.   Gently mix the cell suspension and transfer the ﬂ ask to a 27 °C 
incubator.  
  6.   Allow the cells to attach for approximately 30 min then observe 
them under the microscope to conﬁ rm attachment and good 
health.  
  7.   Remove the medium and add 15 ml of fresh medium.  
  8.   Continue to incubate the cells at 27 °C until the ﬂ ask is con-
ﬂ uent and change the medium if needed.  
3.5  Reviving Sf9 
Cell Line from 
Frozen Stock
Protein Production in Insect Cells

108
  9.   When the ﬂ ask is conﬂ uent, dislodge the cells by streaming 
medium over the monolayer using a 10 ml pipette and by tap-
ping the ﬂ ask gently against your palm.  
 10.   Split the cells 1:3 or 1:4 into T-75 ﬂ asks and add fresh medium 
to the ﬁ nal volume of 15 ml in each ﬂ ask. 
 Cells previously cultured in an anchorage-dependent manner need 
complete adaptation to suspension culture. The cells can be grown 
in suspension using either shake ﬂ asks or spinner ﬂ asks; however, 
our method of choice is the former. The use of simple shake ﬂ asks 
makes the process of protein expression in insect cells easily scal-
able from 10 ml to more than 10 l volume and does not require 
specialized equipment, which would be needed for spinner ﬂ asks 
and bioreactors.
  1.  After growing a sufﬁ cient number of cells in 3–4 conﬂ uent 
T-75 ﬂ asks, dislodge the cells as described in Subheading  3.5 , 
 step 9 above and determine the viable cell count using Trypan 
Blue Stain (Invitrogen) and a hemocytometer ( see  Note 17 ). 
  2.   Seed the cells (1 × 10 6 cells/ml) into a 500 ml non-bafﬂ ed 
polycarbonate or glass ﬂ ask in Sf-900 II medium.  
  3.   Incubate the ﬂ ask at 27 °C with shaking set at 90–105 rpm 
( see  Note 18 ).  
  4.   When the cells reach a density of 4 × 10 6 cells/ml, dilute them 
back to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml and expand the cell volume depend-
ing on requirement of the cells ( see  Note 19 ). 
 Once the cells start doubling regularly after revival, it is advisable 
to freeze down the low passage number cells in several cryo-vials.
  1.   Prepare freezing medium containing 72.5 % (v/v) Sf-900 II 
medium, 20 % (v/v) FBS and 7.5 % (v/v) DMSO and store at 4 °C.  
  2.   Label sterile cryo-vials with the name of the cell line, date of 
freezing and any other relevant information and store the vials 
at 4 °C until ready to use.  
  3.   Take a small suspension of cells from a shake ﬂ ask and count 
viable cells using a hemocytometer. Alternatively cells from 
adherent cultures can be used for freezing.  
  4.   Take the required volume of cell suspension for 1 × 10 7 cells 
per vial.  
  5.   Centrifuge the cells at 500 ×  g for 10 min and discard the 
supernatant.  
  6.   Resuspend the cells in the freezing medium (prepared in  step 1) 
so that after resuspension the cell density is ~1 × 10 7 cells/ml.  
  7.   Quickly aliquot 1 ml of the cell suspension into the cryo-vials 
(prepared in  step 2) . 
3.6  Suspension 
Culture of Sf9 Cells 
in Shake Flask
3.7  Cell Freezing
Pravin Mahajan et al.

109
  8.   Place the vials into a suitable freezing container (e.g., Mr. 
Frosty, Nalgene) and transfer the container to a −80 °C freezer 
overnight ( see  Note 20 ). 
  9.   The following day transfer the vials to liquid nitrogen 
storage.  
 It is extremely important to clean the shake ﬂ asks properly so that 
they can be reused without affecting the cell health or growth. 
Any residual disinfectant or scum of dead cells can adversely affect 
the cells and protein expression.
  1.   Pour off any spent media into a waste container and add ~10 g 
of Virkon powder per liter of the spent media.  
  2.  Completely ﬁ ll the empty culture ﬂ ask with 1 % (w/v) Virkon 
and leave for at least 20 min (but no longer than 30 min). Make 
sure that every surface of the ﬂ ask that has come in contact with 
virus is covered with the diluted Virkon ( see  Note 21 ).  
  3.   Use a laboratory brush to remove any scum of dead cells from 
the internal surface of the ﬂ ask.  
  4.  Discard the waste, ﬁ ll the ﬂ ask with water and scrub again with 
the brush to make sure there is no visible cell debris or dead 
cell scum remaining inside the ﬂ ask.  
  5.   Repeat the rinsing and brushing procedure until the ﬂ ask 
looks visibly clean.  
  6.   If available, wash the ﬂ asks using a washer-disinfector (such as 
a G 7883, Miele, or similar) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
  7.   Dry the ﬂ asks in a drying cabinet set at 50–60 °C, cover with 
two layers of aluminum foil and autoclave.  
  1.   Prepare ~100 ml of Sf9 cells one day in advance by diluting 
the cell count to 1 × 10 6 cells/ml in Sf-900 II medium.  
  2.   The next day dilute the mid-log phase Sf9 cells to 2 × 10 5 cells/
ml in Sf900-II medium.  
  3.   Label four 24-well TC plates with “plate 1” to “plate 4” to 
cover your 96 samples ( see Fig.  3 for how to transfer samples 
between 96-well and 24-well blocks or plates).
  4.  Using a 1 ml 12-channel multichannel pipette (with 6 tips 
spaced two apart), dispense 1 ml of diluted cells ( step 2 ) into 
each well of four 24-well TC plates. Include controls: one 
for Cellfectin-only and the other for untreated cells ( see 
 Note 22 ). Incubate the plates at 27 °C for 1 h to allow cell 
attachment ( see  Note 23 ). 
  5.  Bring Unsupplemented Grace’s insect medium (serum free) and 
Cellfectin to RT. Using a multichannel pipette, add 50 μl of 
3.8  Decontamination 
and Cleaning of Shake 
Flasks
3.9  Transfection into 
Sf9 Cells
Protein Production in Insect Cells

110
Unsupplemented Grace’s insect medium into a sterile ﬂ at- 
bottomed 96-well microtiter plate (that can hold up to 200 μl of 
sample, e.g., Sterilin Ltd. UK). Transfer 5 μl of recombinant bac-
mid DNA (concentration should be 1–3 μg/μl) into each well 
and mix by shaking the plate gently or pipetting ( see  Note 13 ).  
  6.  Mix Cellfectin thoroughly by tapping the tube gently. In a 
15 ml tube, combine 5 ml of Unsupplemented Grace’s insect 
medium and 0.3 ml of Cellfectin, then add 50 μl to each well 
of the 96-well microtiter plate containing the recombinant 
bacmid DNA ( step 5 ). Do not add Cellfectin mixture to the 
cell control well, just an equivalent amount of medium. Mix 
the plates by gently tapping.  
  7.   Cover the microtiter plate with an adhesive tape pad and incu-
bate the mixture inside the LAF workstation for 45 min then 
dilute the solution by adding 100 μl of Unsupplemented 
Grace’s insect medium (serum free) ( see  Note 24 ). 
  8.  Remove the 24-well TC plates containing the cells ( step 4 ) 
from the incubator and aspirate the medium using a multi-
channel pipette ( see  Note 25 ). Immediately overlay the cells 
with the 0.2 ml of Cellfectin-DNA complexes ( step 5 ) using a 
12-channel multichannel pipette (with six tips spaced two 
 Fig. 3  The format for transferring samples between 24 and 96-well blocks 
 
Pravin Mahajan et al.

111
apart) following the layout from Fig.  3 . Do not leave the plate 
open for too long, the cells will dry out from the center and 
this will lead to cell death.  
  9.   Add a further 0.2 ml of Unsupplemented Grace’s insect 
medium (Serum free) to each well and incubate the cells for 
5 h at 27 °C.  
 10.    Remove the transfection mixture and add 0.8 ml of Sf900-II 
insect medium containing 2 % (v/v) FBS and antibiotics 0.1 % 
(v/v) Pen/Strep to each well ( see  Note 26 ). Incubate the cells 
at 27 °C for 72–96 h.  
  11.   Signs of infection should be seen in the transfected cells 4–5 
days post transfection, by comparing with the control cells 
under an inverted microscope. Conﬂ uent growth of cells will 
be seen in control wells, whereas areas of clearing will be prom-
inent in wells with infected cells. Infected cells are usually larger 
and deformed or elongated compared to uninfected cells.  
 12.    Harvest the viruses when the cells are well infected (this may 
take up to 96 h or more) by transferring the liquid contents 
from the 24-well TC plate into a sterile 96-deep-well block 
( see Fig.  3 for layout) and centrifuging at 1,500 ×  g for 20 min 
at RT. Collect the clear supernatant (<700 μl) in another 
sterile 96-deep-well block. This is the P0 baculovirus (BV) 
stock, which is stored at 4 °C, protected from light.  
  1.   Using a 1 ml multichannel pipette, dispense 3 ml of Sf9 cells 
(in Sf900-II medium, containing 2 % (v/v) FBS, at a density 
of 2 × 10 6 cells/ml) into each well of four 24-deep-well blocks.  
  2.   Following the layout shown in Fig.  3 , infect the cells with 
120 µl of P0 BV stock ( see  Note 27 ) and incubate at 27 °C, 
with shaking at 450 rpm in a Glas-Col shaker for 66–72 h (i.e., 
set up late on day 1 and harvest early on day 3).  
  3.   Pellet the cells by centrifugation at 1,500 ×  g  for 20 min and 
harvest the supernatant by pipetting into a two 96-deep-well 
blocks in the LAF workstation according to the layout shown 
in Fig.  3 . Store as P1 BV stock at 4 °C in the dark.  
  4.   Wash the cell pellets once with 1 ml of ice cold PBS, spin as 
above and discard the supernatant.  
  5.   Resuspend in 1 ml of Lysis buffer, supplemented with prote-
ase inhibitors, and store at −80 °C for test puriﬁ cation at a 
later date (or preferably purify directly).  
  1.   If frozen, thaw pellets in a water bath at RT, then sonicate on ice 
for 3 min (5 s on, 10 s off with 35 % amplitude on a 750 W soni-
cator) using a 24-head probe (check that the probe is level and 
all tips are in the liquid; after sonication check for clearing).  
3.10  Test Expression
3.11  Test Puriﬁ cation
Protein Production in Insect Cells

112
  2.   Remove 15 μl of the total cell lysate into a PCR plate as the 
Total fraction and store at 4 °C.  
  3.   Transfer the remaining sample into a 96-deep-well block 
according to the layout shown in Fig.  3 and centrifuge at 
3,000 ×  g for 30 min at 4 °C.  
  4.   Remove the clariﬁ ed supernatant to a fresh 96-deep-well block 
using a multichannel pipette, taking care to avoid transferring 
any pelleted material ( see  Note 28 ). 
  5.   Add 100 μl of 50 % Ni-NTA (or Ni-IDA) slurry to each well 
using a multichannel pipette with cut tips, mixing well before 
each row ( see  Note 29 ). 
  6.   Seal the block with a silicone mat and place another 96-deep- 
well block on top, tape together, and incubate at 18 °C on 
their side in any shaker, for 1 h, with shaking at 90 rpm 
( see  Note 30 ).  
  7.   Centrifuge the block for 30 s at 200 ×  g to remove the liquid 
from the lid and load the mixture on to a 96-well ﬁ lter plate 
(Thomson) placed on top of a 96-deep-well waste collection 
block. 
  8.   Allow the liquid to drip through the ﬁ lter plate or centrifuge 
at 200 ×  g for 1 min.  
  9.   Add 800 μl of Wash buffer to the resin block to wash out the 
remaining resin and then transfer to the corresponding wells 
of the ﬁ lter plate. Allow the buffer to ﬂ ow-through or centri-
fuge brieﬂ y at 200 ×  g . Pour off the buffer from the waste 
block after this and all subsequent washing steps.  
 10.   Add 800 μl of Wash buffer and allow the buffer to ﬂ ow 
through or centrifuge brieﬂ y at 200 ×  g . 
 11.   Repeat the wash step a further three times and after the ﬁ nal 
wash, spin the plate for 2 min at 300 ×  g to remove any residual 
Wash buffer. Pour off Wash buffer from the waste block and 
spin for a further 1 min to remove all trace of Wash buffer 
( see  Note 31 ).  
 12.   Place the ﬁ lter plate on top of a fresh 200 μl V-bottomed 
96-well microtiter plate and add 50 μl of Elution buffer to 
each ﬁ lter well.  
 13.   Incubate at RT with shaking for 20 min, then centrifuge for 
3 min at 300 ×  g to collect the elution (Puriﬁ ed fraction).  
 14.   In a 96-well PCR plate, mix 15 μl of each Puriﬁ ed fraction 
with 5 μl of 4× sample buffer, containing DTT. Heat denature 
at 80 °C for 10 min.  
 15.   Prepare four SDS-PAGE pre-cast gels by rinsing with water, 
adding 1× XT MES buffer and rinsing the wells. Rinse the 
packaging and save for use as a staining tray.  
Pravin Mahajan et al.

113
 16.   Using a multichannel pipette, load 15 μl of your samples onto 
the gels, note that samples will be interleaved (e.g., A1, B1, 
A2, B2). Also load 5 μl of the SeeBlue Plus2 (Invitrogen) pro-
tein ladder in one lane of the gel.  
 17.   Run the gel at 150 V for at least 1 h, or as long as required for 
the dye-front to reach the bottom of the gel.  
 18.   Break open the cast and carefully remove the gel into the 
rinsed packaging from  step 14 . Add a cap full of InstantBlue 
(Expedeon Protein Solutions) and stain for ~1 h with shaking 
at RT.  
 19.   Discard the stain and wash twice with water, taking care not to 
tear the gel. Leave in water with shaking to destain for as long 
as required.  
 20.   Conﬁ rm the sizing of your products against the protein ladder 
( see  Note 32 and Fig.  4 ).
 The volumes of P0 (0.70 ml) and P1 (3 ml) viruses generated as 
described in Subheadings  3.9 and  3.10 respectively are low in vol-
ume and insufﬁ cient to be used for large-scale expression experi-
ments. Therefore, it is necessary to amplify the virus in a larger 
volume, typically to the scale of 50–100 ml. The virus can be stored 
at 4 °C for months but it is advisable to re-amplify the virus, if stored 
at 4 °C for a longer period of time. For virus ampliﬁ cation, insect 
cells are generally infected with low Multiplicity of Infection (MOI—
number of virus particles per cell) to avoid generating non-infectious 
particles in the virus stocks. Use a healthy log phase culture of Sf9 
cells with more than 95 % viability. All of our virus stocks are made 
in Sf-900 II, but other media formulations may work equally well.
  1.   Take a sterile 250 or 500 ml ﬂ ask and seed 50 ml of suspension- 
adapted Sf9 cells (2 × 10 6 cells/ml) in Sf-900 II medium.  
3.12  Virus 
Ampliﬁ cation
 Fig. 4  Image showing the SDS-PAGE result of a test puriﬁ cation from insect cells . 
The gel shows a range of high, medium, and low expressions of various proteins 
of different molecular weights. Note that samples loaded using a multichannel 
pipette will be interleaved (e.g., A1, B1, A2, B2) 
 
Protein Production in Insect Cells

114
  2.  Add FBS to the ﬁ nal concentration of 2 % ( see  Note 33 ). 
  3.  Add 100 µl of the P1 BV stock to the cells and gently swirl the 
ﬂ ask. 
  4.   Transfer the ﬂ ask to a 27 °C shaking incubator with shaking 
speed set at 100 rpm and incubate the ﬂ ask for 72 h.  
  5.  At 72 h post-infection take a small aliquot of cells and observe 
under the microscope for signs of infection ( see  Note 34 ) and 
absence of any form of microbial contamination.  
  6.   Transfer the cells to a 50 ml tube and centrifuge at 900 ×  g for 
20 min.  
  7.   Collect the supernatant into a fresh 50 ml tube and store at 
4 °C. This represents P2 BV stock.  
  8.   The cell pellet generated in the process of virus ampliﬁ cation 
can be utilized for protein puriﬁ cation using IMAC. Protein 
puriﬁ ed from this pellet can be used for any intended applica-
tion. Moreover, this puriﬁ cation validates the ability of the 
virus stock to express protein.  
 This protocol is successfully applied for the expression of a broad 
range of proteins but for some proteins the expression time point 
and MOI can be highly speciﬁ c and will require optimization 
( see  Note 35 ).
  1.  Seed log phase Sf9 cells to the density of 1 × 10 6 cells/ml in 
Insect-XPRESS or Sf-900 II medium. Keep the volume of cul-
ture to 1 l in a 3 l capacity ﬂ ask. If more than 1 l scale-up is 
needed, use multiple 3 l ﬂ asks with 1 l culture volume in each 
( see  Note 36 ). 
  2.   Incubate ﬂ asks at 27 °C with shaking set at 100 rpm and allow 
the cells to grow for 24 h.  
  3.   The next day, check the cell density using a hemocytometer 
and also check cell health and for any signs of contamination. 
Cells should go through one doubling cycle in 24 h and the 
cell count should be ~2 × 10 6 cells/ml.  
  4.  Add 1.5–3.0 ml of P2 BV stock per liter of culture, swirl the 
ﬂ ask gently and transfer the culture to a 27 °C shaker incu-
bator set at 100 rpm ( see  Note 37 ). 
  5.  Incubate the ﬂ ask for 66–72 h.  
  6.   Take a small sample of the infected culture and look under the 
microscope for signs of infection but not lysis of the cells and 
also look for absence of any bacterial, yeast or fungal contami-
nation ( see  Note 38 ). 
  7.  Take out 3 ml of the culture and centrifuge separately (at 
900 ×  g for 20 min) from the remaining culture for expression 
testing ( see  Note 39 ). 
3.13  Large-Scale 
Expression
Pravin Mahajan et al.

115
  8.   Without waiting for results from  step 7 above, transfer the 
remaining cells to 1 l centrifuge pots, balance pairwise and 
centrifuge at 900 ×  g for 20 min using JLA 8.1000 rotor on 
Avanti J-20XP or Avanti J-26XP centrifuge ( see  Note 40 ). 
  9.  Pour the supernatant into a waste container for decontamina-
tion using Virkon (this can be done in the culture ﬂ ask).  
 10.   Resuspend the cell pellet obtained from 1 l of the culture in 
25–30 ml of PBS by swirling and pipetting gently and transfer 
to 50 ml tubes.  
 11.   Balance the tubes pairwise and centrifuge at 900 ×  g for 20 min 
using a benchtop centrifuge.  
 12.   Discard the PBS in Virkon and purify the protein from the cell 
pellet as described in Subheading  3.14 or freeze the cell pellets 
at −80 °C for puriﬁ cation at a later date.  
 All of the following steps of protein extraction and puriﬁ cation are 
performed at 4 °C or on ice. Prechill the buffers and centrifuges.
  1.  If protein puriﬁ cation is performed straight after harvesting the 
cells, transfer the cell pellets to ice or if the cells were frozen, 
thaw the pellets in a water bath set at RT or 37 °C. Do not 
leave pellets in the water bath for any longer than is required to 
thaw them and transfer onto ice immediately once thawed.  
  2.   Resuspend the cells in one volume of ice cold 2× Lysis buffer 
(1 ml/g wet-weight of cells) using a pipette and add addi-
tional Lysis buffer until the suspension is homogeneous.  
  3.   Place the cell suspension container on ice. Set the amplitude to 
35 % on a 750 W Sonics Vibra-Cell sonicator and sonicate 
with 10–15 bursts of 10 s on, 10 s off ( see  Note 41 ). Save 
10 µl of the lysate which represents the Total fraction.  
  4.   Transfer the lysates to centrifuge tubes, balance the tubes pair-
wise and centrifuge at 21,000 rpm using a JA-25.50 rotor 
(~53,000 ×  g ) for at least 30 min at 4 °C.  
  5.   Transfer the clear supernatant into a clean tube taking care to 
avoid transferring any pelleted material. This clariﬁ ed superna-
tant represents the soluble fraction.  
 The protein puriﬁ cation scheme for insect cells is similar to protein 
puriﬁ cation from  E. coli as described in Chapter   5  , Subheading   3.6   . 
However, we recommend paying particular attention to the fol-
lowing points while purifying proteins from insect cells:
  1.   The buffer compositions described here work for a diverse set 
of proteins but the buffers can be substituted to address issues 
such as protein instability and requirements of ﬁ nal applica-
tions. Careful optimization of the buffer composition with 
respect to the buffering system, pH, salt concentrations and 
additives is particularly critical for difﬁ cult to purify proteins.  
3.14  Protein 
Extraction
3.15  Large-Scale 
Protein Puriﬁ cation
Protein Production in Insect Cells

116
  2.  In comparison to  E. coli cell lysates, insect cell lysates are denser 
because of higher background protein concentration. This can 
result in clogging of pre-packed IMAC columns, therefore we 
recommend doing manual IMAC using the gravity-ﬂ ow proce-
dure for puriﬁ cation of proteins from insect cells.  
  3.  Often intrinsic proteins from insect cells co-purify due to the 
afﬁ nity of exposed histidines or metal binding moieties of endog-
enous proteins towards the immobilized metal ions. Therefore it 
is often the case that IMAC followed by SEC is not enough to 
obtain very pure protein from insect cells, which necessitates 
inclusion of additional puriﬁ cation steps such as ion exchange 
chromatography or tag cleavage and rebinding to IMAC.  
 Follow the guidelines as recommended in Chapter   5  , 
Subheading   3.7  . 
4  Notes 
  1.   X-gal does not produce sufﬁ ciently dark blue non- recombinant 
colonies in our hands therefore we use Blue-gal instead. The 
plates can be stored for up to 1 month at 4 °C, covered with 
foil to prevent exposure to light.  
  2.  Be careful not to splash the cells against the sides of the wells 
whilst using the repeat pipettor and also check that the liquid is 
at the bottom of the well before continuing. This step can also 
be done using a single channel pipette but will take more time.  
  3.   When there are no colonies, plate 50 μl of undiluted culture 
instead.  
  4.   This step can be performed at RT on the bench over the week-
end if necessary.  
  5.   One 96-well block should provide sufﬁ cient bacmid DNA for 
transfection. However, we ﬁ nd it useful to set up two blocks to 
provide a balance for the centrifugation step.  
  6.   We only use the reagents from the Montage Plasmid 
Miniprep HTS 96 Kit (Millipore) for purifying the recombinant 
bacmid DNA, not the ﬁ lter plates. The reagents can also be 
purchased from Millipore individually.  
  7.   Covering the block with an adhesive tape pad or alternative will 
result in leaking and cross-contamination of wells. Make sure the 
silicone sealing mats are suitable for either round or square 96-deep-
well blocks, depending on which 96-well blocks you use.  
  8.   This second centrifugation step is important to remove as 
much of the insoluble pelleted material as possible in order to 
obtain clean bacmid DNA at the end of the prep.  
3.16  Quality 
Assurance
Pravin Mahajan et al.

117
  9.  It is recommended not to remove all of the supernatant to 
avoid transferring insoluble material.  
 10.   Incubation can also be done overnight at 4 °C, and will result 
in a higher yield of bacmid DNA, but is not necessary.  
 11.   If you have more than one block, be careful not to remove the 
marker labels when using 70 % (v/v) ethanol.  
 12.   Do not allow the pellets to dry out completely.  
 13.   The bacmid DNA is very fragile so mix gently and do not 
over-pipette.  
 14.   High concentrations of bacmid DNA will inhibit the bacmid 
PCR screen so we dilute the bacmid prior to addition. Where 
the yields of bacmid are low it may be necessary to use a lower 
dilution instead.  
 15.   All cell culture steps must be performed under aseptic condi-
tions in a LAF workstation, making sure that sterility is main-
tained throughout the procedures. To keep the cultures free 
from contamination by bacteria, yeast, fungi and viruses, it is 
crucially important to keep the benches, LAF workstation and 
incubators clean. Use 70 % (v/v) ethanol to wipe the LAF 
workstation before and after use, also wipe the outside of 
media bottles, pipettors, ﬂ asks, and other containers with 70 % 
(v/v) ethanol before transferring them into the LAF worksta-
tion. Wear clean lab coats and gloves and wash hands before 
and after working with cell culture. Any spillage inside the 
LAF workstation, incubators, etc. should also be cleaned 
immediately with 70 % (v/v) ethanol or MicroSol. Use sepa-
rate media bottles for general cell culture maintenance and for 
virus work. We recommend adding penicillin and streptomy-
cin to the ﬁ nal concentration of 50 U/ml and 50 μg/ml 
respectively to the cell culture media to prevent bacterial con-
tamination during culture growth.  
 16.   Always wear protective clothing (lab coat, gloves, and safety 
specs) when thawing vials containing frozen cells as they 
sometimes explode on contact with the water.  
 17.   The % cell viability is calculated by counting the number of 
viable cells and also the number of total cells on the hemocy-
tometer grid. Viable cells do not take up Trypan Blue Stain 
(Invitrogen); whereas, non-viable cells take up the stain and 
appear blue under the microscope. To determine cell viability, 
mix 0.1 ml of Trypan Blue Stain (Invitrogen) with 1 ml of cell 
suspension and load a hemocytometer. Count the number of 
blue-stained cells and also the total number of cells and then 
calculate the number of viable cells per ml and correct for the 
dilution factor. Cell viability should be at least 95 % for a 
healthy log phase culture before it can be used for transfec-
tion, virus ampliﬁ cation or protein expression.  
Protein Production in Insect Cells

118
 18.   For better aeration of the cells, it is important to keep the cul-
ture volume between 25 and 35 % of the total volume capacity 
of shake ﬂ ask and shaking between 90 and 105 rpm. Cells 
form clumps initially but should start growing in single cell 
suspension within a week or so.  
 19.   Cells can be transferred gradually to 1 l and then 3 l ﬂ asks, 
keeping the culture volume between 25 and 35 % of the total 
volume capacity of shake ﬂ ask. Ideally do not allow the cell 
density to exceed 5 × 10 6 cells/ml or fall below 0.7 × 10 6 cells/
ml. Cell growth may slow down if diluted to the density of less 
than 0.7 × 10 6 cells/ml.  
 20.   If a freezing container is not available, vials can be transferred 
to a −20 °C freezer for 2–3 h followed by transfer to −80 °C 
overnight.  
  21.   It is not necessary to keep Virkon solution in ﬂ asks for more than 
20 min. Leaving Virkon for longer may make it difﬁ cult to remove 
the traces from ﬂ asks. Glass ﬂ asks are easier to clean than the 
polycarbonate ﬂ asks. Polycarbonate ﬂ asks for suspension culture 
are meant to be disposable but they can be reused several times if 
cleaned properly after Virkon treatment. We have noticed that if 
Virkon is left in polycarbonate ﬂ asks for an extended time, the 
plastic starts leaching and the ﬂ asks become unusable. Other dis-
infectants may be used but if using Virkon for decontaminating 
cell culture glassware, special attention should be paid to remove 
any residues of Virkon from the ﬂ asks before autoclaving.  
  22.   The Cellfectin and cell-only controls are important for determin-
ing the success of the transfection as they allow the user to distin-
guish cytotoxic effects and uninfected cells from infected cells.  
 23.   Cell attachment can be observed using an inverted microscope 
by focusing through the sample; the cells should be visible in 
one plane of view once successfully attached.  
 24.   Adding serum to the transfection will inhibit the process.  
 25.   Pipette the medium off gently and avoid touching the bottom 
of the plate so as to not disturb the cells. Keep the tips on one 
edge of the wells and tilt the plate slightly to ease aspiration. 
As soon as you have removed the medium, replace it with the 
lipid-DNA complex mixtures to prevent the cells drying out. 
When doing this step it is beneﬁ cial to have the tips already in 
place on the multichannel pipette ready to add your transfec-
tion mixture. Also have a waste container to pipette the media 
into and note that you can reuse your 1 ml tips that you aspi-
rate your medium off with.  
  26.  This step again needs to be done quickly without disturbing the 
cells. It is beneﬁ cial to use two 1 ml multichannel pipettes. Have 
96 1 ml tips ready for aspirating off the transfection mixture and 
Pravin Mahajan et al.

119
have another set of tips ready for adding the medium. Tilt the 
plate as in  Note 25 to aspirate off the mixture and then add the 
medium slowly by pipetting it gently down the side of the well.  
 27.   For some targets it may be necessary to use the P1 virus to 
infect for test expression. However, we have found that there 
is little difference in the yields when expressing from P1 rather 
than P0. We therefore use P0 virus, which shortens the expres-
sion process by at least 3 days.  
 28.   To avoid disturbing the Insoluble fraction, tilt the plate and 
drive the tips down the side of the wells at an angle. Stop just 
above the pellet, on most plates there is a ridge just off the 
bottom—feel for this with the tips. Gently pipette up the 
supernatant and then transfer to the new plate. Do not go 
back into the wells as this will resuspend the pellets, if this hap-
pens then re-spin the sample and try again.  
 29.   The resin tends to clump and settles quickly. We recommend 
using 200 μl tips with ~5 mm cut from the ends to prevent 
clogging the tips and ensure even loading. Also, continually 
mix the resin by pipetting up and down in addition to shaking 
the reservoir from side to side to prevent settling.  
 30.   When the silicone matting seal is pressed down ﬁ rmly and held 
in place with another deep-well block the block will not leak 
when placed on its side. If you prefer, you can incubate the 
plate upright but the resin tends not to mix as well when done 
this way, we would therefore recommend keeping the samples 
in a 24-well format for this step as this provides greater surface 
area for binding.  
 31.   Removing all trace of Wash buffer is essential to ensure that 
the subsequent elution step does not become diluted with 
Wash buffer.  
 32.   It is beneﬁ cial to grade the expression level of your proteins to 
more easily identify ones that you may wish to scale up. At this 
point we also recommend conﬁ rming the targets using quality 
control steps such as intact mass determination (if quantities 
are sufﬁ cient) or by in-gel tryptic digest MSMS analysis.  
 33.   Baculovirus stability is known to improve in the presence of 
FBS. As Sf-900 II is a serum-free medium, addition of FBS to 
the ﬁ nal concentration of 2 % is recommended to stabilize the 
virus and maintain its infectivity when it is stored at 4 °C.  
 34.   Signs of baculovirus infection: baculovirus infected insect cells 
look swollen, nuclei appear to ﬁ ll the cells and the cells do 
not show any clumps when compared to a healthy cell control. 
If the cells are in very late phase of infection, they will start 
to lyse. 
Protein Production in Insect Cells

120
 35.   Availability of healthy viable cells is very important for success-
ful scale-up of a broad range of targets. Culture conditions 
such as temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, osmolality, and 
nutrient composition of the culture medium can inﬂ uence the 
infection of the insect cells. In addition, factors such as cell 
line, expression time point, MOI and cell density at the time 
of infection can have signiﬁ cant effects on protein expression 
in insect cells. This protocol is generically applied to a large 
number of proteins; however, occasionally for some proteins, 
optimization at protein expression level is necessary to improve 
the results. Optimization experiments should be performed 
on a small scale initially and can be later applied to large-scale 
expressions. The following conditions could be tested for 
expression optimization: range of MOI, two harvesting time 
points (48 and 72 h), two cell lines (Sf9 and High Five), or 
different cell densities (2 × 10 6 cells ml and 4 × 10 6 cells/ml). It 
should be noted that baculoviruses are lytic viruses for insect 
cells and will eventually lyse the cells if left long enough after 
infection. This also means that a harvesting time of 48 or 72 h 
is also determined by the volume of virus added. The cells can 
be infected with low MOI (0.05–0.3 pfu/cell) and harvested 
at 72 h or they can be infected with a high MOI (>1 pfu/cell) 
and harvested at 48 h. Cells infected with high MOI and har-
vested at 72 h may show signiﬁ cant lysis.  
 36.   Before diluting the cells, check for the health of the cells and 
absence of any signs of infection or contamination under a 
microscope. If less than 1 l scale-up is enough, smaller ﬂ asks 
should be used. However, remember to use a culture volume 
of only 25–35 % of the total volume capacity of the ﬂ ask. 
  37.    The amount of virus added is determined by the titer of virus 
stock. We do not routinely measure viral titers but various meth-
ods for baculovirus titration have been developed based on cell 
viability, plaque formation, antibody-based assays, etc. [ 14 ] For 
the 72 h expression time point, we recommend an MOI of 
0.05–0.3 pfu/cell. If the titer of virus stock is 1 × 10 8 pfu/ml 
and 2 ml of virus is added to 1 l of the cells (total of 2 × 10 9 cells), 
that would be an MOI of 0.1. Addition of more virus can affect 
the expression and can also cause cell lysis.  
 38.   It should be noted that good signs of infection are desirable 
but more than 10 % lysis of cells can be detrimental to protein 
puriﬁ cation.  
 39.   This small volume of cells can be used for expression testing 
before committing to purify a large batch of cells. This can 
give a quick estimate of protein expression levels or any failure 
of the batch to express the protein of interest. To purify the 
protein from 3 ml of culture, follow the protocol as described 
in Subheading  3.11 . 
Pravin Mahajan et al.

121
  40.  Sf9 cells become very fragile after infection and can rupture if 
centrifuged at very high speed resulting in loss of protein in the 
medium itself. We recommend harvesting the cells by centrifu-
gation at 900 ×  g for 20 min and handling cell pellets gently.  
 41.   Sonication time may need to be adjusted depending on vol-
ume of the cell suspension. Avoid excessive foaming and heat-
ing of the suspension by adjusting the instrument settings and 
keeping the cell suspension on ice all the time to reduce the 
potential for protein precipitation or denaturation. Cell dis-
ruption by sonication can also help in reducing viscosity by 
shearing nucleic acids.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We would like to thank all the SGC scientists (past and present) 
who contributed towards the development of the methods. The 
SGC is a registered charity (number 1097737) that receives funds 
from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Genome 
Canada, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly Canada, the Novartis Research 
Foundation, Pﬁ zer, Takeda, AbbVie, the Canada Foundation for 
Innovation, the Ontario Ministry of Economic Development and 
Innovation, and the Wellcome Trust.  
 References 
  1.  Ignoffo CM (1975) Entomopathogens as 
insecticides. Environ Lett 8:23–40  
  2.  Invitrogen (2002) Guide to Baculovirus 
expression vector systems (BEVS) and insect 
cell 
culture 
techniques. 
Invitrogen 
Life 
Technologies, Carlsbad  
  3.  Kost TA, Condreay JP, Jarvis DL (2005) 
Baculovirus as versatile vectors for protein 
expression in insect and mammalian cells. Nat 
Biotechnol 23:567–575  
  4.  Summers 
MD, 
Anderson 
DL 
(1972) 
Granulosis virus deoxyribonucleic acid: a 
closed, double-stranded molecule. J Virol 
9:710–713  
  5.  Matthews REF (1982) Classiﬁ cation and nomen-
clature of viruses. Intervirology 17:1–181  
  6.  O’Reilly D ML, Luckow V (1992) Baculovirus 
expression vectors: a laboratory manual  
  7.  Vaughn JL, Goodwin RH, Tompkins GJ et al 
(1977) The establishment of two cell lines from 
the insect  Spodoptera frugiperda (Lepidoptera; 
Noctuidae). In Vitro 13:213–217  
  8.  Granados RR, Guoxun L, Derksen ACG et al 
(1994) A new cell line from  Trichoplusia ni 
(BTI-Tn-5B1-4) susceptible to  Trichoplusia ni 
single enveloped nuclear polyhedrosis virus. 
J Invertebr Pathol 64:260–266  
  9.  Smith GE, Summers MD, Fraser MJ (1983) 
Production of human beta interferon in insect 
cells infected with a baculovirus expression vec-
tor. Mol Cell Biol 3:2156–2165  
  10.  Invitrogen (2010) Bac-to-Bac® Baculovirus 
expression 
system. 
Invitrogen 
Life 
Technologies, Carlsbad  
  11.  Hanahan D, Jessee J, Bloom FR (1991) 
Plasmid transformation of  Escherichia coli and 
other bacteria. Methods Enzymol 204:63–113  
  12.  Shrestha B, Smee C, Gileadi O (2008) 
Baculovirus expression vector system: an 
emerging host for high-throughput eukaryotic 
protein expression. Methods Mol Biol 439:269  
  13.  Invitrogen (2010) Growth and maintenance of 
insect cell lines. Invitrogen Life Technologies, 
Carlsbad  
  14.  Roldao A, Oliveira R, Carrondo MJ et al 
(2009) Error assessment in recombinant bacu-
lovirus titration: evaluation of different meth-
ods. J Virol Methods 159:69–80 
Protein Production in Insect Cells

123
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_7, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 7  
 OmniBac: Universal Multigene Transfer Plasmids 
for Baculovirus Expression Vector Systems 
 Deepak  B.  Thimiri Govinda Raj ,  Lakshmi  S.  Vijayachandran , 
and  Imre  Berger 
 Abstract 
 Current baculovirus expression vector systems (BEVS) rely on either using homologous recombination or 
site speciﬁ c transposition (Tn7 transposition) to obtain recombinant baculovirus. Each approach has its 
own merits. To date, the choice of transfer plasmids limited expression of target proteins to only one of the 
two types of BEVS. Here we describe OmniBac, comprising novel universal multigene transfer plasmids 
that can access all BEVS currently in use for protein production in the community. Detailed protocols are 
presented for integrating OmniBac plasmids into baculoviral genomes used for heterologous protein pro-
duction in insect cells.  
 Key words   BEVS  ,   Bac-to-Bac  ,   FlashBac  ,   BacVector series  ,   MultiBac  ,   OmniBac ,   Tn7 transposition  , 
 Cre-LoxP fusion  ,   Homologous recombination  ,  Co-expression  ,   Multiprotein complexes  
1  Introduction 
 A number of recombinant baculovirus expression systems (BEVS) 
are in use for the production of recombinant proteins and their 
complexes in insect cells. Examples include Invitrogen’s  Bac -to - 
Bac  ® system [ 1 ], the FlashBAC system from Oxford Expression 
Technologies (OET) [ 2 – 4 ], the BacVector series from Novagen 
[ 5 ], and the MultiBac [ 6 ] and SweetBac [ 7 ] systems developed by 
academic research groups. The baculovirus genomes that are uti-
lized by these systems are accessed by using plasmids called transfer 
plasmids. Two methods are predominantly used to react the trans-
fer plasmids with the baculovirus genomes to insert the recombi-
nant genes, relying either on homologous recombination [ 2 – 5 ] or, 
alternatively, on site speciﬁ c transposition [ 1 ,  6 ,  7 ], Currently, the 
choice of transfer plasmid decides the entry method used to inte-
grate heterologous genes into the viral genome, which in turn dic-
tates the baculovirus genome to be used for insect cell infection 

124
and protein production. A range of baculoviruses is available to the 
community relying on either one or the other system, each with its 
own merit. However, transfer plasmids that could access all com-
monly used baculoviruses, by either transposition or homologous 
recombination, respectively, was lacking to date. Such universal 
transfer plasmids, however, would be desirable as they would pro-
vide ﬂ exibility to switch baculoviruses without having to reclone 
the genes of interest into a different transfer plasmid. This is par-
ticularly relevant for multiprotein complexes with many subunits 
and therefore many encoding genes, where recloning could 
become a signiﬁ cant burden. 
 We created new “OmniBac” transfer plasmids that contain 
both the functionalities required for Tn7 transposition (Tn7R and 
Tn7L DNA sequences) and also DNA elements required for 
homologous recombination (Orf1629 and lef2/603 sequences) 
[ 8 ]. The OmniBac transfer plasmids are fully compatible with the 
multigene construct generation methods of our previous MultiBac 
system [ 6 ,  9 ]. Moreover, our acceptor–donor tandem recom-
bineering (TR) approach [ 10 ,  11 ] can be likewise used with the 
OmniBac plasmids, which act then as acceptors, to put together 
multigene expression constructs. 
 Here we present protocols for recombinant baculovirus gen-
eration by using our novel OmniBac transfer plasmids. Two proto-
cols are detailed, one each for homologous recombination and for 
the BAC/Tn7 entry approach (Fig.  1 ).
 Fig. 1  OmniBac transfer plasmids can universally access available baculovirus genomes using either homolo-
gous recombination ( a ) or Tn7 transposition ( b ) to generate recombinant baculoviruses for protein expression 
in insect cells 
 
Deepak B. Thimiri Govinda Raj et al.

125
2  Materials 
 All solutions should be prepared using ultrapure and sterilized 
water (Millipore Milli-Q system or equivalent; conductivity of 
18.2 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and analytical grade reagents. Prepared 
solutions are sterilized wherever it is necessary and stored at room 
temperature (unless it is indicated otherwise). It is recommended 
to diligently follow all biosafety rules and regulations when per-
forming the protocol and while disposing waste materials. 
  1.  pOmniBac1 or pOmniBac2 plasmid ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.  DH10Bac, DH10MultiBac, DH10EMBacY bacterial cell 
strains.  
  3.   Buffers from QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit (Qiagen, cat. no. 
27104) (or similar, or self-made buffer solutions).  
  1.  pOmniBac1 or pOmniBac2 plasmids ( see  Note 1 ) (500 ng of 
transfer plasmid DNA).  
  2.  100 ng of puriﬁ ed baculoviral DNA (Novagen, OET systems).  
  1.  Sterile Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks (100 ml).  
  2.   Tabletop Centrifuge.  
  3.   Fluorescence spectrophotometer and cuvettes.  
  4.  Sonicator.  
  5.  YFP standard.  
  6.   Lysis buffer (e.g., PBS).  
  7.   6X protein gel loading dye (125 mM Bis/Tris-Cl, pH 6.8, 
20 % (v/v) glycerol, 4 % (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10 % 
(v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 0.4 mg/ml bromophenol blue).  
  8.  95 °C heating block.  
   9.  Incubator set at 27 °C.  
 10.   6-well tissue culture plate.  
 11.   Sterile pipettes, tips, and sterile hood.  
 12.   Inverted phase-contrast microscope.  
 13.   Sf21 insect cells (or Sf9, others).  
 14.   Insect cell serum free media (Invitrogen or Hyclone).  
 15.   Transfection reagent such as Fugene (Roche), Gene Juice 
(Novagen), Lipofectin (Invitrogen), etc.  
2.1  Reagents 
Required for 
Integration by Tn7 
Transposition
2.2  Reagents 
Required for 
Integration by 
Homologous 
Recombination
2.3  Reagents and 
Equipment Required 
for Both Approaches
Universal Multigene Transfer Plasmids for BEVS

126
3  Methods 
 Heterologous genes of interests (GOI) are cloned into the expres-
sion cassettes of the OmniBac plasmids and, if multiprotein expres-
sion is planned, also into the expression cassettes of Donor plasmids 
which are identical to the Donors supplied with the original 
MultiBac system (Fig.  2a ) [ 11 ]. Gene insertion can be performed 
by the user’s method of choice (restriction enzymes and ligase, 
ligation-independent cloning methods, PCR-based methods, 
others). Our preferred method of choice is sequence and ligation 
independent cloning (SLIC  ) [ 12 ]. Several expression cassettes can 
be placed on each of the plasmids, by taking advantage of the mul-
tiplication module comprising a homing endonuclease (HE) site 
and a BstXI that ﬂ ank the expression cassettes [ 9 ,  13 ], OmniBac 
plasmids containing one or more expression cassettes are trans-
formed into common  E .  coli cloning strains, and positive clones 
identiﬁ ed by restriction mapping and by sequencing using stan-
dard protocols.
 Expression of several genes may be desired. Donor plasmid, 
each containing one or several expression cassettes, can be combi-
natorial assembled with the OmniBac acceptor plasmid by Cre 
recombinase (Fig.  2b ) [ 10 ,  14 ,  15 ]. Donors and OmniBac plas-
mids are mixed with the Donors slightly in excess, and incubated 
 Fig. 2  The OmniBac system. ( a ) Acceptors (pOmniBac1, pOmniBac2) and Donors (pIDC, pIDK, pIDS) are shown 
in a schematic fashion. Origins of replication (ColE1 and R6Kγ) are indicated. Plasmids contain expression 
cassettes controlled by late baculoviral promoters (polh or p10) as well as eukaryotic polyadenylation signals 
(from SV40 or HSVtk). Homing endonuclease sites and matching BstXI sites ( blue squares ) ﬂ anking the expres-
sion cassettes are shown.  Ap stands for ampicillin,  Cm for chloramphenicol,  Kn for kanamycin,  Gn for genta-
mycin,  Sp for spectinomycin resistance markers [ 8 ]. ( b ) Combinatorial assembly of acceptor–donor fusions 
using Cre-recombinase. The Cre reaction is an equilibrium reaction resulting in acceptor–donor fusions that 
are characterized by unique resistance marker combinations which can be used for selection [ 10 ].  A stands 
for Acceptor,  D  for Donor,  AD and  ADD denote Acceptor–Donor fusions by the Cre-LoxP reaction at the equilib-
rium of assembly (marked as Cre) and disassembly (marked as DeCre)  
 
Deepak B. Thimiri Govinda Raj et al.

127
with the Cre enzyme following published protocols [ 9 ]. After  
transformation, the desired fusion constructs are selected based on 
the combination of resistance markers, and validated by restriction 
mapping and DNA sequencing. The integration of OmniBac- 
based transfer plasmids into the baculovirus of choice using Tn7 
transposition or homologous recombination follows the same pro-
tocols (below) as for the OmniBac plasmids alone (Subheading  3.1 
or Subheading  3.2 , respectively). 
  1.  Prepare transfection dilution mixture containing the transfection 
reagent and insect cell media as recommended by the manufac-
turer’s protocol. (BacVector series, Novagen, or FlashBac, OET)  
  2.   Prepare 0.5–0.8 × 10 6 Sf21 cells per well in 2 ml serum free 
medium in the 6-well culture plate.  
  3.   Incubate at 27 °C for 1 h for the cells to adhere on the surface 
of the plate.  
  4.   In the meantime, prepare the co-transfection mix containing 
100 ng of BacVector or Flashbac DNA (5 µl), 500 ng of 
recombinant OmniBac plasmid (5 µl), lipofectin or alternative 
transfection reagent (5 µl), and 1 ml of serum free, antibiotic 
free medium ( see  Note 2 ). 
  5.   Incubate at room temperature for 15–30 min to generate 
Liposome–DNA complexes.  
  6.   Remove the culture medium from the 6-well plates without 
disrupting the monolayer ( see  Note 3 ). 
  7.    Add immediately 1 ml of transfection mixture (liposome–DNA 
complexes) drop-wise such that monolayer is not affected. 
Incubate in dark for minimum 5 h or overnight at 27 °C  
  8.   After ﬁ rst incubation period, add further 1 ml of serum free 
insect cell medium into each well. Continue the second incu-
bation period of 4–5 days at 27 °C in dark.  
  9.   After the second incubation period, collect the the superna-
tant from the wells which is  V0 virus ( see  Note 4 ). Proceed for 
virus ampliﬁ cation ( see  step 9 in Subheading  3.2 ). 
  1.   Transform chemical competent DH10Bac, DH10MultiBac, 
DH10EMBacY, etc. cells by mixing 10–15 µl of the annealing 
reaction with 200 µl of cell suspension on ice.  
  2.   Incubate for 30 min on ice, heat-shock at 42 °C for 45–60 s, 
incubate on ice for 2 min, add 600 µl of LB Broth, and incu-
bate in a 37 °C shaker for overnight.  
  3.   Streak out 150 μl on plates containing the antibiotics, IPTG 
(1 mM) and Bluogal or X-Gal at standard concentration. Use 
dilution series (1:1, 1:10, 1:100, 1:1,000), this results usually 
in optimal separation of colonies on one of the plates.  
3.1  Integration of 
OmniBac Plasmid into 
Baculovirus Genome 
by Homologous 
Recombination in 
Insect Cells (FlashBac, 
BacVector Series, etc.) 
and Production of 
Recombinant Virus
3.2  Integration of 
OmniBac Plasmid into 
Baculovirus Genome 
by Tn7 Transposition 
(Bac-to-Bac, Multibac, 
Others) and 
Production of 
Recombinant Virus
Universal Multigene Transfer Plasmids for BEVS

128
  4.  Pick 2–3 white clones for each construct, start mini-cultures 
overnight, and (optionally) restreak. Proceed for bacmid prep-
aration for insect-cell infection.  
  5.   Isolate baculoviral DNA using solution I, II, III of the 
QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit by following the Qiagen manual. 
Precipitate the resultant supernatant (900 μl) with isopropanol 
(700 μl) and wash the pellet twice with 200 μl 70 % EtOH. 
Dry the pellet and resuspend in 20 μl sterilized ddH 2 O. 
Further add 200 μl of sterilized medium.  
  6.   Seed 1 × 10 6 Sf21 cells in duplicates in 6-well plates and incu-
bate for 15–30 min at 27 °C.  
  7.  Prepare transfection reagent solution of 100 μl media with 
10 μl transfection reagents (Fugene reagent from Roche). Add 
this mixture (100 μl) to the volume containing dissolved 
MultiBac baculoviral DNA supplemented with 200 μl media 
( step 4 ).  
  8.  Add half of the above transfection mixtures to each of the two 
wells marked for the construct to be tested.  
  9.   Incubate for 60 h at 27 °C. Then, collect the supernatant from 
the well which is  V0 virus . Add 3 ml of fresh media to each 
well and proceed for protein expression test on the samples.  
 10.   Prepare Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks containing 25 ml Sf21 cell suspen-
sion at a density of 0.5–1 × 10 6 cells/ml. Make sure cells divide 
properly in the ﬂ asks used (test once or twice the doubling 
rate, which should be around 18–20 h for most insect cells at 
27 °C).  
 11.   Infect 25 ml Sf21 cell culture with 3 ml of V0 virus.  
 12.   Monitor cell growth by withdrawing aliquots (24 h intervals) 
and counting cells. If cells double, dilute culture in fresh ﬂ ask 
and cell density must maintain at 1–1.5 × 10 6 cells/ml 
( see  Note 5 ).  
 13.   Identify the time when cells stop doubling (day of prolifera-
tion arrest,  dpa ). Aliquot 1 × 10 6 cells (i.e., 0.9 ml culture if 
cell count is at 1.1 × 10 6 /ml). Pellet the cells at high speed for 
1 min (i.e., “dpa” probe). Take also probes (1 × 10 6 cells) every 
12 or 24 h after dpa (dpa +12, dpa +24, etc.).  
 14.   After taking probes after dpa +48/60 h, Sf21 cell suspension 
is transferred to a sterile 50 ml Falcon tube, centrifuged gently 
(100–150 rcf, 3 min) and the supernatant is retained in a fresh 
sterile 50 ml Falcon tube (this is  V1 virus ). The Sf21 pellet is 
then gently resuspended in fresh media (50 ml) and placed 
back into the shaker ﬂ ask. Continue to withdraw probes 
(1 × 10 6 cells) until dpa +96 h, or, if EMBacY virus is used, 
until the YFP expression reaches a plateau ( see  Note 6 ). 
 15.   Harvest cell pellet and store the pellet at −20 °C.  
Deepak B. Thimiri Govinda Raj et al.

129
 16.   Analyze dpa; dpa +12, dpa +24 h probe from protein expres-
sion by SDS-PAGE or Western blot analysis. Herein, sonicate 
and resuspend the pellets in appropriate amount of lysis buffer, 
mix with Protein gel loading buffer, and run on SDS-PAGE 
Gel. Perform western blot analysis if necessary.  
4  Notes 
  1.   OmniBac plasmid sequence information can be downloaded 
from the link:   http://www.embl.fr/multibac/multiexpres-
sion _technologies/   .  
  2.   For the control, omit baculoviral DNA from the transfection 
mix. 
  3.   Make sure that insect cell monolayer is not dry out during the 
step. Include the washing step with serum-free medium, if 
cells were maintained in serum-supplemented medium and 
repeat the step twice.  
  4.   V0 virus is the seed stock of recombinant virus which is used 
for virus ampliﬁ cation.  
  5.   If couple of doubling are observed (indicative of very week V0 
virus), the culture needs to be diluted and split using a fresh 
ﬂ ask or suspension discarded. If cells continue to double after 
4–5 days, it is recommended to repeat the bacmid preparation 
and transfection reaction.  
  6.   Centrifuge the resuspended pellet at maximum speed in a table-
top centrifuge at room temperature for 3 min. Transfer the 
supernatant into fresh eppendorf tube and measure YFP ﬂ uo-
rescence (excitation: 488 nm, emission max: ~520 nm) using 
spectroﬂ uorometer and having YFP standard as a control.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We thank all members of the Berger laboratory for helpful discus-
sions. This work was supported by the Centre National de 
Recherche Scientiﬁ que (CNRS) through a PEPS discovery grant 
(to IB), and by the European Commission (EC) Framework 
Program 7 (PCUBE, BioSTRUCT-X and ComplexINC, to IB). 
DBTGR is recipient of an EC/EMBL CoFund EIPOD 
fellowship. 
 Competing Financial Interest Statement 
 The authors declare competing ﬁ nancial interests. IB is the author 
on patents or patent applications detailing reagents and parts of the 
methods here described.  
Universal Multigene Transfer Plasmids for BEVS

130
 References 
  1.  Luckow VA, Lee SC, Barry GF et al (1993) 
Efﬁ cient generation of infectious recombinant 
baculoviruses by site-speciﬁ c transposon-medi-
ated insertion of foreign genes into a baculovi-
rus genome propagated in Escherichia coli. J 
Virol 67:4566–4579  
  2.  Hitchman RB, Possee RD, Crombie AT et al 
(2010) Genetic modiﬁ cation of a baculovirus 
vector for increased expression in insect cells. 
Cell Biol Toxicol 26:57–68. doi:  10.1007/
s10565-009-9133-y   
  3.  Hitchman RB, Possee RD, King LA (2009) 
Baculovirus expression systems for recombi-
nant protein production in insect cells. Recent 
Pat Biotechnol 3:46–54  
  4.  Possee RD, Hitchman RB, Richards KS et al 
(2008) Generation of baculovirus vectors for 
the high- throughput production of proteins in 
insect cells. Biotechnol Bioeng 101:1115–
1122. doi:  10.1002/bit.22002   
  5.   Kitts PA, Possee RD (1993) A method for pro-
ducing recombinant baculovirus expression 
vectors at high frequency. Biotechniques 
14:810–817  
  6.   Berger I, Fitzgerald DJ, Richmond TJ (2004) 
Baculovirus expression system for heterolo-
gous multiprotein complexes. Nat Biotechnol 
22:1583–1587. doi:  10.1038/nbt1036   
  7.   Palmberger D, Wilson IB, Berger I et al (2012) 
SweetBac: a new approach for the production 
of mammalianised glycoproteins in insect cells. 
PLoS One 7:e34226. doi:  10.1371/journal.
pone.0034226   
  8.  Vijayachandran LS, Thimiri Govinda Raj DB, 
Edelweiss E et al (2013) Gene gymnastics: 
synthetic biology for baculovirus expression 
vector system engineering. Bioengineered 
4:279–287  
  9.  Fitzgerald DJ, Berger P, Schafﬁ tzel C et al 
(2006) Protein complex expression by using 
multigene baculoviral vectors. Nat Methods 
3:1021–1032. doi:  10.1038/nmeth983   
  10.  Bieniossek C, Nie Y, Frey D et al (2009) 
Automated unrestricted multigene recom-
bineering for multiprotein complex produc-
tion. Nat Methods 6:447–450. doi:  10.1038/
nmeth.1326   
  11.  Bieniossek C, Imasaki T, Takagi Y et al (2012) 
MultiBac: expanding the research toolbox for 
multiprotein complexes. Trends Biochem Sci 
37:49–57. doi:  10.1016/j.tibs.2011.10.005   
  12.  Haffke M, Viola C, Nie Y et al (2013) Tandem 
recombineering by SLIC cloning and Cre-
LoxP fusion to generate multigene expression 
constructs for protein complex Research. 
Methods Mol Biol 1073:131–140  
  13.  Li MZ, Elledge SJ (2007) Harnessing homolo-
gous recombination in vitro to generate recom-
binant 
DNA 
via 
SLIC. 
Nat 
Methods 
4:251–256. doi:  10.1038/nmeth1010   
  14.  Trowitzsch S, Bieniossek C, Nie Y et al (2010) 
New 
baculovirus 
expression 
tools 
for 
recombinant protein complex production. J 
Struct 
Biol 
172:45–54. 
doi:  10.1016/j.
jsb.2010.02.010   
  15.  Vijayachandran LS, Viola C, Garzoni F et al 
(2011) 
Robots, 
pipelines, 
polyproteins: 
enabling multiprotein expression in prokary-
otic and eukaryotic cells. J Struct Biol 175:198–
208.  doi:  10.1016/j.jsb.2011.03.007   
Deepak B. Thimiri Govinda Raj et al.

131
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_8, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 8  
 Multiprotein Complex Production in Insect Cells 
by Using Polyproteins 
 Yan  Nie ,  Itxaso  Bellon-Echeverria ,  Simon  Trowitzsch , 
 Christoph  Bieniossek , and  Imre  Berger 
 Abstract 
 A powerful approach utilizing polyproteins for balancing stoichiometry of recombinant multiprotein 
complexes overproduced in baculovirus expression vector systems (BEVS) is described. This procedure has 
been implemented here in the MultiBac system but can also be directly adapted to all commonly used 
BEVS. The protocol details the design principles of polyprotein-expressing DNA constructs, the genera-
tion of composite baculovirus for polyprotein production, and the expression and in vivo processing of 
polyproteins in baculovirus infected insect cells.  
 Key words   Polyprotein  ,  Multiprotein complexes  ,   Subunit stoichiometry  ,  Baculovirus-insect cell 
expression system  ,   Tobacco etch virus (TEV) NIa protease  ,   In vivo proteolysis  ,   Multigene delivery  , 
 MultiBac system  ,  Cre recombinase  ,  Tn7 transposition  
1  Introduction 
 Multiprotein complexes catalyze essential cellular activities. 
Studying their structure and function is an emerging focus of bio-
logical research. In most cases, recombinant production is required 
for obtaining sufﬁ cient amounts of homogenous material for 
detailed analyses [ 1 ]. MultiBac is an advanced expression system 
that has been designed for overexpressing multiprotein complexes 
in insect cells infected by a single composite multigene baculovirus. 
MultiBac has enabled production of many challenging multipro-
tein complexes, setting the stage to unlock their mechanism [ 2 – 4 ]. 
A bottleneck which can be encountered when many heterologous 
proteins are co-produced from individual expression cassettes 
derives from imbalanced expression levels of the individual pro-
teins prohibiting proper complex assembly [ 3 ,  5 ]. Some subunits 
may be expressed stronger, others weaker, and occasionally one 
subunit is expressed at such a low level that it becomes detrimental 

132
to overall yield and a complex containing all desired subunits can-
not be obtained. 
 In order to balance expression levels and achieve properly assem-
bled complexes with correct subunit stoichiometry, we have imple-
mented a novel strategy based on polyproteins that are processed in 
vivo into individual subunits by a highly speciﬁ c protease [ 3 ,  5 ] 
(Fig.  1 ). This approach derives from the strategy used by certain 
viruses such as Coronavirus to realize their proteome [ 6 ]. To facili-
tate polyprotein production with the MultiBac BEVS, new transfer 
plasmids have been created that rely on Tn7 transposon- mediated 
gene integration into the MultiBac baculovirus (Fig.  2 ). Other bacu-
loviruses that are in use rely on homologous recombination for com-
posite baculovirus generation (ﬂ ashBAC from OET, BacVector series 
from Novagen, others). These baculoviruses can likewise be accessed 
for polyprotein expression by using the pOmni-PBac plasmid [ 7 ].
 All polyprotein transfer plasmids contain the same expression 
cassette which encompasses a very late viral promoter (polyhedrin) 
followed by the gene encoding for NIa protease from tobacco etch 
virus (TEV) for subunit liberation, a short oligonucleotide 
sequence presenting a BstEII and an RsrII restriction endonucle-
ase site, and ﬁ nally a gene encoding for cyan ﬂ uorescent protein 
(CFP) for direct read-out of polyprotein expression. A TEV NIa 
protease cleavage site (tcs) is placed upstream of the CFP encoding 
gene (Fig.  2a ). Heterologous genes of interest (GOIs) can be 
inserted into this polyprotein expression cassette by using the 
 Fig. 1    Design and in vivo processing of polyproteins. ( a ) Genes of interest (GOIs) 
are assembled into a single open reading frame (ORF), giving rise to a polyprot-
ein. In this polyprotein, individual genes of interest are spaced apart by cleavage 
sites (tcs) for tobacco etch virus (TEV) NIa protease which is also encoded by the 
ORF. The C-terminal CFP serves to monitor heterologous expression level. 
( b ) Composite MultiBac baculoviral genome DNA containing the polyprotein 
expression cassette ( left ) is used to transfect cultured insect cells for multipro-
tein complex production ( right  ) 
 
Yan Nie et al.

133
 Fig. 2  Integration of polyprotein expression cassettes into MultiBac baculovirus. ( a ) MultiBac Acceptor vectors 
pPBac, pKL-PBac, and pOmni-PBac, tailored for polyprotein production, are shown schematically ( top ). They 
contain a regular ColE1 origin of replication and a polyprotein expression cassette, which encodes an N-terminal 
TEV protease and a C-terminal CFP spaced by a TEV cleavage site (tcs). BstEII and RsrII sites are used for insert-
ing the polyprotein encoding ORF of interest. Donor vectors pIDC, pIDK, and pIDS contain a conditional origin of 
replication derived from the R6Kγ phage [ 13 ]. The multiplication module ﬂ anking the expression cassettes 
contain a homing endonuclease site and a complementary BstXI site ( boxes in light blue ). Polh and p10 are 
baculoviral very late promoters; SV40 and HSVtk are polyadenylation signals. MCS1 and MCS2 stand for mul-
tiple cloning sites. Tn7L and Tn7R are speciﬁ c DNA sequences for Tn7 transposition; the lef2/603 and Ori1629 
homology regions are shown as  gray boxes . LoxP sites are shown as  red balls .  Cm stands for chloramphenicol, 
 Gn for gentamicin,  Kn for kanamycin,  Sp for spectinomycin. ( b ) Besides polyprotein expression cassettes, single 
protein and multigene expression cassettes can also be integrated into the Tn7 attachment site (mini-attTn7) 
harbored by the LacZ (lacZα) gene, or the LoxP site of the MultiBac baculovirus.  Ap stands for ampicillin. The 
F-Replicon is a single-copy bacterial origin of replication. For reagents contact: iberger@embl.fr       
 
Polyprotein-Based Multiprotein Complex Production

134
BstEII and RsrII sites and restriction–ligation cloning ( see  Note 1 ). 
Transfer plasmids are then used to integrate the resulting polypro-
tein expression cassette into baculovirus genomes of choice to gen-
erate composite baculovirus for protein expression (Fig.  2b ). With 
this strategy, a number of complexes have been successfully pro-
duced with balanced subunit expression levels, including a 
~700 kDa physiological core complex of human general transcrip-
tion factor TFIID [ 4 ] (Fig.  3 ).
 Multiprotein complexes can be expressed from a single polypro-
tein, or alternatively, from several polyproteins that are co- expressed, 
or a combination of single protein expression cassettes and one or 
several polyproteins, depending on the complex of choice. We rec-
ommend combining a maximum of four to ﬁ ve genes (in addition to 
the genes encoding for TEV protease and the ﬂ uorescent protein) 
into a single open reading frame (ORF). Otherwise, any later work 
to modify the genes of interest may become complicated. 
 We observed that while it is sufﬁ cient to provide one TEV NIa 
protease gene in a co-expression experiment using several polypro-
teins, it appears that “tagging” all polyproteins with TEV NIa pro-
tease at the N-terminus balances overexpression levels between 
polyproteins (IB, unpublished data).  
2  Materials 
 We strongly recommend carrying out the design of polyproteins 
in silico using a DNA cloning software of choice (i.e., VectorNTI, 
ApE, others). Gene synthesis may be preferred for generating the 
individual genes of interest, in which internal BstEII and RsrII sites 
must be eliminated. If synthetic genes are used in conjunction with 
other plasmids of the MultiBac system, we recommend to further 
eliminate also any restriction sites that are part of the so- called mul-
tiplication modules (AvrII, ClaI, SpeI, BstZ17I, NruI, PmeI, 
BstXI) in the MultiBac plasmids [ 2 ,  3 ,  9 ]. Thereby, maximum ﬂ ex-
ibility of gene assembly is achieved for co-expressing proteins. 
 The modular concept of the MultiBac system allows transfer-
ring expression cassettes between various plasmids [ 2 ,  9 ]. This 
option can be used if several polyproteins are to be co-expressed, 
for example by inserting a polyprotein expression cassette into a 
Donor and accessing the LoxP site present on the MultiBac bacu-
loviral backbone (Fig.  2b ). Alternatively, Acceptor–Donor fusions 
can be generated by Cre-LoxP reaction of Donors of choice with 
pKL-PBac or pOmni-PBac, following published protocols [ 9 ,  10 ]. 
When co-expressing several polyproteins, we recommend using 
different ﬂ uorescent markers (CFP, YFP, mCherry, others) to 
monitor polyprotein expression instead of tagging each polyprot-
ein with the same ﬂ uorescent protein. 
Yan Nie et al.

135
 All reagents are prepared using ultrapure water (Millipore 
Milli-Q system or equivalent; conductivity of 18.2 MΩ cm at 
25 °C) and analytical grade reagents. Buffers, antibiotics, and 
enzymes are stored at −20 °C. 
 Fig. 3    Multiprotein complexes produced from polyproteins. ( a ) The TAF8/TAF10 dimer (inserted into the Tn7 
attachment site) was co-expressed as a polyprotein with the yellow ﬂ uorescent protein (YFP) inserted into the 
viral LoxP site from a composite baculovirus (EMBacY-TAF8/TAF10). YFP and CFP expression per one million cells 
were tracked for evaluating the viral infection and polyprotein production. St stands for a deﬁ ned ﬂ uorescence 
standard (used to calibrate for 100,000 arbitrary units), dpa stands for day of proliferation arrest in the infected 
culture [ 5 ]. ( b ) SDS-PAGE ( left ) shows balanced expressions of TAF8 and TAF10. Complete proteolysis of the TAF8/
TAF10 polyprotein was conﬁ rmed by Western blot ( right  ) using antibody speciﬁ c for the hexa histidine- tags of 
TAF10 and TEV protease ( doublet ).  M stands for molecular weight marker,  C  stands for cell control (uninfected 
insect cells),  W stands for whole cell extract,  S  stands for supernatant. ( c ) Sections from SDS-PAGE are shown for 
TAF8/TAF10 dimer from size exclusion chromatography puriﬁ cation, SMAT complex from IMAC batch puriﬁ cation 
[ 5 ], 3TAF and core-TFIID complexes from size exclusion chromatography puriﬁ cation [ 4 ]  
 
Polyprotein-Based Multiprotein Complex Production

136
  1.   Restriction endonucleases BstEII and RsrII and reaction 
buffers (New England Biolabs, NEB).  
  2.   T4 DNA ligase and buffer (NEB).  
  3.  Gel extraction kit (i.e., Qiagen, Germany).  
  4.  Plasmid puriﬁ cation kit (i.e., Qiagen, Germany).  
  5.  Regular  E .  coli competent cells (TOP10, HB101, or 
comparable).  
  6.  E .  coli competent cells containing  pir gene (if Donor plasmids 
are used,  see  Note 2 ). 
  7.   Antibiotics: chloramphenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin, spec-
tinomycin (for concentrations  see ref.  8 ).  
  8.  Agar for pouring plates.  
  9.  Media (LB, TB, SOC) for growing minicultures.  
  1.  E .  coli competent cells (DH10MultiBac, DH10EMBacY, 
DH10MultiBac  Cre ) ( see  Note 3 ).  
  2.   Antibiotics chloramphenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin, spec-
tinomycin, tetracycline (for concentrations  see ref.  8 ). 
  3.   Bluo-Gal or X-Gal.  
  4.   IPTG. 
  5.   Agar for pouring plates.  
  6.   Media (LB, TB, SOC) for growing minicultures.  
3  Methods 
 The genes encoding for the polyproteins are designed in silico, and 
then inserted into the transfer plasmid of choice. Once designed, 
polyprotein encoding genes can be created by a variety of means 
including DNA synthesis, restriction–ligation cloning, or sequence 
and ligation independent cloning (SLIC) [ 10 ,  11 ] or other meth-
ods, according to the preferences of the user. We recommend cus-
tom DNA synthesis to facilitate polyprotein construction. 
  1.   Group genes into polyproteins based on a set of chosen criteria 
(such as putative interaction partners, physiological (sub)assem-
blies, subunits with the same copy number within a complex).  
  2.   Decide on the number of polyproteins that should be co- 
expressed (we recommend not to catenate more than four to 
ﬁ ve genes in addition to the protease and ﬂ uorescent marker 
encoding genes in each polyprotein ORF).  
  3.   Decide on placement of tags. Note that cleavage sites other 
than TEV protease cleavage sites have to be used if tags are to 
2.1  Materials for 
Inserting Polyprotein 
Constructs into 
Transfer Vectors via 
Restriction–Ligation 
Cloning
2.2  Materials for 
Integrating Polyprotein 
Expression Cassettes 
into Baculovirus 
Genome
3.1  Polyprotein 
In Silico Design
Yan Nie et al.

137
be removed at a later stage by a speciﬁ c protease (i.e., 
PreScission protease, thrombin, enterokinase, others).  
  4.  Remove stop codons from individual genes, except for the last 
gene of interest if the option to monitor polyprotein expres-
sion via the plasmid-encoded ﬂ uorescent marker protein is not 
desired. If ﬂ uorescence read-out is desired, delete stop codons 
of all genes that are to be inserted.  
  5.   Decide on TEV protease cleavage site containing linker in 
between individual protein entities in the polyprotein. In par-
ticular if long unstructured tails are already predicted for 
example at the C-terminus of a given protein, we recommend 
adjoining the TEV NIa protease cleavage site (typically 
ENLYFQ’G) directly. The glycine residue replaces the starting 
methionine of the following protein.  
  6.   Generate the DNA sequence. Add BstEII site to 5′ end and 
RsrII site to 3′ end. 
  7.  Create complete polyprotein expression construct in silico, 
predict translation, verify reading frame through the TEV NIa 
protease and the ﬂ uorescent marker.  
  8.  Decide on DNA assembly strategy (SLIC, restriction–ligation, 
PCR assembly, others).  
  9.   Create all DNA sequences in silico and validate by simulating 
the reading frame.  
  1.  Choose from pOmni-PBac, pPBac, or pKL-PBac to generate 
the polyprotein expressing construct for expression with the 
baculovirus of choice ( see  Note 4 ). All polyprotein expression 
cassettes have the same design with BstEII and RsrII sites for 
DNA insertion between the gene encoding for TEV NIa pro-
tease and the gene encoding for CFP. pKL-PBac contains a 
LoxP site for integrating Donor plasmids with further genes of 
interest; pOmni-PBac contains elements for homologous 
recombination in addition to elements for Tn7 transposition.  
  2.  Digest several micrograms transfer plasmid by BstEII and 
RsrII enzymes according to manufacturers’ recommendation. 
Sequential digestion is recommended as BstEII cuts optimally 
at 60 °C, while RsrII prefers 37 °C.  
  3.  Analyze the digestions by agarose gel electrophoresis to con-
ﬁ rm that the digestions are complete.  
  4.   Purify digested plasmid by using commercial gel extraction 
kits (for example Qiagen gel extraction kit). It is recommended 
to elute the extracted DNA in the minimal volume deﬁ ned 
by the manufacturer. Determine the concentration of the 
extracted 
DNA 
spectrophotometrically 
(e.g., 
Thermo 
Scientiﬁ c NanoDrop 2000). Store in frozen aliquots.  
3.2  Preparation of 
Transfer Plasmid DNA
Polyprotein-Based Multiprotein Complex Production

138
  1.   Digest several micrograms of the DNA (generated by DNA 
synthesis, SLIC, PCR assembly, or other methods of choice) 
encoding for the desired polyprotein with BstEII and RsrII 
enzymes according to the manufacturers’ recommendation. 
Sequential digestion is recommended as BstEII cuts optimally 
at 60 °C, while RsrII prefers 37 °C.  
  2.  Purify digested insert DNA by using a commercial gel extrac-
tion kit. It is recommended to elute the extracted DNA in the 
minimal volume deﬁ ned by the manufacturer. Determine the 
concentration of the extracted DNA spectrophotometrically.  
  3.   Set up ligation reactions by mixing puriﬁ ed insert and vector 
( see Subheading 3.2) in 10–20 μL reaction volume with T4 
DNA ligase and speciﬁ c buffer according to the recommen-
dations from the supplier. Perform ligation reactions at 
25 °C overnight. It is recommended to analyze the ligation 
reaction by agarose gel electrophoresis to evaluate the liga-
tion efﬁ ciency.  
  4.   Transform regular  E .  coli competent cells ( see  Note 2 ) with 
ligation reaction by following standard transformation proce-
dures. Incubate the transformation reaction in a 37 °C shaker 
for 1–2 h and plate on agar plates in a dilution series to ensure 
optimal colony separation.  
  5.   Pick colonies, grow minicultures, and purify plasmids.  
  6.   Indentify positive clones by restriction digestion and DNA 
sequencing of the insert.  
  1.   Transform corresponding  E .  coli competent cells (DH10MultiBac 
or DH10EMBacY) with transfer plasmid by following standard 
transformation procedures. Incubate the transformation reac-
tion in a 37 °C shaker overnight ( see  Note 5 ).  
  2.   Plate the transformation reaction on agar plates containing 
antibiotics as described [ 9 ], IPTG (1 mM) and Bluo-Gal (or 
X-Gal) in a dilution series to ensure optimal colony separation. 
Incubate at 37 °C until blue and white colonies are well 
distinguishable.  
  3.   Restreak four to eight white colonies to unambiguously con-
ﬁ rm that they are positive (white). It is recommended to 
restreak also a blue colony as negative control.  
  4.   Inoculate four conﬁ rmed white colonies in 2 mL aliquots of 
LB medium supplemented with corresponding antibiotics. 
After overnight incubation, use two to four of the cell cultures 
for bacmid puriﬁ cation, transfection, viral ampliﬁ cation, and 
multiprotein complex overexpression [ 8 ]. 
3.3  Inserting 
Polyprotein Expression 
Cassettes into BstEII/
RsrII Digested Transfer 
Vectors
3.4  Integrating 
Polyprotein Expression 
Constructs into the 
MultiBac Baculoviral 
Genome via Tn7 
Transposition
Yan Nie et al.

139
  1.   Place polyprotein expression cassette into Donor plasmid of 
choice by SLIC, restriction–ligation, PCR assembly, or other 
methods of choice. Validate resulting constructs by restriction 
mapping. 
  2.  Transform DH10MultiBac Cre electro-competent cells (these 
contain Cre recombinase expressed from a separate plasmid 
[ 9 ]) with this polyprotein expressing Donor plasmid by fol-
lowing standard electroporation procedures. Incubate the 
transformation reaction in a 37 °C shaker overnight.  
  3.   Plate the transformation reaction on agar plates containing cor-
responding antibiotics, IPTG (1 mM) and Bluo-Gal (or X-Gal) 
in a dilution series to ensure optimal colony separation. Incubate 
at 37 °C until blue color of the colonies is clearly observed.  
  4.   Restreak four to eight blue colonies on the same type of agar 
plates to conﬁ rm they are positive.  
  5.    Inoculate four conﬁ rmed blue colonies in 2 mL aliquots of 
LB medium supplemented with corresponding antibiotics. 
After overnight incubation, use all four cell cultures ( see  Note 6 ) 
for bacmid puriﬁ cation, transfection, viral ampliﬁ cation, and 
multiprotein complex overexpression following published 
protocols [ 8 ].  
4  Notes 
  1.   The BstEII enzyme has the asymmetric restriction site 
G^GTNAC_C, the RsrII restriction enzyme has the asymmet-
ric restriction site CG^GWC_CG. In both cases the central 
base can have different contexts. When constructing the ORF 
encoding for the polyprotein, the sites have to be chosen such 
as to be compatible with the transfer plasmids.  
  2.   Donors and their derivatives can only be propagated in cells 
that express the  pir gene (such as BW23473, BW23474, or 
PIR1 and PIR2, Invitrogen) due to the conditional origin 
present on these plasmids [ 13 ]. In contrast, Acceptors and 
their derivatives contain regular ColE1 origin of replication 
and can be propagated in regular  E .  coli strains (TOP10, 
HB101, or comparable) [ 3 ,  12 ]. 
  3.   The generation of DH10MultiBac Cre cells by expressing Cre 
recombinase is detailed in ref.  9 . 
  4.  Plasmids pPBac and pKL-PBac rely on Tn7 transposition and 
a baculovirus genome in form of a bacterial artiﬁ cial chromo-
some (bacmid) for composite baculovirus generation (i.e., 
Bac-to- Bac system from Invitrogen, MultiBac). Plasmid 
3.5  Integrating 
Polyprotein Expression 
Cassettes into 
MultiBac Baculoviral 
Genome via In Vivo 
Cre-LoxP Reaction
Polyprotein-Based Multiprotein Complex Production

140
pOmni-PBac, in contrast, is a universal transfer plasmid that 
can access baculoviruses by both Tn7 transposition and 
homologous recombination [ 7 ]. 
  5.   Besides polyprotein expression constructs, the Tn7 attachment 
site (mini-attTn7) and the LoxP site can also be used for integrat-
ing single protein and multigene expression constructs (Fig.  2b ). 
  6.   It is recommended to check at least four blue colonies since 
the integration efﬁ ciency of in vivo Cre-LoxP reaction is gen-
erally lower than Tn7 transposition.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We thank all the members of the Berger laboratory for helpful dis-
cussions. YN was a fellow of the Marie-Curie training network 
Chromatin Plasticity and the Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation 
(BIF, Germany). IBE is a Hoffmann-La Roche postdoctoral fel-
low. ST was supported by a European Commission (EC) Marie 
Curie IEF postdoctoral fellowship. IB acknowledges support from 
the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), the Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientiﬁ que (CNRS), the EMBL and the European 
Commission (EC) Framework Programme (FP7) projects 
INSTRUCT, PCUBE, BioStruct-X, and ComplexINC. 
 Competing Financial Interest Statement 
 The authors declare competing ﬁ nancial interests. IB is the author 
on patents and patent applications containing parts of the methods 
and reagents here described.  
 References 
  1.  Nie Y, Viola C, Bieniossek C et al (2009) 
Getting a grip on complexes. Curr Genomics 
10:558–572  
  2.  Berger I, Fitzgerald DJ, Richmond TJ (2004) 
Baculovirus expression system for heterolo-
gous multiprotein complexes. Nat Biotechnol 
22:1583–1587  
  3.  Bieniossek C, Imasaki T, Takagi Y et al (2012) 
MultiBac: expanding the research toolbox for 
multiprotein complexes. Trends Biochem Sci 
37:49–57 
  4.  Bieniossek C, Papai G, Schafﬁ tzel C et al 
(2013) The architecture of human general 
transcription factor TFIID core complex. 
Nature 493:699–702  
  5.  Vijayachandran LS, Viola C, Garzoni F et al 
(2011) 
Robots, 
pipelines, 
polyproteins: 
enabling multiprotein expression in prokary-
otic and eukaryotic cells. J Struct Biol 
175:198–208  
  6.  Gorbalenya AE, Enjuanes L, Ziebuhr J et al 
(2006) Nidovirales: evolving the largest RNA 
virus genome. Virus Res 117:17–37  
  7.   Vijayachandran LS, Thimiri Govinda Raj DB, 
Edelweiss E et al (2013) Gene gymnastics: 
synthetic biology for baculovirus expression 
vector system engineering. Bioengineered 4: 
279–287  
  8.  Bieniossek C, Richmond TJ, Berger I (2008) 
MultiBac: multigene baculovirus-based eukary-
Yan Nie et al.

141
otic protein complex production. In: Coligan 
JE, Dunn BM, Speicher DW, Wingﬁ eld PT 
(eds) Current protocols in protein science. 
Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, USA, Unit 5.20  
  9.  Fitzgerald DJ, Berger P, Schafﬁ tzel C et al 
(2006) Protein complex expression by using 
multigene  baculoviral vectors. Nat Methods 
3:1021–1032 
  10.  Bieniossek C, Nie Y, Frey D et al (2009) 
Automated unrestricted multigene recom-
bineering for multiprotein complex produc-
tion. Nat Methods 6:447–450  
  11.   Li MZ, Elledge SJ (2007) Harnessing homolo-
gous recombination in vitro to generate recombi-
nant DNA via SLIC. Nat Methods 4:251–256  
  12.  Trowitzsch S, Bieniossek C, Nie Y et al (2010) 
New baculovirus expression tools for recombi-
nant protein complex production. J Struct Biol 
172:45–54  
  13.  Metcalf WW, Jiang W, Wanner BL (1994) Use 
of the rep technique for allele replacement to 
construct new Escherichia coli hosts for main-
tenance of R6Kλ origin plasmids at different 
copy numbers. Gene 138:1–7  
Polyprotein-Based Multiprotein Complex Production

143
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_9, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 9  
 Expression Screening in Mammalian Suspension Cells 
 Susan  D.  Chapple and  Michael  R.  Dyson 
 Abstract 
 Proteins naturally expressed in eukaryotic organisms often require host chaperones, binding partners, and 
posttranslational modiﬁ cations for correct folding. Ideally the heterologous expression system chosen 
should be as similar to the natural host as possible. For example, mammalian proteins should be expressed 
in mammalian expression systems. However this does not guarantee a protein will be expressed in a sufﬁ -
cient high yield for structural or biochemical studies or antibody generation. Often a screening process is 
undertaken in which many variants including truncations, point mutations, investigation of orthologues, 
fusion to peptide or protein tags at the N- or C-terminus, the co-expression of binding partners, and even 
culture conditions are varied to identify the optimal expression conditions. This requires multi-parallel 
expression screening in mammalian cells similar to that already described for  E .  coli expression. Here we 
describe in detail a multi-parallel method to express proteins in mammalian suspension cells by transient 
transfection in 24-well blocks.  
 Key words   Expression screening  ,  HEK293 cells  ,   CHO cells  ,   Transient transfection  ,   Mammalian cell 
culture ,   Interaction assays  ,   Antibodies  
1  Introduction 
 Expression of human and mammalian proteins in  E .  coli often 
results in a poor soluble expression yield [ 1 ]. Expression in eukary-
otic systems such as yeast or insect cells can aid expression. However 
the most authentic chaperones, binding partners, and posttransla-
tional modiﬁ cations for mammalian proteins will be found in mam-
malian expression systems. There are several reasons why one may 
wish to perform a multi-parallel expression experiment. Firstly it is 
common to express single or tandem domains of multi-domain 
containing proteins to both improve expression and to study their 
function. Unfortunately domain boundaries are not accurately pre-
dicted within the current protein databases [ 2 ] and so often several 
truncations are performed at the DNA level either by rational or 
combinatorial [ 3 ] design followed by expression screening. 
Secondly individual expression domains can be stabilized and their 

144
yield improved by fusion at the N- or C-terminus with peptide or 
protein tags [ 4 ]. Each protein target is different and so it is likely 
that several fusion partners would need to be investigated. Thirdly, 
it is well known that protein orthologues and mutations can dis-
play different solubility and crystallization properties and so one 
may wish to investigate a panel of point mutations and ortho-
logues. Lastly some proteins are only stable in the presence of their 
natural binding partners and so one may wish to investigate co- 
expression with candidate binding partners [ 5 ]. The variables 
described here soon multiply and a thorough investigation requires 
the use of a plate based mammalian expression screen. 
 The optimization of expression parameters is not the only rea-
son an investigator may wish to perform a multi-parallel expression 
experiment. They may also, for example, need to express a panel of 
receptor ectodomains for interaction studies [ 6 ] or functional 
screening [ 7 ]. Also panels of recombinant antibodies can be 
expressed for screening in proteomic applications [ 8 ,  9 ] or to aid 
therapeutic antibody lead isolation and optimization projects [ 10 ]. 
 Screening expression in suspension adapted HEK293 or CHO 
cells allows the convenience of fast scale-up of any hits discovered 
in a small-scale expression screen [ 11 ,  12 ]. Here we describe a 
method for transfection of HEK293F cells in 24-well blocks and a 
dot-blot screen to identify secreted expression screen hits. The dot 
blot screen could be replaced by a standard western blot procedure 
or ELISA. Also the methods are transferable to suspension Chinese 
Hamster Ovary (CHO) suspension cells.  
2  Materials 
 All chemicals were from Sigma unless stated otherwise. 
  1.   For maintenance of cells in Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks a humidiﬁ ed 
CO 2 shake incubator is required with a 25 mm orbital throw 
such as the Infors Multitron.  
  2.   Vented sterile Erlenmeyer ﬂ asks (Corning).  
  3.   HEK293F cells and Freestyle media (Life Technologies).  
  4.   A hemocytometer for cell counting.  
  1.   For maintenance of cells in 24-well blocks a humidiﬁ ed CO 2 
plate shaker incubator is required with a 3 mm orbital throw 
such as the Infors Multitron plate shaker incubator.  
  2.  Sterile 24-well blocks were from Qiagen (Fig.  1 ).
  3.   Linear 25 kDa polyethylenimine (PEI) was from Polysciences 
Inc. This was prepared at a concentration of 1 mg/ml in 
MilliQ water. Solubilization was achieved by ﬁ rst adding 
2.1  HEK293F Cell 
Maintenance
2.2  HEK293F Cell 
24-Well Block 
Transfection
Susan D. Chapple and Michael R. Dyson

145
concentrated HCl to a stirred PEI solution until the pH was 
<2.0 and stirring continued for 2–3 h. The pH was then adjusted 
to 7.0 using concentrated NaOH. The PEI solution was ﬁ nally 
ﬁ lter- sterilized by passage through a 0.22 μm membrane and 
1 ml aliquots stored at −20 °C. Each batch of PEI should be 
tested for transfection efﬁ ciency using a GFP reporter plasmid 
[ 11 ] and different DNA to PEI ratios (e.g., 1:1 and 1:2 [ 12 ]).  
  1.   Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).  
  2.   8 M urea.  
  3.   Blocking solution (e.g., 3 % milk/PBS/TWEEN).  
  4.   Nitrocellulose from Schleicher and Schuell.  
  5.   Whatman 3MM ﬁ lter paper.  
  6.   Dot Blot apparatus from Schleicher and Schuell (Manifold I 
system dot blot apparatus).  
3  Methods 
  1.   When the cell density reaches 1–4 × 10 6 cells/ml passage the 
cells ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.   Centrifuge cells for 4 min at 1,500 ×  g  (Sorvall Legend centri-
fuge) at room temperature in a 50 ml Falcon tube.  
  3.   Resuspend the cells in fresh medium (i.e., 1/4 the original 
culture volume) and pipette to break up any cell clumps.  
  4.  Count viable cells by trypan blue exclusion using a 1:5 dilu-
tion (e.g., 200 µl cells: 100 μl trypan blue:700 μl medium).  
2.3  Expression 
Screening by Dot Blot
3.1  HEK293F Cell 
Maintenance
 Fig. 1  24-well block for HEK293F cell culturing and transfection 
 
Multiplexed Transient Transfection of HEK293 Cells

146
  5.  Seed the required culture volume with 2.5 × 10 5 cells/ml 
using Freestyle medium ( see  Note 2 ). 
  6.   Label ﬂ ask with name, cell line name, passage number, date, 
seeding density.  
  7.  Incubate at 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 , 60 % humidity, 125 rpm.  
  8.  The cells will require splitting again 3–4 days later.  
  1.  Split 200 ml of HEK293F cells at 2.5 × 10 5 cells/ml in a 1 L sterile 
vented erlenmeyer ﬂ ask for each 24-well block (i.e., for 96-well 
plate 4 × 200 ml ﬂ asks are required), 48 h before the transfection.  
  2.  On the day of transfection, add 400 µl of serum-free media 
(SFM), warmed to room-temperature ( see  Note 3 ) to the 
wells of the 24-well block followed by 4 µg of plasmid DNA 
( see  Note 4 ).  
  3.  Add 5 µl PEI to the walls of each well with a repeater pipettor 
or a multichannel pipette with a Varispan to allow pipetting 
into the 6-well row of the 24-well block. The PEI is placed 
approximately 0.5–1 cm from the meniscus of the SFM.  
  4.  Vortex the 24-well block for 10 s on plate vortexer. Incubate 
for 10 min at room temp ( see  Note 5 ). 
  5.   Add Pluronic F68 reagent into each 1 L vented Erlenmeyer 
ﬂ ask, now containing 1 × 10 6 cells/ml ( see  Note 6 ) to a ﬁ nal 
concentration of 0.1 % ( see  Note 7 ).  
  6.  HEK293F cells are added (4 ml) to each well of the 24-well 
block containing the DNA–PEI complex. Cover with an air- 
pore plate sealer.  
  7.  Incubate the 24-well block at 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 , 75 % humidity, 
400 rpm in a plate shake incubator with a 3 mm orbital throw. 
Check after 1 h that the cells are still in complete suspension.  
  8.  Harvest after 5 days transfection ( see  Note 8 ), by centrifuga-
tion at 2,500 ×  g  for 5 min, and analyze the supernatant 
(secreted proteins) or cell lysate (intracellular proteins) by 
western blot or by dot blot.  
  1.  8 M urea was added to cleared culture supernatants (or puriﬁ ed 
proteins) to give a ﬁ nal concentration of 5 M urea (i.e., 125 µl 
8 M urea added to 75 µl culture supernatant ( see  Note 9 )).  
  2.  Incubate the culture supernatant–urea mix for 1 h at room 
temperature.  
  3.   Set up dot blot apparatus during this time: Pre-soak Whatman 
3MM ﬁ lter paper (2–3 sheets) and nitrocellulose membrane in PBS.  
  4.  Arrange Minifold I apparatus according to the Schleicher–
Schuell protocol. In summary: place the middle unit (96 wells 
with small holes) on top of base collection unit according to 
the line up pins.  
3.2  HEK293F Cell 
24-Well Block 
Transfection
3.3  Expression 
Screening by Dot Blot
Susan D. Chapple and Michael R. Dyson

147
  5.   Place 2–3 sheets of PBS-soaked ﬁ lter paper onto the unit, fol-
lowed by the membrane.  
  6.  Place the top unit (96-well plate with dispensing holes) in place 
over the ﬁ lter paper and membrane using the line up pins.  
  7.  Secure the whole dot blot apparatus in place using the four clips 
on the side (N.B make sure that they are ﬁ xed in place using clip 
1 followed by clip 4 then clip 2 followed by clip 3 and NOT 
clips 1 + 2 followed by clips 3 + 4 as illustrated in Fig.  2 ).
  8.   When ready to load the samples: connect dot blot unit to vac-
uum source and turn on for a few seconds to clear the excess 
PBS from the wells.  
  9.   Switch vacuum off then load all samples to be analyzed (can 
use multichannel pipette).  
 10.    Switch on vacuum and allow samples to move onto the mem-
brane (this should take approx 10–20 s). If there are small air 
bubbles trapping sample in a well, gently tap the apparatus on 
the bench to move the air bubbles out the way and allow the 
sample to move onto the membrane.  
 11.    Once ﬁ nished, remove membrane and place in blocking 
solution.  
 12.   Probe with antibody as detailed in standard western blot 
protocols.  
 13.   Finally: rinse dot blot apparatus in water to prevent anything 
clogging up the apparatus and allow to air dry on bench.  
4  Notes 
  1.   Work at all times with good aseptic technique within a function-
ing tissue culture hood. Pre-warm the culture media in hood for 
approx 1 h prior to use. Always clean (using ethanol spray) the 
inside of hood and any equipment to be used prior to use in the 
hood. Infection of mammalian cell cultures with bacteria or yeast 
results in poor expression yield and can be major cause for delay.  
2
1
4
3
 Fig. 2  Dot blot apparatus depicting clip numbering 
 
Multiplexed Transient Transfection of HEK293 Cells

148
 2.   HEK293F cells can be split as low as 1 × 10 5 cells/ml. It is 
important not to allow the cells to over-grow (≥3 × 10 6 cells/ml) 
as dead cells can accumulate resulting in a less healthy cell popu-
lation. Maintaining cells in a good state is essential for high 
transfection efﬁ ciency and thus expression yield.  
  3.   The serum-free media is the media the cells are normally propa-
gated with, minus the addition of serum. For example for HEK293F 
cells, this would be Freestyle medium (Life Technologies).  
 4.   The plasmid DNA to be used for transfection must be of sufﬁ -
cient purity to allow for an efﬁ cient transfection. The DNA 
should be prepared according to the NAPPA protocol [ 13 ], a 
standard midi- or maxi-prep method involving an isopropanol 
precipitation, or a commercially available transfection quality 
plasmid DNA kit from suppliers such as Qiagen or Macherey- 
Nagel. The OD 260nm :OD 280nm  ratio should be between 1.8 and 
1.9. This ensures low protein and endotoxin contamination.  
 5.   10 minutes is the minimum time to allow for formation of the 
DNA–PEI complex. Up to 30 min still allows for efﬁ cient trans-
fection, but from 30 min to 1 h transfection efﬁ ciency gradually 
decreases due to the formation of higher order DNA–PEI 
aggregates. 
 6.   The cells should be as close to mid-logarithmic phase as possi-
ble (for HEK293 cells between 0.8 × 10 6 and 1.2 × 10 6 cells/ml) 
with a cell viability of ≥95 %.  
 7.   The anti-foaming agent Pluronic is required to maintain the 
viability of the HEK293 suspension cells during growth in 
24-well blocks.  
 8.   The time required before harvesting depends on the protein 
being expressed. Intracellular and nuclear located proteins may 
require only 2–3 days for optimal expression, whereas secreted 
protein such as receptor ectodomains or antibodies typically 
require 4–5 days. The time required should be determined 
empirically for the target class of proteins being investigated.  
 9.   It was found that the  addition of urea enhanced the binding of 
glycoproteins to the nitrocellulose membrane [ 11 ].  
 References 
  1.  Dyson MR, Shadbolt SP, Vincent K et al (2004) 
Production of soluble mammalian proteins in 
Escherichia coli: identiﬁ cation of protein fea-
tures that correlate with successful expression. 
BMC Biotechnol 4:32  
  2.  Dyson MR (2010) Selection of soluble protein 
expression constructs: the experimental deter-
mination of protein domain boundaries. 
Biochem Soc Trans 38:908–913  
  3.  Dyson MR, Perera RL, Shadbolt SP et al 
(2008) Identiﬁ cation of soluble protein frag-
ments by gene fragmentation and genetic 
selection. Nucleic Acids Res 36:e51  
  4.  Brown MH, Barclay AN (1994) Expression of 
immunoglobulin 
and 
scavenger 
receptor 
superfamily domains as chimeric proteins with 
domains 3 and 4 of CD4 for ligand analysis. 
Protein Eng 7:515–521  
Susan D. Chapple and Michael R. Dyson

149
  5.  Trowitzsch S, Bieniossek C, Nie Y et al (2010) 
New baculovirus expression tools for recombi-
nant protein complex production. J Struct Biol 
172:45–54 
  6.  Bushell KM, Söllner C, Schuster-Boeckler B 
et al (2008) Large-scale screening for novel 
low-afﬁ nity extracellular protein interactions. 
Genome Res 18:622–630  
  7.  Gonzalez R, Jennings LL, Knuth M et al 
(2010) Screening the mammalian extracellu-
lar proteome for regulators of embryonic 
human stem cell pluripotency. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 107:3552–3557  
  8.  Colwill K, Graslund S (2011) A roadmap to 
generate renewable protein binders to the 
human proteome. Nat Methods 8:551–558  
  9.  Dyson MR, Zheng Y, Zhang C et al (2011) 
Mapping protein interactions by combining 
antibody afﬁ nity maturation and mass spec-
trometry. Anal Biochem 417:25–35  
  10.  Bradbury ARM, Sidhu S, Dubel S et al (2011) 
Beyond natural antibodies: the power of in 
vitro display technologies. Nat Biotechnol 
29:245–254  
  11.  Chapple S, Crofts A, Shadbolt SP et al (2006) 
Multiplexed expression and screening for 
recombinant protein production in mamma-
lian cells. BMC Biotechnol 6:49  
  12.  Tom R, Bisson L, Durocher Y (2008) 
Transfection of HEK293-EBNA1 cells in suspen-
sion with linear PEI for production of recombi-
nant proteins. CSH Protoc 2008:pdb.prot4977  
  13.  Link AJ, LaBaer J (2008) Construction of 
Nucleic Acid Programmable Protein Arrays 
(NAPPA) 3: isolating DNA plasmids in a 96-well 
plate format. CSH Protoc  2008:pdb.prot5058  
Multiplexed Transient Transfection of HEK293 Cells

151
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_10, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 10  
 Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes 
for Structural Biology 
 Takaho  Terada ,  Takeshi  Murata ,  Mikako  Shirouzu , 
and  Shigeyuki  Yokoyama 
 Abstract 
 Cell-free protein synthesis is advantageous for the expression of protein complexes, since it is suitable for 
the co-expression of two or more components of the target protein complexes. The quantity and the qual-
ity of cell-free expressed complexes are generally better than those of protein complexes expressed in 
conventional cell-based systems, because various parameters, such as the stoichiometry of the component 
proteins, can be more precisely controlled. In this chapter, we describe techniques for the expression of 
protein complexes by an  Escherichia coli cell-free protein synthesis system, which has been successfully 
utilized in crystallographic structural studies. 
 Key words   Protein complex  ,   Cell-free protein synthesis  ,   Escherichia coli ,  X-ray crystallography  ,   Dialysis  
1  Introduction 
 Cell-free protein synthesis is a convenient method for protein 
expression. Lysates prepared from the cells of various organisms, 
such as  Escherichia coli [ 1 ], wheat germ [ 2 ], insect [ 3 ], and human 
[ 4 ], have been developed and commercialized. Usually, coupled 
transcription–translation of the DNA template encoding the target 
protein is performed in the lysate. Plasmids and PCR-ampliﬁ ed 
DNA fragments can be used as the templates for transcription, e.g., 
by T7 phage RNA polymerase. The transcribed messenger RNAs 
are translated into proteins by ribosomes, translation factors, trans-
fer RNAs (tRNAs), and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. If the mRNA 
contains many minor codons, then the lysate is supplemented with 
minor tRNA species that translate the minor codons, for better pro-
tein expression [ 5 ]. The lysate may also be supplemented with 
molecular chaperones, e.g., the bacterial DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE and 
GroEL/GroES systems, if required for proper protein folding. The 
substrates for coupled transcription–translation, such as amino acids 

152
and nucleoside triphosphates, are continually provided to the reac-
tion mixture, for example, by dialysis against a feeding solution, in 
order to achieve milligram-level productivity. 
 Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming one of the standard pro-
tein expression methods for structural biology and genomics, 
because it provides a number of advantages over the conventional 
recombinant expression of proteins in host cells. First, cell-free pro-
tein synthesis is advantageous for high-throughput expression 
screening and/or large-scale production of various target proteins in 
structural genomics [ 6 ,  7 ]. Cell-free synthesis can produce sufﬁ cient 
amounts (milligram quantities) of proteins with either selenomethi-
onine substitutions for X-ray crystallography [ 8 ] or stable-isotope 
labels for NMR spectroscopy [ 9 ]. Our group has determined ~250 
crystal structures and ~1,300 NMR structures, by using cell-free 
produced protein samples [ 10 ]. Cell-free protein synthesis is partic-
ularly useful for the production of difﬁ cult target proteins, such as 
physiologically toxic proteins and integral membrane proteins. 
Membrane proteins can be synthesized in the presence of appropri-
ate detergents and in lipid bilayer environments [ 11 – 13 ]. 
 Furthermore, cell-free protein synthesis is suitable for the 
expression of protein complexes consisting of two or more differ-
ent component proteins (or subunits). Such heteromultimers can 
be synthesized by the co-expression of the DNA templates, each 
encoding a component of the complex. Based on the results of 
preliminary small-scale coupled transcription–translation trials, the 
amounts of the DNA templates in the large-scale expression may 
be adjusted, to achieve the appropriate expression levels of the 
component proteins corresponding to their correct stoichiometry 
in the heteromultimer. By contrast, it is difﬁ cult to precisely adjust 
the expression levels of the component proteins in cell-based 
expression systems. In cell-free synthesis, the component proteins 
can be expressed in a particular order by sequentially adding 
the templates to the reaction mixture. Otherwise, some of 
the component proteins can be expressed in the presence of the 
other component proteins that are prepared beforehand and added 
to the cell-free reaction solution. Moreover, appropriate molecular 
chaperones can be added to the reaction mixture, to facilitate the 
proper integration of the component proteins into the complex. In 
addition, some protein complexes can be reconstituted by co-
refolding of the cell-free expressed component proteins. 
 By using the cell-free protein expression method, we have 
determined the crystal structures of heterodimeric complexes, 
including those between Slac2-a/melanophilin and Rab27B 
GTPase [ 14 ], the armadillo repeat domain of adenomatous poly-
posis coli (APC) and the tyrosine-rich domain of Sam68 [ 15 ], the 
Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK2 and its partner 
ELMO1 [ 16 ], the extracellular domains of the calcitonin receptor- 
like receptor (CRLR) and receptor activity-modifying protein 2 
Takaho Terada et al.

153
(RAMP2) [the adrenomedullin (AM) receptor] [ 17 ], and the 
extracellular domains of interleukin-5 (IL-5) and the IL-5 receptor 
α subunit (IL-5RA) [ 18 ]. 
 Recently, we reported the crystal structures of the  Enterococcus 
hirae V1-ATPase A 3 B 3 , DF, and A 3 B 3 DF complexes (Fig.  1 ), by 
using cell-free synthesized protein samples [ 19 ,  20 ]. The A 3 B 3 DF 
complex was then reconstituted from the A 3 B 3 and DF subcom-
plexes [ 21 ]. These component proteins could only be expressed in 
the soluble forms by co-expression, and they formed the stoichio-
metric complexes in the cell-free protein synthesis system. The 
same approach was applied to the expression of human V-ATPase 
subunits and subcomplexes [ 22 ] (Fig.  2 ). Notably, the qualities of 
the crystals of the cell-free expressed complexes were much better 
than those of the recombinant protein complexes expressed in vivo 
in  E .  coli host cells.
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures of  E .  hirae V-ATPase sub-complexes. ( a ) A schematic model of  E .  hirae V-ATPase. The 
enzyme is composed of nine subunits (Eh-A, -B, -d, -D, -E, -F, -G, -a, -c; previously designated as Ntp-A, -B, 
-C, -D, -E, -G, -F, -I, -K). Crystal structures of ( b ) Eh-A 3 B 3 [ 19 ,  21 ], ( c ) Eh-DF [ 20 ] and ( d ) Eh-A 3 B 3 DF [ 19 ,  21 ]. 
The Eh-A 3 B 3 and Eh-DF complexes were expressed separately, using an  E .  coli cell-free expression system. 
The Eh-A 3 B 3 DF complexs were reconstituted from Eh-A 3 B 3 and Eh-DF [ 19 – 21 ] 
 
Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes

154
 In this chapter, we describe our protocols for the large-scale 
expression of protein complexes by coupled transcription–translation, 
using T7 RNA polymerase and the  E .  coli cell-free protein synthe-
sis system, which are particularly useful for crystallization and X-ray 
crystallographic analyses.  
2  Materials 
 Prepare all solutions using sterilized ultrapure water and analytical 
grade reagents. 
  1.   LMCPY mixture: 160 mM HEPES-KOH buffer (pH 7.5), 
4.13 mM  L -tyrosine, 534 mM potassium  L -glutamate, 5 mM 
DTT, 3.47 mM ATP, 2.40 mM GTP, 2.40 mM CTP, 2.40 mM 
UTP, 0.217 mM folic acid, 1.78 mM cAMP, 74 mM 
 ammonium acetate, and 214 mM creatine phosphate. Store 
below −20 °C ( see  Notes 1 and  2 ). 
2.1  Components for 
Cell-free Synthesis 
Solutions
 Fig. 2  Cell-free co-expression of the E2 and G1 subunits of human V-ATPase, to 
form the E2·G1 subcomplex. SDS-PAGE analyses of the individually expressed E2 
subunit ( E2  ) and G1 subunit ( G1 ), and the co-expressed subunits, E2 and G1 
( E2·G1 ).  Lane M  molecular weight markers,  lane S supernatant,  lane P pellet, 
 lane E  eluate from the afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation column. An  asterisk indicates the band 
of each expressed protein, corresponding to its molecular mass. The E2 subunit 
(26.6 kDa) was observed only in the pellet ( lane P  ). In contrast, the G1 subunit 
(14 kDa) appeared mostly in the supernatant ( lane S ) and only slightly in the 
pellet ( lane P ), and was eluted well from the column ( lane E  ). However, the cell-
free co- expressed E2 and G1 subunits were observed mostly in the supernatant 
( lane S  ), and co-eluted from the column ( lane E  ). Therefore, cell-free co-expression 
of the E2 and G1 subunits successfully resulted in the soluble expression of the 
E2·G1 subcomplex of human V-ATPase. This ﬁ gure was prepared by modiﬁ cation 
of Fig. 2 of Rahman et al. [ 22 ] 
 
Takaho Terada et al.

155
  2.   Amino acid mixture: 20 mM each of 19 amino acids, without 
 L -tyrosine, in water. Store at −20 °C ( see  Notes 2 and  3 ).  
  3.   Magnesium acetate solution: 1.6 M magnesium acetate in 
water. Store at −20 °C.  
  4.   S30 buffer: 10 mM Tris-acetate buffer (pH 8.2), 60 mM 
potassium acetate, 16 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM DTT. 
Store at −20 °C.  
  5.   Sodium azide solution: 5 % (w/v) in water. Store at −20 °C.  
  6.   Creatine kinase solution: Dissolve 500 mg lyophilized creatine 
kinase powder (Roche Applied Sciences, 127556) in 133.3 mL 
water. Store at −20 °C ( see  Note 4 ). 
  7.   tRNA solution: Dissolve 500 mg lyophilized tRNA powder 
( E .  coli MRE600-derived, Roche Applied Sciences, 109550) 
in 28.6 mL water. Store at −20 °C ( see  Note 4 ). 
  8.   E .  coli S30 extract: in the S30 buffer ( see  Note 5 ). Store at 
−80 °C or in liquid nitrogen ( see  Note 4 ). 
  9.   T7 RNA polymerase: 10 mg/mL in 20 mM Tris–HCl 
(pH 8.0) buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM 
EDTA, and 50 % glycerol ( see  Note 6 ). Store at −20 °C 
( see  Note 4 ).  
 10.   Two or more plasmid DNA templates, each encoding a pro-
tein component of the target complex (or subcomplex).  
  1.   Constant temperature incubator shaker (Taitec BR-300LF).  
  2.   Dialysis tubing: Spectra/Por 7 (MWCO, 15,000; Sealing 
Width, 45 mm; Spectrum Laboratories).  
  3.   Dialysis tubing closures (Spectrum Laboratories).  
  4.   100-mL centrifuge tubes.  
  5.   50-mL centrifuge tubes.  
  6.   400-mL square-shaped polystyrene cases.  
  7.   35-mL conical Oak Ridge tubes (Nalgene).  
3  Methods 
 All of the component proteins of the target complex (or subcom-
plex) can be co-expressed in the  E .  coli cell-free protein synthesis 
system, by coupled transcription–translation of the plasmid DNA 
templates encoding the component proteins. The plasmids for 
 cell- free protein expression are designed and prepared as reported 
[ 6 ,  13 ]. Typically, the protein product consists of the N-terminal 
tag sequence (e.g., a modiﬁ ed HAT tag), the TEV cleavage site, 
the linker sequence GSSGSSG, and the target protein [ 6 ]. It should 
be noted that the N-terminal tag sequence is useful not only for 
2.2  Apparatus for 
Large-Scale Cell-Free 
Synthesis Reactions
3.1  Large-Scale 
Cell-Free Protein 
Synthesis Reaction
Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes

156
afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation but also for higher yield. One of the compo-
nents of the target complex (or subcomplex) should be tagged 
differently from the others, to facilitate the afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation of 
the complete complex. 
 The reaction solution contains 2 μg/mL template plasmid(s), 
66.7 μg/mL T7 RNA polymerase 
 30 % (v/v) S30 extract, 0.175 mg/mL tRNA, 1.5 mM each of 
19 amino acids without  L -tyrosine, 37.3 % (v/v) LMCPY mixture, 
0.25 mg/mL creatine kinase, 10 mM magnesium acetate, and 
0.05 % (w/v) sodium azide ( see  Notes 1 and  3 ). The feeding solu-
tion contains 30 % (v/v) S30 buffer, 1.5 mM each of 19 amino 
acids without  L -tyrosine, 37.3 % (v/v) LMCPY mixture, and 
10 mM magnesium acetate ( see  Notes 1 and  3 ). 
 The typical protocol uses 9 mL of the reaction solution and 
90 mL of the feeding solution. The reaction scales can be smaller 
and larger for expression screening and large-scale puriﬁ cation, 
respectively. The volume of the feeding solution should be at least 
ten times larger than that of the reaction solution. Perform all pro-
cedures on ice, unless otherwise speciﬁ ed.
  1.  Set the following parameters for the incubator shaker: 25 °C 
( see  Note 7 ), 50 rpm, and 50-mm amplitude.  
  2.   Thaw each component for the cell-free synthesis solution on 
ice. After thawing, gently shake each reagent tube, to ensure 
that the solution is homogeneous. Place and keep all reagents 
on ice during handling.  
  3.  Prepare 90 mL of the feeding solution. First of all, gently shake 
the tube containing the LMCPY mixture, to make it homoge-
neous ( see  Note 2 ). Combine the LMCPY mixture (33.6 mL), 
the amino acid mixture (6.75 mL), the magnesium acetate 
solution (0.522 mL), the S30 buffer (27 mL), and the sodium 
azide solution (0.9 mL) ( see  Notes 1 and  3 ). Bring the volume 
of the mixture solution to 90 mL with water. Place the mixture 
in a 100-mL centrifuge tube, and mix it thoroughly by turning 
the tube upside down gently several times.  
  4.   Prepare 9 mL of the reaction solution. Gently shake the tube 
containing the LMCPY mixture to make it homogeneous ( see 
 Note 2 ). Combine the LMCPY mixture (3.36 mL), the amino 
acid mixture (0.675 mL), the magnesium acetate solution 
(0.052 mL), the sodium azide solution (0.9 mL), and the 
tRNA solution (0.09 mL) ( see  Notes 1 and  3 ). To this  solution, 
sequentially add the creatine kinase solution (0.6 mL), the T7 
RNA polymerase solution (0.06 mL), and the plasmid DNA 
templates ( see  Note 8 ). Bring the volume of the mixture to 
9 mL with water. Place the reaction solution in a 50-mL cen-
trifuge tube and mix it thoroughly by turning the tube upside 
down gently several times.  
Takaho Terada et al.

157
  5.  Place the feeding solution (90 mL from  step 3 ) in a 400-mL 
square-shaped polystyrene case.  
  6.  Seal one end of the dialysis tube (Spectra/Por 7, 
MWCO = 15,000) with a closure (Spectrum). Place the reaction 
solution (9 mL) in the tube, remove as much air from the tube 
as possible, and seal the open end of the tube with a closure.  
  7.  Submerge the dialysis tube in the feeding solution in the poly-
styrene case. Wrap the case with plastic wrap.  
  8.  Shake the case reciprocally with a incubator shaker (50-mm 
amplitude, 50 rpm) at 25 °C for 4 h ( see  Notes 7 and  9 ) 
  9.  Transfer the reaction solution from the dialysis tube into a 
35-mL conical Oak Ridge tube, and transfer 0.002- and 
0.008-mL aliquots into Eppendorf tubes for SDS-PAGE 
analysis. Centrifuge the 35-mL conical Oak Ridge tube  at 
20,130 × g for 20 min. Transfer the supernatant to a fresh 
50-mL centrifuge tube, and store it on ice.  
  10.  Centrifuge the 0.008-mL aliquot of the reaction mixture in the 
Eppendorf tube at 20,380 × g for 10 min. Transfer the superna-
tant to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Suspend the precipitate in an 
appropriate buffer, using the same volume as that of the super-
natant. Analyze 0.001 mL each of the total reaction mixture, 
the supernatant, and the suspended precipitate by SDS-PAGE.  
 11.   Purify the protein complex in the supernatant, if it is expressed 
as expected.  
4  Notes 
  1.  This protocol is for cellular protein complexes. For cell-free 
expression and assembly of extracellular protein complexes and 
extracellular regions of membrane protein complexes with disul-
ﬁ de bonds, the protocol must be modiﬁ ed to lower the DTT 
concentration, and/or to include the reduced and oxidized 
forms of  L -glutathione (GSH and GSSG, respectively) at an 
appropriate ratio and a disulﬁ de isomerase, such as  E .  coli DsbC.  
  2.  L -Tyrosine is included in the LMCPY mixture, but not in the 
“amino acid mixture”, as the solubility of  L -tyrosine is much 
lower than those of the other 19 amino acids. The tube contain-
ing the LMCPY mixture must be gently shaken just before use.  
  3.   The “amino acid mixture” contains  L -methionine. However, 
when  L -selenomethionine, instead of  L -methionine, is to 
be incorporated into the protein complex, an amino acid 
mixture lacking  L -methionine should be used. The  L -sele-
nomethionine should be added separately to the reaction 
solution and the feeding solution.   
Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes

158
  4.   Divide the solution into appropriate volumes, in order to 
avoid repeated freezing and thawing.  
  5.   The  E .  coli S30 extract is prepared from  E .  coli BL21(DE3) 
bearing the pMINOR plasmid [ 5 ] or BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-
RIL, as reported [ 1 ]. A cell-free protein synthesis kit utilizing 
the S30 extract prepared by our protocol, the Remarkable 
Yield Translation System Kit, is available from ProteinExpress, 
Chiba, Japan (  http://www.proteinexpress.co.jp/e/index.
html   ). If chaperones are required to facilitate complex (or sub-
complex) formation by the component proteins, then the S30 
extract may be prepared from  E .  coli BL21 expressing a set of 
 E .  coli chaperones (usually DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE and/or 
GroEL/GroES) in addition to the minor tRNAs (e.g., from 
pMINOR).  
  6.   T7 RNA polymerase is prepared as reported [ 23 ]. 
  7.   The optimal incubation temperature should be selected from 
20, 25, and 30 °C, by a preliminary small-scale expression 
experiment. If necessary, an incubation at 15 °C may be per-
formed for particularly unstable complexes.  
  8.   The concentrations of the plasmid DNA templates should be 
determined by a preliminary small-scale expression trial. There 
will be optimal concentrations of the templates to maximize 
the coupled transcription–translation reaction, while the ratio 
of the templates should be adjusted to achieve the correct stoi-
chiometry of the component proteins in the target complex 
(or subcomplex).  
  9.   An incubation longer than 4 h may be performed in the cases 
of poor expression, such as at low temperature (20 or 15 °C), 
when expressing one or more protein components with a large 
number of residues (>10,000), or with hard to express 
stretch(s) of amino acid residues.  
 Acknowledgements 
 We thank T. Mishima and T. Nakayama for their assistance in man-
uscript preparation. This work was supported by the RIKEN 
Structural Genomics/Proteomics Initiative (RSGI), the National 
Project on Protein Structural and Functional Analyses, and the 
Targeted Proteins Research Program (TPRP), of the Ministry of 
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.  
Takaho Terada et al.

159
 References 
  1.  Kigawa T, Yabuki T, Matsuda N et al (2004) 
Preparation of  Escherichia coli cell extract for 
highly productive cell-free protein expression. J 
Struct Funct Genomics 5:63–68  
  2.   Madin K, Sawasaki T, Ogasawara T et al (2000) A 
highly efﬁ cient and robust cell-free protein synthe-
sis system prepared from wheat embryos: plants 
apparently contain a suicide system directed at 
ribosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:559–564  
  3.  Wakiyama M, Kaitsu Y, Matsumoto T et al 
(2010) Coupled transcription and translation 
from polymerase chain reaction-ampliﬁ ed 
DNA in  Drosophila Schneider 2 cell-free sys-
tem. Anal Biochem 400:142–144  
  4.  Mikami S, Kobayashi T, Masutani M et al 
(2008) A human cell-derived  in vitro coupled 
transcription/translation system optimized for 
production of recombinant proteins. Protein 
Expr Purif 62:190–198  
  5.  Chumpolkulwong N, Sakamoto K, Hayashi A 
et al (2006) Translation of ‘rare’ codons in a cell-
free protein synthesis system from  Escherichia 
coli . J Struct Funct Genomics 7:31–36  
  6.  Yabuki T, Motoda Y, Hanada K et al (2007) A 
robust two-step PCR method of template 
DNA production for high-throughput cell-free 
protein synthesis. J Struct Funct Genomics 
8:173–191 
  7.  Aoki M, Matsuda T, Tomo Y et al (2009) 
Automated system for high-throughput pro-
tein production using the dialysis cell-free 
method. Protein Expr Purif 68:128–136  
  8.  Kigawa T, Yamaguchi-Nunokawa E, Kodama 
K et al (2002) Selenomethionine incorporation 
into a protein by cell-free synthesis. J Struct 
Funct Genomics 2:29–35  
  9.  Kigawa T, Yabuki T, Yoshida Y et al (1999) 
Cell-free production and stable-isotope label-
ing of milligram quantities of proteins. FEBS 
Lett 442:15–19 
  10.  Yokoyama S, Terwilliger TC, Kuramitsu S et al 
(2007) RIKEN aids international structural 
genomics efforts. Nature 445:21  
  11.  Shimono K, Goto M, Kikukawa T et al (2009) 
Production of functional bacteriorhodopsin by 
an Escherichia coli cell-free protein synthesis 
system supplemented with steroid detergent 
and lipid. Protein Sci 18:2160–2171  
  12.  Wada T, Shimono K, Kikukawa T et al (2011) 
Crystal structure of the eukaryotic light-driven 
proton-pumping rhodopsin, Acetabularia rho-
dopsin II, from marine alga. J Mol Biol 
411:986–998  
  13.  Kimura-Soyema T, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S 
(2013) Cell-free membrane protein expres-
sion. In: Methods in molecular biology: cell- 
free protein expression and engineering. 
Submitted  
  14.  Kukimoto-Niino M, Sakamoto A, Kanno E 
et al (2008) Structural basis for the exclusive 
speciﬁ city of Slac2-a/melanophilin for the 
Rab27 GTPases. Structure 16:1478–1490  
  15.  Morishita EC, Murayama K, Kato-Murayama 
M et al (2011) Crystal structures of the arma-
dillo repeat domain of adenomatous polyposis 
coli and its complex with the tyrosine-rich 
domain of Sam68. Structure 19:1496–1508  
  16.  Hanawa-Suetsugu K, Kukimoto-Niino M, 
Mishima-Tsumagari C et al (2012) Structural 
basis for mutual relief of the Rac guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor DOCK2 and its 
partner ELMO1 from their autoinhibited 
forms. 
Proc 
Natl 
Acad 
Sci 
USA 
109:3305–3310  
  17.  Kusano S, Kukimoto-Niino M, Hino N et al 
(2012) Structural basis for extracellular inter-
actions between calcitonin receptor-like recep-
tor and receptor activity-modifying protein 2 
for adrenomedullin-speciﬁ c binding. Protein 
Sci 21:199–210  
  18.  Kusano S, Kukimoto-Niino M, Hino N et al 
(2012) Structural basis of interleukin-5 dimer 
recognition by its α receptor. Protein Sci 
21:850–864  
  19.  Arai S, Saijo S, Suzuki K et al (2013) Rotation 
mechanism of Enterococcus hirae V1-ATPase 
based on asymmetric crystal structures. Nature 
493:703–707  
  20.  Saijo S, Arai S, Hossain KM et al (2011) Crystal 
structure of the central axis DF complex of the 
prokaryotic V-ATPase. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 108:19955–19960  
  21.  Arai S, Yamato I, Shiokawa A et al (2009) 
Reconstitution in vitro of the catalytic portion 
(NtpA 3 -B 3 -D-G complex) of  Enterococcus hirae 
V-type Na+-ATPase. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun 390:698–702  
  22.  Rahman S, Ishizuka-Katsura Y, Arai S et al 
(2011) Expression, puriﬁ cation and character-
ization of isoforms of peripheral stalk subunits 
of human V-ATPase. Protein Expr Purif 
78:181–188  
  23.  Davanloo P, Rosenberg AH, Dunn JJ et al 
(1984) Cloning and expression of the gene for 
bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 81:2035–2039  
Cell-Free Expression of Protein Complexes

161
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_11, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 11  
 Cell-Free Protein Synthesis for Functional 
and Structural Studies 
 Shin-ichi  Makino ,  Emily  T.  Beebe ,  John  L.  Markley , and  Brian  G.  Fox 
 Abstract 
 Recent advances in cell-free protein expression systems have made them reliable and practical for functional 
and structural studies of a wide variety of proteins. In particular, wheat germ cell-free translation can con-
sistently produce target proteins in microgram quantities from relatively inexpensive, small-scale reactions. 
Here we describe our small-scale protein expression method for rapidly producing proteins for functional 
assay and techniques for determining if the target is suitable for scale-up to amounts potentially needed for 
structure determination. The cell-free system is versatile and can be easily customized with the inclusion of 
additives. We describe simple modiﬁ cations used for producing membrane proteins.  
 Key words   Cell-free translation  ,   Wheat germ extract  ,   Functional assay  ,   Membrane protein  ,   Liposomes  , 
 Transcription  
1  Introduction 
 Rapid and efﬁ cient production of high-quality protein for func-
tional and structural studies is not trivial. Although methods for 
recombinant protein production in cost-effective systems such as 
bacterial or yeast cells have evolved signiﬁ cantly over the decades 
[ 1 ,  2 ], they are certainly not suitable for all targets. Similarly, pro-
tein production from cell-free systems has improved over the same 
time period, so that high yields of many types of proteins including 
toxic and membrane proteins are now possible without the need for 
the extensive growth optimizations often required by cell-based 
approaches. The cell-free approach is particularly well-suited for the 
efﬁ cient incorporation of labeled amino acids. In addition, stabiliz-
ing compounds or posttranslational reagents can be added to the 
cell-free protein synthesis reaction mixture. Cell-free expression 
should be considered as a viable salvage pathway for targets difﬁ cult 
to produce from other systems. Among commercially available cell-
free protein expression systems, a wheat germ cell- free extract made 

162
from carefully selected embryos has outstanding quality for the 
durability of the translation reaction [ 3 – 5 ]. The wheat germ system 
has proven capable of expressing the majority of proteins tested [ 6 ] 
and is less prone to the proteolytic degradation often seen in other 
cell-free systems [ 7 ]. Additionally, because wheat germ extract is of 
eukaryotic derivation, it is expected to be more suitable than pro-
karyotic systems for the production of eukaryotic proteins. 
 The techniques we describe here were developed to identify 
suitable targets for wheat germ cell-free protein production for 
structure determination by both NMR spectroscopy and X-ray 
crystallography. Our screening consists of expression, solubility, 
and puriﬁ cation testing, requiring only one small-scale reaction. 
Small-scale puriﬁ cation is a good way to assess the probability of 
success for downstream applications. Importantly, the translation 
reaction is reproducible and scalable, which allows efﬁ cient plan-
ning for the next production. According to our experience, greater 
than 74 % of the proteins we have tested can be synthesized in μg 
quantities from a single small-scale reaction, a yield that is often 
sufﬁ cient for functional assays. In many cases, the translation reac-
tions may be used directly for some functional assays by compari-
son with negative controls in lieu of puriﬁ cation [ 8 ]. 
 In this chapter, we describe wheat germ protein synthesis pro-
tocols using an expression plasmid containing a gene of interest 
cloned into the cell-free expression vector, pEU [ 9 ]. Unlike many 
commercial cell-free expression systems that include machineries 
for both RNA and protein synthesis, the wheat-germ system 
described here uses uncoupled transcription/translation to increase 
yield. Because the optimal magnesium requirement for SP6 RNA 
polymerase is different from that for wheat germ translation, overall 
yields can be increased by separating the two reactions [ 4 ]. Although 
this may at ﬁ rst glance seem cumbersome, it has the advantage of 
allowing controlled addition of RNA to the translation. We describe 
a gel electrophoresis method for checking the quality of the mRNA. 
Because the cell-free system has no membrane- or cell wall-delin-
eated compartments, there are no barriers for introducing compo-
nents that can improve protein folding or solubilization. Along 
with standard methods, we suggest custom reaction modiﬁ cations 
for different applications including membrane proteins.  
2  Materials 
 All reagents must be RNase-free. Ultrapure water (Milli-Q water, 
Millipore, Billerica, MA) is used for preparation of reagents ( see 
 Note 1 ). All glassware, stainless steel spatulas, and Teﬂ on-coated 
magnetic stir bars must be baked at 180 °C for at least 3 h to ensure 
that they are RNase-free prior to use. Disposable plastic tips and tubes 
2.1  Reagents and 
Equipment for In Vitro 
Transcription and 
Translation
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

163
that are certiﬁ ed RNase-free may be used without further treatment. 
Unless exempted in the method, all buffers should be passed through 
a 0.2 μm membrane ﬁ lter to avoid microbial contamination. Reagents 
should be stored at −20 °C unless otherwise stated.
  1.   Plasmid clone containing a gene in a pEU-series cell-free 
expression vector [ 9 ] ( see  Note 2 ). 
  2.   Plasmid DNA prepared with a commercially available plasmid 
isolation kit ( see  Note 3 ). 
  3.   Proteinase K buffer (10×): 100 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 
50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), and 1 % (w/v) SDS.  
  4.   Proteinase K enzyme solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, 
MO). Store at 4 °C.  
  5.   QIAprep spin miniprep kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA), which 
includes plasmid puriﬁ cation column, Buffer PB, and Buffer 
PE. Store at ambient temperature.  
  6.   Transcription buffer (TB + Mg, 5×): 400 mM HEPES–KOH 
diluted from 1 M HEPES–KOH (pH 7.8), 100 mM magne-
sium acetate, 10 mM spermidine trihydrochloride, and 50 mM 
DTT ( see  Note 4 ). 
  7.   NTPs mixture: 25 mM each of ATP, GTP, CTP, and UTP, pH 
adjusted to 7 with 2 N KOH using a pH test strip. Store at 
−80 °C ( see  Note 4 ). 
  8.  SP6 RNA polymerase and RNase inhibitor (RNasin; Promega 
Corporation, Madison, WI). For long term storage, keep fro-
zen at −80 °C, but once thawed, store at −20 °C.  
  9.   TAE buffer (50×): 242 g Tris base, 57.1 mL acetic acid, 
100 mL of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0), and water adjusted to 1 L. 
Store at ambient temperature.  
 10.    1 % agarose gel in 1× TAE buffer for electrophoresis, RNase- 
free grade. Prepare on the day of use.  
  11.    Electrophoresis chamber and gel casting apparatus ( see  Note 5 ). 
 12.   RNA denaturing buffer (2×): 97 % (v/v) formamide (deion-
ized grade), 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), and 0.015 % (w/v) bro-
mophenol blue.  
  13.   Ethidium bromide solution, 10 mg/mL. Store at ambient 
temperature.  
 14.   UV transilluminator.  
 15.   Dialysis buffer (DB, 5×): 120 mM HEPES–KOH, 500 mM 
potassium acetate, 12.5 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM sper-
midine trihydrochloride, 20 mM DTT, 6 mM ATP, 1.25 mM 
GTP, 80 mM creatine phosphate, 0.025 % (w/v) sodium 
azide, and pH adjusted to 7.8 with 2 N KOH using a pH 
 electrode. Store at −80 °C.  
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

164
 16.   Amino acids (Advanced ChemTech, Louisville, KY).  
 17.   Mixture of 20 amino acids: each 6 mM in water, and pH 
adjusted to 7 with 2 N KOH and measured using a pH test 
strip. Do not ﬁ lter the preparation because some amino acids 
are not fully dissolved at this concentration ( see  Note 6 ). 
 18.   Creatine kinase (Roche Applied Sciences, Indianapolis IN). 
Dissolve in water to make 50 mg/mL and store at −80 °C. 
Dilute to 1 mg/mL on the day of use.  
  19.  Wheat germ cell-free extract (WEPRO2240H, CellFree 
Sciences, Co., Ltd, Matsuyama, Japan). The extract concentra-
tion is adjusted to 240 absorbance units per mL at 260 nm, 
and most of the free amino acids have been removed by the 
manufacturer. The sufﬁ x H denotes pretreatment with His-tag 
afﬁ nity resin to subtract wheat germ proteins that co-purify 
during immobilized metal afﬁ nity chromatography (IMAC) 
puriﬁ cation ( see  Note 7 ). Leftover extract should be ﬂ ash- 
frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C ( see  Note 4 ). 
 20.   Polypropylene U-bottom 96-well plates (Greiner Bio-One, 
Monroe NC).  
  21.  Dialysis cups with a molecular weight cut off value of 12,000 Da 
(Pin-Hwan Trading Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan) and buffer 
receptacles which ﬁ t the dialysis cups (CellFree Sciences).  
  1.  Microcentrifuge.  
  2.  Centrifuge with swinging bucket rotor adapted for microplates.  
  3.  4–20 % Criterion TGX Stain-free precast 26-well gels (Bio-
Rad, Hercules CA) and a stain-free imaging system (Bio-Rad), 
or any other SDS-PAGE gel and staining systems.  
  4.   3× SDS sample buffer: 150 mM Tris–HCl (pH 6.8), 37.5 mM 
EDTA (pH 8.0), 6 % (w/v) SDS, 0.01 % (w/v) bromophenol 
blue, 6 % (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, and 30 % (v/v) glycerol.  
  5.  Precision Plus Protein Unstained Standards (Bio-Rad) or any 
other protein marker for SDS-PAGE.  
  6.  Ni Sepharose high-performance chromatography resin (GE 
Healthcare, Piscataway NJ).  
  7.  IMAC binding/washing buffer: 50 mM sodium dihydrogen 
phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, 25 mM imidazole, and pH adjusted to 
8.0 with 2 N NaOH. Store at ambient temperature ( see  Note 8 ).  
  8.  IMAC elution buffer: 50 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate, 
300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, and pH adjusted to 8.0 
by HCl. Store at room temperature.  
  9.   96-Well ﬁ lter plate (MultiScreen HTS-HV, 0.45-µm pore, 
Millipore).  
2.2  Reagents 
and Equipment 
for Analysis 
and Puriﬁ cation
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

165
3  Methods 
 Plasmid DNA preparations occasionally contain RNase activity, 
which probably comes from RNase A used in most of the commer-
cially available plasmid puriﬁ cation kits. To ensure no carryover of 
contaminating RNase in the transcription reaction, Proteinase K 
treatment of the puriﬁ ed plasmid is recommended ( see  Note 9 ).
  1.   Small-scale Proteinase K reactions are typically performed in 
100 μL volumes. Determine the volume of DNA solution to 
be treated ( see  Notes 10 and  11 ). 
  2.  Prepare a Proteinase K master mix consisting of 10× Proteinase 
K buffer, Proteinase K, and Milli-Q water, so that ﬁ nal con-
centrations of the components in the reaction are 1× Proteinase 
K buffer and 50 μg/mL Proteinase K.  
  3.  Dispense the master mix and add the DNA solution ( see  Note 12 ). 
  4.  Incubate the reaction for 1–2 h at 37 °C.  
  5.  Add 5 volumes (500 μL) QIAGEN buffer PB to the reaction.  
  6.  Add all 600 μL to a QIAGEN spin column. Centrifuge for 
1 min at 14,000 ×  g . Discard ﬂ ow-through.  
  7.   Wash the column with 750 μL QIAGEN PE buffer, contain-
ing ethanol. Centrifuge for 1 min. Discard ﬂ ow-through.  
  8.   Centrifuge the column again for 1 min to remove residual 
ethanol. Transfer the column to a new microcentrifuge tube 
and allow any remaining ethanol to evaporate for 10 min at 
room temperature ( see  Note 13 ). 
  9.  Add 20 μL of Milli-Q water to the center of the column ﬁ lter 
( see  Note 14 ). Let the column sit for 1 min.  
 10.   Centrifuge the column assembly at 14,000 ×  g for 2 min to 
elute the DNA.  
 11.   Quantify the DNA concentration by reading the absorbance 
at 260 nm ( see  Note 15 ). 
  1.   For 8 μL transcriptions, calculate the required volume of tran-
scription master mix (2×) according to the following formula 
( see  Notes 16 and  17 ):
 Required volume
Number of reactions
L
extra
= {
}´
´
(
)
4
1 2 20
m
.
%
  
  2.   Prepare transcription master mix as directed in Table  1 in the 
order written from top to bottom.
  3.   Dispense 4 µL of the transcription master mix into microcen-
trifuge tubes or a 96-well microplate ( see  Note 18 ). 
  4.   Add 4 µL of DNA solution into the dispensed aliquots 
( see  Notes 19 and  20 ).  
3.1  Proteinase K 
Treatment for Trace 
RNase Removal, 
Small-Scale Method
3.2  Transcription
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

166
  5.   Close the cap of the microcentrifuge tube or seal the plate 
tightly ( see  Note 21 ). 
  6.  Incubate at 37 °C for 4 h ( see  Note 22 ). 
  7.   The RNA can be used for subsequent translation reaction 
without puriﬁ cation ( see  Note 23 ). 
 This is an optional technique for checking RNA quality. It is especially 
recommended for researchers new to RNase-free procedures and is 
also good for trouble-shooting poor translation results ( see  Note 24 ).
  1.   After transcription is complete, gently mix the reaction with a 
micropipette, and transfer 1 µL to a microcentrifuge tube contain-
ing 9 µL Milli-Q water and 10 µL 2× RNA denaturing buffer.  
  2.   Heat the sample to at least 65 °C for 2 min to denature the 
RNA ( see  Note 25 ). 
  3.   Immediately quench the sample on ice to prevent formation of 
RNA secondary structure that might be caused by slow 
cooling. 
  4.   Load 2 µL of each RNA sample onto the gel. Load a double- 
stranded DNA marker with non-denaturing loading dye for a 
staining control ( see  Note 26 ).  
  5.   Run the electrophoresis in 1× TAE buffer ( see  Note 27 ). 
  6.   Stain the gel in a 0.5 µg/mL ethidium bromide solution in 
Milli-Q water for 15 min on an orbital shaker ( see  Note 28 ). 
  7.    Destain the gel with Milli-Q water for 10–15 min on an orbital 
shaker ( see  Note 29 ). 
  8.   Image the gel on a transilluminator. Figure  1 shows an exam-
ple of transcription analysis by gel.
3.3  Agarose Gel 
Analysis to Check RNA 
Integrity
 Table 1 
 Transcription reaction composition 
 Components 
 Volume (μL) 
 Subcomponents for master mix 
 Volume (μL) 
 Transcription Master mix 
 4 
 Water 
 0.88 
 5× TB + Mg 
 1.6 
 25 mM NTP (pH 7) 
 1.28 
 SP6 RNA polymerase (80 U/μL) 
 0.16 
 RNase inhibitor (80 U/μL) 
 0.08 
 DNA 
 4 
 Total 
 8 
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

167
 Either of two translation methods, bilayer [ 10 ] or dialysis, may be 
selected according to the application. For either method, the reac-
tion has a volume of 25 μL and identical composition (Table  2 ) ( see 
 Note 31 ). The bilayer method is suitable for high-throughput 
experiments, because the reaction can be performed in a 96-well 
microplate format [ 10 ]. The dialysis reaction often results in higher 
protein yields and is more sensitive to buffer conditions such as pH 
(Fig.  2 ), but requires special dialysis cups and receptacles and 
involves more handling.
3.4  Translation
Terminator
RNA 1
RNA 2
ORF
RNA 1
RNA 2
DNA
Degraded
Plasmid
a
c
RNA
b
 Fig. 1  Agarose gel analysis for transcription. Successful transcription ( a ) appears 
as a ladder of higher molecular weight bands without low molecular weight spe-
cies. Degraded RNA ( b ) typically appears as a smear or haze in the low molecular 
weight range. Fully degraded material or a failed transcription may appear as a 
single band corresponding to the DNA template ( see  Note 30 ). ( c ) The RNA ladder 
generated from transcription comes from a length distribution of the transcripts 
mainly terminating at a speciﬁ c region on the vector. RNA 1 contains a region 
between the SP6 promoter and the terminator. RNA 2 and longer transcripts 
result from one or more rounds of continuous transcription past the terminator. 
The RNA 1 and 2 correspond to the bands labeled in panel  a 
 Table 2 
 Translation reaction composition 
 Components 
 Volume (μL) 
 Subcomponents for master mix 
 Volume (μL) 
 Translation Master mix 
 20 (22.4) 
 Water 
 8.75 (9.8) 
 5× DB 
 2.75 (3.08) 
 6 mM Amino acids 
 1.25 (1.4) 
 1 mg/mL Creatine kinase 
 1 (1.12) 
 WEPRO2240H 
 6.25 (7) 
 RNA 
 5 (5.6) 
 Total 
 25 (28) 
 Use these volumes if an unpuriﬁ ed transcription reaction will be used as the RNA source ( see  Note 32 ) 
 The volumes for bilayer reaction setup are shown in parenthesis. In the bilayer method, 25 μL is taken out to inject 
beneath the feeding buffer  
 
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

168
  1.   Calculate the required volume of feeding buffer according to 
the following formula:
 
Required volume
Number of reactions
L
extra
= {
} ×
×
(
)
125
1 1 10
m
.
%
 
  2.   Prepare the feeding buffer as directed in Table  3 .
  3.   Dispense 125 μL of feeding buffer into each well of a U-bottom 
96-well microplate.  
3.4.1  Bilayer Translation
0
5
10
15
20
25
Reaction pH
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
Synthesized protein (µg/reaction)
Dialysis
Bilayer
Batch
 Fig. 2    Comparison of synthesis yields among batch, bilayer, and dialysis methods 
with changing buffer pH. An N-terminally His-tagged green ﬂ uorescent protein 
(GFP) [ 11 ] was synthesized in 25-μL scale translation reactions containing 
0.7 mg/mL puriﬁ ed RNA. Synthesized protein was quantiﬁ ed directly by ﬂ uores-
cence (excitation at 488 nm; emission at 509 nm) and calibrated with a puriﬁ ed 
protein standard. The series of the reaction pH values were obtained by titration 
of 5× DB preparation with different amounts of KOH  
 Table 3 
 Feeding buffer composition 
 Components 
 Volume (μL) 
 Water 
 600 (93.75) 
 5× DB (pH 7.8) 
 160 (25) 
 6 mM Amino acids, pH 7 
 40 (6.25) 
 Total 
 800 (125) 
 The volumes for a bilayer reaction are shown in parenthesis  
 
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

169
  4.   Calculate the required volume of translation master mix 
according to the following formula:
 
Required volume
Number of reactions
L
extra
= {
} ×
×
(
)
22 4
1 2 20
.
.
%
m
 
  5.   Prepare the translation master mix as described in Table  2 , 
adding components in the order listed.  
  6.   Dispense 22.4 μL of translation master mix into microcentri-
fuge tubes.  
  7.   Add 5.6 μL of RNA into the dispensed master mix aliquots 
( see  Note 33 ). 
  8.   Remove 25 μL of this reaction from the microcentrifuge tube, 
and slowly inject beneath the feeding buffer dispensed in the 
96-well microplate. Take care not to mix the feeding buffer 
and reaction layers ( see  Note 34 ). 
  9.   Carefully seal the top of the wells using an adhesive ﬁ lm to 
avoid condensation and/or evaporation.  
 10.    Incubate overnight at ambient temperature ( see  Note 35 ). 
  1.   Insert each dialysis cup into a receptacle, visually inspecting 
the dialysis membranes for tears or gaps.  
  2.   Equilibrate the membrane for 30 min by adding 500 μL 
Milli-Q water into the dialysis cups, and 800 μL Milli-Q water 
into the receptacles ( see  Notes 36 and  37 ). 
  3.   Calculate the required volume of feeding buffer according to 
the following formula:
 
Required volume
Number of reactions
L
extra
= {
} ×
×
(
)
800
1 1 10
m
.
%
 
  4.   Prepare the feeding buffer as directed in Table  3 . 15–50 mL 
conical tubes are useful for this preparation.  
  5.   Remove the water from within the dialysis cups ( see  Note 38 ). 
  6.   Remove water from the receptacles housing the dialysis cups.  
  7.   Immediately dispense 800 μL feeding buffer in each receptacle 
( see  Note 39 ).  
  8.   Calculate the required volume of translation master mix 
according to the following formula:
 
Required volume
Number of reactions
L
extra
= {
} ×
×
(
)
20
1 2 20
m
.
%
 
  9.   Prepare the translation master mix as directed in Table  2 , add-
ing each component in the order listed.  
 10.    Dispense 20 μL of translation master mix into dialysis cups. 
Carefully dispense with the pipette tip touching the side wall 
close to the membrane ( see  Note 37 ). 
3.4.2  Dialysis Translation
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

170
 11.   Add 5 μL RNA to dialysis cups, and tightly close the lid ( see 
 Note 40 ).  
  12.  Seal the top part of the dialysis cup and the receptacles together 
using Paraﬁ lm to avoid evaporation from either compartment.  
 13.   Incubate at room temperature 16–22 h, or overnight ( see 
 Notes 35 and  41 ).  
  1.  Remove the reactions from the microplate or dialysis cup and 
transfer to a microcentrifuge tube. Measure ﬁ nal volumes of 
the reactions using the micropipette ( see  Notes 42 and  43 ). 
  2.  Fractionate supernatant and pellet by centrifuging at 18,000 ×  g 
for 3 min at ambient temperature.  
  3.  Resuspend the pellet in 150 µL (bilayer) or 25 µL (dialysis) of 
resuspension buffer by pipetting ( see  Note 44 ). 
  4.  Prepare 18 µL SDS-PAGE samples using 1/25 volume of 
each fraction, 6 μL 3× SDS sample buffer, and water.  
  5.  Perform SDS-PAGE using 3 µL load volumes. Image the gel 
after electrophoresis with a stain-free imaging system (Bio-
Rad) ( see  Notes 45 and  46 ). 
 His-tagged proteins can be easily screened for puriﬁ cation efﬁ -
ciency using a portion of a single translation ( see  Note 47 ).
  1.    Dispense 20 µL of a 50 % suspension of Ni Sepharose resin and 
100 µL of IMAC binding/washing buffer into the wells of a 
96-well ﬁ lter plate assembled with a 96-well microplate reservoir.  
  2.   Add 2/3 volume of the supernatant fraction, and shake for 
10 min on a microplate shaker.  
  3.   Centrifuge at 2,500 ×  g for 1 min at ambient temperature to 
pass unbound components through the ﬁ lter. Discard the 
ﬂ ow- through fraction ( see  Note 48 ). 
  4.   Add 150 µL IMAC binding/washing buffer into each well to 
wash the resin, shake brieﬂ y, and centrifuge again. Discard the 
collected wash.  
  5.   Repeat  step 4 two more times.  
  6.   Replace the 96-well microplate reservoir with a fresh collec-
tion plate, and add 50 µL IMAC elution buffer to each well of 
the ﬁ lter plate. Shake for 5 min.  
  7.   Centrifuge at 2,500 ×  g for 1 min at ambient temperature to 
collect the eluate.  
  8.   Prepare SDS-PAGE samples with 12 µL eluate and 6 µL 3× 
SDS sample buffer, and load 3 µL. Perform SDS-PAGE ( see 
 Notes 45 and  46 ). Figure  3 shows an optimization of imidaz-
ole concentration and an example SDS-PAGE gel image of the 
puriﬁ cations.
3.5  Analysis of 
Expression and 
Solubility
3.6  Afﬁ nity 
Puriﬁ cation
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

171
With 50 mM imidazole buffer
a
b
50
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Protein purified (µg/reaction)
250
75
50
25
(kDa)
37
150
100
20
15
10
(mM)
With 25 mM imidazole buffer
 Fig. 3    Puriﬁ cation results using His-tag pretreated extract, WEPRO2240H. ( a ) 
Puriﬁ cation yield comparison between 25 mM and 50 mM imidazole IMAC bind-
ing/washing buffers. 24 proteins were synthesized by the bilayer method and 
IMAC-puriﬁ ed using 25 mM or 50 mM imidazole-containing buffers. Puriﬁ ed pro-
teins were quantiﬁ ed by band intensity on an SDS-PAGE stain-free gel image 
accounting for molecular weight and number of tryptophan residues of each 
protein in comparison with marker bands of known concentrations and number 
of tryptophan residues. Some of the tested proteins were puriﬁ ed in signiﬁ cantly 
greater amounts with 25 mM imidazole buffer, which is probably due to a lower 
afﬁ nity for the resin. This result indicates lowering imidazole concentration can 
expand the target selection for downstream applications. The diagonal dashed 
line correlates with proteins that puriﬁ ed equally in either buffer. ( b ) A represen-
tative SDS-PAGE gel image of puriﬁ ed samples. This protein puriﬁ ed as 6.0 and 
1.7 μg per small-scale translation reaction using 25 and 50 mM imidazole IMAC 
binding/washing buffers, respectively 
 Cell-free translation can be easily modiﬁ ed in several ways to facili-
tate membrane protein synthesis. Although membrane proteins are 
partially or fully insoluble after cell-free translation and thus may 
not be puriﬁ ed directly from the soluble fraction, this method is 
still very useful in the production of active membrane proteins for 
functional analysis. The cell-free reaction does not contain intact 
cell membranes or organelles, but can be supplemented with 
 liposomes to provide an artiﬁ cial lipid bilayer micro environment, 
which can encourage protein folding [ 9 ]. The resulting proteoli-
posomes can be isolated by ﬂ otation on a discontinuous density 
gradient after ultracentrifugation [ 9 ], or simply pelleted brieﬂ y in a 
microfuge and washed with assay buffer. Pellet isolation also serves 
to partially purify the membrane protein, because almost all of the 
3.7  Expression of 
Membrane Proteins
 
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

172
proteins from the wheat germ extract have been found to be solu-
ble [ 4 ]. If a membrane protein needs to be solubilized and puri-
ﬁ ed, translation reactions are also compatible with some classes of 
detergents [ 12 ], which can solubilize membrane proteins during 
translation. Once proteins are solubilized, they can usually be puri-
ﬁ ed on afﬁ nity media in the same manner as soluble proteins. 
 Liposomes or detergent can be added to the translation reaction by 
reducing the corresponding volume of water. A standard 25 μL 
liposome reaction contains 2 μL of 15 mg/mL liposomes 
( see  Notes 49 and  50 ). For detergent-mediated translation, some 
optimization may be required, as translation may not be compati-
ble with certain types or concentrations of detergent. Because 
detergents can compromise membrane protein activity, perform-
ing a functional assay on protein translated under different deter-
gent conditions is very useful, if practical.  
  1.   Centrifuge a membrane protein translation at 18,000 ×  g for 
3 min at ambient temperature to produce a visible pellet, con-
taining insoluble protein and lipids ( see  Note 51 ). 
  2.   Wash the pellet and resuspend in assay buffer at the desired 
concentration ( see  Note 52 ). 
  1.   After membrane protein translation with or without lipo-
somes, make small aliquots of the translation reaction and cen-
trifuge to obtain the pellets.  
  2.   Suspend the pellet in various buffers with or without deter-
gents ( see  Note 53 ).  
  3.   Centrifuge to separate supernatant and pellet.  
  4.   Check solubility by SDS-PAGE, and functionality if possible.  
4  Notes 
  1.  Diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water should not be used, 
because residual DEPC might negatively affect the reaction.  
  2.   Our standard expression vector, pEU-His-FV, which contains 
the SP6 RNA polymerase promoter and the tobacco mosaic 
virus omega translational enhancer is engineered to contain a 
6× His N-terminal tag and is compatible with the Flexi-cloning 
system (Promega). Our expression vector and various plasmid 
clones are publicly available through the PSI Materials 
Repository (  http://psimr.asu.edu/   ). 
  3.   PCR-generated fragments can also be used as a transcription 
template [ 13 ]. However, we have seen about 20 % lower pro-
tein synthesis yields from PCR DNA templates compared to 
3.7.1  Translation with 
Liposomes or Detergent
3.7.2  Proteoliposome 
Puriﬁ cation by Pelleting
3.7.3  Detergent 
Solubilization Screening
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

173
plasmid templates in a dialysis mode reaction, and recommend 
using plasmids for best results.  
  4.   It is advisable to make small aliquots of these reagents to avoid 
a reduction in synthesis efﬁ ciency caused by repeated freezing 
and thawing.  
  5.   Maintain dedicated electrophoresis equipment for RNA work 
to reduce the risk of RNase contamination from DNA han-
dling methods.  
  6.   Stable isotope labeled amino acids ( 15 N,  13 C, and/or  2 H) are 
available through Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, 
MA. If these mixtures are used, prepare a 1 % (w/v) solution 
and use as 0.1 % (w/v) in the ﬁ nal reaction and buffer.  
  7.   If IMAC puriﬁ cation is not performed, WEPRO2240 should 
be used. If amino acid labeling is not performed, the 
WEPRO1240 series extracts, which contain amino acids, can 
be used. Another type of extract with sufﬁ x G is also available, 
which is designed for expression and puriﬁ cation of proteins 
with glutathione- S -transferase (GST) tags.  
  8.   This imidazole concentration (25 mM) works well only in 
combination with the His-tag pretreated extract (H-series). If 
untreated extract is used, increasing the imidazole concentra-
tion to 50 mM is required to minimize co-puriﬁ cation of 
intrinsic wheat germ proteins; however, this condition still 
permits two wheat germ proteins to co-purify with the target 
protein. The wheat germ proteins appear as a doublet of 
around 50 kDa on SDS-PAGE [ 14 ]. These proteins are invis-
ible if the stain-free imaging system is used, probably due to a 
lack of tryptophan residues in the proteins.  
  9.   This step can be skipped if the DNA preparation is consistently 
pure enough not to show any RNase activity. We employ this 
step in our standard protocol, because it ensures reliability of 
the expression screening outcome and minimizes the need to 
repeat experiments.  
 10.   At least 8 μg DNA should be included for each reaction, 
because the targeted ﬁ nal concentration is 0.4 mg/mL in 
20 μL elution per column. Typical miniprep columns are capa-
ble of binding 20 μg DNA. Because there could be substantial 
loss during puriﬁ cation in a small elution volume, treat the 
entire DNA miniprep.  
 11.   Proteinase K treatment of maxiprep DNA is usually done by 
using the same concentration of enzyme and buffer but 
employs phenol/chloroform extraction and ethanol precipita-
tion as the puriﬁ cation method [ 14 ].  
 12.   Transferring the DNA to a new reaction tube is a good way to 
avoid possible RNase contamination carried over from the 
wall of the tube used for the preceding DNA puriﬁ cation.  
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

174
 13.   This step reduces contamination of the DNA by residual etha-
nol, which can inhibit transcription.  
 14.   Delivering the water to the ﬁ lter is important for keeping elu-
tion volumes consistent. Avoid trapping water on the plastic 
ridge surrounding the ﬁ lter. 
 15.   Due to the small volume (typically around 12 μL), use an 
instrument that can determine the absorbance from 1 or 2 μL 
of the eluate, such as a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo 
Fisher Scientiﬁ c, Waltham, MA) or a UV microplate reader.  
 16.   Inclusion of negative and positive control samples is recom-
mended. Typically we use water instead of DNA for a negative 
control and an expression plasmid encoding green ﬂ uorescent 
protein (GFP) for a positive control. GFP will develop a visible 
green color during translation, providing an immediate indica-
tor for the success of the translation reaction.  
 17.    The reaction volume, 8 μL, includes 1 μL for electrophoresis 
and 5 μL (for dialysis) or 5.6 μL (for bilayer) for the transla-
tion reaction. If no quality check will be performed, the reac-
tion volume can be minimized down to 5 μL for a dialysis 
translation, because only 5 μL of the transcription reaction will 
go into the translation reaction. The slightly larger transcrip-
tion volume for the bilayer translation ensures sufﬁ cient 
 volume to prevent pipetting errors that can prematurely mix 
the two layers,  see Subheading  3.4.1 and  Notes 33 and  34 . 
 18.    Either a PCR-plate or U-bottom plate can be used, but make 
sure it is tightly sealable with a lid or adhesive ﬁ lm. 
 19.   Transcriptions may also be performed by using equal concen-
trations of DNA. In this case, the DNA and water volumes are 
adjusted so that the ﬁ nal DNA concentration is 0.2 μg/μL.  
 20.   Mix well by pipetting owing to the small volume.  
 21.   It is critical that transcription plates are well-sealed, or the 
reaction may evaporate during the course of the incubation. 
Microcentrifuge tubes are recommended unless multichannel 
pipettes are used.  
 22.   The reaction solution should start to appear cloudy due to the 
formation of insoluble magnesium pyrophosphate, a by- 
product of transcription. For small-volume transcriptions this 
precipitate may be hard to see, but reference to the clear 
 negative control can be useful for determining whether the 
transcriptions are progressing properly. It is sometimes helpful 
to look upwards through the plate or tube at a light source to 
see the precipitate. Although it is a good indicator for the 
progress of transcription, the appearance of precipitate does 
not indicate the absence of RNase contamination.  
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

175
 23.   Optionally for certain applications, the RNA can be puriﬁ ed 
and stored at −80 °C. We use the RNeasy kit (QIAGEN) or 
PureLink RNA kit (Ambion) for puriﬁ cation ( see  Note 32 for 
a modiﬁ ed composition of the translation reaction for use with 
puriﬁ ed RNA).  
 24.   This protein expression system is highly dependent on the 
quality of the transcript. Checking RNA by electrophoresis 
will provide important information regarding RNA quality.  
 25.   Temperatures ranging from 65 to 95 °C are acceptable.  
 26.   The DNA size marker can be used for approximate RNA size 
evaluation. On a 1 % agarose gel, double-stranded DNA at the 
1.5 and 3 kbp positions roughly corresponds to denatured 
RNA at 2.7 and 6.0 kb, respectively.  
  27.   Voltage will differ depending on the apparatus, but for reference 
we typically use 100 V at constant voltage for about 25 min.  
 28.    A freshly diluted ethidium bromide solution will provide the 
most consistent staining.  
 29.    This step reduces background staining of the gel. The time 
can be extended, if the background is still high.  
 30.    One common reason for a failed transcription is improper 
removal of ethanol from the Proteinase K-treated plasmid.  
 31.    If amino acid labeling is needed, such as for structural studies, 
use 0.1 % (w/v) [ 15 N] or [ 13 C/ 15 N] uniformly labeled 20 
amino acids mixture for NMR spectroscopy, or 0.6 mM sele-
nomethionine and 0.3 mM of the other 19 amino acids for 
X-ray crystallography samples.  
 32.   The buffer concentration shown in Table  2 is adjusted to com-
pensate for the effects of carryover components from the tran-
scription reaction. If puriﬁ ed RNA is used, use 7.75 μL water 
and 3.75 μL 5× DB per 25-μL reaction. The extract can be 
assumed to contain 1× DB.  
 33.    Mix well by gentle pipetting. Avoid bubbling, which can 
introduce air into the pipette tip and compromise the bilayer.  
 34.    Establishing distinct feeding and reaction layers at the start of 
translation is critical to improving translation yield over that 
seen in a simple batch reaction (Fig.  2 ). Once the reaction is 
underlaid beneath the feeding layer, avoid moving or jarring 
the plate. Bubbles introduced at this step can also cause 
 premature mixing of the layers, so be careful to keep the 
pipette tip free of air. Do not press the tip to the bottom of the 
well during injection as it can cause the reaction to dispense 
under pressure; rather hold the pipette tip near the bottom of 
the well at a comfortable angle when injecting.  
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

176
 35.   Incubation temperatures between 15 and 26 °C produce simi-
lar yields. If the room temperature is fairly constant and falls 
within this range, there is no need to put the microplate in an 
incubator.  
 36.   This step serves to hydrate the membrane and to remove pre-
servatives. When adding the water to the cup, avoid getting 
drops on the sides of the cup, as they can be hard to remove 
and could later dilute the translation reaction. Instead, direct 
the water close to the membrane. Similarly, avoid trapping air 
under the membrane when inserting the cup back into the 
water-ﬁ lled receptacle. Gently tilting the assembly will remove 
any air bubbles.  
 37.   Leave the lid loosely closed between manipulations to prevent 
splashing during lid opening and closing.  
 38.   Be careful not to puncture the membrane.  
  39.  Once equilibrated, do not let the dialysis membrane dry out or it 
may crack. If a large number of dialysis reactions will be set up, they 
can be handled in smaller batches to avoid membrane drying.  
 40.   This reaction volume will just cover the surface of the dialysis 
membrane. This low volume to surface area ratio facilitates 
good exchange of the reaction with the feeding layer and leads 
to good translation yields. Increasing the volume of the 
 reaction will not result in proportional increases in protein 
production; rather, too high a reaction volume can lead to 
insufﬁ cient diffusion of inhibitory translation by-products and 
result in lower yields. If more protein is needed, we recom-
mend setting up additional 25 μL dialysis reactions.  
 41.   Optionally, the dialysis reaction time can be extended by sup-
plementing RNA and replenishing dialysis buffer [ 15 – 17 ]. 
This can prolong the activity of the extract and result in higher 
protein yields.  
 42.   Typical volumes after translation reaction are around 150 μL 
for a bilayer and 21–28 μL for dialysis reactions. Note that the 
volume of the bilayer reaction includes both reaction and 
feeding buffer due to gradual mixing of the two layers.  
 43.   Some applications, such as general expression screening, do 
not require a precise volume measurement. It can be impor-
tant for some purposes, such as for the determination of solu-
bility as a function of protein concentration.  
 44.   The volumes and types of buffer for resuspending are modiﬁ -
able according to the application.  
 45.   If Coomassie staining detection will be used, load 9 μL. 
 46.   Heat-denaturing the SDS sample prior to loading may be nec-
essary for some proteins. For example, tightly folded proteins, 
such as GFP must be heated to allow molecular weight- 
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

177
proportional mobility and also to eliminate interference from 
GFP ﬂ uorescence during stain-free imaging. On the other 
hand, heating can cause some proteins such as integral mem-
brane proteins to aggregate and either not enter the gel, or 
migrate as a smeared or fuzzy band. A good rule of thumb is 
to avoid heating unless the protein is known to require heat 
treatment for full denaturation. Empirical testing of each new 
target is always a good idea.  
  47.   Proteins containing other afﬁ nity tags, such as streptavidin bind-
ing peptide [ 18 ], Strep(II)-tag [ 19 ], or the GST tag [ 20 ], can be 
screened by simply substituting different resins and buffers. 
Puriﬁ cation efﬁ ciency can be monitored using SDS-PAGE.  
 48.   The ﬂ ow-through fraction can be used to check binding efﬁ -
ciency, if needed.  
 49.   Liposome preparation is described in [ 9 ].  
 50.   Liposomes are only added to the translation reaction, not the 
feeding buffer.  
 51.   The pellet also contains insoluble by-products and co- 
precipitated proteins.  
 52.   SDS-PAGE can be used to quantify the amount of protein in 
the pellet. This can help in determining resuspension volume 
to achieve a desired target concentration [ 17 ]. 
 53.    Depending on the application, whole translations can be used 
in solubilization screening instead of pellet fractions.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by NIGMS Protein Structure Initiative 
(PSI) grants U54 GM074901 to J.L.M, which funds the Center 
for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics (CESG), U54 GM094584 to 
B.G.F., which funds the Transmembrane Protein Center (TMPC), 
and U01 GM094622 to J.L.M., which funds the Mitochondrial 
Protein Partnership. The authors thank the many other CESG staff 
members for their contributions.  
 References 
  1.  Chen R (2012) Bacterial expression systems for 
recombinant protein production:  E .  coli and 
beyond. Biotechnol Adv 30:1102–1107  
  2.  Mattanovich D, Branduardi P, Dao L et al 
(2012) Recombinant protein production in 
yeasts. Methods Mol Biol 824:329–358  
  3.  Madin K, Sawasaki T, Ogasawara T et al (2000) 
A highly efﬁ cient and robust cell-free protein 
synthesis system prepared from wheat embryos: 
plants apparently contain a suicide system 
directed at ribosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
97:559–564  
Cell-Free Protein Synthesis

178
  4.  Takai K, Sawasaki T, Endo Y (2010) Practical 
cell-free protein synthesis system using puriﬁ ed 
wheat embryos. Nat Protoc 5:227–238  
  5.  Carlson ED, Gan R, Hodgman CE, Jewett MC 
(2012) Cell-free protein synthesis: applications 
come of age. Biotechnol Adv 30:1185–1194  
  6.  Goshima N, Kawamura Y, Fukumoto A, Miura 
A, Honma R, Satoh R et al (2008) Human 
protein factory for converting the transcrip-
tome into an  in vitro -expressed proteome. Nat 
Methods 5:1011–1017  
  7.  Rui E, Fernandez-Becerra C, Takeo S, Sanz S, 
Lacerda MV, Tsuboi T, del Portillo HA (2011) 
 Plasmodium vivax : comparison of immunoge-
nicity among proteins expressed in the cell-free 
systems of  Escherichia coli and wheat germ by 
suspension array assays. Malar J 10:192  
  8.  Takasuka TE, Walker JA, Bergeman LF, Vander 
Meulen KA, Makino S, Elsen NL, Fox BG 
(2013) 
Cell-free 
translation 
of 
biofuels 
enzymes. Methods Mol Biol (in press)  
  9.  Goren MA, Nozawa A, Makino S, Wrobel RL, 
Fox BG (2009) Cell-free translation of integral 
membrane proteins into unilamelar liposomes. 
Methods Enzymol 463:647–673  
  10.  Sawasaki T, Hasegawa Y, Tsuchimochi M, 
Kamura N, Ogasawara T, Kuroita T, Endo Y 
(2002) A bilayer cell-free protein synthesis sys-
tem for high-throughput screening of gene 
products. FEBS Lett 514:102–105  
  11.  Frederick RO, Bergeman L, Blommel PG, 
Bailey LJ, McCoy JG, Song J et al (2007) 
Small-scale, semi-automated puriﬁ cation of 
eukaryotic proteins for structure determina-
tion. J Struct Funct Genomics 8:153–166  
  12.  Chae PS, Rasmussen SGF, Rana RR, Gotfryd 
K, Chandra R, Goren MA et al (2010) 
Maltose- neopentyl glycol (MNG) amphiphi-
les for solubilization, stabilization and crystal-
lization of membrane proteins. Nat Methods 
7:1003–1011  
  13.  Sawasaki T, Ogasawara T, Morishita R, Endo Y 
(2002) A cell-free protein synthesis system for 
high-throughput proteomics. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 99:14652–14657  
  14.  Makino S, Goren MA, Fox BG, Markley JL 
(2010) Cell-free protein synthesis technology 
in NMR high-throughput structure determi-
nation. Methods Mol Biol 607:127–147  
  15.  Makino S, Sawasaki T, Tozawa Y, Endo Y, 
Takai K (2006) Covalent circularization of 
exogenous RNA during incubation with a 
wheat embryo cell extract. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun 347:1080–1087  
  16.  Makino S, Sawasaki T, Endo Y, Takai K (2010) 
 In vitro dissection revealed that the kinase 
domain of wheat RNA ligase is physically iso-
latable from the ﬂ anking domains as a non- 
overlapping domain enzyme. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun 397:762–766  
  17.  Jarecki BW, Makino S, Beebe ET, Fox BG, 
Chanda B (2013) Function of Shaker potassium 
channels produced by cell-free translation upon 
injection into  Xenopus oocytes. Sci Rep 3:1040  
  18.  Keefe AD, Wilson DS, Seelig B, Szostak JW 
(2001) One-step puriﬁ cation of recombinant 
proteins using a nanomolar-afﬁ nity streptavidin- 
binding peptide, the SBP-Tag. Protein Expr 
Purif 23:440–446  
  19.  Voss S, Skerra A (1997) Mutagenesis of a ﬂ ex-
ible loop in streptavidin leads to higher afﬁ nity 
for the  Strep -tag II peptide and improved per-
formance in recombinant protein puriﬁ cation. 
Protein Eng 10:975–982  
  20.  Smith DB, Johnson KS (1988) Single-step 
puriﬁ cation of polypeptides expressed in 
 Escherichia coli as fusions with glutathione 
 S -transferase. Gene 67:31–40  
Shin-ichi Makino et al.

179
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_12, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 12  
 Insoluble Protein Puriﬁ cation with Sarkosyl: 
Facts and Precautions 
 Ben  Chisnall ,  Courtney  Johnson ,  Yavuz  Kulaberoglu , 
and  Yu  Wai  Chen 
 Abstract 
 When eukaryotic proteins are overexpressed in  Escherichia coli hosts, they often form inclusion bodies. 
Natively folded proteins can be extracted from inclusion bodies using mild detergents such as sarkosyl. 
One common problem is the sequestration of nucleic acid contaminants with the protein of interest. Here 
we describe methods for monitoring the presence of co-precipitated nucleic acids, and their removal. 
These procedures are simple to implement and can be easily adapted to a high-throughput format. While 
sarkosyl is a common chemical, some information such as its UV absorption spectrum and micellar size are 
absent in the literature or poorly referenced. We review and summarize the properties that are the most 
relevant to structural biology.  
 Key words   Sarkosyl  ,  Inclusion body  ,  Nucleic acid contamination  ,   Detergent  ,   Insoluble protein  , 
 Critical micelle concentration  ,  CMC  ,  Aggregation number  ,  UV absorption spectra  ,  Gel electropho-
resis  ,   NanoDrop  
1  Introduction 
 In structural biology projects, one early hurdle is often the protein 
of interest being insoluble. This problem is common when eukary-
otic recombinant proteins are overproduced in bacterial hosts. In 
many cases, the insolubility problem cannot be overcome by modu-
lating the growth and induction condition of the culture. It has been 
reported that some proteins, despite depositing as inclusion bodies, 
retain their native structures and functions. One promising approach 
is therefore to recover these protein samples from the solid phase 
employing a mild detergent. However, protein samples extracted 
from inclusion bodies usually contain nucleic-acid contaminants [ 1 ]. 
Here we describe an easy procedure for monitoring these contami-
nations and we discuss how these can be removed or avoided. 

180
 The detergent of choice, sarkosyl ( N -lauroylsarcosine), has 
many desirable properties which contribute to its wide usage in 
protein puriﬁ cation [ 2 ,  3 ]: it is non-denaturing, it forms micelles 
that are small in size, it does not interfere with spectroscopic con-
centration measurement, and it is of low cost. In the second half of 
this chapter, we examine its ultraviolet (UV) absorption spectro-
scopic properties, the reported values of its critical micelle concen-
tration (CMC) and its average micellar size as these are the most 
important facts concerning its use in protein puriﬁ cation. 
2  Materials 
 This procedure is executed in exactly the same way as DNA gel 
electrophoresis except that here protein samples are loaded.
  1.   Agarose (electrophoresis grade, e.g., from Invitrogen).  
  2.   1× TAE buffer (40 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 20 mM acetic acid, 
1 mM EDTA), 500 ml.  
  3.   Ethidium bromide solution (1 mg/ml).  
  4.   Sample loading buffer (6×) for DNA gel electrophoresis (e.g., 
TrackIt™ Cyan/Yellow Loading Buffer, Life Technologies).  
  5.   1 kb DNA ladder.  
  6.   Horizontal gel electrophoresis apparatus (e.g., Bio-Rad Sub- 
Cell GT System), with gel casting set and combs.  
  7.   UV transilluminator or imaging system (e.g., Bio-Rad Gel 
Doc XR+).  
  8.   UV spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 1000, Thermo Scientiﬁ c).  
  1.  1 M MgCl 2 solution.  
  2.   0.1 M CaCl 2 solution.  
  3.   DNase I (AppliChem, 2 mg/ml).  
  4.   RNase A (AppliChem, 2 mg/ml).  
  5.   50 mM EDTA solution.  
  1.   Millipore-grade water.  
  2.   Reference buffer with sarkosyl matching the protein sample 
(e.g., PBS with 0.1 % sarkosyl, or dialysis buffer, or centrifuga-
tion ﬁ ltrate).  
  3.   Reference buffer without sarkosyl (e.g., PBS).  
2.1  Agarose Gel 
Electrophoresis for 
Proteins
2.2  DNase I and 
RNase A Digestions
2.3  Protein 
Concentration 
Measurement in the 
Presence of Sarkosyl
Ben Chisnall et al.

181
3  Methods 
  1.   Make up a 40 ml (for one gel) solution of 1 % (w/v) agarose, 
using 1× TAE. Dissolve the powder completely by heating in 
a microwave oven. 
  2.   Pour into a Bio-Rad Sub-Cell GT gel casting setup, insert an 
8-well comb and leave for 1 h to set.  
  3.   Cover the gel with enough 1× TAE buffer to completely sub-
merge the gel (approximately 400 ml).  
  4.   Mix the protein samples with 6× sample loading buffer 
(25 µl + 5 µl for each sample) and load the mixture into the 
wells of the gel. Do the same for the DNA marker.  
  5.   Run the electrophoresis at room temperature for 45 min at 
constant voltage of 70 V.  
  6.   Remove the gel and put it in a tray ﬁ lled with deionized water. 
Add 2.5 µl of ethidium bromide solution and place on a shaker 
to stain for 20 min.  
  7.   Destain in water for 30 min. Examine the gel under a UV 
transilluminator or imaging system.  
 The protein samples with nucleic acid contaminants are subjected 
to enzyme digestion as follows (in a 50 μl solution):
  1.  Prepare the protein sample, add MgCl 2 to 20 mM and CaCl 2 
to 1 mM.  
  2.  Add 1 µl of DNase I (2 mg/ml) and 1 µl of RNase A (2 mg/ml).  
  3.   Incubate at room temperature for 1 h.  
  4.   Run a sample on a 1 % agarose gel to check the results 
(Subheading  3.1 ). 
  1.   Turn on 340 nm normalization in the NanoDrop “Protein 
A280” measurement mode.  
  2.   Measure spectrum of protein sample using reference buffer 
with sarkosyl as blank.  
  3.   Measure spectrum of protein sample using reference buffer 
without sarkosyl as blank. This spectrum is reported.  
  4.   Measure spectrum of reference buffer with sarkosyl using buf-
fer without sarkosyl as blank to check the background absorp-
tion of sarkosyl. This can be used to estimate the concentration 
of sarkosyl in the buffer.  
3.1  Agarose Gel 
Electrophoresis for 
Protein
3.2  DNase I and 
RNase A double 
Digestion
3.3  Protein 
Concentration 
Measurement in the 
Presence of Sarkosyl
Sarkosyl Puriﬁ cation: Facts and Precautions

182
4  Discussion 
 A single band in sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (SDS-PAGE), stained with Coomassie blue (Fig.  2 , 
right panel “S” lane), is no guarantee of a protein puriﬁ ed to homo-
geneity when using sarkosyl solubilization. When such a sample was 
examined using a UV spectrophotometer, such as the NanoDrop 
1000 which scans from 220–350 nm, the spectrum typically lacks a 
peak at the characteristic 280 nm for proteins. Instead, the peak 
shifts to somewhat below 280 nm due to the contribution of the 
nucleic acids which absorb maximally at 260 nm (Fig.  1 , dark and 
light grey spectra) or even worse, there may be no peak in this 
region but just a shoulder. One needs to perform an agarose gel 
electrophoresis, which shows that the sample is contaminated with 
both DNA and RNA (Fig.  2 , left panel “S” lane).
 Typical results of DNase I and RNase A single and double diges-
tions are shown in Fig.  2 left panel, conﬁ rming the identities of the 
major contaminants. The nucleic acids are digested into smaller 
pieces but they still need to be removed by a further step of, for 
example, size exclusion chromatography, which is outside the 
scope of this chapter. However, it is rather straightforward to 
incorporate this double digestion step during cell lysis and before 
4.1  Monitoring 
Nucleic Acid 
Contaminants in 
Protein Samples
4.2  Reducing/
Removal of Nucleic 
Acid Contaminants
 Fig. 1  UV spectra of protein samples puriﬁ ed from inclusion bodies using sar-
kosyl.  Dark and light grey : samples solubilized in 10 % and 1 % sarkosyl buffers, 
respectively.  Black : sample digested with DNase I and RNase A before solubiliza-
tion in 1 % sarkosyl. These spectra were recorded against a reference buffer 
without sarkosyl ( see  Subheading  3.3 ). The shaded area is where the absorption 
due to sarkosyl dominates 
 
Ben Chisnall et al.

183
centrifugation. Following this digestion, the sample extracted from 
the inclusion bodies has much reduced contamination and shows a 
good protein peak at 280 nm (Fig.  1 , black spectrum).  
5  Properties of Sarkosyl 
 In this section, we reviewed and summarized some basic knowl-
edge of sarkosyl which are important factors to consider in protein 
puriﬁ cation. We found that while its data are reported widely, some 
references may not be reliable. 
 The chemical structure of sarkosyl (synonyms:  N -methyl- N -(1- 
oxododecyl)-glycine, sodium salt; sodium  N -lauroyl sarcosinate) is 
shown in Fig.  3 . The free acid (CAS number 97-78-9) has a chemi-
cal formula of C 15 H 29 NO 3 and a molecular mass of 271.4 g; 
whereas its sodium salt (CAS number 137-16-6) has a chemical 
formula of C 15 H 28 NO 3 Na and a molecular mass of 293.4 g. The 
solubility of sarkosyl in water is reported by several vendors to be 
≥100 mg/ml (≥10 % w/v; 0.34 M). In our hands and other pro-
tein puriﬁ cation works, it has been used at up to 10 % [ 2 ].
5.1  Chemical 
Properties
 Fig. 2    Agarose gel electrophoresis and SDS-PAGE of protein samples. A protein 
sample solubilized in sarkosyl was run in 1 % agarose gel and stained with 
ethidium bromide ( left ). M: 1kB DNA ladder; S: sample extracted with 1 % sar-
kosyl; the rest are samples digested with the respective enzymes. The DNA and 
RNA contaminants are indicated. The same sample (S) was analyzed in 12 % 
SDS-PAGE ( right ) and stained with Coomassie blue. M: protein ladder (10–
250 kDa, New England Biolabs) 
 
Sarkosyl Puriﬁ cation: Facts and Precautions

184
 Sarkosyl has no chiral center so it does not show circular 
dichroism. 
 It would be most useful to know the absorption characteristics 
of sarkosyl in the UV range which are used for monitoring protein 
concentration. We made a concentration series of sarkosyl solutions 
with water and measured their spectra (Fig.  4a ) on a NanoDrop 
1000 spectrophotometer which is commonly used in many protein 
labs. The most important is that sarkosyl absorbs minimally at 
>260 nm ( see  Note 1 ). Even at 10 %, its presence will not interfere 
signiﬁ cantly with the measurement of protein and nucleic acid con-
centrations. However, it should be noted that with >1 % sarkosyl, 
the region 220–260 nm are not interpretable ( see  Note 2 ). The best 
practice would be to measure the sample against a reference buffer 
without sarkosyl ( see Subheading  3.3 ; Fig.  4b ;  Note 3 ).
 The knowledge concerning sarkosyl micelle formation becomes 
very important when it is employed in preparing samples for bio-
physical studies that are sensitive to the overall shape and size of the 
solution species, e.g., in solution scattering. There are several inde-
pendent determinations of the CMC of sarkosyl in the literature 
[ 4 – 6 ] ( see  Note 4 ) and from vendors (Anatrace, AppliChem) using 
different methods, resulting in values ranging from 9.5 to 15 mM 
(0.28–0.44 %) at 20/25 °C. Sigma-Aldrich product information 
reported the micellar average molecular weight to be 600 (aggrega-
tion number is 2) but without a reference to the original literature. 
According to this information, sarkosyl could be easily removed by 
simple dialysis or ﬁ ltration using devices with a pore size (MWCO) 
of 3,000, even when its concentration is >CMC. However, one 
should be aware that sarkosyl may bind the protein tightly and form 
mixed micelles which cannot be removed by dialysis ( see  Note 5 ).  
6  Notes 
  1.   Sigma-Aldrich product information lists that sarkosyl has 
absorption maxima ( λ max ) at 220 and 265 nm, and a molar 
extinction coefﬁ cient ( ε ) at 280 nm of 3 M −1 cm −1 (catalogue 
number L5777). The reference cited was “Data for bio-
chemical research” by Dawson et al. [ 7 ], a popular data book 
from which the origin of these data could not be traced. We 
5.2  Spectroscopic 
Properties
5.3  Micellar 
Properties
 Fig. 3  Chemical structure of sarkosyl 
 
Ben Chisnall et al.

185
searched in the literature for the UV spectrum of sarkosyl 
without success. Our results agree with a low value of molar 
extinction coefﬁ cient ( ε ) at 280 nm but contradict with a 
reported  λ max of 265 nm.  
  2.   The shape of these NanoDrop spectra are misleading because 
they show a shift of the peak towards longer wavelengths, as 
the concentration increases beyond 1 %. This is an artifact 
of the instrument when the optics is overloaded with signal, 
as a result reducing the effective usable wavelength to 
around 260 nm.  
 Fig. 4  The UV spectra of sarkosyl as a function of concentration and that of a typi-
cal protein sample with sarkosyl. ( a ) Spectra of sarkosyl solutions in water. ( b ) 
 Red : protein sample in 0.1 % sarkosyl measured against buffer without sarkosyl; 
 Green : sample against buffer with 0.1 % sarkosyl;  Grey : buffer with 0.1 % sar-
kosyl against buffer without sarkosyl (Color ﬁ gure online) 
 
Sarkosyl Puriﬁ cation: Facts and Precautions

186
  3.   Because of the apparent shift of the absorption peak, a sample 
measured against a reference buffer, both with sarkosyl, will 
show a spectrum having negative values at the lower wave-
lengths in the 220–240 nm region (Fig.  4b , green 
spectrum).  
  4.   It should be noted that ref.  6 , the most cited reference, is inac-
cessible. The journal article was not available online, nor can 
we obtain the contact details of the two authors.  
  5.   Shown in Fig.  4b is a sample ﬁ rst solubilized in 10 % sarkosyl, 
subsequently diluted to 0.1 % sarkosyl, and concentrated. The 
grey buffer (ﬁ ltrate during concentration) spectrum is consis-
tent with the 0.1 % sarkosyl spectrum in Fig.  4a . However, the 
protein sample (red and green spectra) still has a prominent 
peak at 240 nm. When compared with Fig.  4a , this suggests 
that the protein sample still contains a large amount of 
(5–10 %) sarkosyl. This calls for further puriﬁ cation steps to be 
performed.  
 Acknowledgements 
 B.C. was supported by a King’s College London (2012) summer 
vacation studentship. Mahima Kalra and Florence Thomas also 
took part in implementing sarkosyl solubilization methods.  
 References 
  1.   McNally E, Sohn R, Frankel S et al (1991) 
Expression of myosin and actin in  Escherichia 
coli . Methods Enzymol 196:368–389  
  2.   Tao H, Liu W, Simmons BN et al (2010) 
Purifying natively folded proteins from inclu-
sion bodies using sarkosyl, Triton X-100, and 
CHAPS. Biotechniques 48:61–64  
  3.   Frankel S, Sohn R, Leinwand L (1991) The use 
of sarkosyl in generating soluble protein after 
bacterial expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
88:1192–1196  
  4.   Bordes R, Tropsch J, Holmberg K (2010) Role 
of an amide bond for self-assembly of surfac-
tants. Langmuir 26:3077–3083  
  5.   Gad EAM, ElSukkary MMA, Ismail DA (1997) 
Surface and thermodynamic parameters of 
sodium N-acyl sarcosinate surfactant solutions. 
J Am Oil Chem Soc 74:43–47  
  6.  Venkataraman NI, Subrahmanyam VVR (1985) 
Effect of structure on surfactance of sodium 
salts of N-acylamino acids in aqueous solutions. 
J Ind Chem Soc 62:507–512  
  7.  Dawson RMC (1986) Data for biochemical 
research, 3rd edn. Clarendon, Oxford, xii, 
p 580 
Ben Chisnall et al.

Part II
Experimental Structure Determination and Characterization

189
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_13, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
Chapter 13
Estimation of Crystallization Likelihood Through 
a Fluorimetric Thermal Stability Assay
Vincent Mariaule, Florine Dupeux, and José A. Márquez
Abstract
Construct design and sample formulation are critical in structural biology projects. Large numbers of 
­sample variants are often produced and analyzed for a single target and significant effort is dedicated to 
sample characterization in order to identify at an early stage the most promising samples to help save 
manpower and time. Here, we present a method based on a thermal stability assay that can help estimate the 
likelihood of biological samples to produce crystals. This assay is rapid, inexpensive and consumes very small 
amounts of sample. The results can be used to prioritize certain constructs at an early stage or as an objective 
test to help decide when to undertake other type of approaches addressed at improving sample properties.
Key words Thermofluor, Differential scanning fluorimetry, Thermal denaturation, Crystallization 
likelihood
1  Introduction
Biological samples that are stable, monodisperse and that lack 
unfolded regions show a higher tendency to crystallize [1]. 
However, it is not always possible to anticipate which samples will 
have these properties. A standard approach in structural biology 
projects consists in producing a number of sample variants for each 
single target originating from multiple constructs or from different 
species that are assayed for crystallization either sequentially or in 
parallel [2, 3]. This strategy has often proven successful. However, 
up-scaling protein production for a number of different samples 
requires manpower and time. For this reason, a significant amount 
of effort is often dedicated to identifying at an early stage those 
constructs or sample variants that are more likely to produce crys-
tals [4]. A number of experimental techniques like gel filtration, 

190
mass spectrometry, light scattering, analytical ultracentrifugation, 
or NMR, among others, can help identify those samples with opti-
mal properties or at least identify those that are unlikely to produce 
results [1, 4]. However, some of these experimental approaches 
consume appreciable quantities of sample or require costly 
equipment.
Fluorimetric thermal stability assays, also called Differential 
Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF) or Thermofluor assays, have been 
extensively used to identify ligands or buffer components that pro-
mote sample stability and increase crystallization success rate [5–
7]. This assay was originally developed for the high throughput 
screening of small molecules in drug discovery and relies on the 
use of an environmentally sensitive fluorescent probe [8]. Such 
probes are weakly florescent in water, but show increased quantum 
yields in organic solvents or hydrophobic environments [9]. In a 
typical thermofluor assay, the fluorescent probe is added to the 
sample, which is then subjected to a stepwise increase in tempera-
ture, while the fluorescence signal is being recorded (with a 
RT-PCR machine). Initially, no or only weak interactions are 
expected to occur between sample and probe, as the surface of 
proteins tends to be dominated by hydrophilic side chains. 
However, as the protein unfolds it will expose its hydrophobic 
core, to which the fluorophore can bind. Hence, protein denatur-
ation can be monitored through the sharp increase of fluorescence 
expected to occur as the protein unfolds. The midpoint or the 
inflection point in this transition is often used as an approximation 
to the melting temperature of the sample. The authors have used 
this method to evaluate the melting temperature of 657 unique 
samples in a reference buffer. These samples were also subjected to 
extensive crystallization screening. The results of this analysis show 
a critical value of Tm below which crystallization success rate 
decreases very rapidly [10]. This assay requires very small amounts 
of sample, uses standard equipment, and is very rapid. The results 
can be used to prioritize certain constructs or help make decisions 
in biological crystallography projects.
2  Materials
Prepare all solutions using ultrapure water (prepared by purifying 
deionized water to attain a sensitivity of 18 MΩ cm at 25 °C) and 
analytical grade reagents.
	 1.	 Reference Thermal Stability Assay buffer (RTSA buffer): 
100 mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl. Add 10 mL of water 
in a 50 mL graduated cylinder. Weigh 1.2 g HEPES and then 
0.44  g NaCl and transfer to the graduated cylinder. Add 
35 mL of water and mix. Adjust the pH to 7.5 with HCl. 
Make up to 50 mL with water.
Vincent Mariaule et al.

191
	 2.	 SYPRO® Orange 9.5× mix solution: Thaw SYPRO® Orange 
5,000× stock solution (Invitrogen, catalogue No: S6651, 10× 
50 μL) at room temperature. Add 3.9 μL of SYPRO® orange 
5,000× stock to 2.0121 mL of RTSA buffer. Mix by pipetting 
and protect from light.
	 3.	 qPCR machine (Stratagene, Mx3005P).
	 4.	 PCR plate (Thermo scientific, catalogue No: AB-0600).
	 5.	 Clear tape for qPCR (Bio-Rad, catalogue No: 223–9444).
3  Methods
	 1.	 Turn on the qPCR machine and the corresponding software 
20 min before the run to pre-warm the lamp.
	 2.	 Prepare the sample solution: Calculate the protein solution 
needed for a final assay concentration of 10  μM with the 
­following formula:
	
V
MW
C
protein
protein
protein
=
×
×
−
400
10 3
	
Vprotein per single assay in μL, MWprotein in kDa, Cprotein in mg/mL.
Preferably, use a maximum 2 μL of Vprotein per assay. Increase 
the concentration of your protein if needed.
As the SYPRO Orange fluorescence signal depends on the 
hydrophobicity of the medium, adding lipids and deter-
gents to the sample buffer is not recommended. However, 
in some cases it is possible to obtain results under these 
conditions.
	 3.	 Calculate the volume of RTSA buffer to add in each well of 
the PCR plate.
	
V
V
RTSA buffer
protein
=
−
20
	
VRTSA buffer in μL.
	 4.	 Add first the calculated volume of RTSA in each well then add 
the protein volume calculated above. Mix gently by pipetting 
avoiding air bubbles.
	 5.	 Add 21 μL of SYPRO® Orange 9.5× mix solution avoiding the 
formation of air bubbles.
	 6.	 Seal the plate with clear tape for PCR.
	 7.	 Set parameters for the thermal shift assay:
Excitation/emission filters: 492 nm/ 568 nm.
1 min plateau.
3.1  The Thermal 
Stability Assay
Estimation of Crystallization Likelihood Through a Fluorimetric Thermal Stability Assay

192
1 °C step increase.
Start temperature: 25 °C.
72 cycles.
	 8.	 Export raw data as an Excel file for analysis.
	 1.	 Import the data file from the qPCR machine into Excel or a 
similar program. Plot the fluorescence value as a function of 
the temperature for each well. An optimal denaturation curve 
(Fig. 1) has an approximately sigmoidal shape with a baseline, 
and a rapid transition region that represents the denaturation 
process. However, after this rapid transition the fluorescence 
signal tends to show a rapid decrease, likely arising from the 
precipitation of the unfolded protein.
To calculate the melting temperature, select a point in the 
base line (Fig. 1, point 1). If the curve does not display a con-
stant baseline use the lowest point before the temperature 
transition region. Select a second point corresponding to the 
maximum of fluorescence signal after the transition region 
(Fig.  1, point 2). The melting temperature (Tm) can be 
approximated as the temperature corresponding to the mid-
point between maximum and baseline signals. To compare 
results from different assays, it is recommended to use normal-
ized data instead of raw data (see Note 1).
3.2  Data Analysis
Fig. 1 Thermal stability assay. Optimal denaturation curve
Vincent Mariaule et al.

193
	 2.	 Some samples produce a denaturation curve with multiple 
transitions (Fig.  2a). This may be indicative of sample 
heterogeneity.
	 3.	 Some samples produce a continuous decrease of the fluores-
cence signal with no clear transition regions (Fig.  2b). No 
clear Tm can be estimated in this case.
	 1.	 For samples with an optimal denaturation curve a Tm can be 
easily estimated. Proteins with Tm above 45 °C show a higher 
tendency to crystallize, while crystallization likelihood 
decreases rapidly for values of Tm below 45 °C [10]. This cri-
terion can be used to decide which constructs or samples 
should be prioritized.
	 2.	 For samples with a Tm comprised between 29 and 44 °C crys-
tallization can be attempted at 4 °C. In general incubating the 
crystallization experiments at least 25 °C below the estimated 
Tm is likely to maximize crystallization likelihood [10].
	 3.	 For samples with very low Tm, a screening for buffer condi-
tions or ligands that increase protein stability, as those 
described in refs. 5–7 can be carried out.
	 4.	 Multiphasic denaturation curves may be indicative of sample 
heterogeneity. The causes can be varied. For example, it may 
indicate the presence of multiple proteins in the sample that 
unfold independently. They could also be due to the pres-
ence of different domains or both folded and unfolded 
regions in the same protein. Partial saturation with a ligand 
may sometimes produce this type of curves reflecting the dif-
ferences in stability between the bound and unbound forms 
3.3  Interpretation  
of Results
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
a
b
Fluorescence
Temperature (Celsius)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
Fluorescence
Temperature (Celsius)
Fig. 2 Multiphasic (a) and monotonic (b) curves in thermal shift assay
Estimation of Crystallization Likelihood Through a Fluorimetric Thermal Stability Assay

194
of the protein. Although these curves may be indicative of 
some type of heterogeneity, which could be deleterious for 
crystallization, they could be very informative and an effort 
to interpret the results in the context of the particular sample 
may prove fruitful. In some cases thermofluor assays can be 
used to study protein–protein or protein–ligand interactions 
[11, 12].
	 5.	 Some samples produce a continuously decreasing fluorescent 
signal with no clear transition regions (Fig 2b). Often these 
samples show a high fluorescence signal at low temperature, 
which may indicate binding of the fluorophore to the folded 
protein or the presence of hydrophobic components in the 
sample buffer. However, this type of results is not very 
­informative on the likelihood of these samples to crystallize 
[10]. Other florescent probes may be tested in these cases 
(see Note 2).
	 6.	 The presence of detergents in the sample buffer may interfere 
with the fluorescent signal (see Note 3).
	 7.	 In some cases, natural fluorescent cofactors can be exploited as 
intrinsic probes for thermal denaturation experiments [13].
4  Notes
	 1.	 Data normalization can be obtained by applying the following 
formula:
	
x
x
x
x
x
normalized T
T
,
min
max
min
=
−
−
	
xnormalized,T: normalized fluorescence value at temperature T, xT: 
raw fluorescence value at temperature T, xmin: minimal raw flu-
orescence value, xmax: maximal raw fluorescence value.
	 2.	 Some samples may fail to produce results with SYPRO® 
Orange. Other environmentally sensitive fluorescent probes 
can be tested in those cases [5, 9].
	 3.	 The presence of detergents in the sample may interfere with 
the fluorescent signal. Specific thermofluor methods have 
been developed for membrane proteins [14].
Vincent Mariaule et al.

195
	 1.	Zulauf M, D'Arcy A (1992) J Cryst Growth 
122:102–106
	 2.	Banci L, Bertini I, Cusack S et al (2006) Acta 
Crystallogr D 62:1208–1217
	 3.	Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Nat Methods 5:135–146
	 4.	Geerlof A, Brown J, Coutard B et  al (2006) 
Acta Crystallogr D 62:1125–1136
	 5.	Niesen FH, Berglund H, Vedadi M (2007) Nat 
Protoc 2:2212–2221
	 6.	Ericsson UB, Hallberg BM, Detitta GT et al 
(2006) Anal Biochem 357:289–298
	 7.	Vedadi M, Niesen FH, Allali-Hassani A et al 
(2006) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103: 
15835–15840
	 8.	Pantoliano MW, Petrella EC, Kwasnoski JD 
et al (2001) J Biomol Screen 6:429–440
	 9.	Hawe A, Sutter M, Jiskoot W (2008) Pharm 
Res 25:1487–1499
	10.	Dupeux F, Rower M, Seroul G et  al (2011) 
Acta Crystallogr D 67:915–919
	11.	Matulis D, Kranz JK, Salemme FR et al (2005) 
Biochemistry 44:5258–5266
	12.	Heads JT, Adams R, D'Hooghe LE et  al 
(2012) Protein Sci 21:1315–1322
	13.	Forneris F, Orru R, Bonivento D et al (2009) 
FEBS J 276:2833–2840
	14.	Alexandrov AI, Mileni M, Chien EY et  al 
(2008) Structure 16:351–359
References
Estimation of Crystallization Likelihood Through a Fluorimetric Thermal Stability Assay

197
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_14, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 14  
 CrystalDirect™: A Novel Approach for Automated Crystal 
Harvesting Based on Photoablation of Thin Films 
 José  A.  Márquez and  Florent  Cipriani 
 Abstract 
 The last years have seen a major development in automation for protein production, crystallization, and 
X-ray diffraction data collection, which has contributed to accelerate the pace of structure solution and to 
facilitate the study of ever more challenging targets through macromolecular crystallography. This has led 
to a considerable increase in the numbers of crystals produced and analyzed. However the process of 
recovering crystals from crystallization supports and mounting them in X-ray data collection pins remains 
a manual and delicate operation. Here we present a novel approach enabling full automation of the crystal 
mounting process and describe the operation of the ﬁ rst-automated CrystalDirect harvesting unit. 
Implications for crystallography applications and for the future operational integration of automated crys-
tallization and data collection resources are discussed.  
 Key words   Macromolecular crystallography  ,  Crystallization  ,   Automation ,   High-throughput  , 
 Automated crystal harvesting  ,  CrystalDirect  
1  Introduction 
 Over the last decade automated approaches for protein production 
and crystallization have become common tools in structural biol-
ogy in general and in macromolecular crystallography in particular 
[ 1 – 5 ]. This has not only contributed to decrease the time for struc-
ture determination, but has allowed to undertake the study of ever 
more challenging targets, like multi-protein complexes and mem-
brane proteins that often require the production and analysis of 
large numbers of crystals [ 2 ,  3 ]. In parallel synchrotron beam lines 
and data processing software have been progressively automated 
increasing their throughput signiﬁ cantly [ 2 ,  6 – 9 ]. These develop-
ments have also contributed to facilitate the use of crystallography 
in drug design, by facilitating the production and X-ray analysis of 
large numbers of crystals with potential ligands [ 10 ,  11 ]. However, 
automated crystallization and data collection facilities remain sepa-
rated by the need to harvest crystals out of crystallization supports, 

198
typically crystallization plates, and mount them in supports com-
patible with X-ray data collection at cryogenic temperatures. This 
introduces a manpower intensive step that contributes to slow 
down the process of crystal analysis. Moreover, manual crystal 
recovery and ﬂ ash cryo-cooling sometimes results in a loss of dif-
fraction power due to mechanical damage, sample loss, or improper 
cryo-cooling. Automated crystal harvesting is needed to bridge the 
gap between automated crystallization and data collection units 
and to improve the reliability and reproducibility of the whole pro-
cess [ 12 ]. 
 Several approaches have been proposed to ﬁ ll this gap. Rupp 
and coworkers have developed a semiautomated crystal mounting 
device capable of recovering crystals through an operator-guided 
robotic system [ 12 – 14 ]. Another approach involves exposing crys-
tals to X-rays in situ, that is directly in the crystallization support 
where they grow [ 15 ]. Robotic beam line systems able to present 
either crystallization plates or micro-ﬂ uidic devices to X-ray beams 
at synchrotron beam lines have been developed and used for the 
rapid discrimination between salt and protein crystals as well as for 
multi-crystal data collection both at standard and micro focus 
beam lines [ 9 ,  16 – 18 ]. However, this approach has two major 
drawbacks. First, there is signiﬁ cant X-ray scattering background 
associated to the plastics used in the crystallization plates and 
micro-ﬂ uidic chips, which may complicate the analysis of the data. 
Second, since the experiments are performed at room temperature, 
data collection may be rapidly limited by radiation damage. 
 In this chapter we describe the operation of the ﬁ rst 
CrystalDirect harvesting unit based on a novel concept designed to 
enable full automation of the crystal mounting process [ 19 ]. In the 
CrystalDirect approach crystals are grown on the surface of a very 
thin ﬁ lm in a specially designed vapor diffusion crystallization 
plate. This ﬁ lm has been selected to be both compatible with crys-
tal growth and with data collection (i.e., produces very low X-ray 
scattering background). In order to recover the crystals, instead of 
“ﬁ shing” them out of the crystallization drop, the ﬁ lm area con-
taining the crystal is excised and attached to a pin (Fig.  1 ). Rather 
than using a mechanical system which could introduce vibrations, 
the CrystalDirect system uses a laser to excise the ﬁ lm through 
photoablation. Laser photoablation is commonly used in industry 
for precise machining of materials. In addition to its high precision 
it has the advantage of removing matter from the ablated zone 
without affecting the adjacent areas. The use of this approach in 
macromolecular crystallography has been recently illustrated [ 19 ].
 In addition to providing full automation of crystal harvesting 
the CrystalDirect approach has the advantage of reducing the 
mechanical stress to the crystals as, contrary to the standard  manual 
process, no tool enters the crystallization experiment during the 
harvesting operation. Moreover, it works similarly well with either 
José A. Márquez and Florent Cipriani

199
large or microcrystals, as the cut area can be adapted to match the 
size of the crystal. Alternatively, multiple crystals can be recovered 
on the same support and analyzed by applying serial X-ray data col-
lection strategies. Finally, the laser ablation process is extremely pre-
cise and can also be used to ablate parts of crystals without affecting 
the other parts [ 19 ]. This advantage could be used to remove areas 
of the crystals containing defects before data collection. 
 The CrystalDirect approach opens the prospect for the full 
automation of the crystal harvesting process and could contribute 
to the operational integration of automated crystallization and 
X-ray data collection facilities. This could contribute signiﬁ cantly 
to increase their productivity and decrease signiﬁ cantly the delay 
between crystal identiﬁ cation and data analysis, bringing a new 
level of efﬁ ciency in macromolecular crystallography. Moreover 
the CrystalDirect approach could contribute signiﬁ cantly to the 
advancement of very challenging projects in structural biology, 
 Fig. 1  The CrystalDirect concept. ( a ) Schema of the CrystalDirect 96-well vapor 
diffusion crystallization plate. Numbers designate the different components:  1  : 
body of the 96-well plate,  2 : crystallization cells,  3  : CrystalDirect crystallization 
ﬁ lm,  4 : top sealing ﬁ lm,  5  : solution reservoir,  6  : crystallization solution,  7  : crys-
tallization drops deposited on the CrystalDirect ﬁ lm,  8 : Crystals. ( b ) Film areas 
containing one or multiple crystals can be excised with the aid of a laser [ 9 ]. 
( c ) The excised ﬁ lm containing the crystals is attached to a pin compatible with 
X-ray data collection. Reproduced from Acta Crystallographica [ 19 ], a journal of 
the International Union of Crystallography 
 
CrystalDirect™: Automated Crystal Harvesting

200
like those involving the study of membrane proteins, multi-protein 
complexes or large ligand screening efforts. To realize its full 
potential though, the CrystalDirect system will need to be com-
bined with automated protocols for the delivery of cryo- protectants 
and other chemicals to crystals. Some cryo-protection methods 
potentially compatible with the CrystalDirect system have been 
already proposed [ 14 ,  20 ,  21 ]. These and other methods are cur-
rently under investigation.  
2  Materials 
  1.  CrystalDirect 96-well vapor diffusion crystallization plates 
(Fig.  1 ) conform to the Microplate standard of the Society for 
Biological Screening (SBS) and are compatible with all of 
the popular crystallization robots. Each of the cells in a 
CrystalDirect plate consist of two parts, one formed by a plas-
tic reservoir that holds the crystallization solution and a second 
part consisting of an “open window” through the plastic frame. 
This window is closed by applying a very thin ﬁ lm at the bot-
tom of the plate that represents the surface that will hold the 
crystallization drops (Fig.  1 ). Once crystallization experiments 
have been set up, either manually or using standard robotic 
equipment, a standard ﬁ lm is applied to the top of the plate to 
seal the crystallization cells ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.   The CrystalDirect harvesting unit [ 19 ] (Fig.  2 ) consists of a 
motorized table that holds the crystallization plate. A laser 
source, a scanner that directs and focuses the beam of the laser 
 Fig. 2    The CrystalDirect Harvesting unit. ( a ) Schematic view of the components of the harvesting unit. ( b ) Detail 
of the ﬁ lm excision and pin attachment process as seen through the camera of the harvesting unit. The  inlet 
shows a CrystalDirect plate on the plate support of the harvesting unit 
José A. Márquez and Florent Cipriani

201
to speciﬁ c areas, a pin handling robot and a cryo-cooling unit. 
All the process is monitored through a camera and controlled 
through a computer.
  3.  The CrystalDirect software allows selecting any position on 
the crystallization plate and drawing cutting areas around the 
crystals.  
  4.   CrystalDirect pins have been designed to be compatible with 
standard synchrotron beam lines and with the CrystalDirect pro-
cess. They are similar to current crystal SPINE mounting pins 
[ 22 ], except that they are cut in bias at the tip, to provide a bet-
ter surface of attachment between the pin and the ﬁ lm (Fig.  2 ). 
In addition to this, the shaft of the pin is hollow allowing the 
application of vacuum through it, which ensures proper attach-
ment of the ﬁ lm to the pin during the harvesting process.  
3  Methods ( See  Note 7 ) 
  1.  The CrystalDirect plates are similar to current vapor diffusion 
plates and can be used to set up crystallization experiments 
either manually or with the help of robotic equipment and 
standard protocols. The plates are compatible with all of the 
popular robotic systems for crystallization, liquid handling, 
and plate imaging. They have been designed for high-quality 
imaging with both visible and ultraviolet light ( see  Note 2 ).  
  1.  Once crystals have grown, the plates are transferred to the 
plate holder of the CrystalDirect harvesting unit. Using the 
speciﬁ c software accessible from the control computer the 
operator can select any position in the crystallization plate and 
visualize the crystallization drop through the camera of the 
system (Fig.  2 ). With the help of the software the operator 
locates the crystals and selects the cutting area and location of 
the pin ( see  Note 3 ). Once the harvesting information is vali-
dated the process follows in a fully automated way ( steps 2 – 5 ). 
  2.    Once the harvesting information is validated The CrystalDirect 
system prepares a pin by automatically applying a small amount of 
glue to its tip. The Pin is then moved close to the harvesting area.  
  3.   The tip of the pin is set in contact with the ﬁ lm while applying 
vacuum through the shaft of the pin. This is to facilitate 
 attachment between the pin and the ﬁ lm. Vacuum can be 
released once contact has occurred.  
  4.   The laser is activated and the scanner drives the focused laser 
beam through the predeﬁ ned cutting shape to excise the ﬁ lm. 
  5.   The pin handling unit transfers the pin, with the ﬁ lm attached 
to its tip into a cryo-stream for ﬂ ash-freezing ( see  Note 4 ). 
Alternatively the pin can be maintained at room temperature.  
3.1  Setting Up 
Crystallization 
Experiments in 
CrystalDirect Plates
3.2  Deﬁ nition of the 
Harvesting Area and 
Automated Crystal 
Harvesting
CrystalDirect™: Automated Crystal Harvesting

202
  1.  Either fresh or frozen samples ready for X-ray analysis can be 
recovered from the harvesting system ( see  Note 5 ). An auto-
mated crystal recovery and storage unit allowing continuous 
operation with multiple samples is currently under develop-
ment ( see  Note 6 ). 
4  Notes 
  1.   Although initially designed to provide a support for the 
CrystalDirect harvesting process, the CrystalDirect plates are 
also very well suited for in situ X-ray diffraction experiments. 
This is because crystals grow on a very thin ﬁ lm that generates 
negligible X-ray scattering as compared to standard crystalliza-
tion plates in which crystals grown on a thick plastic support 
producing signiﬁ cant X-ray background. The low background 
of the CrystalDirect plates could be an advantage for the analy-
sis in situ of microcrystals, or weakly diffracting samples.  
  2.   CrystalDirect plate deﬁ nitions for the most common robotic 
equipment can be obtained from the HTX lab at the EMBL 
Grenoble Outstation (htx@embl.fr).  
  3.   Remote operation of the CrystalDirect system is also possible. 
A web-based system allowing specifying and drawing cutting 
areas directly on images produced by standard crystallization 
imaging robots is currently under development. 
  4.   A number of cry-cooling methods compatible with the crystal 
direct system have been proposed [ 14 ,  20 ,  21 ]. Methods for 
fully automated delivery of cryo-protectants and other chemi-
cals to crystals are currently under development. 
  5.   After the harvesting process crystals are mounted in standard 
pins compatible with most X-ray data collection facilities. The 
CrystalDirect harvesting unit can be operated off-line, i.e., 
harvesting and storing multiple frozen crystals in standard 
pucks that will be later transferred to a beam line and loaded in 
a standard automated sample changer. Alternatively, the sys-
tem could be integrated as a beam line component supplying 
fresh or frozen crystals for on-line analysis with X-rays.  
  6.   Future versions of the CrystalDirect harvesting unit will 
include a plate hotel to store multiple crystallization plates and 
a crystal storage system to allow continuous operation harvest-
ing multiple crystals from multiple crystallization plates.  
  7.   A video illustrating the automated CrystalDirect harvesting 
process is available at   https://embl.fr/htxlab/   . 
3.3  Crystal Recovery
José A. Márquez and Florent Cipriani

203
 Acknowledgments 
 We are thankful to Dr. Ulrich Zander, Martin Röwer, Gael Seroul, 
Christoph Landret, Julien Huet, Alexandre Gobbo, Gergely Papp, 
and Frank Felisaz for their contributions and to the European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory for support to the CrystalDirect 
project. We want to thank INSTRUCT and the E.C.-funded 
P-CUBE project (FP7/2007-2013; grant No 227764) for ﬁ nan-
cial support.  
 References 
  1.  Edwards A (2009) Annu Rev Biochem 
78:541–568 
  2.  Abola E, Kuhn P, Earnest T et al (2000) Nat 
Struct Biol 7(Suppl):973–977  
  3.  Banci L, Bertini I, Cusack S et al (2006) Acta 
Crystallogr D 62:1208–1217  
  4.  Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J et al (2008) 
Nat Methods 5:135–146  
  5.  Rupp B, Segelke BW, Krupka HI et al (2002) 
Acta Crystallogr D 58:1514–1518  
  6.  Lamzin VS, Perrakis A (2000) Nat Struct Biol 
7(Suppl):978–981  
  7.  Wasserman SR, Koss JW, Sojitra ST et al 
(2012) Trends Pharmacol Sci 33:261–267  
  8.  Arzt S, Beteva A, Cipriani F et al (2005) Prog 
Biophys Mol Biol 89:124–152  
  9.  Axford D, Owen RL, Aishima J et al (2012) 
Acta Crystallogr D 68:592–600  
  10.   Murray CW, Blundell TL (2010) Curr Opin 
Struct Biol 20:497–507  
  11.   Blundell TL, Jhoti H, Abell C (2002) Nat Rev 
Drug Discov 1:45–54  
  12.  Viola R, Carman P, Walsh J et al (2007) 
J Struct Funct Genomics 8:145–152  
  13.  Viola R, Carman P, Walsh J et al (2007) J Appl 
Crystallogr 40:539–545  
  14.  Viola R, Walsh J, Melka A et al (2011) J Struct 
Funct Genomics 12:77–82  
  15.   McPherson A (2000) J Appl Crystallogr 
33:397–400  
  16.  Jacquamet L, Ohana J, Joly J et al (2004) 
Structure 12:1219–1225  
  17.  Ng JD, Clark PJ, Stevens RC (2008) Acta 
Crystallogr D 64:189–197  
 18.   Yadav MK, Gerdts CJ, Sanishvili R et al (2005) 
J Appl Crystallogr 38:900–905  
  19.  Cipriani F, Rower M, Landret C et al (2012) 
Acta Crystallogr D 68:1393–1399  
  20.  Pellegrini E, Piano D, Bowler MW (2011) 
Acta Crystallogr D 67:902–906  
  21.  Kim CU, Kapfer R, Gruner SM (2005) Acta 
Crystallogr D 61:881–890  
  22.  Cipriani F, Felisaz F, Launer L et al (2006) 
Acta Crystallogr D 62:1251–1259  
CrystalDirect™: Automated Crystal Harvesting

205
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_15, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 15  
 Methods to Reﬁ ne Macromolecular Structures 
in Cases of Severe Diffraction Anisotropy 
 Michael  R.  Sawaya 
 Abstract 
 Diffraction anisotropy is characterized by variation in diffraction quality with reciprocal lattice direction. 
In the example presented here, diffraction extended to 2.1 Å resolution along a* and c* directions but 
only to 3.0 Å along the b* direction. Severe anisotropy such as this is often associated with lack of detail 
in electron density maps, stalled model improvement, and poor reﬁ nement statistics. Published methods 
for overcoming these difﬁ culties have been combined and implemented in the diffraction anisotropy 
server. Speciﬁ cally, the server offers information to diagnose the degree of anisotropy, and then applies 
ellipsoidal resolution boundaries, anisotropic scaling, and B-factor sharpening to the data set to compen-
sate for the deleterious effects of diffraction anisotropy. Here, I offer advice on implementing these 
 methods to facilitate reﬁ nement of macromolecular structures in cases of severely anisotropic data.  
 Key words   Diffraction anisotropy  ,   Crystallographic reﬁ nement  
1  Introduction 
 Difﬁ culties in reﬁ ning structures with anisotropic data can be 
reduced by adopting two strategies. The ﬁ rst strategy is to refrain 
from discarding valuable reﬂ ection measurements in the outer res-
olution shells. For example, during data collection, the user may 
notice strong reﬂ ection intensities recorded at 2.1 Å along one axis 
of the detector but relatively weak along the orthogonal axis. The 
quality of the measurements near this axis in the 2.1 Å resolution 
shell will appear diminished by their grouping with the remaining 
reﬂ ections enclosed by the same  spherical shell. It would be self- 
defeating to eliminate these strong reﬂ ections based on these 
 misleading statistics since they are actually well measured and offer 
a valuable contribution to the detail of the electron density map. 
The anisotropy server offers tools to examine the appropriate 
resolution limits along each of the principal axes and then rede-
ﬁ ne the boundaries of a data set as an  ellipsoid , congruous with 

206
the anisotropic limits of the diffraction signal. In this way, strong 
reﬂ ections are no longer systematically grouped with weak in the 
highest  resolution shells, and statistics at high resolution more 
accurately reﬂ ect data quality. 
 The second strategy is to sharpen electron density maps for 
model building. Sharpening compensates for side effects caused by 
anisotropic scaling, involuntarily employed by reﬁ nement pro-
grams to eliminate directional dependence of <|F|>. Anisotropic 
scaling diminishes the magnitudes of the high resolution reﬂ ec-
tions in the strongest diffracting direction, and in so doing, dimin-
ishes the level of detail in electron density maps. The server offers 
options for sharpening the structure factors, restoring the level of 
detail in the map, and facilitating model-building efforts.  
2  Methods 
 The procedures outlined in Fig.  1 and below are illustrated from 
my experiences in reﬁ ning the structure of a PE-PPE complex 
from  Mycobacterium tuberculosis [ 1 ]. Visually, diffraction extended 
to 2.1 Å resolution along a* and c* directions but only to 3.0 Å 
along the b* direction.
  1.  Process the data using a higher resolution limit than might 
seem warranted by the  R merge or  I / σ statistics. For example, 
include shells of data to  I / σ > 1 or even lower. The recently vali-
dated CC 1/2 statistic [ 2 ] could instead be used as a criterion. 
Include data to CC 1/2 of 0.20 or 0.10. Use the server as a tool to 
carve the ﬁ nal ellipsoidal resolution boundary for the data set.  
  2.  Keep the data unmerged. Unmerged data permits calculation 
of the  R merge and CC 1/2 statistics after rejecting the poor mea-
surements that fall outside the chosen ellipsoidal resolution 
boundary. The use of merged data still permits diagnosis of 
anisotropy, but does not permit the user to observe or report 
updated  R merge or CC 1/2 statistics.  
  3.   If using Denzo/Scalepack [ 3 ], adjust the error model so that 
0.9 <  χ 2 < 1.1 in each resolution bin. If neglected, the | F |/ σ val-
ues calculated by the server will give a false indication of the 
resolution limit.  
  There are currently three versions of the anisotropy server; each 
accepts a different data format.
  1.  Use the XDS version (  http://services.mbi.ucla.edu/anisoscale
/anisoscale_xds   ) if the data is in XDS ahkl format [ 4 ]. It is the 
most comprehensive and convenient to use of the three ver-
sions. If provided with unmerged data, the server will report 
 R merge and I/ σ statistics after imposing the ellipsoidal bound-
ary, offering a more accurate view of data quality.  
2.1  Data Preparation
2.2  Server Versions
Michael R. Sawaya

207
  2.  Use the Denzo/HKL version (obtainable from a link at   http://
services.mbi.ucla.edu/anisoscale/   ) if the data is in x-ﬁ le for-
mat [ 3 ]. It offers the advantages of working with unmerged 
data, but requires the user to download the scripts and install 
them on the user’s computer.  
  3.   Use 
the 
MTZ 
version 
(  http://services.mbi.ucla.edu/
anisoscale/   ) if just a diagnosis of anisotropy is needed. It accepts 
CCP4’s .mtz ﬁ les [ 5 ] and therefore imposes no restrictions on 
Process 
images to
detector 
corners. 
Upload data to 
appropriate version
of anisotropy 
server: XDS, X-FILE
or MTZ 
Specify resolution
limits and 
sharpening or 
request automatic
detection 
Interpret output 
anisotropy graphs
and statistics 
Anisotropy is
negligible.  
Anisotropy is 
significant. 
Resolution limits
and sharpening 
values are:  
acceptable.
Use  the server
modified data set
for refinement
 
 
Use original  data
for refinement 
unacceptable.
Specify new input
resolution limits or
sharpening factor 
 
 
 Fig. 1  An overview of the steps involved in using the anisotropy server. (1) Process the data with care not to omit 
strong reﬂ ections at high resolution even though they may not ﬁ ll the entire shell due to anisotropy, such as those 
indicated in the diffraction image. If in doubt about the choice of high resolution cutoff, integrate over the entire 
detector surface. (2) Choose the version of anisotropy server which is compatible with data format. (3) Submit 
data to the server with appropriate input parameters selected. The server reports anisotropy analyses, suggests 
anisotropic resolution limits, applies these boundaries, applies optional B-factor sharpening, and reports statis-
tics. (4) From these reports, conclude one of the following: (a) anisotropy is negligible and the data is best used 
in its original form, (b) that the suggested modiﬁ cations are appropriate and should be implemented in the fol-
lowing reﬁ nement steps, or (c) some modiﬁ cations are justiﬁ ed but with different speciﬁ cations. In this last case, 
resubmit the data with speciﬁ ed instructions to change the resolution limits or sharpening factor       
 
Overcoming Severe Diffraction Anisotropy

208
the choice of data processing software since it is usually simple 
to convert any format to mtz. This version offers no update of 
statistics after drawing ellipsoidal resolution boundaries. Supply 
data as structure factor amplitudes not intensities.  
  1.  Specify the location of the data set for analysis using the 
“Browse” button.  
  2.   Specify resolution limits for the three principal axes or request 
automatic limits detection. I recommend automated detection 
for an initial analysis. Request it by submitting default values of 
“0.0” for limit 1, limit 2, and limit 3 ﬁ elds. If the user con-
cludes from the output analysis that a change in limits is desired, 
he can adjust them by running the server a second time with 
speciﬁ ed values. Enter them (Å) in any order ( see  Note 1 ). 
The server will apply the limits to the appropriate axes.  
  3.  Specify B-factor sharpening (Å 2 ) or request automatic sharpen-
ing. The automatic sharpening factor is derived from the most 
negative principal component of the anisotropic part of B 
affecting the observed amplitudes ( see  Note 2 ).  
  4.   Specify data labels for | F | and  σ values if the user is using the 
MTZ version of the server. Be sure the labels correctly match 
those in the uploaded .mtz ﬁ le. If not, the server will produce 
no output.  σ values are important for the accuracy of the 
anisotropy analysis and must be included.  
  5.   Push the “Submit Data” button.  
3  Interpreting Anisotropy Analysis 
  The server reports “almost no”, “mild”, “strong”, or “severe” 
anisotropy based on the spread in components of the anisotropic B, 
calculated by the program PHASER [ 6 ]. If the spread is less than 
25 Å 2 the server will indicate no anisotropy or mild anisotropy. If the 
spread is greater than 25 Å 2 the server will indicate strong or severe 
anisotropy. The spread is printed in the ﬁ rst graphic and depicted as 
a reading on a thermometer (Fig.  2 ). This diagnosis is only an 
estimate and the user should verify the result by interpreting the 
<| F |>/ σ falloff graph, a more reliable diagnostic, discussed below.
  The server offers a suggestion for resolution limits along each of 
the three principal axes, if automatic detection is requested. These 
are printed at the bottom of the ﬁ rst graphical output (Fig.  2 ). 
These limits correspond to the resolutions at which the <| F |>/ σ 
values dip below a value of 3.0, along each of the three principal 
axes, calculated by the CCP4 program TRUNCATE [ 5 ].
  1.   If the spread in the three suggested resolution limits is less than 
0.25 Å, an ellipsoidal resolution boundary is unlikely to be 
2.3  Input Parameters
3.1  Asses the Degree 
of Anisotropy
3.2  Asses the Need 
for an Ellipsoidal 
Resolution Boundary
Michael R. Sawaya

209
beneﬁ cial. In this case, use a conventional spherical resolution 
boundary drawn by the data processing program of choice. 
There is no need to regard the remaining output from the 
anisotropy server. 
  2.  If the spread is more than 0.25 Å, an ellipsoidal resolution 
boundary may be beneﬁ cial. The larger the spread, the more 
justiﬁ ed is the use of an ellipsoidal resolution boundary. In this 
case, continue with anisotropy analysis.  
 Fig. 2    “Strong anisotropy” is indicated by the spread in components of the aniso-
tropic B-factor, 27.6 Å 2 . The suggested resolution limits are 2.1 Å, 3.0 Å, and 
2.1 Å corresponding to the resolution values at which <| F |>/ σ  dips below a value 
of 3.0 near the a*, b*, and c* axes, respectively. The spread in resolution limits is 
large, 0.9 Å, suggesting the anisotropy is severe and that deﬁ ning an ellipsoidal 
boundary appears justiﬁ ed for this case 
 
Overcoming Severe Diffraction Anisotropy

210
4  Improving the Structure Model 
  1.  From the server, use the link provided to download the struc-
ture factors (mtz format) trimmed to the requested ellipsoidal 
resolution limits, anisotropically scaled, and sharpened by the 
requested factor.  
  2.  Continue atomic reﬁ nement as customary, but use the down-
loaded structure factors. The drop to expect in R-factors is 
proportional to the severity of anisotropy. In the PE-PPE proj-
ect, the drop was 6 %.  
  3.  View reﬁ ned maps and models in a graphics display program.  
  4.   Adjust map sharpening. The program COOT [ 7 ] offers an 
interactive means of sharpening the map by adjusting a slider, 
currently available under the “calculate” menu. If the electron 
density map lacks features, specify a more negative value. If the 
map appears overly detailed with noisy features, specify a more 
positive value. It will not affect atomic B-factors.  
  5.   Build in newly visible features. In the PE-PPE project, sharp-
ening permitted the observation of additional details not oth-
erwise observable, such as water molecules, carbonyl bumps, 
and side chain rotamers. Additional building improved the 
model, leading to an additional 5 % drop in R-factors. Similar 
experiences were reported by others [ 8 – 10 ].  
5  Reporting Data Statistics After Drawing Ellipsoidal Resolution Limits 
  1.  State in the abstract that the diffraction was “anisotropic” with 
a maximal resolution that the user speciﬁ ed. Do not specify 
only the maximal resolution without the qualifying word 
“anisotropic”; it would be misleading. Alternatively, specify 
the spread in resolution limits among the three principal direc-
tions. For example, “the diffraction was anisotropic with reso-
lution limits between 2.1 Å and 3.0 Å.”  
  2.  Explain in the methods section that an ellipsoidal resolution 
boundary was used. State the three values for the limits and to 
which axes they correspond to. For example, “an ellipsoidal 
resolution boundary was drawn with limits of 2.1 Å along a* 
and c* and 3.0 Å along b*.”  
  1.  Report the data statistics before and after drawing the ellipsoi-
dal resolution boundary. Do not report only the initial statis-
tics; it could be considered misleading. The XDS version of the 
server offers a log ﬁ le from XSCALE, showing the data statis-
tics after the ellipsoidal resolution boundary is drawn (Table  1 ). 
5.1  Resolution
5.2  Data Quality 
Statistics
Michael R. Sawaya

211
Showing both sets of statistics indicates to reviewers that 
incompleteness in the high resolution shell is due to anisotropy 
rather than poor data collection skills.
  2.   Do not exclude a high resolution shell due to poor complete-
ness. Completeness necessarily decreases as a consequence of 
using an ellipsoidal resolution boundary. If the  I / σ or CC 1/2 
 Table 1 
 A table of data quality statistics provided by the XDS version of the server reveals 
improvement in  R merge and  I / σ statistics after carving the ellipsoidal boundary 
 Resolution 
 Observed 
 Redundancy 
 Completeness 
 R merge 
 I / σ 
 Before 
 After 
 Before  After 
 Before 
(%) 
 After 
(%) 
 Before 
(%) 
 After 
(%) 
 Before  after 
 9.35 
 3,440 
 3,387 
 7.5 
 7.5 
 87.1 
 87.0 
 3.4 
 3.4 
 41.5 
 41.7 
 6.61 
 7,167 
 7,085 
 9.5 
 9.5 
 100.0 
 100.0 
 4.0 
 4.0 
 40.7 
 40.8 
 5.40 
 9,105 
 9,050 
 9.6 
 9.6 
 100.0 
 100.0 
 5.5 
 5.5 
 32.9 
 33.0 
 4.68 
 10,474 
 10,373 
 9.8 
 9.8 
 99.9 
 100.0 
 5.4 
 5.4 
 33.8 
 33.7 
 4.18 
 12,192 
 12,047 
 9.9 
 9.9 
 100.0 
 99.9 
 5.2 
 5.2 
 33.5 
 33.7 
 3.82 
 13,539 
 13,446 
 10.1 
 10.1 
 99.9 
 99.9 
 5.9 
 5.9 
 30.2 
 30.4 
 3.53 
 14,571 
 14,336 
 10.0 
 10.0 
 100.0 
 100.0 
 6.8 
 6.7 
 26.4 
 26.4 
 3.31 
 15,261 
 15,202 
 9.9 
 9.9 
 100.0 
 100.0 
 9.2 
 9.1 
 20.3 
 20.4 
 3.12 
 15,632 
 15,522 
 9.8 
 9.8 
 99.7 
 99.7 
 11.5 
 11.3 
 16.2 
 16.4 
 2.96 
 16,495 
 16,554 
 9.6 
 9.6 
 99.5 
 99.5 
 14.1 
 14.2 
 13.3 
 13.2 
 2.82 
 17,196 
 16,649 
 9.4 
 9.2 
 99.3 
 94.8 
 16.1 
 15.8 
 11.2 
 11.7 
 2.70 
 16,784 
 15,737 
 9.0 
 8.6 
 99.1 
 85.7 
 24.5 
 22.6 
 8.0 
 9.4 
 2.59 
 17,203 
 16,175 
 8.9 
 8.3 
 99.0 
 79.0 
 33.1 
 30.3 
 6.2 
 7.8 
 2.50 
 17,597 
 15,131 
 8.5 
 7.4 
 98.9 
 69.5 
 40.7 
 36.9 
 5.0 
 6.7 
 2.41 
 16,933 
 13,907 
 8.1 
 6.8 
 98.5 
 61.9 
 49.6 
 40.3 
 4.0 
 6.4 
 2.34 
 17,693 
 13,585 
 8.2 
 6.3 
 99.1 
 56.0 
 55.4 
 42.8 
 3.6 
 6.2 
 2.27 
 17,080 
 11,657 
 7.7 
 5.3 
 98.4 
 46.6 
 62.1 
 44.9 
 3.1 
 6.1 
 2.20 
 17,854 
 10,592 
 7.7 
 4.7 
 98.2 
 40.4 
 75.1 
 49.4 
 2.7 
 5.8 
 2.15 
 16,724 
 7,929 
 7.3 
 3.4 
 98.1 
 30.2 
 100.1 
 59.4 
 2.0 
 4.9 
 2.09 
 13,913 
 5,289 
 5.6 
 2.2 
 82.7 
 19.9 
 135.2 
 70.4 
 1.4 
 4.0 
 Total 
 286,853 
 243,653 
 8.6 
 7.4 
 97.8 
 71.9 
 10.6 
 9.2 
 12.5 
 16.9 
 These updated values reﬂ ect more accurately the quality of the data in the high resolution bins.  I / σ improved 
from 1.4 to 4.0 in the highest resolution shell.  R merge improved from 135 % to 70 %. A decrease in completeness 
(83–20 %) is an unavoidable consequence of imposing the ellipsoidal resolution boundary; it does not infer the 
need to discard the shell 
Overcoming Severe Diffraction Anisotropy

212
statistic is acceptable, the resolution shell should be retained, 
even if the completeness is only 20 %. A well-measured reﬂ ec-
tion doesn’t lose its worth simply because its neighboring 
reﬂ ections are poorly measured.  
6  Notes 
  1.  Adjust the Ellipsoidal Resolution Limits: There are some 
instances when the automatically detected resolution limits are 
inaccurate or do not meet the user’s personal criteria. The user 
can specify new resolution limits for the three principal axes by 
rerunning the server and ﬁ lling in the appropriate ﬁ elds.
 (a)   If any of the three curves cross the threshold more than 
once, then the suggested resolution limits will be too low. 
The server selects (incorrectly here) the lowest resolution 
crossing point for each <| F |>/ σ curve. Rerun the server 
using the highest resolution crossing for each <| F |>/ σ 
curve. 
 (b)   If any of the three curves do not cross the threshold value 
of 3.0, reprocess the data to higher resolution and resub-
mit it to the anisotropy server. Otherwise, the anisotropy 
analysis may be inaccurate and useful, well-measured high 
resolution reﬂ ections may be discarded.  
 (c)  If the <| F |>/ σ cutoff of 3 is considered to be too conserva-
tive, as may be justiﬁ ed by a recent report from Karplus 
and Diederichs [ 2 ], rerun the server with higher resolution 
limits. 
 (d)   If large improvements in  R merge and  I / σ statistics are 
observed after imposing the ellipsoidal boundary (Table  1 ), 
it may be necessary to rerun the server with higher resolu-
tion limits.  
  2.   Adjust the Sharpening Factor: I do not recommend using a 
value more negative (sharpening) than the suggested value, 
printed in the second graphical output of the server (Fig.  3 ). 
Excessive sharpening will lead to arbitrarily low atomic 
B-factors upon further atomic reﬁ nement, thus falsely indicat-
ing higher model quality. If the user wants the atomic B-factors 
to be unaffected, specify zero for the sharpening factor, then 
submit the data to the server again. Use COOT [ 7 ] to sharpen 
the map interactively as described below.
 Acknowledgment 
 I am grateful to Duilio Cascio for helpful comments regarding this 
manuscript and the diffraction anisotropy server.  
Michael R. Sawaya

213
 Fig. 3   The server carves out an ellipsoidal resolution boundary by rejecting reﬂ ections falling outside the 
server suggested or user requested anisotropic resolution limits. The carving is illustrated (Strong et al. [ 1 ]) 
with views of the  h = 0,  k = 0, and  l = 0 planes. Compare column 1 with column 2. Structure factor magnitudes 
are plotted in  grayscale , with the largest | F  |s represented in  black . Structure factors with | F |/ σ less than 2.5 
are colored red. The server reports the number of reﬂ ections discarded (43,200) and the average | F |/ σ of these 
reﬂ ections (0.24). If the limits are chosen correctly, the | F |/ σ will be less than 3.0 and the majority of the  red 
colored reﬂ ections will have been removed, as is the case here. These discarded reﬂ ections had an average 
| F |/ σ of 0.24. The effect of the anisotropic scaling and B-factor sharpening can also be seen. Note in the  h = 0 
precession image that the high resolution reﬂ ections near the vertical axis were diminished by the anisotropic 
scaling procedure (i.e., they appear  lighter gray compared to the previous panels). After sharpening, these 
reﬂ ections are restored to their former magnitude as evidenced by comparing the similarity in darkness of 
these reﬂ ections in the  left and  right columns . The server suggests a sharpening factor (−29.3 Å 2 ) to compen-
sate for the side effects of anisotropic scaling 
 
Overcoming Severe Diffraction Anisotropy

214
 References 
  1.  Strong M, Sawaya MR, Wang S et al (2006) 
Toward the structural genomics of complexes: 
crystal structure of a PE/PPE protein complex 
from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 103:8060–8065  
  2.  Karplus PA, Diederichs K (2012) Linking crys-
tallographic model and data quality. Science 
336:1030–1033 
  3.  Otwinowski Z, Minor W (1997) Processing of 
X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation 
mode. In: Carter CW Jr, Sweet RM (eds) 
Methods in enzymology: macromolecular 
crystallography, part A, vol 276. Academic, 
New York, pp 307–326  
  4.  Kabsch W (2010) XDS. Acta Crystallogr D 
66:125–132 
  5.  Winn MD, Ballard CC, Cowtan KD et al 
(2011) Overview of the CCP4 suite and 
 current developments. Acta Crystallogr D 
67:235–242 
  6.  McCoy AJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, Adams PD 
et al (2007) Phaser crystallographic software. 
J Appl Crystallogr 40:658–674  
  7.  Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG et al (2010) 
Features and development of Coot. Acta 
Crystallogr D 66:486–501  
  8.   Lee M, Maher MJ, Guss JM (2007) Structure of 
the T109S mutant of Escherichia coli dihydrooro-
tase complexed with the inhibitor 5-ﬂ uorooro-
tate: catalytic activity is reﬂ ected by the crystal 
form. Acta Crystallogr F 63:154–161  
  9.  Suits MD, Sperandeo P, Dehò G et al (2008) 
Novel structure of the conserved Gram-negative 
lipopolysaccharide transport protein LptA and 
mutagenesis analysis. J Mol Biol 380:476–488  
  10.  de Chiara C, Rees M, Menon RP et al (2013) 
Self-assembly and conformational heterogene-
ity of the AXH domain of ataxin-1: an unusual 
example of a chameleon fold. Biophys J 
104:1304–1313  
Michael R. Sawaya

215
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_16, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 16  
 Applications of NMR-Based PRE and EPR-Based DEER 
Spectroscopy to Homodimer Chain Exchange 
Characterization and Structure Determination 
 Yunhuang  Yang ,  Theresa  A.  Ramelot ,  Shuisong  Ni , 
 Robert  M.  McCarrick , and  Michael  A.  Kennedy 
 Abstract 
 The success of homodimer structure determination by conventional solution NMR spectroscopy relies 
greatly on interchain distance restraints (less than 6 Å) derived from nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs) 
obtained from  13 C-edited,  12 C-ﬁ ltered NOESY experiments. However, these experiments may fail when 
the mixed  13 C-/ 12 C-homodimer is never signiﬁ cantly populated due to slow homodimer chain exchange. 
Thus, knowledge of the homodimer chain exchange kinetics can be put to practical use in preparing 
samples using the traditional NMR method. Here, we described detailed procedures for using paramag-
netic resonance enhancements (PREs) and EPR spectroscopy to measure homodimer chain exchange 
kinetics. In addition, PRE and EPR methods can be combined to provide mid-range (<30 Å) and long- 
range (17–80 Å) interchain distance restraints for homodimer structure determination as a supplement to 
short-range intrachain and interchain distance restraints (less than 6 Å) typically obtained from  1 H- 1 H 
NOESY experiments. We present a summary of how to measure these distances using NMR-based PREs 
and EPR-based double electron electron resonance (DEER) measurements and how to include them in 
homodimer structure calculations.  
 Key words   NMR ,   EPR ,   Spectroscopy  ,   Homodimer ,   Chain exchange  ,   Structure determination  
1  Introduction 
 Structural genomics provides three dimensional (3D) structures of 
proteins on a genome-wide scale by emphasizing high-throughput 
methods of structure determination. Owing to the numerous con-
tributions from scientists working on the Protein Structure 
Initiative (PSI) project, the number of protein structures solved 
and deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) increased dramati-
cally in the past decade. Complete genome sequence information 
allows almost every open reading frame (ORF) to be cloned and 
expressed as a protein. The 3D structure of many of these proteins 
can then be determined at the atomic level using two main 

216
 techniques: X-ray crystallography and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
(NMR) spectroscopy. In particular, the NMR method plays an 
important role for structure determination of proteins for which 
single crystals could not be obtained, making it a complementary 
method to X-ray crystallography [ 1 ]. Protein NMR has become a 
routine method for structure determination for solution proteins 
with molecular mass under 25 kDa. However, structure determi-
nation of homodimer, oligomeric, or protein–protein/DNA/
RNA complexes is still challenging. Notwithstanding, the 
Northeast Structural Genomics (NESG) consortium has solved 
the structure of 26 oligomeric proteins out of 299 targets (306 
pdb submissions) during the second phase of the PSI project 
(  http://spine.nesg.org/nmr_progress.cgi   ). Given that about 80 % 
of proteins from  Escherichia coli have been predicted to exist as 
homo-oligomers based on a survey of their protein annotations in 
the Swiss-Prot database [ 2 ], and more than 86 % of all proteins in 
the Swiss-Prot database were predicted to exist naturally as oligo-
meric complexes based on a computational prediction [ 3 ], more 
powerful and robust methods are needed for structural character-
ization of dimers or oligomers. 
 Prior to preparing the exchanged  13 C-/ 12 C-labeled sample to 
measure interchain nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs) using the 
conventional NMR method [ 4 – 6 ] for homodimer structure deter-
mination, it is useful to have knowledge of the chain exchange 
kinetics. These can be obtained from techniques such as electronic 
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy and paramagnetic 
relaxation enhancement (PRE). In this chapter, we present proto-
cols for making NMR-based PREs and EPR-based double electron 
electron resonance (DEER) measurements of homodimer chain 
exchange rate kinetics. The kinetics and thermodynamics of sub-
unit exchange in multimeric proteins is of great potential signiﬁ -
cant to understanding functions in the cell that require exchanging 
binding partners in order to carry out speciﬁ c biochemical or cel-
lular functions [ 7 ,  8 ]. 
 In addition to traditional solution-state NMR spectroscopy 
using NOE-based methods, protein structure determination can 
integrate information obtained from other techniques such as EPR 
spectroscopy [ 9 ], PRE [ 9 – 11 ], residue dipolar coupling (RDC) 
[ 12 ], and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) [ 13 ]. In this chapter, 
we present a method for combining traditional NMR NOE restraints 
for homodimer structure determination with mid-range and long-
range distance restraints using NMR-based PREs and EPR-based 
DEER measurements, respectively. The methods are demonstrated 
using the homodimer protein Dsy0195 from strictly anaerobic bac-
terium  Desulﬁ tobacterium hafniense . The details on the protein 
Dsy0195 constructs, expression, puriﬁ cation, and ( 1 -oxy - 2 , 2, 5, 
5-tetramethyl- D -pyrroline-3-methyl)-methanethiosulfonate 
(MTSL) spin labeling were previously published [ 9 ,  14 ,  15 ].  
Yunhuang Yang et al.

217
2  Materials 
  In our laboratory, three NMR spectrometers were used for the 
structure determination studies and for measurement of chain 
exchange for homodimer Dsy0195: BrukerAvance III 850 and 
600 MHz spectrometers equipped with conventional 5 mm probes, 
and a Varian Inova 600 MHz with a 5 mm HCN cold probe 
( see  Note 1 ). All DEER experiment data were collected on the 
spectrometer (Bruker ELEXSYS E580) with a SuperQft Q-band 
bridge and Q-band (EN 5107D2) probe (34 GHz), and analyzed by 
the software package DeerAnalysis2011 (requires Matlab) [ 16 ]  
  The locations of MTSL introduced into the homodimer protein of 
interest by site-direct spin labeling are critical to both PRE and 
DEER experiments. In this work, single cysteine mutants S36C 
and S52C of Dsy0195 were produced for DEER and PRE 
experiments ( see  Note 2 ). Protein samples of Dsy0195 prepared in 
this work included: wild type ( wt ) Dsy0195,  15 N-Dsy0195, MTSL-
Dsy0195- S52C, Dsy0195-S36C, and MTSL-Dsy0195-S36C. The 
protein concentrations were 1.0 mM for PRE experiments and 
0.2 mM for DEER experiments, respectively ( see  Note 3 ). 
  Prepare 
all 
solutions 
using 
18 
ΜΩ 
deionized 
water 
(LABCONCOPRO PS, Kansas city, MO, USA) and analytical 
grade reagents unless otherwise stated. Store all buffers and protein 
samples prepared at 4 °C before any EPR or NMR experiment.
  1.  35 mM MTSL (Toronto Research Chemicals, Inc.) in 
methanol.  
  2.  150 mM ascorbic acid (Acros Organics).  
  3.  PRE sample buffer: 20 mM ammonium acetate, 100 mM 
sodium chloride, 5 mM calcium chloride, 0.02 % ( w / v ) sodium 
azide, 50 μM DSS (for internal chemical shift referencing), 5 % 
( v / v ) D 2 O, pH 4.5.  
  4.   DEER sample buffer: 20 mM ammonium acetate, 100 mM 
sodium chloride, 5 mM calcium chloride, 0.02 % ( w / v ) sodium 
azide, 30 % ( w / v ) glycerol, pH 4.5 ( see  Note 4 ).  
3  Methods 
  1.  Dilute 0.2 mM MTSL-Dsy0195-S36C to 0.1 mM with the 
DEER buffer to generate the control sample. Transfer the con-
trol sample into an EPR capillary tube ( see  Note 5 ), and freeze 
carefully by dipping into liquid nitrogen. All DEER data were 
2.1  Equipment
2.2  Protein Samples
2.3  Reagents 
and Buffers
3.1  Chain Exchange 
Rate of Dsy0195 
Measured by DEER 
Experiments
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

218
collected on a Bruker ELEXSYS E580 spectrometer with a 
SuperQft pulse bridge, 10 W ampliﬁ er and Q-band 
(EN 5107D2) probe at 80 K.  
  2.  Find the resonator dip ( see  Note 6 ). In order to ensure that 
consistent levels of microwave power were achieved, a screen 
capture of the dip in the tuning window within the Bruker 
Xepr software was taken once the tuning was optimized for the 
ﬁ rst sample. For subsequent samples, the sample was manipu-
lated within the resonator and the dip was compared to the 
screen capture until an identical frequency and coupling was 
obtained.  
  3.  DEER experimental setup. The relaxation times  T 1 and  T 2 
were measured to optimize the shot repetition time and DEER 
end point, respectively. The pulse lengths were optimized to be 
as short as possible to yield a maximum modulation depth ( see 
 Note 7 ). In this case, 10 ns ( π /2) and 20 ns ( π ) probe pulses 
and a 24 ns ( π ) pump pulse were used; however, this is spec-
trometer dependent and will have to be determined in each 
case. The data were collected with an 80 MHz frequency sepa-
ration between the pump and probe frequencies. Collect the 
DEER data.  
  4.   Repeat the DEER experiment of the control sample four more 
times to obtain the measurement reproducibility. Figure  1a 
shows the background subtracted and scaled time domain data 
for ﬁ ve repeated DEER measurements of the control sample 
( see  Note 8 ). The modulation depth is measured as the percent 
difference between the maximum intensity at time zero and 
the ﬁ rst minimum, which in this case was 14 %. The repeated 
results shown in Fig.  1a demonstrate the small experimental 
deviation (Fig.  1a ).
  5.   Mix 10 μl of 0.2 mM Dsy0195-S36C and 10 μl of 0.2 mM 
MTSL-Dsy0195-S36C, transfer into EPR tube, and freeze in 
liquid nitrogen at a dimer exchange time of approximately 1 h 
to attempt to estimate the exchange rate. Collect the DEER 
data as in  step 3 . Based on the obtained modulation depth 
from this experiment, determine a range of appropriate time 
points for the remaining experiments.  
  6.  Repeat  step 5 with a series of exchange time times as 
 determined in the previous step, in this case, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 25, 
35, 52.5, 112.5, and 155 min ( see  Note 9 ). 
  7.   The scaled modulation depth for each measurement was 
derived as in  step 4 . All modulation depths were scaled to the 
value of the control sample, in which the depth of 0.14 was 
scaled to 1.  
Yunhuang Yang et al.

219
  8.  Plot the curve of the normalized modulation depth versus the 
exchange time. Curve ﬁ tting obeys a ﬁ rst-order exponential 
decay (Fig.  1c ), and the homodimer chain exchange rate of 
0.039 min −1 is derived from the ﬁ t. 
  1.   Prepare the control sample without chain exchange. Dilute 
150 μl of 1.0 mM  15 N-Dsy0195 with the PRE buffer to a ﬁ nal 
concentration of 0.5 mM as the control sample. Transfer the 
control sample into the NMR tube and put into the NMR 
spectrometer.  
  2.   Setup the NMR acquisition parameters. Load the standard 2D 
SOFAST-HMQC pulse sequence sfhmqcf3gpph, and set pulse 
sequence parameters by default values including the ﬂ ip angle 
for the ﬁ rst proton pulse of 120°, the band-selective proton 
pulse centered at 8.0 ppm covering a bandwidth of 4.0 ppm. 
The acquisition parameters were setup as follows: spectrum 
width, SW 1 × SW 2 = 29 × 15 ppm for  15 N and  1 H (optimized 
from the chemical shift dispersions in both dimension); time 
3.2  Chain Exchange 
Rate of Dsy0195 
Measured by PRE 
Experiments 
( See  Note 10 )
 Fig. 1  Homodimer chain exchange rate measurement using DEER experiment. ( a ) Overlay of scaled refocused 
echo intensity versus phase memory time for the control sample (repeated ﬁ ve times). ( b ) Time-domain DEER 
signals of 1:1 mixture of Dsy0195-S36C-MTSL/ 15 N-Dsy0195-S36C at a series of exchange time points: 0, 2.5, 
5, 10, 15, 25, 35, 52.5, 70, 112.5, 155 min. ( c ) Plot of the normalized modulation depth versus chain exchange 
time following the ﬁ rst-order exponential decay. The  blue ﬁ lled circle stands for the experimental depth and 
 red solid line for the ﬁ tting curve following the ﬁ rst-order exponential decay 
 
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

220
domain data set, TD 1 × TD 2 = 80 × 1,024; number of scan, 
ns = 4; acquisition time for the  1 H dimension of 47 ms, and the 
maximum acquisition time for the  15 N dimension of 23 ms; 
recycle time, d1 = 100 ms. The total experimental time is 58 s. 
Collect the 2D SOFAST-HMQC spectrum.  
  3.   Process the NMR data with NMRPipe [ 17 ]. The time domain 
data were Fourier transformed in both dimensions after zero 
ﬁ ll in the t1 × t2 dimensions to 128 × 2,048 points, applying a 
window function of a 90° shifted sine-bell and mirror image 
linear prediction (LP) in the  15 N dimension. The processed 
spectra were visualized using SPARKY [ 18 ] and peak intensi-
ties were obtained from SPARKY peak heights.  
  4.  Peak intensity normalization. The cross peak intensities were 
normalized with the average intensity from the seven back-
bone peaks K44, E41, G55, E56, K57, L58, and G59, for 
which distances between amide protons of interest in one chain 
to the C β of S52 in the other chain are greater than 30 Å based 
on the crystal structure of Dsy0195 ( see  Note 11 ). 
  5.  Estimate the peak intensity deviations of control sample. 
Repeat the data collection four times at an interval time of 
approximately 10 min. Figure  2a showed the average peak 
intensity and standard deviation versus individual amino acid 
(39 backbone peaks without overlap). The plot indicated the 
errors in peak intensity reproducibility could be up to 15 %.
  6.   Mixed sample preparation and NMR data collection. Mix 
150 μl of 1.0 mM  U - 15 N-Dsy0195 and 150 μl of 1.0 mM 
MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C. Transfer the mixed sample into NMR 
tube, put into NMR magnet. Lock the signal, tune and match 
the probe, shim the ﬁ eld, determine the solvent carrier fre-
quency and 90° pulse width as quickly as possible (can be done 
within 5 min). Collect the spectra at a series of chain exchange 
times 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, 35, 45, 52.5, 60, 70, 90, 112.5, 
140, 155, 180, and 210 min ( see  Note 12 ). 
  7.   Process the data and normalize the peak intensities as in  steps 
3 and  4 . 
  8.   Repeat  steps 6 and  7 four more times. The average peak inten-
sity and standard deviation for each peak can be obtained from 
the ﬁ ve repeated measurements.  
  9.   Derive the homodimer chain exchange rate. Plot the peak 
intensity versus exchange time for each residue that had a 
decrease in peak intensity. This curve for residue E84 is given 
as an example (Fig.  2b ). The curve ﬁ tting followed the ﬁ rst- 
order exponential decay and indicated that the chain exchange 
rate of Dsy0195 was 0.037 ± 0.008 min −1 ( see  Note 13 ). 
Yunhuang Yang et al.

221
   The initial Dsy0195 monomer structure was determined following 
the conventional protocols of our laboratory, referred to in recent 
structure publications [ 19 – 22 ]. The monomer structure quality 
was assessed using software package PSVS 1.4 [ 23 ]. Although the 
overall tertiary structure was correct, many distance violations were 
present in both N-terminus and C-terminus of Dsy0195 that are 
located at the homodimer interface known from its crystal 
structure. These violations could result from some interchain 
NOEs were automatically assigned as interchain NOEs during 
structure calculations using CYANA [ 24 ] with input of peak lists of 
NOESY spectra. An additional problem in the structure 
determination of the homodimer Dsy0195 by NMR spectroscopy 
was that few interchain NOEs were detected from the  13 C-edited, 
 12 C-ﬁ ltered NOESY experiment, which led to either poor quality 
of the homodimer structure solved by NMR method alone [ 14 ]. 
These problems were overcome by using the mid-range and long-
rang interchain distance restraints that were derived from PRE and 
DEER experiments [ 9 ,  14 ]. After these interchain distance 
restraints were used as input, more interchain NOEs were assigned 
in the conventional  13 C-edited NOESY spectra by the CYANA 
3.3  Structure 
Determination of 
Homodimer Dsy0195 
by Combining NMR 
and EPR Derived 
Interchain Distance 
Restraints
3.3.1  Overview
 Fig. 2  Homodimer chain exchange rate measurement using PRE experiment. 
( a ) Plot of the normalized peak intensity (average from ﬁ ve repeats) of 39 
 backbone amide peaks without overlap in 2D SOFAST-HMQC spectra of  15 N-
Dsy0195. The  blue circle  stands for the average intensity, and the  pink line for the 
standard deviation. ( b ) Plot of the normalized intensity (average from ﬁ ve repeats) 
versus chain exchange time for a given residue (E84) as an example. The  blue 
ﬁ lled circle  stands for the peak intensity,  pink line  for standard  deviation, and the 
 red solid line for the ﬁ tting curve following the ﬁ rst-order exponential decay  
 
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

222
program [ 9 ]. In this chapter, we focus on deriving these mid-range 
and long-range distance restraints by PRE and DEER experiments 
and using them in the structure determination of homodimer 
Dsy0195 along with conventional NMR data using the CYANA 
program.  
  1.   Sample preparation. Two samples each of 0.2 mM MTSL-
Dsy0195- S36C and MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C were prepared for 
DEER experiments.  
  2.   Collect the DEER data as in Subheading  3.1  step 3 . Distances 
were derived using the DEERAnalysis2011 package from the 
Jeschke laboratory at ETH using a Tikhonov regularization. 
As mentioned above, this software is well documented and a 
detailed description of the analysis is out of the scope of this 
chapter.  
  3.   Two distances of 34 and 20 Å between two nitroxides in the 
MTSL-labeled homodimers S36C and S52C were derived, 
respectively. Considering that the free radical of the nitroxide 
is typical 8–10 Å from its own backbone amide, the error bar 
for DEER distance restraints is ±5 Å in the following structure 
calculation.  
  1.   Mixed sample with PREs (referred to as paramagnetic state or 
reduced state) preparation. Mix 150 μl of 1.0 mM  15 N-labeled 
Dsy0195 and 150 μl of 1.0 mM MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C. 
Transfer the mixture into the NMR tube and put into the 
NMR spectrometer. The experiment was carried out at 293 K.  
  2.   NMR data collection. Collect 2D  1 H- 15 N HSQC in the 
reduced state ( see  Note 14 ). After the experiment, add about 
3–4 μl 150 mM ascorbic acid (correspondingly two- to three-
fold molar excess to MTSL) to get rid of MTSL from the pro-
tein (referred to as diamagnetic state or oxidized state). Collect 
the 2D  1 H- 15 N HSQC in the diamagnetic state with the same 
parameters as the paramagnetic state.  
  3.  Process the NMR data with NMRPipe. The time domain data 
were Fourier transformed in both dimensions after zero ﬁ ll at 
 t 1 ×  t 2 dimensions of 512 × 2,048 and application of a 90° 
shifted sine-bell window function. The processed spectra were 
visualized and peak picked using SPARKY.  
  4.  Peak intensity normalization. Measure the intensity of each 
resonance from the spectrum of mixed sample before the addi-
tion of ascorbic acid, recorded as  I para* , that of the mixed sam-
ple after the addition of ascorbic acid, recorded as  I dia . Peak 
intensities were normalized as the same in Subheading  3.2 
 step 4 . Then, the peak intensity of solely paramagnetic state 
 I para is equal to 2( I para* −  I dia /2) (equation 3 in ref.  11 ), where 
 I dia is the intensity for diamagnetic state ( see  Note 15 ). 
3.3.2  Long-Range 
Distance Restraints 
Derived from DEER 
Experiments
3.3.3  Mid-range 
Distance Restraints 
Derived from PRE 
Experiments
Yunhuang Yang et al.

223
  5.  Mid-range interchain distance restraints. Based on the ratio of 
peak intensity ( I para / I dia ) for each resonance, the interchain dis-
tances were derived following the equations (4) and (5) in the 
literature [ 11 ]. Based on the calculation, the distances for peak 
intensity ratios of 0.9 and 0.1 are about 22 and 13 Å, respec-
tively. Three classes of distance restraints were used for  structure 
calculation. Peaks with an intensity ratio >0.9 were restrained 
only with a lower bound of 22 Å; peaks with an intensity ratio 
<0.1 were restrained only with an upper bound of 13 Å; peaks 
with intensity between 0.1 and 0.9 were restrained with ± 4 Å 
for upper and lower bound, respectively, for structure calcula-
tion. For Dsy0195, 67 lower-bound and 35 upper- bound 
interchain restraints were derived from PRE data.  
  As additional input, the interchain restraints from both PRE and 
DEER experiments were in the structure calculation. We used the 
CYANA program to calculate the homodimer structure with the 
chemical shift assignments, NOESY peaklists, dihedral-angle 
restraints, backbone hydrogen-bond restraints. The homodimer 
structure calculation resulted in a converged ensemble of structures. 
We assessed the structure quality using PSVS 1.4 and checked the 
NOE assignments manually based on the NOE and dihedral- angle 
violations.  
  Convert the ﬁ nal NOE-derived distance restraints from CYANA, 
dihedral-angle restraints, and hydrogen-bond restraints to Xplor/
CNS format using PDBStat [ 23 ]. These restraints were used to 
calculate 100 structures using Xplor-NIH followed by reﬁ nement 
of the 20 lowest energy structure using restrained molecular 
dynamics in explicit water with CNS 1.2 (CNSw) [ 25 ]. Use PSVS 
1.4 to assess the structure quality and check the restraints violation. 
The ﬁ nal NMR ensemble of 20 structures with the lowest energy 
was deposited in the PDB (PDB ID 2KYI).  
4  Notes 
  1.  Although we report the NMR spectrometers that were speciﬁ -
cally used in our lab, any NMR spectrometer with 500 MHz 
or greater could be used for these experiments. Since our PRE 
experimental data were collected on a Bruker Avance III 
600 MHz spectrometer, the parameter names given for the 2D 
SOFAST-HMQC in this chapter are consistent with the Bruker 
NMR software package TopSpin.  
  2.  Distances between protons of interest and the MTSL nitroxide 
that are within 30 Å can be derived by PRE experiments, 
whereas the measureable distances between two nitroxides 
3.3.4  Interchain NOEs 
Determination and 
Homodimer Structure 
Calculation
3.3.5  Homodimer 
Structure Reﬁ nement 
( See  Note 16 )
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

224
range from 17 to 80 Å for DEER experiments. In this work, 
the distance between the C β of S36 in the two chains is about 
33.5 Å based on the crystal structure, which is suitable for 
DEER measurements, while the distance for S52 is about 
15 Å, suitable for PRE experiments.  
  3.  In general, higher protein concentrations (~1 mM or greater) 
will provide the best signal-to-noise ratios and shorter data col-
lection times for NMR and PRE experiments as long as protein 
does not aggregate. In contrast, protein concentrations of 
about 0.1–0.2 mM are optimal for the DEER experiment 
using a Q-band probe for good signal-to-noise with the bene-
ﬁ t of avoiding the strong background signal of interchain 
molecular electron–electron interaction.  
  4.  Homogenous distributions of homodimers are achieved by 
addition of 30 % glycerol as a cryoprotectant.  
  5.  For these measurements, it is critical that the sample height 
within the tube is kept consistent so that identical levels of tun-
ing can be obtained from sample to sample.  
  6.  As the primary objective of these measurements is the precise 
determination of the modulation depth in the DEER experi-
ment, achieving consistent coupling is essential. In a typical 
Q-band setup, the coupling is less overcoupled than in an 
X-band experiment. As such, the pump and probe frequency 
separation is on the order of the width of the resonator band-
width, making the microwave power achieved at the two fre-
quencies very sensitive to the tuning.  
  7.  In a typical DEER experiment, one collects data to as long an 
end point as possible given the limitation of the  T 2 of the sam-
ple. This yields the most precise distance distribution informa-
tion. In these exchange experiments, since it is only the 
modulation depth which is being determined, one can shorten 
the end point of the experiment to enhance the signal-to-noise 
and sample throughput as a precise distance determination is 
not the primary goal.  
  8.   Quantitative determination of the modulation depth from 
sample to sample depends on consistent analysis of the data, 
particularly the subtraction of the intermolecular background 
signal. This was accomplished using the DEERAnalysis2011 
package from the Jeshcke laboratory [ 16 ]. A detailed descrip-
tion of the analysis is out of the scope of this chapter, but the 
included documentation with the software is extensive.  
  9.   These selected incubation times for chain exchange were 
appropriate for the system studied, but these can be adjusted 
based on the exchange rate of each individual system. The ﬁ rst 
data point is limited to the time it takes to mix the MTSL- 
labeled and unlabeled protein, load the tube and freeze the 
Yunhuang Yang et al.

225
sample in liquid nitrogen. In practice, this could potentially be 
as low as a 1 min given conventional methods. If shorter times 
are needed in the case of very rapid dimer exchange rates, rapid 
freeze quench (RFQ) methods could potentially be adapted.  
  10.   The mixture of  15 N-labeled Dsy0195 and MTSL-labeled 
Dsy0195-S52C in 1:1 ratio were prepared (the ratio can be 
different) [ 15 ], and fast NMR data collection using 2D 
SOFAST-HMQC [ 26 ] experiments were carried out at a series 
of mixing times for dimer chain exchange. Samples were put 
into 5 mm Shigemi NMR tubes with magnetic susceptibility 
matched to solvent D 2 O (BMS-003, Shigemi, Inc., Allison 
Park, PA, USA). All spectra were carried out on a Bruker 
Avance III 600 MHz spectrometer at 293 K.  
  11.    In the NMR spectra of mixed samples, NMR signals are com-
ing from two dimer forms:  15 N-Dsy0195 and  15 N-Dsy0195/
MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C that was created by the chain exchange 
during the mixing time. PREs can only be observed for those 
amide protons in the  15 N-labeled chain of dimer  15 N-Dsy0195/
MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C that are less than 30 Å away from the 
nitroxide in the other chain. For the other amide protons with-
out PREs, the peak intensities in 2D HMQC will remain 
unchanged during the chain exchange process. These are can-
didates for normalization of peaks in the entire spectrum.  
  12.   The optimal exchange times will vary signiﬁ cantly for each 
dimer depending on the chain exchange rate.  
  13.   Although the plot of peak intensity versus chain exchange time 
of each individual peak can be plotted, the successful curve ﬁ t-
ting following the ﬁ rst exponential decay is not guaranteed. 
Especially, for the residues with no PREs or weak PREs, the 
curve ﬁ tting will not follow a ﬁ rst-order exponential decay due 
to no or little change of the peak intensity.  
  14.   The acquisition parameters are setup as follows: spectrum 
width: SW 1 × SW 2 = 29 × 18 ppm (optimized from the chemical 
shift dispersions in both dimension), time domain data set, 
TD 1 × TD 2 = 256 × 1,024; acquisition time (AQ) at  1 H dimen-
sions of 34 ms and the maximum acquisition at  15 N dimension 
of 51 ms; number of scan, NS = 128; recycle time, d1 = 1 s. The 
total experimental time is about 10 h.  
  15.   The intensity of each peak ( I para* −  I dia /2) in paramagnetic state 
comes only from the dimer  15 N-Dsy0195/MTSL-Dsy0195- 
S52C, which accounts for 50 % of the sample in the mixture of 
1:1  15 N-Dsy0195 and MTSL-Dsy0195-S52C [ 11 ].  
  16.   This step was done following our laboratory protocols at the 
time when the structure of Dsy0195 was determined. The pro-
tocols of protein structure calculation and reﬁ nement are dif-
ferent from lab to lab. 
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

226
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences, Grant Number: U54-GM074958; National 
Science 
Foundation, 
Grant 
Number 
CHE-0645709; 
BrukerBiospin, Miami University and Ohio Board of Reagents.  
 References 
  1.  Wüthrich K (1986) NMR of proteins and 
nucleic acids. Wiley, New York  
  2.  Goodsell DS, Olson AJ (2000) Structural sym-
metry and protein function. Annu Rev Biophys 
Biomol Struct 29:105–153  
  3.  Shen HB, Chou KC (2009) Quatldent: a web 
server for identifying protein quaternary struc-
tural attribute by fusing functional domain and 
sequential evolution information. J Proteome 
Res 8:1577–1584  
  4.  Otting G, Wüthrich K (1989) Extended het-
eronuclear editing of 2D 1H NMR spectra of 
isotope-labeled proteins, using the X(ω1, ω2) 
double half ﬁ lter. J Magn Reson 85:
586–594  
  5.  Lee W, Revington MJ, Arrowsmith C et al 
(1994) A pulsed ﬁ eld gradient isotope-ﬁ ltered 
3D 13C HMQC-NOESY experiment for 
extracting intermolecular NOE contacts in 
molecular complexes. FEBS Lett 350:87–90  
  6.  Folmer RH, Hilbers CW, Konings RN et al 
(1995) A (13)C double-ﬁ ltered NOESY with 
strongly reduced artefacts and improved sensi-
tivity. J Biomol NMR 5:427–432  
  7.  Sobott F, Benesch JL, Vierling E et al (2002) 
Subunit exchange of multimeric protein com-
plexes. Real-time monitoring of subunit 
exchange between small heat shock proteins by 
using electrospray mass spectrometry. J Biol 
Chem 277:38921–38929  
  8.  Pan J, Rintala-Dempsey AC, Li Y et al (2006) 
Folding kinetics of the S100A11 protein dimer 
studied by time-resolved electrospray mass 
spectrometry and pulsed hydrogen-deuterium 
exchange. Biochemistry 45:3005–3013  
  9.  Yang Y, Ramelot TA, McCarrick RM et al 
(2010) Combining NMR and EPR methods 
for homodimer protein structure determina-
tion. J Am Chem Soc 132:11910–11913  
  10.   Battiste JL, Wagner G (2000) Utilization of 
site-directed spin labeling and high-resolution 
heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance for 
global fold determination of large proteins 
with limited nuclear overhauser effect data. 
Biochemistry 39:5355–5365  
  11.  Rumpel S, Becker S, Zweckstetter M (2008) 
High-resolution structure determination of 
the CylR2 homodimer using paramagnetic 
relaxation enhancement and structure-based 
prediction of molecular alignment. J Biomol 
NMR 40:1–13  
  12.  Wang X, Bansal S, Jiang M et al (2008) RDC- 
assisted modeling of symmetric protein homo- 
oligomers. Protein Sci 17:899–907  
  13.  Grishaev A, Wu J, Trewhella J et al (2005) 
Reﬁ nement of multidomain protein structures 
by combination of solution small-angle X-ray 
scattering and NMR data. J Am Chem Soc 
127:16621–16628  
 14.  Yang Y, Ramelot TA, Cort JR et al (2011) 
Solution NMR structure of Dsy0195 homodi-
mer from Desulﬁ tobacterium hafniense: ﬁ rst 
structure representative of the YabP domain 
family of proteins involved in spore coat 
assembly. J Struct Funct Genomics 12:
175–179  
 15.  Yang Y, Ramelot TA, Ni S et al (2013) 
Measurement of rate constants for homodi-
mer subunit exchange using double electron–
electron 
resonance 
and 
paramagnetic 
relaxation enhancements. J Biomol NMR 55:
47–58  
  16.  Jeschke G, Chechik V, Ionita P et al (2006) 
DeerAnalysis2006—a comprehensive software 
package for analyzing pulsed ELDOR data. 
Appl Magn Reson 30:473–498  
  17.  Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW et al 
(1995) NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral 
processing system based on UNIX pipes. 
J Biomol NMR 6:277–293  
  18.  Goddard TD, Kneller DG (2008) SPARKY 3. 
University of California, San Fransisco  
  19.  Yang Y, Ramelot TA, Cort JR et al (2012) 
Solution NMR structure of hypothetical pro-
tein CV_2116 encoded by a viral prophage 
 element in Chromobacterium violaceum. Int J 
Mol Sci 13:7354–7364  
  20.  Yang Y, Ramelot TA, Cort JR et al (2011) 
Solution NMR structure of photosystem II 
reaction 
center 
protein 
Psb28 
from 
Yunhuang Yang et al.

227
Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803. Proteins 
79:340–344 
  21.   Ramelot TA, Yang Y, Xiao R et al (2012) 
Solution NMR structure of BT_0084, a conju-
gative transposon lipoprotein from Bacteroides 
thetaiotamicron. Proteins 80:667–670  
  22.   Feldmann EA, Ramelot TA, Yang Y et al 
(2012) Solution NMR structure of Asl3597 
from Nostoc sp. PCC7120, the ﬁ rst structure 
from protein domain family PF12095, reveals 
a novel fold. Proteins 80:671–675  
  23.   Bhattacharya A, Tejero R, Montelione GT 
(2007) Evaluating protein structures deter-
mined by structural genomics consortia. 
Proteins 66:778–795  
  24.  Guntert P (2004) Automated NMR structure 
calculation with CYANA. Methods Mol Biol 
278:353–378  
  25.  Linge JP, Williams MA, Spronk CA et al 
(2003) Reﬁ nement of protein structures in 
explicit solvent. Proteins 50:496–506  
  26.  Schanda P, Brutscher B (2005) Very fast two- 
dimensional NMR spectroscopy for real-time 
investigation of dynamic events in proteins on 
the time scale of seconds. J Am Chem Soc 
127:8014–8015  
Homodimer Chain Exchange Characterization and Structure Determination

229
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_17, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 17  
 A Cost-Effective Protocol for the Parallel Production 
of Libraries of  13 CH 3 -Speciﬁ cally Labeled Mutants 
for NMR Studies of High Molecular Weight Proteins 
 Elodie  Crublet ,  Rime  Kerfah ,  Guillaume  Mas , 
 Marjolaine  Noirclerc- Savoye ,  Violaine  Lantez , 
 Thierry  Vernet , and  Jerome  Boisbouvier 
 Abstract 
 There is increasing interest in applying NMR spectroscopy to the study of large protein assemblies. 
Development of methyl-speciﬁ c labeling protocols combined with improved NMR spectroscopy enable 
nowadays studies of proteins complexes up to 1 MDa. For such large complexes, the major interest lies in 
obtaining structural, dynamic and interaction information in solution, which requires sequence-speciﬁ c 
resonance assignment of NMR signals. While such analysis is quite standard for small proteins, it remains 
one of the major bottlenecks when the size of the protein increases. 
 Here, we describe implementation and latest improvements of SeSAM, a fast and user-friendly approach 
for assignment of methyl resonances in large proteins using mutagenesis. We have improved culture medium 
to boost the production of methyl-speciﬁ cally labeled proteins, allowing us to perform small-scale parallel 
production and puriﬁ cation of a library of  13 CH 3 -speciﬁ cally labeled mutants. This optimized protocol is 
illustrated by assignment of Alanine, Isoleucine, and Valine methyl groups of the homododecameric 
 aminopeptidase PhTET2. We estimated that this improved method allows assignment of ca. 100 methyl 
cross-peaks in 2 weeks, including 4 days of NMR time and less than 2 k€ of isotopic materials.  
 Key words   Methyl group  ,   Isotopic labeling  ,  High molecular weight proteins  ,   NMR spectroscopy  , 
 SeSAM ,   Assignment  ,  Site-directed mutagenesis  
1  Introduction 
 Supramolecular systems are involved in many of the key processes 
that occur in cells. Therefore, understanding their local structure 
and dynamics is critical. For such investigations, NMR spectros-
copy is a technique of choice and now allows studies of assemblies 
up to 1 MDa [ 1 ]. This was made possible by the development of 
protocols for the selective protonation of methyl groups in perdeu-
terated proteins [ 2 – 6 ]. This strategy is based on some very favor-
able relaxation properties of methyl groups in proteins that show 

230
increased sensitivity compared to backbone amide proton. 
Moreover, methyl group containing residues are usually common 
and well dispersed within the polypeptide sequences, covering 
homogeneously the protein space. Thus, methyl groups are excel-
lent probes of protein structure, dynamics, and interactions, par-
ticularly for very large proteins. In addition to studying naturally 
occurring methyl groups, methyl-containing amino acids can also 
be used to replace solvent-exposed residues as NMR reporters of 
protein interaction in order to, for instance, validate an expected 
binding site [ 7 ,  8 ]. 
 In all cases, analysis of structural and dynamic information 
yielded by methyl groups requires sequence-speciﬁ c assignment of 
methyl resonances. Conventional through bonds assignment 
approaches [ 9 ] to assign backbone and side chain methyl groups 
resonances work efﬁ ciently for small proteins but cease to be appli-
cable to proteins over 100 kDa. In this case, alternative approaches 
are required. Several examples of different methyl group assign-
ment procedures that have been successfully applied to large pro-
teins are provided below. To date, many of the supramolecular 
systems studied by NMR spectroscopy are multimeric; an option 
to assign such assemblies is thus to try to split the quaternary com-
plex into smaller fragments. This “divide-and-conquer” technique 
[ 1 ,  10 ] relies on disassembling the oligomeric system and transfer-
ring the resonances assignment to the full-size complex. This 
method however requires considerable optimization to ﬁ nd condi-
tions that destabilize oligomeric interfaces without signiﬁ cantly 
disrupting the structure of the monomer or domain. Another 
alternative to overcome size limitation is solid-state NMR spec-
troscopy [ 11 ], in which the linewidth is independent of the molec-
ular weight [ 12 ]. Yet, this approach requires crystal preparation 
giving high-quality spectra similar to solution state NMR, and 
time-consuming analysis of complex  13 C– 13 C correlation spectra 
acquired 
using 
solid-state 
NMR. 
Methyl-methyl 
Nuclear 
Overhauser Enhancement (NOE) experiments can also be used in 
combination with chemical shift prediction programs to assign 
methyl groups in proteins [ 13 ]. This method is so far limited to 
small systems due to the complexity of detecting long range NOE 
at more than 7 Å in very large protein assemblies. Another approach 
to assign large proteins is to analyze paramagnetic relaxation 
enhancements (PRE) induced by nitroxide spin-labels in combina-
tion with an available 3D structure [ 14 ]. 
 Alternatively, several groups have reported a mutagenesis- 
based approach for assignment of some methyl resonances in large 
proteins. Using Leu or Val mutations along with stereospeciﬁ c 
 13 CH 3 labeling of Leu/Val residues, A. Seven and J. Rizo [ 15 ] 
were able to assign methyl resonances to a 73 kDa protein domain. 
Similarly, 15 of 17 methyl resonance frequencies of methionine 
methyl groups of an RNA polymerase were assigned by site-by-site 
Elodie Crublet et al.

231
mutation strategy [ 16 ]. A similar approach was used to obtain 
some Ile, Leu, or Val methyl group assignments in the protease 
ClpB [ 17 ]. In parallel, the assignment-by-mutagenesis strategy has 
also been applied to a 468 kDa supramolecular protein oligomer, 
for the ﬁ rst time in a highly systematic way [ 18 ]. The method 
called SeSAM (Sequence-Speciﬁ c Assignment of methyl groups by 
Mutagenesis) is based on automated molecular biology techniques, 
small-scale parallel preparation of residue-speciﬁ c isotope-labeled 
samples, and sensitivity-optimized NMR experiments. Each mutant 
construct is expressed on a small-scale using fully perdeuderated 
expression media supplemented with isotope-labeled metabolic 
precursors designed for the speciﬁ c protonation of a single class of 
methyl group [ 2 – 5 ,  10 ,  19 – 21 ]. A conservative mutation of one 
methyl-containing residue to another nonlabeled one causes the 
disappearance of its NMR correlation from NMR spectrum of a 
speciﬁ cally methyl-labeled sample. This systematic strategy led to 
complete resonance assignment of the 34 isoleucine-δ1 and 30 
alanine-β methyl groups in less than 2 months. 
 Although very effective, this method remains difﬁ cult to imple-
ment. The production step is achieved from 50 mL culture medium 
per mutant, i.e., one culture ﬂ ask for each mutant. It therefore 
requires a lot of manipulation from the user and may be the source 
of handling mistakes. Moreover, the puriﬁ cation step is time con-
suming because each mutant is puriﬁ ed sequentially. Therefore, we 
attempted to optimize and simplify this strategy (Fig.  1 ). First we 
improved the culture medium to enhance cell density, allowing us 
to decrease the culture volume and perform all the cultures in par-
allel, in 24 deep-well plates. Then, all the mutants were puriﬁ ed in 
parallel, on a 96-well plate format, therefore enabling puriﬁ cation 
of the samples in a few hours instead of weeks. Using this improved 
approach, we were able to reduce experiment time by a factor of 4 
and isotope cost by a factor of 2 compared to previously published 
implementation [ 18 ].
2  Materials 
  1.   Freshly transformed  E .  coli cells (BL21(DE3), BL21(DE3)
RIL… etc) to overexpress protein of interest.  
  2.   LB broth.  
  3.   2× M9 medium prepared in H 2 O (for 1 L: 20 g of Na 2 HPO 4 , 
7H 2 O; 6 g of KH 2 PO 4 ; 1 g of NaCl; 2 g of NH 4 Cl). Autoclave 
to sterilize.  
  4.   M9 prepared in D 2 O (for 1 L: 5.3 g of anhydrous Na 2 HPO 4 ; 
3 g of anhydrous KH 2 PO 4 ; 0.5 g of NaCl; 1 g of NH 4 Cl). Use 
sterile D 2 O.  
  5.  Oligo-elements (for 1 L of M9 medium: 1 mL of 1 M MgSO 4 , 
1 mL of 0.1 M CaCl 2 , 1 mL of 0.1 M MnCl 2 , 1 mL of 50 mM 
2.1  Expression 
of Methyl- Speciﬁ cally 
Labeled Proteins
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

232
ZnSO 4 , 0.5 mL of 100 mM FeCl 3 ). Sterilize on 0.22 μm ﬁ lter. 
Stocks solutions should be prepared in H 2 O when used in M9 
100 % H 2 O or 50 % H 2 O/D 2 O (for the precultures) and in 
D 2 O when used in M9 100 % D 2 O. In this case, all powders 
should be dissolved and lyophilized twice in D 2 O to remove 
residual water before preparing stock solutions.  
  6.  Vitamin cocktail (for 50 mL: 25 mg of pyridoxine, 25 mg of 
biotin, 25 mg of panthothenate hemi-calcium, 25 mg of folic 
acid, 25 mg of choline chloride, 25 mg of niacineamide, 
2.5 mg of riboﬂ avin, 125 mg of thiamine). Solubilize by adjust-
ing the pH around 7, sterilize on 0.22 μm ﬁ lter and decrease 
the pH around 5 for long-term storage. Use 2 mL for 1 L of 
M9 medium. Vitamins should be prepared in H 2 O for precul-
tures and in D 2 O when used in M9 100 % D 2 O ( see above).  
  7.  Isotopes: D 2 O ( 2 H ≥ 99.8 %),  D -( 2 H,  12 C)-glucose ( 2 H ≥ 
98 %), deuterated rich cell extract. Several sources of cell 
extract are commercially available (Spectra 9 (CIL), Celtone ® 
Complete Medium (CIL), BioExpress ® 1000 (CIL), Silantes ® 
 Fig. 1  The Principle of improved SeSAM. Schematic illustration of the parallel mutation-based NMR assign-
ment strategy. (1) Each methyl-containing residue in the target sequence is mutated, on a site-by-site basis, 
to another similar methyl containing amino acid (e.g., Val-to-Ala) ( see Table  1 ). (2) Mutant constructs are 
expressed on a small-scale in 24 deep-well plates, using M9 medium prepared in D2O and supplemented with 
2 g/L  2 H-cell extract. One hour before induction, fully perdeuderated expression medium is complemented 
with isotope-labeled metabolic precursors designed for the speciﬁ c incorporation of  13 CH 3 isotopes of a single 
class of methyl groups. The volume of culture is adjusted to ensure a minimal yield of 0.3–0.5 mg of puriﬁ ed 
protein. (3) Cell pellets are then lysed in parallel using chemical lysis buffer and proteins are puriﬁ ed in 96-well 
plates ﬁ lled with anion exchange (or any other suitable) resin. Each mutant sample is dialyzed against H 2 O, 
lyophilized, and dissolved in NMR suitable buffer. (4) NMR spectra can be acquired using the SOFAST-methyl 
TROSY pulse sequence and an NMR spectrometer operating at high magnetic ﬁ eld. Sequence-speciﬁ c assign-
ment of each NMR signal is inferred by comparing the 2D  1 H- 13 C correlation spectrum of each member of the 
mutant library with a spectrum of the native protein. A conservative mutation of one methyl-containing residue 
to another nonlabeled one causes the disappearance of the methyl group signal from NMR spectra recorded 
for a speciﬁ cally methyl-labeled sample 
 
Elodie Crublet et al.

233
E.Coli-OD2 (Silantes), Isogro ® (Isotec), etc.) In this study, we 
chose Isogro ® (noted as  2 H-cell extract in the following text), 
but other cell extracts are likely to give the same results.  
  8.   IPTG (1 M in D 2 O).  
  9.  13 CH 3 -methyl-speciﬁ cally labeled precursors were purchased 
on a deuterated form ready for direct introduction into the 
culture medium (NMR-Bio):  2 H- 13 CH 3 -Alanine ( 13 C ≥ 99 %; 
 2 H ≥ 98 %),  2 H- 13 CH 3 -2-ketobutyric acid ( 13 C ≥ 99 %; 
 2 H ≥ 98 %),  2 H- 13 CH 3 -2-hydroxy-2-methyl-3-oxo-4-butanoic 
acid ( 13 C ≥ 99 %;  2 H ≥ 95 %),  2 H- L -Isoleucine ( 2 H ≥ 98 %), 
 2 H- L -Leucine ( 2 H ≥ 98 %),  2 H-α-ketoisovalerate ( 2 H ≥ 98 %). 
  10.   10 mL- 24 deep-well plates.  
  11.   Gas permeable adhesive seals.  
  1.   10× BugBuster ® buffer (Merck-Millipore).  
  2.   DNAse, RNAse, lysozyme (Euromedex).  
  3.   96-well ﬁ lter plates (Macherey-Nagel).  
  4.  2,2 mL-96 deep-well plates.  
  5.  Aluminum seals.  
  6.  QIAvac 96 Vacuum manifold (Qiagen) or any vacuum mani-
fold for processing 96-well plates.  
  7.  Appropriate resin (for nontagged proteins: any ion exchange 
resin (Q sepharose, SP sepharose, etc.) or afﬁ nity resin (Protein 
A, Protein G, Heparin sepharose, etc.); for tagged proteins: 
Ni-NTA, Talon resin, Strep-tactin sepharose. etc.). In this 
study, we used Q sepharose resin (GE Healthcare Life Sciences).  
  8.  Anion exchange chromatography equilibration/washing buf-
fer: 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 160 mM NaCl.  
  9.  Anion exchange chromatography elution buffer: 20 mM Tris–
HCl pH 7.5, 350 mM NaCl.  
  10.   Dialysis membrane (Gebaﬂ ex, Dialysis system for small- volume 
samples).  
  NMR spectra were recorded on a Agilent Direct Drive spectrometer 
operating at a proton frequency of 800 MHz equipped with a 
5 mm cryogenically cooled triple resonance pulsed ﬁ eld gradient 
probe head. Samples were loaded in a 2.5 mm shigemi tube 
inserted coaxially into a 5 mm tube.  
3  Methods 
 The goal of the approach is both to improve yields and simplify the 
procedure previously published [ 18 ]. For that purpose, all the small-
scale parallel production, lysis, and puriﬁ cation steps should ﬁ rst be 
setup on uniformly deuterated native protein before applying the 
2.2  Puriﬁ cation
2.3  NMR 
Spectroscopy
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

234
protocol to the whole isotopically labeled library of mutants. The 
hypothesis is made that all mutants behave identically to the native 
protein and that methyl labeling does not change the puriﬁ cation 
proﬁ le (same expression level, same puriﬁ cation conditions, etc.). 
  Constructs carrying single point mutations can be purchased 
commercially or prepared using an automated molecular biology 
platform. Here, they were generated by in-house automated 
molecular biology Platform (RoBioMol—Institut de Biologie 
Structurale, Jean-Pierre Ebel) using an automated PCR-based 
protocol adapted from the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis 
method. PCR ampliﬁ cation was performed with Phusion Hot Start 
enzyme (Finnzymes) using the expression plasmid pET41c-
PhTET2 as template and the speciﬁ c mutagenic primers. Products 
were puriﬁ ed and digested by  Dpn I. Final mutations were selected 
by transformation and veriﬁ ed by sequencing. Valine residues were 
mutated into Alanine residues, Alanine into Valine, Isoleucine into 
Leucine. Amino acids must be substituted by an isosteric one to 
avoid considerable changes in the structure and minimize secondary 
shift effects ( see  Note 1 and Table  1 ).
  Selective methyl protonation provides excellent probes for 
monitoring interactions and dynamics, and high-quality spectra 
can be recorded in very large systems. For assignment, a prerequisite 
is to restrict labeling to only one type of methyl-containing residue 
at once, in order to minimize secondary chemical shift perturbations 
3.1  Generation 
of Mutant Plasmids 
Libraries
3.2  Protein Labeling 
for Methyl Detection
 Table 1 
 Suggested substitutions for methyl containing residues 
 Mutated CH 3 -
containing residue 
 Suggested 
substitution 
 Acceptable substitution 
 Ala 
 Ser 
 Val [ 18 ], Gly, Cys, Thr 
 Ile 
 Val [ 30 ,  32 ] 
 Leu [ 17 ,  18 ,  32 ], Met 
 Leu 
 Ile [ 17 ], Met 
 Val, Phe 
 Val 
 Ile [ 17 ] 
 Met, Leu, Ala [ 25 ], Thr 
 Thr 
 Ser 
 Ala, Asn, Val 
 Met 
 Leu 
 Ile, Val 
 Adapted from BLOSUM 62 substitution matrix [ 29 ] 
 The BLOSUM (BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix) matrix is a substitution matrix used 
for sequence alignment of proteins [ 29 ]. BLOSUM matrices are used to score 
alignments between evolutionarily divergent protein sequences. They are based on 
local alignments. In this table, suggested/acceptable substitutions for each of the 
6 methyl-containing amino acids, for the purpose of assignment using SeSAM 
strategy [ 18 ], are listed along with an application reference when it exists  
Elodie Crublet et al.

235
due to the mutation. Currently, methods are available to label 
Isoleucine (δ1 [ 2 ] or γ2 [ 22 ]), Alanine [ 3 ,  23 ], Threonine [ 24 ], or 
Methionine [ 10 ,  20 ] methyl groups efﬁ ciently. For Leucine and 
Valine, however, the labeling scheme is more difﬁ cult because these 
amino acids share the same biogenesis pathway and each residue 
has two prochiral methyl groups. Consequently, compared to other 
residues, for a similar spectral window, the number of methyl group 
resonances is four times higher, potentially resulting in peak overlap 
and loss of resolution. Thus, until recently, the assignment-by- 
mutagenesis strategy was not attractive for Valine residues. Since 
then, a stereospeciﬁ c isotopic labeling method was developed for 
Leucine/Valine labeling [ 21 ]. More recently, our group has also 
developed the stereoselective labeling of Valine without Leucine 
using coincorporation of pro- S Acetolactate and  2 H-Leucine [ 25 ]. 
This new isotopic labeling strategy increased the resolution and 
reduced overlaps and potential secondary chemical shifts by a 
factor of 4 on average. Thus, it enabled easy assignment-by- 
mutagenesis of Valine residues in large protein assemblies, 
compared to standard labeling using 2 keto-acids [ 26 ]. 
 In this section we describe the protocol to speciﬁ cally label 
large proteins for methyl detection and produced them on a small- 
scale using enriched cell extract.
  1.   Bacteria must ﬁ rst be trained to adapt progressively in 100 %  2 H 
medium. All these adaptation steps will be performed in 24-well 
plates covered with gas permeable adhesive seal. Pick a fresh 
colony of transformed cells from each mutant of an LB plate 
( see  Note 2 ) and start a 2-mL bacterial culture of LB medium 
prepared in H 2 O. Once OD 600nm reaches 3–4 (6–8 h) at 37 °C, 
transfer 50 μL of the cell culture into 2 mL of M9 medium 
prepared in H 2 O. The starting OD 600nm of this new culture 
should be about 0.1. Incubate the culture in a shaking incuba-
tor (220–250 rpm) at 37 °C overnight (the OD 600nm should be 
around 2–2.5) and transfer 100–200 μL of the cell culture into 
2 mL of M9 medium prepared in 50 % D 2 O ( see  Note 3 ) (start-
ing OD 600nm = 0.2). Let the culture grow at 37 °C until the 
OD 600nm reaches 2–2.5 and transfer 300 μL of the cell culture 
into 3 mL of M9 medium in 100 % D 2 O (starting OD 600nm = 0.25). 
Incubate the culture at 37 °C overnight until OD 600nm is 1.5–2 
and use this cell culture as your starting culture.  
  2.   Prepare the volume of M9 needed for the whole culture 
(2 × 5 mL for each mutant) in a sterile ﬂ ask (M9 in 
D 2 O + oligo- elements in D 2 O + vitamins in D 2 O + 2 g/L of 
 12 C,  2 H  glucose + antibiotics). Add 2 g/L of  2 H-cell extract 
( see  Notes 4 – 6 ).  
  3.   Fill a 24 deep-well block ( see  Note 7 ) with 3.5 mL of this 
medium. Inoculate each well with the overnight culture at a 
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

236
starting OD 600nm of 0.3. Cover with gas permeable adhesive 
seal and grow at 37 °C until OD 600nm reaches 1.5.  
  4.   Add the precursors ( see  Note 8 ) diluted in 1.5 mL of M9/
D 2 O, 1 h prior to IPTG induction. The amount of  13 CH 3 -
precursors to add was optimized to ensure complete labeling 
of proteins overexpressed in rich medium (Fig.  2a ). The yield 
of the protein was improved by a factor of 1.7 when  2 H-cell 
extract was added to the culture medium, while the frequency 
of labeling was still almost 100 %, proving there is no isotopic 
dilution by  2 H-cell extract (Fig.  2b ).
  5.  Let the culture grow for 1 h. The OD 600nm should reach a 
value of 1.5.  
  6.   Add IPTG (in D 2 O) to 0.5 mM to induce protein expression. 
Continue incubation at 37 °C for 4 h (depending on your 
protein).  
  Fig. 2  Level of incorporation of  13 CH 3 -alanine in proteins expressed in M9 medium supplemented with  2 H-cell 
extract. Level of incorporation of  13 C at the Cβ-alanine position in overexpressed ubiquitin as a function of the 
amount of the exogenous alanine added in culture medium 1 h prior to induction. Ubiquitin was expressed in 
 E .  coli in M9/D 2 O culture medium supplemented with 2 g/L  2 H,  12 C glucose, and 2 g/L  2 H,  12 C Isogro ® . Different 
amounts of  13 CH 3  L -alanine (0–1.4 g/L) were added 1 h before induction.  2 H-Isovalerate (400 mg/L) and 
 2 H-Isoleucine (120 mg/L) were added to prevent scrambling from alanine. Fixed amount of  13 CH 3  L -methionine 
(0.5 g/L) was used as an internal reference. The level of incorporation was determined by analyzing the inten-
sities of one alanine methyl resonance with respect to signal of methyl group of one methionine residue. 
A level of incorporation in Alanine side chains ≥90 % is obtained by adding 1 g of alanine per liter of culture 
medium. ( b ) Comparison of 1D  13 C-ﬁ ltered NMR spectra of U-[ 12 C,  2 H], Ala-[ 13 CH 3 ] β  ubiquitin expressed in 
equal volume of M9 medium (M9) or M9 medium supplemented with  2 H-cell extract (M9+2H-cell extract). 
Data were recorded at 37 °C using a 2.5 mm Shigemi tube, on an 800 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with 
a cryogenic probe head. Comparison of 1D spectra shows an increase of the signal-to-noise ratio by a factor 
of 1.65. These results are in agreement with an increase of both the cell density (OD 600nm  × 1.7 with  2 H-cell 
extract) and the culture yields (yields × 1.75 with  2 H-cell extract), indicating that  13 C-Alanine is fully incorpo-
rated in these conditions       
 
Elodie Crublet et al.

237
  7.  Centrifuge the entire plate in a swing-out rotor for  20 min at 
3,250 × g. Discard the supernatant and store the pellet at 
−80 °C or process directly.  
  Protein puriﬁ cation and lysis strategy may vary according to the 
protein of interest (presence and type of fusion tag). Here we 
described the lysis strategy optimized for PhTET2 expressed in 
BL21(DE3)RIL.
  1.  Lyse the cells ( see  Note 9 ). Add 250 μL of lysis buffer into 
each well in the 24-well culture plate (1× BugBuster ® , 20 mM 
Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl ( see  Note 10 ), 5 mM MgCl 2 , 
2 μg/mL DNAse, 10 μg/mL RNAse, 0.3 mg/mL Lysozyme) 
and resuspend the cells by pipetting up and down. Pool the 2 
pellets of the same mutant ( see  Note 7 ) and incubate 40 min at 
room temperature with (occasional) shaking.  
  2.   Heat the crude extract at 85 °C ( see  Note 11 ) for 15 min by 
making the plate directly ﬂ oat in a water bath.  
  3.   Centrifuge the plate at 3,250 × g for 20 min. Both soluble- and 
whole-cell pellets should be analyzed ( see Subheading  3.4 
 step 6 ).  
  In this section, we describe a typical protein puriﬁ cation procedure 
using an anion exchange resin, but alternative resins can be used 
( see  Note 12 ).
  1.  Prepare the puriﬁ cation 96-well ﬁ lter plate. Resuspend the Q 
sepharose resin thoroughly. Pipet 800 μL of resin suspension 
(bed volume of 400 μL) into each well of the plate. Wash each 
well twice with 1 mL of water and 3 times with 1 mL of equili-
bration buffer using a vacuum manifold (or alternatively a cen-
trifuge with a swing-out rotor).  
  2.  Transfer the clear supernatants (Subheading  3.3  step 3 ) into 
the 96-well ﬁ lter plate containing the resin. Seal the block with 
aluminum seal and caps to avoid leaks and place at room tem-
perature for 1 h with gentle shaking.  
  3.   Place the 96-well ﬁ lter plate over a 96 deep-well plate in the 
vacuum manifold. Remove the aluminum seal and caps (only 
over the used wells) and let the samples ﬂ ow through the resin 
ﬁ rst by gravity, then by applying vacuum until the samples have 
been completely drawn through the plate.  
  4.   Place a drain deep-well plate and wash the resin by adding 
400 μL of washing buffer to each well and then apply vacuum 
as above. Repeat the wash 4 times.  
  5.   Place the ﬁ lter plate on top of a new deep-well plate and add 
400 μL of elution buffer in each well. Incubate 2 min and pro-
ceed as above. Repeat the elution 4 times and store the eluate.  
3.3   Lysis
3.4  Small-Scale 
Parallel Puriﬁ cation
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

238
  6.  Analyze by SDS-PAGE the total, soluble and eluted fractions 
for some of the mutants, according to standard procedures.  
  To assign a large protein such as PhTET2 (468 kDa, 353 residues 
per subunit), the SeSAM strategy [ 18 ] is followed. 
 The type of probe and the tube conﬁ guration can affect the 
required amount of material. For small sample amounts, users 
should always choose the most sensitive probe available (best signal- 
to-noise per mg of protein). Using a standard 5-mm cryogenically 
cooled probe, the protein should be concentrated to optimize the 
amount of spins present in the most sensitive area of the active vol-
ume (i.e., near the axial symmetry axis). This can be achieved simply 
by placing the sample in a small diameter tube (1 to 3 mm) centered 
inside a standard 5-mm tube. As a result, compared to a 5-mm 
NMR tube, the sensitivity gain is ca. a factor of 2 per mg of protein. 
Alternatively, using cryoprobes optimized for small volumes (3 mm 
coldprobe (Agilent); 1.7 mm microcryoprobe (Bruker)) can further 
increase sensitivity twofold allowing a reduction of the culture 
 volume (one 5-mL well for each mutant) or a division of the acqui-
sition time by a factor of 4. In this study, the samples were loaded in 
a 2.5 mm shigemi tube placed coaxially to a regular 5-mm NMR 
tube as a sample holder and NMR spectra were recorded on a spec-
trometer equipped with a 5-mm cryoprobe.
  1.   Prepare methyl-labeled mutants as described above. Transfer 
the protein in an NMR suitable buffer. In our case, the protein 
was extensively dialyzed in H 2 O, lyophilized and resuspended 
in 60 μL (± 0.15 mM) of 20 mM Tris–DCl, 20 mM NaCl 
pH 7.4 in 100 % D 2 O. Alternatively (if the protein is not stable 
in pure H 2 O), buffer can be exchanged by a series of dilution/
concentration steps in D 2 O buffer using a concentration unit 
with an appropriate cut-off.  
  2.  Record  1 H- 13 C SOFAST-methyl-TROSY spectra (more sensi-
tive experiment by unit of time [ 27 ]) for each mutant sample 
and native protein. Here, taking advantage of the thermosta-
bility of PhTET2, NMR data are recorded at 50 °C. The angle 
of proton excitation pulse is set to 30° and the recycling delay 
is optimized to 0.4 s. The length of each NMR experiment is 
adjusted depending on the concentration of the sample (typi-
cally 1 h for 9 nmol of sample).  
  3.   All data are processed and analyzed with NMRPipe [ 28 ]. 
Sequence-speciﬁ c assignments of each NMR signal are inferred 
by comparing the 2D  1 H- 13 C correlation spectrum recorded 
for each member of the mutant library with a spectrum recorded 
for the wild-type protein (Fig.  3 ). Conceptually, assignment-
by- mutagenesis is straightforward. In practice, however, the 
overlap of resonances and the occurrence of secondary  chemical 
3.5  NMR 
Spectroscopy
Elodie Crublet et al.

239
shifts changes can confuse the analysis. Perturbations are likely 
to occur but can be minimized (using conservative mutations). 
In the ﬁ rst round, all spectra with only one missing peak are 
considered for a straightforward assignment of a ﬁ rst set of res-
onances. Then, more complex spectra are studied with consid-
eration of structure, ﬁ rst set of unambiguous assignment and 
the whole set of spectra taken into account, in order to analyze 
secondary chemical shift perturbations. That is why consider-
ing the full library of single-site mutations greatly simpliﬁ es the 
process of resonance assignment by cross-validating the results 
several times ( see  Note 13 ).
 Fig. 3  Examples of spectra of mutants with speciﬁ c Ile-δ1, Ala-β, or Val pro- S -labeled methyl probes. Spectra 
of mutants displaying modest secondary chemical shift perturbations ( a – c ) were initially chosen for analysis 
and, when possible, sequence-speciﬁ c assignment of methyl groups were made. This initial set of unambigu-
ous assignments assisted the analysis of spectra displaying larger chemical shift perturbations ( d – f  ). Spectra 
of this ﬁ gure are extracted from the work of Amero et al. [ 18 ] and Mas et al. [ 25 ]. SOFAST Methyl- TROSY 
spectra were recorded at 50 °C, on an 800 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a cryogenic probe head, 
using samples of U-[ 12 C,  2 H], Ile-[ 13 CH 3 ] δ1 ( a and  d ) [ 18 ], U-[ 12 C,  2 H], Ala-[ 13 CH 3 ] β ( b  and  e ) [ 18 ], or U-[ 12 C,  2 H], 
Val-[ 13 CH 3 ] pro- S  ( c and  f ) [ 25 ] labeled mutant PhTET2 protein ( red ). Each spectrum was overlaid with the refer-
ence spectrum of the native particle ( black ). Experimental acquisition times were adjusted to the sample 
protein concentration (from 0.26 to 0.42 mg/sample, i.e., 7–11 nmol of PhTET2 monomer) with a maximum 
experimental time set to 1 h. The assignment inferred for the missing resonance in the mutant spectrum is 
indicated and secondary chemical shift perturbations are annotated with  arrows 
 
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

240
4  Conclusion 
 Thanks to the development of protocols and molecules that allow 
residue-speciﬁ c protonation of methyl groups in highly perdeuter-
ated proteins, it is now feasible to apply solution NMR techniques 
to protein systems as large as 1 MDa. Structural and dynamic 
information yielded by methyl groups is most useful when a 
sequence-speciﬁ c assignment for the probe is known. Easily obtain-
ing these assignments remains the major hurdle in many studies of 
large proteins. Here we describe a fast, efﬁ cient, and user-friendly 
protocol for resonance assignment that has allowed us to assign up 
to 100 methyl cross-peaks in about 2 weeks with 4 days of NMR 
time and a isotopic cost of less than 2 k€. We demonstrated the 
feasibility of this protocol on samples labeled on Alanine, Isoleucine, 
or Valine. This method can also be extended to Methionine- or 
Threonine-labeled proteins. As for Valine labeling, the methyl- 
speciﬁ c labeling of Leucine residues will require the development 
of a stereoselectively labeled amino acid (or precursor) to label 
Leucine residues independently from Valines.  
5  Notes 
  1.  Amino acids should typically be substituted by an isosteric 
amino acid to prevent signiﬁ cant changes in the local environ-
ment and protein packing, which could introduce signiﬁ cant 
chemical shift perturbations. We chose to exchange Valine to 
Alanine according to Amero et al . [ 18 ], who mutated Alanine 
into Valine. However, according to BLOSUM matrices for 
amino acid substitutions [ 29 ], the Valine to Isoleucine muta-
tions (score 3) would have been wiser and most likely to have 
minimal effect on the structure and NMR spectra. Indeed, 
Valine differs from Isoleucine by the loss of only one CH 2 
group, whereas it differs from Alanine by the loss of CH–CH 3 . 
According to these matrices, Chan et al . [ 30 ] generated a set 
of mutants in which each Isoleucine was substituted by a Valine 
(score 3). The resulting chemical shift perturbations were 
smaller than those from the corresponding Ile to mutations 
Ala (score −1) facilitating the assignment (Table  1 ). 
  2.    Antibiotics are not speciﬁ ed. Put appropriate antibiotics con-
sidering the plasmid and the cells used. However, ampicillin is 
not suitable because it can be inactivated by the β-lactamases 
produced by the cell, resulting in plasmid loss and drop of pro-
tein expression. This effect seems to be worse in D 2 O medium 
because of the successive adaptation steps that promote loss of 
selective pressure. Here, we routinely used the pET-41 plas-
mid, which contains the kanamycin resistance gene.  
Elodie Crublet et al.

241
  3.  M9 50 % D 2 O is prepared with 2× M9 H 2 O and same volume 
of D 2 O. The oligo-elements, vitamins, antibiotics, and glucose 
used at this step are still prepared in water.  
  4.   To increase cell density, we supplemented M9 medium with 
 2 H-cell extract. We optimized the protocol with Isogro ® but 
many similar rich bacterial cell growth media are commercially 
available (Spectra 9, Celtone ® Complete Medium, BioExpress ® 
1000, Silantes ® E.Coli-OD2, etc.). We did not test them but 
they can most likely be used to replace Isogro ® , after suitable 
optimization.  
  5.   Rich medium can be the source of isotopic dilution as it con-
tains  12 C2H 3 -labeled amino acids. To minimize this, we tested 
different concentrations of  2 H-cell extract (2, 3, or 10 g/L). 
Growth is signiﬁ cantly increased from 0 to 2 g/L; however 
higher concentrations of  2 H-cell extract did not show further 
signiﬁ cant improvement. Moreover,  2 H-cell extract is added at 
the start of the culture, whereas methyl speciﬁ cally labeled pre-
cursors are added 1 h before induction. This early addition 
reduces isotopic dilution because most of deuterated amino 
acids are consumed for the cell growth, while  13 CH 3 -precursors 
are incorporated for the production of the labeled protein. 
Optimization was done using Isogro ® , but similar results are 
expected for other types of commercial  2 H-cell extracts.  
  6.   For ubiquitin, yields with 2 g/L of  2 H-cell extract were 
increased by a factor of 1.7 (Fig.  2b ).  
  7.  Considering both yields, parallelization of the method and 
simpliﬁ cation of the puriﬁ cation steps, we were able to reduce 
the volume of production to 10 mL for each mutant. One 24 
deep-well plate is thus suitable for 12 mutants (2 wells of 5 mL 
for each mutant). The ﬁ nal concentration in a 2.5 mm Shigemi 
tube is around 0.15 mM (9 nmol or 0.35 mg of PhTET2 
monomer) in 60 μL. 
  8.  Incorporation level of  13 CH 3 -alanine was determined using 
2 g/L of  12 C,  2 H-glucose, and 2 g/L of  2 H-cell extract in cul-
ture medium. Using higher concentrations of glucose may 
cause isotopic dilution of the  13 CH 3 -precursor [ 31 ] and the 
incorporation curves must then be modiﬁ ed accordingly.  
  9.   One crucial step to optimize in the protein production process 
is the bacterial cell lysis. Different lysis methods should be 
tested. However, when tens or hundreds of mutants are 
 produced, only a few lysis methods can be reasonably used in 
parallel. Sonication proved problematic unless using High 
Throughput sonicators (which are expensive) or ultrasonic 
bath (but the ultrasonic energy is not always equally distrib-
uted throughout the plate and the results may not be repro-
ducible from well to well). For these reasons, we chose to 
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

242
optimize lysis conditions using chemical treatment (all the 
 preliminary tests were performed on the native protein). This 
allowed us to achieve lysis directly on the culture plates, in 
parallel. We tested different lysis buffers and selected the 
BugBuster ® , as it showed the best solubility yields for our pro-
tein of interest.  
  10.   The NaCl concentration of the lysis buffer has to be settled 
according to the protein of interest. Decrease it if the protein 
does not bind to the ion exchange resin.  
  11.   The protein studied is an aminopeptidase from a thermophilic 
organism, adapted to high temperatures. The protein is thus 
stable at 85 °C for 15 min, whereas most of other  E .  coli pro-
teins will precipitate. Bacterial contaminants are then removed 
by centrifugation.  
  12.   Fill your ﬁ lter plate with any suitable resin (anion or cation 
exchange resin, Ni-NTA, StrepTactin, etc.). Adapt bead vol-
ume to the capacity of the resin. Typically, we prepare wells 
containing 400 μL of anion exchange resin for a 10-mL cell 
culture. This can be scaled up or down to suit your needs based 
on the expected protein yield.  
  13.   In almost 50 % of cases (using conservative mutations 
( see  Note 1 )), the only difference between mutant and refer-
ence spectra is a single missing cross-peak in the spectrum of 
the mutant (Fig.  3a–c ). In such instances, the missing peak can 
be unambiguously assigned to the methyl group of the mutated 
residue. In the remaining spectra, the disappearance of the sig-
nal is accompanied by small changes in the chemical shift of a 
few additional correlations (Fig.  3d–f ). This effect is expected 
and has previously been observed [ 18 ,  32 ]. Peak movements 
that do not directly concern the mutated resonance can com-
plicate the process of obtaining a sequence- speciﬁ c assignment 
from a single experiment, especially in an overcrowded region 
of the spectrum. Conservative mutations enable minimization 
of secondary chemical shift perturbations. In the same way, 
stereospeciﬁ c labeling of a single methyl group (Valine pro- S ) 
versus labeling of 4 methyl groups (Val/Leu) using 
α-ketoisovalerate [ 26 ] reduces peak overlapping as well as 
secondary chemical shift up to a factor of 4. 
 Nonetheless, secondary chemical shift perturbations 
reﬂ ect modiﬁ cations in the local electronic environment and 
can therefore provide complementary information that can be 
used to conﬁ rm the proposed assignment. The key point is 
that the information provided by secondary chemical shift 
changes only becomes interpretable when data from a full 
library of methyl group mutants is considered [ 18 ]. Any 
ambiguous assignment can therefore be readily cross-validated 
Elodie Crublet et al.

243
using structurally close, straightforward-assigned resonances. 
Using an incomplete library of mutants would not permit the 
same level of conﬁ dence in the ﬁ nal assignments.  
 Acknowledgments 
 We would like to thank Dr P. Macek, M. Plevin, O. Hamelin, 
P. Gans, I. Ayala, C. Amero, and A. Favier for stimulating discussions 
and assistance in sample preparation or analysis. This work used the 
RobioMol, High-Field NMR, Isotopic Labeling, and Seq3A  platforms 
of 
the 
Grenoble 
Instruct 
centre 
(ISBG; 
UMS 
3518 
 CNRS-CEA- UJF-EMBL) with support from FRISBI (ANR-10-
INSB-05-02), and GRAL (ANR-10-LABX-49-01) within the 
Grenoble Partnership for Structural Biology (PSB). The research lead-
ing to these results has received funding from the European Research 
Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework 
Programme FP7/2007-2013 Grant Agreement no. 260887.  
 References 
  1.  Sprangers R, Kay LE (2007) Quantitative 
dynamics and binding studies of the 20S 
 proteasome by NMR. Nature 445:618–622  
  2.  Gardner K, Kay LE (1997) Production and 
incorporation of  15 N,  13 C,  2 H ( 1 H-δ1 methyl) 
isoleucine into proteins for multidimensional 
NMR studies. J Am Chem Soc 119:
7599–7600  
  3.  Ayala I, Sounier R, Use N et al (2009) An efﬁ -
cient protocol for the complete incorporation 
of methyl-protonated alanine in perdeuterated 
protein. J Biomol NMR 43:111–119  
  4.  Tugarinov V, Kanelis V, Kay LE (2006) 
Isotope labeling strategies for the study of 
high-molecular- weight proteins by solution 
NMR spectroscopy. Nat Protoc 1:749–754  
  5.  Ruschak AM, Kay LE (2010) Methyl groups 
as probes of supra-molecular structure, dynam-
ics and function. J Biomol NMR 46:75–87  
  6.  Plevin MJ, Boisbouvier J (2012) Isotope- 
labelling of methyl groups for NMR studies of 
large proteins. In: Recent developments in 
biomolecular 
NMR. 
Royal 
Society 
of 
Chemistry. doi:10.1039/9781849735391  
  7.  Stoffregen MC, Schwer MM, Renschler FA 
et al (2012) Methionine scanning as an NMR 
tool for detecting and analyzing biomolecular 
interaction surfaces. Structure 20:573–581  
  8.  Religa TL, Ruschak AM, Rosenzweig R et al 
(2011) Site-directed methyl group labeling as 
an NMR probe of structure and dynamics in 
supramolecular protein systems: applications 
to the proteasome and to the ClpP protease. 
J Am Chem Soc 133:9063–9068  
  9.  Bax A (2011) Triple resonance three- 
dimensional protein NMR: before it became a 
black box. J Magn Reson 213:442–445  
  10.  Gelis I, Bonvin AM, Keramisanou D et al 
(2007) Structural basis for signal-sequence 
recognition by the translocase motor SecA as 
determined by NMR. Cell 131:756–769  
  11.  Turano P, Lalli D, Felli IC et al (2010) NMR 
reveals pathway for ferric mineral precursors to 
the central cavity of ferritin. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 107:545–550  
  12.  Marassi FM, Ramamoorthy A, Opella SJ 
(1997) Complete resolution of the solid-state 
NMR spectrum of a uniformly  15 N-labeled 
membrane protein in phospholipid bilayers. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:8551–8556  
  13.   Xu Y, Liu M, Simpson PJ et al (2009) Automated 
assignment in selectively methyl- labelled pro-
teins. J Am Chem Soc 131:9480–9481  
  14.  Venditti V, Fawzi NL, Clore GM (2011) 
Automated sequence- and stereo-speciﬁ c 
assignment of methyl-labeled proteins by para-
NMR Assignment of Large Protein Assemblies Using Mutagenesis

244
magnetic relaxation and methyl-methyl nuclear 
overhauser 
enhancement 
spectroscopy. 
J Biomol NMR 51:319–328  
  15.   Seven A, Rizo J (2012) Assigning the methyl 
resonances of the 73 kDa Munc13-1 MUN 
domain by mutagenesis. 25 th ICMRBS-
poster n° P302 TU, Lyon  
  16.   Yang X, Welch JL, Arnold JJ et al (2010) 
Long-range interaction networks in the func-
tion and ﬁ delity of poliovirus RNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase studied by nuclear magnetic 
resonance. Biochemistry 49:9361–9371  
  17.   Rosenzweig R, Moradi S, Zarrine-Afsar A et al 
(2013) Unraveling the mechanism of protein 
disaggregation through a ClpB-DnaK interac-
tion. Science 339:1080–1083  
  18.   Amero C, Asuncion Dura M, Noirclerc-Savoye 
M et al (2011) A systematic mutagenesis- 
driven strategy for site-resolved NMR studies 
of supramolecular assemblies. J Biomol NMR 
50:229–236 
  19.   Goto NK, Gardner KH, Mueller GA et al 
(1999) A robust and cost-effective method for 
the production of Val, Leu, Ile (δ1) methyl- 
protonated  15 N-,  13 C-,  2 H-labeled proteins. 
J Biomol NMR 13:369–374  
  20.   Fischer M, Kloiber K, Hausler J et al (2007) 
Synthesis 
of 
a 
 13 C-methyl-group-labeled 
methionine precursor as a useful tool for sim-
plifying protein structural analysis by NMR 
spectroscopy. Chembiochem 8:610–612  
  21.   Gans P, Hamelin O, Sounier R et al (2010) 
Stereospeciﬁ c isotopic labeling of methyl 
groups for NMR spectroscopic studies of high-
molecular- weight proteins. Angew Chem Int 
Ed Engl 49:1958–1962  
  22.  Ayala I, Hamelin O, Amero C et al (2012) An 
optimized 
isotopic 
labelling 
strategy 
of 
isoleucine- gamma2 methyl groups for solution 
NMR studies of high molecular weight pro-
teins. Chem Commun (Camb) 48:1434–1436  
  23.   Isaacson RL, Simpson PJ, Liu M et al (2007) 
A new labeling method for methyl transverse 
relaxation-optimized 
spectroscopy 
NMR 
 spectra of alanine residues. J Am Chem Soc 
129:15428–15429  
  24.  Sinha K, Jen-Jacobson L, Rule GS (2011) 
Speciﬁ c labeling of threonine methyl groups 
for NMR studies of protein-nucleic acid com-
plexes. Biochemistry 50:10189–10191  
  25.  Mas G, Crublet E, Hamelin O et al (2013) 
Speciﬁ c labeling and assignment Strategies of 
valine methyl groups for the NMR Studies of 
high molecular weight proteins (submitted) 
  26.  Tugarinov V, Kay LE (2003) Ile, Leu, and Val 
methyl assignments of the 723-residue malate 
synthase G using a new labeling strategy and 
novel NMR methods. J Am Chem Soc 
125:13868–13878  
  27.  Amero C, Schanda P, Dura MA et al (2009) 
Fast two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy of 
high molecular weight protein assemblies. 
J Am Chem Soc 131:3448–3449  
  28.  Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW et al 
(1995) NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral 
processing system based on UNIX pipes. 
J Biomol NMR 6:277–293  
  29.   Henikoff S, Henikoff JG (1992) Amino acid 
substitution matrices from protein blocks. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 89:10915–10919  
  30.  Chan PH, Weissbach S, Okon M et al (2012) 
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectral assign-
ments of α-1,4-galactosyltransferase LgtC 
from Neisseria meningitidis: substrate binding 
and 
multiple 
conformational 
states. 
Biochemistry 51:8278–8292  
  31.  Plevin MJ, Hamelin O, Boisbouvier J et al 
(2011) A simple biosynthetic method for ste-
reospeciﬁ c resonance assignment of prochiral 
methyl groups in proteins. J Biomol NMR 
49:61–67  
   32.  Sprangers R, Gribun A, Hwang PM et al 
(2005) Quantitative NMR spectroscopy of 
supramolecular complexes: dynamic side pores 
in ClpP are important for product release. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:16678–16683  
Elodie Crublet et al.

245
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_18, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 18  
 High-Throughput SAXS for the Characterization 
of Biomolecules in Solution: A Practical Approach 
 Kevin  N.  Dyer ,  Michal  Hammel ,  Robert  P.  Rambo ,  Susan  E.  Tsutakawa , 
 Ivan  Rodic ,  Scott  Classen ,  John  A.  Tainer , and  Greg  L.  Hura 
 Abstract 
 The recent innovation of collecting X-ray scattering from solutions containing puriﬁ ed macromolecules in 
high-throughput has yet to be truly exploited by the biological community. Yet, this capability is becoming 
critical given that the growth of sequence and genomics data is signiﬁ cantly outpacing structural biology 
results. Given the huge mismatch in information growth rates between sequence and structural methods, 
their combined high-throughput and high success rate make high-throughput small angle X-ray scattering 
(HT-SAXS) analyses increasingly valuable. HT-SAXS connects sequence as well as NMR and crystallo-
graphic results to biological outcomes by deﬁ ning the ﬂ exible and dynamic complexes controlling cell biol-
ogy. Commonly falling under the umbrella of bio-SAXS, HT-SAXS data collection pipelines have or are 
being developed at most synchrotrons. How investigators practically get their biomolecules of interest into 
these pipelines, balance sample requirements and manage HT-SAXS data output format varies from facility 
to facility. While these features are unlikely to be standardized across synchrotron beamlines, a detailed 
description of HT-SAXS issues for one pipeline provides investigators with a practical guide to the general 
procedures they will encounter. One of the longest running and generally accessible HT-SAXS endstations 
is the SIBYLS beamline at the Advanced Light Source in Berkeley CA. Here we describe the current state 
of the SIBYLS HT-SAXS pipeline, what is necessary for investigators to integrate into it, the output format 
and a summary of results from 2 years of operation. Assessment of accumulated data informs issues of con-
centration, background, buffers, sample handling, sample shipping, homogeneity requirements, error 
sources, aggregation, radiation sensitivity, interpretation, and ﬂ ags for concern. By quantitatively examining 
success and failures as a function of sample and data characteristics, we deﬁ ne practical concerns, consider-
ations, and concepts for optimally applying HT-SAXS techniques to biological samples.  
 Key words   High-throughput  ,  SAXS ,  Conformation  ,  Structure  ,  Structural genomics  ,  Macromolecules  
1  Introduction 
 Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) has reemerged in its application 
to the study of biological macromolecules. SAXS from biomole-
cules was an early application of synchrotron radiation [ 1 ] in part 
because of its simplicity in terms of sample preparation. However 

246
with the realization of degree to which biomolecules could be 
crystallized yielding atomic resolution structures, macromolecu-
lar crystallography (MX) quickly became a focus of structural 
biologists. Relatively speaking, the application of SAXS and the 
development of analytical tools languished. Over the course of 
the last 10 years, SAXS has reemerged as a powerful complimen-
tary tool to MX. 
 Three factors have contributed to the emerging power of SAXS. 
First, not all macromolecules of interest are amenable to crystalliza-
tion. Even when a macromolecule has been crystallized and mod-
eled to atomic resolution, biologically relevant alternate 
conformations can, at best, be inferred. Through a genomic analy-
sis, 35–48 % of human gene products are predicted to have signiﬁ -
cant ﬂ exible regions when isolated [ 2 ]. SAXS provides an avenue to 
capture critical structural information from biomolecules even after 
an atomic resolution model is available. SAXS results suggest con-
formational variation is a general functional feature of macromole-
cules, so biologically relevant structural analyses will require a 
comprehensive approach that assesses both ﬂ exibility, as seen by 
SAXS, and detail, as determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR 
[ 3 ]. Indeed, SAXS also provides three-dimensional arrangements 
and oligomeric state for full-length proteins in solution, which is 
typically the functional assembly state, as seen for DNA break 
response framework proteins [ 4 ,  5 ], thermophilic superoxide dis-
mutase [ 6 ], ATPase motors [ 7 ], and abscisic acid receptor [ 8 ]. 
Second, analysis tools have been developed and made accessible for 
the extraction of structural information. Shapes of macromolecule 
may be determined to ~15 Å resolution. Higher resolution infor-
mation may be probed by complimenting SAXS with information 
from an atomic resolution model. Building upon the promise of 
early tools [ 9 ], the EMBL ATSAS [ 10 ] package has been transfor-
mative. Others have further contributed to the expanding suite of 
software available for analysis [ 11 – 14 ]. Additionally, the practical 
implementation of the Porod-Debye law in SAXS experiments of 
biopolymers provides a tool for assessing ﬂ exibility and for valida-
tion of SAXS models [ 15 ]. Flexible regions of macromolecules are 
often involved in interactions, as seen for antibody–protein binding 
[ 16 ,  17 ], and SAXS provides a means to deﬁ ne solution conforma-
tions with ﬂ exible regions. As generally appreciated, crystal contacts 
and constructs with missing regions may cause structural changes in 
the crystal structure relative to the SAXS solution results [ 18 ]. 
SAXS has recently been used to provide similarity maps of the func-
tional conformational states of macromolecules independent of 
shape reconstructions [ 19 ]. Third, high signal to noise SAXS pro-
ﬁ les are routinely collected from small quantities of sample with 
short exposure times. High-quality SAXS proﬁ les are the result of 
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

247
advances in X-ray detectors and high brilliance synchrotron light 
with beam dimensions that match sample dimensions. Thus the 
motivation to move beyond the limits of MX, improved analysis 
tools and collection capabilities have all contributed to the increase 
in structural reports utilizing SAXS. 
 The advent and wide spread availability of high-throughput 
SAXS is relatively new. Pipelines for high-throughput SAXS have 
been reported at SSRL [ 20 ], SOLEIL [ 21 ], PETRA3 [ 22 ], and 
CHESS [ 23 ]. Several additional beamlines have developed these 
capabilities and are yet to be reported. SAXS at SIBYLS has been 
dedicated to HT-SAXS for the last 3 years with the initial applica-
tion to structural genomics pipelines [ 24 ]. SIBYLS has leveraged 
tools developed for crystallography such as data control software 
and optimized features for SAXS [ 25 ]. 
 A distinction of the SAXS at SIBYLS is that a signiﬁ cant fraction 
of samples are collected via mail-in/hand-in. Once an investigator’s 
samples have been delivered to the beamline their samples are 
placed into a queue and collected by beamline staff. The data out-
put is a SAXS proﬁ le which tabulates the  q value (X-ray momentum 
transfer) versus X-ray intensity with an error bar. This three- column 
format is electronically delivered post collection. One advantage to 
the mail-in/hand-in approach is an increase in ﬂ exibly arranging 
data collection times. Optimal sample preparation is often challeng-
ing and difﬁ cult to coordinate for a speciﬁ c time. A second advan-
tage is that “beamtime” is spent collecting data rather than training; 
thus increasing throughput. The disadvantage is that the investiga-
tors themselves are not there to guarantee every sample. Thus the 
guiding principle for development of the mail-in/hand-in program 
has been to enable data collection at as high qualities as if the inves-
tigator was present themselves. Over 160 laboratories have since 
taken advantage of this opportunity. Several results have been 
included in high proﬁ le reports [ 8 ,  26 – 29 ]. Our goal here is not to 
review post-processing analysis tools used to determine structural 
details. We suggest other sources for this purpose [ 10 ,  30 – 32 ]. 
We’ve also recently described more technical aspects of the control 
system and hardware elsewhere [ 25 ,  33 ]. Here we focus on optimal 
input and a detailed description of the output to improve coordina-
tion between investigators and synchrotron beamlines as required 
for true high-throughput. HT-SAXS appears rigid given the reduced 
interaction between the beamline and the investigator. In reality 
both data collection and data processing are ﬂ exible. Investigators 
are empowered to reprocess data by varying from the automated 
processing steps. By optimally taking advantage of HT-SAXS, new 
opportunities continue to be developed for the investigation of bio-
molecules, such as comprehensive mapping of conformational states 
without requiring shape reconstructions [ 19 ].  
High-Throughput SAXS 

248
2  Materials 
 HT-SAXS opportunities extend beyond experiments preformed at 
lower throughput. Optimal samples and procedures depend on the 
type of experiment being performed. Here we will provide general 
requirements for low signal samples acknowledging that at high 
concentrations, requirements may be relaxed. 
 Concentration is an important parameter that impacts signal, prob-
lems from aggregation, and data collection requirements. 
 For organic macromolecules in an aqueous solvent, a useful 
rule of thumb for determining the required concentration for 
high-quality signal is concentration in mg/ml multiplied by molec-
ular weight in kDa must be greater than 100 (mg/ml × kDa > 100). 
 With HT-SAXS the required concentration can be experimen-
tally evaluated, as the desired signal to noise will vary from facility 
to facility and by the scattering power of the solvent.  
 The proper subtraction of background signal is often critical. 
Background includes the halo of the primary X-ray beam, scatter-
ing from windows in the beam path and scattering from solvent. 
To focus analysis on a solute (the macromolecule of interest), the 
SAXS from a solution containing all but the macromolecule of 
interest (referred to from here forward as the buffer) may be sub-
tracted from the SAXS proﬁ le of the solution containing the mac-
romolecule. This subtraction removes all three background 
components mentioned above.  
 Everything in solution scatters X-rays so having the appropriate 
matching buffers is critical. 
 Adequately matched buffers can be prepared by dialysis, size 
exclusion chromatography (SEC) or from a spin concentrator. 
However, these procedures must be carefully attended to, for 
example, ﬁ lters in concentrators are typically covered in preserva-
tives which must be washed at least three times before the ﬂ ow 
through can be used as a proper buffer. Dialysis requires more time 
with viscous solvents. Some SEC fractions contain small amounts 
of column matrix so are not appropriate for use as a buffer. 
 Pipetting of cofactors into both the buffer and the sample, as a 
modiﬁ cation, is also possible provided the added volumes are equal 
to high accuracy (usually requires a minimum of 4 μL). 
 Added signal from improper buffer subtraction will typically 
reduce the apparent rate of intensity decay as a function of angle; 
giving the appearance of an unfolded polymer. Over subtracted 
signal often results in negative intensities at high values of  q . 
 Because of the importance of proper buffer subtraction and 
because buffer is typically inexpensive, we recommend preparing 
larger buffer volumes than required for samples and collecting 
identical buffers both before and after the sample. 
2.1  Concentration
2.2  Isolating the 
Solute Signal
2.3  Matching Buffers
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

249
 Robotic sample loading from 96-well plates requires decisions 
regarding shipping, seal against evaporation, and safe volumes for 
loading the sample cell. If frozen, the plate should be transported in 
sub-freezing conditions. If unfrozen, care must be taken so that 
samples do not slow freeze during transport but remain cool. 
A kilogram of Blue Ice at 5° packed on both sides of the sample plate 
in a well-sealed (taped) Styrofoam box is a reasonable option. 
 HT-SAXS facilities have speciﬁ c sample formats as precise sam-
ple locations in three dimensions are required for robotic loading. 
The sample format at SIBYLS is a speciﬁ c, commercially available, 
full-skirt 96 conical well plate. Samples sent in alternate plate types 
cause delay as samples must be transferred to the proper plate type. 
 A safe volume for ﬁ lling the sample cell above the incident 
beam path is 24 μL. 
 Plates must also be covered with an appropriate seal for trans-
port to prevent mixing between wells, evaporation and contamina-
tion from the sealing material. Plates are typically covered with a 
commercially available silicone mat. 
 Once samples are sealed they are ready for shipment or deliv-
ery. Flash freezing of samples is possible but usually unnecessary 
with 24 h shipping times and a maximum of two additional days 
between delivery and collection. Flash freezing may be accom-
plished by placing the plate over a shallow bath of liquid nitrogen. 
Practice with plates containing water is recommended.  
 Shape reconstruction requires homogeneous samples and removal 
of concentration-dependent signals. 
 A signiﬁ cant fraction of investigators use SAXS data for shape 
determination. Strategies for data collection for this purpose have 
been reported [ 34 ]. Important procedures include collecting a 
concentration series to identify and possibly remove concentration- 
dependent signals contaminating the signal characterizing macro-
molecular shape. 
 SAXS by itself cannot determine heterogeneity so supporting data 
such as elution proﬁ les from chromatographic puriﬁ cation, native gels 
or multi-angle light scattering are required for quality assessment of 
homogeneity. Many problems with SAXS experiments on RNA sam-
ples derive from heterogeneity of the folded RNA so separation by 
sizing chromatography or other means is important [ 35 ]. The report-
ing of a single shape representing an entire population of macromol-
ecules that contribute to the SAXS signal assumes homogeneity.  
 An organized plan for sample and washing steps impacts efﬁ ciency. 
 The SIBYLS HT-SAXS pipeline utilizes formatted spread-
sheets, ﬁ lled out by investigators, for organizing data collection. 
The spreadsheet describes the order of data collection, the desired 
naming of output experimental ﬁ les from each sample, which wells 
contain buffers and at which points in the data collection washes 
are necessary. 
2.4  Sample Format
2.5  Homogeneity 
Requirements for 
Shape Determination
2.6  Organizing Data 
Collection
High-Throughput SAXS 

250
 Washing is not required between every well, if sample collec-
tion order is strategically chosen. For example a concentration 
series collected in the order of lowest to highest does not need 
washing steps. Washing is a signiﬁ cant bottleneck in data collection 
so the fewer washes the higher the throughput.  
3  Methods 
 Signiﬁ cant calibration of the SAXS instrumentation is applied prior 
to data collection. Investigators should be aware of four important 
calibration procedures which will affect all data sets. 
 The incident beam orientation, sample position, and detector 
orientation must all be accurately deﬁ ned in order to calculate scat-
tering plots of Intensity versus  q . This is typically done through the 
collection and analysis of a crystalline powder pattern. Inaccuracy 
in this calibration will result in blurred SAXS curves where sharp 
peaks are broadened and the small  q scattering may have larger 
variation. 
 The incident X-ray wavelength is calibrated typically by mea-
suring absorbance from metal ﬁ lters with ﬂ uorescence near an elec-
tron orbital edge. Inaccuracy in wavelength leads to shifted and 
stretched SAXS proﬁ les with peaks occurring at an alternate appar-
ent  q value. 
 The beamstop and other shadows blocking scattering from the 
beamline to the detector are masked out. Inaccuracy in deﬁ ning 
these regions will lead to large drops in intensity at small  q near the 
beamstop. If the mask is too large, valuable low  q data may be 
obscured. 
 A solute of known molecular weight and concentration is col-
lected to enable plotting data on an absolute scale. This calibration 
can be valuable for calculating molecular weight when the concen-
tration of the macromolecule is known. However the scattering 
contrast between buffer and solute must be considered relative to 
the calibrant. Including a calibrant on the sample plate is an alter-
native. These calibration ﬁ les are readily available if desired.  
 Communicating sample handling procedures is important as the 
assumption is that samples are to be stored in cool conditions and 
centrifuged prior to data collection. 
 Once samples have been delivered to the facility they are stored 
at an appropriate temperature (−80 °C for frozen and 4 °C for 
unfrozen). 
 Just prior to data collection they are spun in a centrifuge to 
condense the sample and sediment large aggregates. Once centri-
fuged, the sealing mat is replaced with a thinner pierceable seal for 
better sample delivery by the sample loading needle.  
3.1  Instrument 
Calibration
3.2  Sample Handling
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

251
 Temperature is an important and underutilized parameter. 
 The plate deck and the sample cell are cooled to 15 °C during 
data collection using a water chiller. The temperature can be 
decreased, but the dew point must be considered as condensation 
on the sample cell windows can negatively affect buffer 
subtractions. 
 Helium can be added to the sample cell environment to mini-
mize the surrounding humidity, effectively lowering the dew point. 
The sample cell can also be heated up to 70 °C using a Peltier; 
however, the temperature is typically kept at 15 °C.  
 Strategic data collection and guarding against interfering bubbles 
is key for efﬁ ciency and data quality. 
 Three plates may be held on the SAXS instrument at one time. 
At a rate of 4 h/plate this conveniently enables unsupervised over-
night collection. 
 Procedures are in place to automatically stop data collection 
and alert the beamline scientists when problems occur. If the X-ray 
source is shutdown for example, the system stops and sends a text 
message alert. Sample loading and data collection can be moni-
tored by beamline staff remotely. 
 A snapshot of every loaded sample is taken so that samples 
with bubbles can be diagnosed after data collection. Often, sufﬁ -
cient volume remains in the plate to recollect these samples. 
 Samples are pipetted one at a time from the plate into the 
sample cell, exposed, then pipetted back into the plate. 
 Typically, the aspiration rate for sample delivery is set at 4 μl/s 
but can be decreased for viscous, low volume, or bubble-prone 
samples. 
 Samples are exposed with a 10 11 photon/s, 12 keV monochro-
matic beam in a series of exposures: 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 s in that 
order. A range of exposure times are collected to identify radiation 
damage and overcome the limited dynamic range of the detector. 
 Images from the sample are named using a preﬁ x designated in 
the investigator prepared spreadsheet followed by the well loca-
tion, followed by the exposure number. Results from these images 
are later merged together by the investigator to maximize quality.  
 Once the images are collected from each sample, data processing 
begins. 
 Automated scripts subtract the images of the closest collected 
buffer before the sample and the closest collected buffer collected 
after the sample. The two proﬁ les are averaged creating a total of 
three scattering proﬁ les for each sample exposure. 
 The subtraction process requires normalization for the num-
ber of X-rays during the exposure of the buffer and the sample. 
X-ray ﬂ ux is monitored by a diode within the beamstop. Extracting 
3.3  Sample 
Temperature Control
3.4  Data Collection
3.5  From Images 
to SAXS Proﬁ les
High-Throughput SAXS 

252
an accurate value for the ﬂ ux during the exposure to the high accu-
racy required is not a trivial procedure and is a source of error. 
 Once a subtracted image is created a mask is applied blocking 
out unwanted pixels for integration. 
 Subtracted and masked images are then integrated utilizing 
geometric and wavelength parameters determined from pre- 
collection calibration.  
 The calculation of error bars and examination of the buffer sub-
traction impacts quality of data analysis. 
 Since SAXS images contain many observations at equivalent  q , 
an error bar may be calculated using the standard deviation and 
average intensity. 
 A second error of the subtraction process involves slight but 
random variations in detector background between sample and 
buffer. In some cases these can be signiﬁ cant. 
 Mechanisms are in place to enable investigators to repeat the 
subtraction and integration process using alternate pairings of sam-
ple and buffer. 
 Raw images are rarely desired, thus investigators typically 
receive the one dimensional SAXS proﬁ le of X-ray intensity as a 
function of  q with error bars.  
4  Preliminary Visualization and Interpretation of Results 
 A sample report and assessment of scattering proﬁ les provides the 
basis for appropriate data processing. 
 Besides receiving scatting data ﬁ les, investigators also receive 
an html formatted sample report. The report is viewable utilizing 
web browser software and enables mouse click based zooming for 
visualization of individual proﬁ les. A partial example is shown in 
Fig.  1 .
 Using this comprehensive view of the data, beamline staff pro-
vides guidance on which of the three proﬁ les from each sample to 
use for further processing.  
 Data redundancy and consistency of buffer subtraction guide fur-
ther data processing. 
 If the SAXS proﬁ le from the sample analyzed with a buffer col-
lected before the sample agrees to within noise to that analyzed 
with a buffer collected after then the average is used. If the two do 
not agree then a judgment is made. 
 Above we described errors that may occur during data collec-
tion and may cause this disagreement between buffer subtraction 
(improperly matched buffer, incorrect measure of the incident 
X-ray ﬂ ux, and detector background oscillations). These errors cre-
ate obvious features in the data. 
3.6  Sources of Error 
and Error Bars
4.1  Sample Report
4.2  Judging Buffer 
Subtraction
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

253
 Signiﬁ cant redundancy often exists in collected data. For 
example, in concentration series, the  q dependent intensity decay 
rate of high  q data is nearly always consistent. Thus outliers can 
often be identiﬁ ed and eliminated. 
 When an obvious choice is not possible, the average is taken.  
 Fig. 1    Exemplary SIBYLS output format of data sets collected from a sample 
plate. Scattering proﬁ les are grouped by concentration series and graphed on 
log plots. In the web-enabled version, individual plots can be enlarged for easier 
viewing. ( a ) A concentration series of a well-behaved sample. ( b ) A sample 
ﬂ agged as radiation sensitive. Aggregation induced through damage has 
occurred during the highest exposure shown in green. ( c ) The extrapolation of 
X-ray intensity at  q = 0 is impossible for the curves shown assuming a particle 
size smaller than 600 Å. Particles of larger size are considered aggregates at 
SIBYLS. ( d ) Proﬁ les are over subtracted indicating an error in buffer subtraction 
(either an inappropriate buffer or instrumental error). ( e ) A slight concentration 
dependence can be observed as the low  q region that increases with concen-
tration (SAXS curves from higher intensity plots). This effect can also be seen in 
plot. ( f ) The low signal to noise indicates low concentration or insufﬁ cient expo-
sure times. ( g ) A sharp drop to negative intensity at low  q is characteristic of 
bubbles or insufﬁ cient volume in the sample cell. Images of the sample cell 
during these exposures may be referenced for further diagnosis. ( h ) The  red and 
 black curves  show a smooth downturn in intensity approaching Izero, indicating 
the presence of inter-particle repulsive forces. The effect is masked by detector 
saturation in the long exposures ( green and blue curves ). ( i ) Aside from major 
detector saturation, the curve shows the rare presence of micro-crystals as 
indicated by sharp peaks of intensity  
 
High-Throughput SAXS 

254
 Once all scattering proﬁ les are selected and plotted, further com-
ments are added. Comments are based on a visual inspection of the 
data. These comments are meant to serve as ﬂ ags of concern rather 
than a deﬁ nitive judgment on further processing of data. The fol-
lowing lists typical comments and examples are shown in Fig.  1 . 
 The intensity at zero scattering angle ( I (0)) cannot be extrapolated 
from aggregated data. Similarly particles of size greater than 600 Å 
cannot be fully characterized with the available  q range at SIBYLS. 
The scattering angles required for Guineir analysis are smaller than 
can be measured. Further analysis of data without a Guineir region 
is limited from a shape restoration perspective as the Guineir region 
is valued for quality control.  
 X-ray radiation damages samples, but the damage rate cannot be 
determined a priori. Some samples show no noticeable differences 
in SAXS for all exposure lengths. Others are damaged by the ﬁ rst 
exposure. Radiation damage is identiﬁ ed as increase in  I (0) with 
exposure toward features of aggregation. Use of the low exposure 
data in this  q region is thus critical for further analysis.  
 Extremely high concentration samples will scatter with intensities 
that saturate the detector in some regions of  q . Data in these 
regions cannot be analyzed and must be compensated by utilizing 
shorter exposures or more dilute concentrations.  
 At low concentration the difference between sample and buffer 
approaches zero. The small  q region may have sufﬁ cient intensity 
to identify the radius of gyration  R  g  . However scattering features 
quickly blend in to ﬂ at, near zero values.  
 Bubbles, low volume, and empty sample cells often resemble pro-
ﬁ les with over subtracted buffers. Radial streaks near the detector 
beamstop indicate that the incident X-ray beam is hitting a liquid/
air surface. High  q is the most clearly affected region.  
 See Subheadings  3.5 ,  3.6 , and  4.2 above for identiﬁ cation and 
causes of this error.  
 Repulsion is indicated by a gradual dip at low  q and is caused by 
inter-particle interference. This effect most often occurs at high 
concentration. Unless the additional structure factor is of experi-
mental interest, an extrapolation to zero concentration using a 
concentration series is often necessary.  
 Concentration dependence includes multimerization, aggregation, 
or inter-particle interference, all of which contribute to characteristic 
changes in the scattering proﬁ les from different concentrations.  
4.3  Red Flags for 
Further Analysis
4.3.1  Aggregation or 
Undeﬁ ned Guineir Region
4.3.2  Radiation 
Sensitivity
4.3.3  Detector Saturation
4.3.4  Low Concentration
4.3.5  Bubble, Low 
Volume, or Empty Sample 
Cell
4.3.6  Bad Buffer 
Subtraction
4.3.7  Repulsion
4.3.8  Concentration- 
Dependent Effects
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

255
 Sharp peaks along the scattering curve indicate micro-crystal for-
mation in the sample solution (Fig.  1d ).  
5  Conclusions and Perspectives 
 By compiling statistics over the course of 2 years (2011 and 2012), 
below we provide a picture of data collection using the mail-in/
hand-in system. SIBYLS collected 267 plates from 106 different 
labs. Of these labs, 73 % requested subsequent data collection. 
While most plates were shipped at 4 C, 10 % were shipped frozen. 
Figure  2 also breaks down the frequency at which each comment 
was made. The scattering from the samples was sufﬁ cient to cause 
detector saturation in 39 % of samples, usually during the longest 
exposure. 45 % of samples were sensitive to radiation after 8 s of 
exposure, while 16 % showed signiﬁ cant radiation damage after 
only 3 s. 10 % of samples had an undeﬁ ned Guineir region due to 
aggregation or molecular dimensions too large for our SAXS con-
ﬁ guration. 7 % of samples had poorly matching buffer blanks. 
Concentration dependence affected 6 % of samples. Another 6 % 
were below the required concentration. Approximately 1 % of sam-
ples were lost by bubbles in the beam path or because of insufﬁ -
cient volume. Repulsion and micro-crystal formation were 
observed in less than 1 % of samples. Through visual inspection of 
each scattering curve by the SIBYLS staff, it was estimated that 
78 % of all data could be used for further processing after a merg-
ing of different exposures and concentrations.
4.3.9  Micro Crystals
 Fig. 2  SIBYLS SAXS sample quality statistics for 2 years of data collection. 
Each SAXS proﬁ le generated through the mail-in/hand-in system is visually 
inspected by beamline staff and commented upon for sample quality. Though 
many samples receive comments, when further merged and processed with 
other exposures and concentrations 78 % are estimated to be suitable for 
further analysis ( pie chart inset )  
 
High-Throughput SAXS 

256
 HT-SAXS systems enable wide spread use of SAXS for structural 
characterization. The introduction of HT-SAXS data collection has 
been accompanied with criticism for being metric driven rather 
than science driven. Looking forward, we’d like to connect 
HT-SAXS efforts with problems being addressed in biology. 
Biological macromolecules are increasingly appreciated as parts of 
larger networks. Frequently, even components of these networks 
are challenging to work with and require speciﬁ c laboratory exper-
tise. Few single laboratories can successfully purify, characterize, 
and study many interacting components within a network. 
HT-SAXS facilities complement efforts to compose more compre-
hensive pictures of networks by drawing upon samples from many 
laboratories and enabling facile structural characterization. 
 SAXS is a solution-based technique so components may be 
examined individually, in the presence of partners or under a host 
of chemical conditions. Besides providing access to SAXS, 
HT-SAXS facilities continue to develop tools to aid in the analysis 
and integration of information collected; the staff at these facilities 
thus play a key part of the broader effort of post-genomic science. 
Further, new opportunities have been enabled with HT-SAXS [ 19 ] 
and by analysis of HT-SAXS data [ 36 ]. We anticipate more high 
impact results in the near future from HT-SAXS as well as from the 
combination of HT-SAXS with crystallography, NMR, and other 
biophysical methods.  
 Acknowledgments 
 This work and the operation of the SIBYLS beamline has been 
supported by the Integrated Diffraction Analysis Technologies 
(IDAT) program, the DOE Ofﬁ ce of Biological and Environmental 
Research plus the National Institutes of Health grant MINOS 
(Macromolecular Insights on Nucleic Acids Optimized by 
Scattering) GM105404.  
 References 
  1.  Koch MHJ (2010) SAXS instrumentation for 
synchrotron radiation then and now. J Phys 
Conf Ser 247:012001  
  2.  Fukuchi S, Hosoda K, Homma K et al (2011) 
Binary classiﬁ cation of protein molecules into 
intrinsically disordered and ordered segments. 
BMC Struct Biol 11:29  
  3.  Rambo RP, Tainer JA (2010) Bridging the 
solution divide: comprehensive structural anal-
yses of dynamic RNA, DNA, and protein 
assemblies by small-angle X-ray scattering. 
Curr Opin Struct Biol 20:128–137  
  4.  Hammel M, Yu Y, Fang S et al (2010) XLF 
regulates ﬁ lament architecture of the XRCC4.
ligase IV complex. Structure 18:1431–1442  
  5.  Hammel M, Rey M, Mani RS et al (2011) 
XRCC4 protein interactions with XRCC4-like 
factor (XLF) create an extended grooved scaf-
fold for DNA ligation and double strand break 
repair. J Biol Chem 286:32638–32650  
  6.  Shin DS, Didonato M, Barondeau DP et al 
(2009) Superoxide dismutase from the eukary-
otic thermophile Alvinella pompejana: struc-
tures, stability, mechanism, and insights into 
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

257
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Mol Biol 
385:1534–1555  
  7.  Yamagata A, Tainer JA (2007) Hexameric 
structures of the archaeal secretion ATPase 
GspE and implications for a universal secretion 
mechanism. EMBO J 26:878–890  
  8.  Nishimura N, Hitomi K, Arvai AS et al (2009) 
Structural mechanism of abscisic acid binding 
and signaling by dimeric PYR1. Science 
326:1373–1379 
  9.  Chacon P, Moran F, Diaz JF et al (1998) Low-
resolution structures of proteins in solution 
retrieved from X-ray scattering with a genetic 
algorithm. Biophys J 74:2760–2775  
  10.  Petoukhov MV, Franke D, Shkumatov AV et al 
(2012) New developments in the ATSAS pro-
gram package for small-angle scattering data 
analysis. J Appl Crystallogr 45:342–350  
  11.  Pelikan M, Hura GL, Hammel M (2009) 
Structure and ﬂ exibility within proteins as 
identiﬁ ed through small angle X-ray scattering. 
Gen Physiol Biophys 28:174–189  
  12.  Bernado P, Mylonas E, Petoukhov MV et al 
(2007) Structural characterization of ﬂ exible 
proteins using small-angle X-ray scattering. 
J Am Chem Soc 129:5656–5664  
  13.  Grishaev A, Wu J, Trewhella J et al (2005) 
Reﬁ nement of multidomain protein structures 
by combination of solution small-angle X-ray 
scattering and NMR data. J Am Chem Soc 
127:16621–16628  
  14.  Schneidman-Duhovny D, Hammel M, Sali A 
(2010) FoXS: a web server for rapid computa-
tion and ﬁ tting of SAXS proﬁ les. Nucleic Acids 
Res 38:W540–W544  
  15.  Rambo RP, Tainer JA (2011) Characterizing 
ﬂ exible and intrinsically unstructured biologi-
cal macromolecules by SAS using the Porod- 
Debye law. Biopolymers 95:559–571  
  16.  Getzoff ED, Tainer JA, Lerner RA et al (1988) 
The chemistry and mechanism of antibody 
binding to protein antigens. Adv Immunol 
43:1–98 
  17.  Tainer JA, Getzoff ED, Alexander H et al 
(1984) The reactivity of anti- peptide antibod-
ies is a function of the atomic mobility of sites 
in a protein. Nature 312:127–134  
  18.  Tsutakawa SE, Hura GL, Frankel KA et al 
(2007) Structural analysis of ﬂ exible proteins in 
solution by small angle X-ray scattering com-
bined with crystallography. J Struct Biol 
158:214–223 
  19.  Hura GL, Budworth H, Dyer KN et al (2013) 
Comprehensive macromolecular conforma-
tions mapped by quantitative SAXS analysis. 
Nat Methods 10:453–454  
  20.  Martel A, Liu P, Weiss TM et al (2012) An 
integrated high- throughput data acquisition sys-
tem for biological solution X-ray scattering 
studies. J Synchrotron Radiat 19:431–434 
  21.  David G, Perez J (2009) Combined sampler 
robot and high-performance liquid chroma-
tography: a fully automated system for biologi-
cal small-angle X-ray scattering experiments at 
the Synchrotron SOLEIL SWING beamline. 
J Appl Crystallogr 42:892–900  
  22.  Franke D, Kikhney AG, Svergun DI (2012) 
Automated acquisition and analysis of small 
angle X-ray scattering data. Nucl Instrum 
Methods A 689:52–59  
  23.  Nielsen SS, Moller M, Gillilan RE (2012) 
High-throughput biological small-angle X-ray 
scattering with a robotically loaded capillary 
cell. J Appl Crystallogr 45:213–223  
  24.  Hura GL, Menon AL, Hammel M et al (2009) 
Robust, high- throughput solution structural 
analyses by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). 
Nat Methods 6:606–U683  
  25.  Classen S, Rodic I, Holton J et al (2010) 
Software for the high- throughput collection of 
SAXS data using an enhanced Blu-Ice/DCS 
control system. J Synchrotron Radiat 17:
774–781  
  26.  Williams RS, Dodson GE, Limbo O et al 
(2009) Nbs1 ﬂ exibly tethers Ctp1 and Mre11-
Rad50 to coordinate DNA double-strand 
break processing and repair. Cell 139:87–99  
  27.  Christie JM, Arvai AS, Baxter KJ et al (2012) 
Plant UVR8 photoreceptor senses UV-B by 
tryptophan-mediated disruption of cross-dimer 
salt bridges. Science 335:1492–1496  
  28.  Chao LH, Stratton MM, Lee IH et al (2011) A 
mechanism for tunable autoinhibition in the 
structure of a human Ca2+/calmodulin-
dependent 
kinase 
II 
holoenzyme. 
Cell 
146:732–745  
  29.  Dueber EC, Schoefﬂ er AJ, Lingel A et al 
(2011) Antagonists induce a conformational 
change in cIAP1 that promotes autoubiquiti-
nation. Science 334:376–380  
  30.  Putnam CD, Hammel M, Hura GL et al 
(2007) X-ray solution scattering (SAXS) com-
bined with crystallography and computation: 
deﬁ ning accurate macromolecular structures, 
conformations and assemblies in solution. 
Q Rev Biophys 40:191–285  
  31.  Petoukhov MV, Svergun DI (2007) Analysis of 
X-ray and neutron scattering from biomacro-
molecular solutions. Curr Opin Struc Biol 
17:562–571  
  32.  Rambo RP, Tainer JA (2013) Super-resolution 
in solution X-ray scattering and its applications 
High-Throughput SAXS 

258
to structural systems biology. Ann Rev Biophys 
42:415–441 
  33.  Classen S, Hura GL, Holton JM et al (2013) 
Implementation and performance of SIBYLS: a 
dual endstation small-angle X-ray scattering 
and macromolecular crystallography beamline 
at the Advanced Light Source. J Appl 
Crystallogr 46:1–13  
  34.  Jacques DA, Guss JM, Svergun DI et al (2012) 
Publication guidelines for structural modelling 
of small-angle scattering data from biomole-
cules in solution. Acta Crystallogr D 68:
620–626  
  35.  Rambo RP, Tainer JA (2010) Improving 
small- angle X-ray scattering data for structural 
analyses of the RNA world. RNA 16:
638–646  
  36.  Rambo RP, Tainer JA (2013) Accurate assess-
ment of mass, models and resolution by small- 
angle scattering. Nature 496:477–481  
Kevin N. Dyer et al.

259
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_19, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 19  
 Measuring Spatial Restraints on Native Protein Complexes 
Using Isotope-Tagged Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass 
Spectrometry 
 Franz  Herzog 
 Abstract 
 Mass spectrometric analyses of proteins afﬁ nity-puriﬁ ed from cell lysates are routinely used by cell biologists 
to characterize the composition and the modiﬁ cations of protein complexes. Here, we describe a protocol 
that combines afﬁ nity-puriﬁ cation with chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry (CXMS) in order to 
detect spatially proximate lysine residues on protein complexes isolated from human tissue culture cells. 
These cross-links are interpreted as distance restraints that aid in elucidating protein binding interfaces and 
the topology of protein complexes. In contrast to established high-resolution structural biology tech-
niques, CXMS analysis has the potential to acquire structural information of small amounts of structurally 
ﬂ exible and heterogeneous protein preparations. We recently demonstrated on a network of modular 
protein phosphatase 2A complexes that restraints obtained by CXMS analysis hold great promise in sup-
porting hybrid structural analysis of endogenous protein complexes by integrating structural data from 
different sources with computational molecular modeling.  
 Key words   Mass spectrometry  ,  Chemical cross-linking  ,   N -Hydroxysuccinimide ester  ,   Isotopic label-
ing ,   Protein complex  ,   Subunit topology  ,  Spatial restraint  ,   Hybrid structural analysis  
1  Introduction 
 Chemical labeling of surface-exposed functional groups has been 
applied for the structural elucidation of proteins and their complexes 
as a complementary method to established high-resolution tech-
niques for decades [ 1 ]. It compensates for the inability of X-ray crys-
tallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to resolve 
structures of macromolecular protein complexes that in many cases 
cannot be puriﬁ ed as stable and homogenous particles. Initially, 
chemical labeling experiments were performed by tagging solvent 
accessible groups with different chemistries such as hydrogen/deu-
terium exchange or hydroxyl radical labeling indicating surface 
exposure of theses residues, also known as footprinting. 

260
 Probing proteins with bi-functional reagents covalently links 
amino acids which are juxtaposed in the structure of soluble pro-
teins. The identiﬁ cation of the chemically modiﬁ ed residues takes 
advantage of recent advances in mass spectrometric instrumenta-
tion, especially, electrospray ionization and Fourier transform- 
based mass analyzers facilitate the sequencing of linked peptides 
with high mass accuracy, resolution, and scan speed. The struc-
tural information gained from chemical cross-linking coupled to 
mass spectrometry (CXMS) is a distance restraint that is deﬁ ned 
by the length of the probe spanning the inter-residue distance 
[ 2 – 5 ]. The majority of studies applied chemical cross-linkers with 
functional groups reactive against primary amines of the lysine 
side chain and the protein N-terminus. The most frequently used 
reactive groups are  N -hydroxysuccinimide esters that form stable 
amid bonds with primary amines at physiological conditions. 
Despite the high- performance detection of cross-linked peptides 
and their fragments by mass spectrometry, the low abundance of 
cross-links and the complexity of cross-link fragment ion spectra 
hamper identiﬁ cation of the cross-link sites. To overcome these 
limitations several workﬂ ows were developed which use a variety 
of modiﬁ ed cross-linker molecules, different enrichment strategies 
and dedicated software programs that exploit the unique features 
of each approach for the identiﬁ cation of the cross-linked lysine 
residues [ 6 ]. Most notably, recent studies implemented an increas-
ing number of reagents with isotope-coded or collision-induced 
dissociation (CID) cleavable spacer arms. Different types of CID 
cleavable cross-linkers generate reporter ions and give rise to the 
linear peptides modiﬁ ed with the remaining cross-linker masses 
[ 7 – 9 ] which facilitates the identiﬁ cation of the cross-link sites by 
conventional MS software tools. 
 Here, we describe a cross-linking approach using an equimolar 
mixture of d 0 - and d 12 -labeled disuccinimidyl suberate (d 0 -DSS and 
d 12 -DSS, [d, deuterium]) which yields cross-links with an isotopic 
mass difference of 12 Da [ 10 ]. Potential cross-links are thus detected 
as isotopic pairs in the precursor (MS1) scan. The isotopic mass shift 
also allows discrimination between cross-link and linear peptide 
fragments in the MS2 scans that are composite spectra of fragment 
ions of the two cross-linked peptides which is key for the identiﬁ ca-
tion of the cross-link sites by the search engine  xQuest [ 11 ,  12 ]. 
 Initially, CXMS analysis was applied to the structural analysis of 
multi-subunit protein complexes which were puriﬁ ed to high 
homogeneity [ 13 – 15 ]. To exploit the potential of MS in detecting 
modiﬁ ed peptides in less deﬁ ned, heterogeneous samples, we 
developed a protocol to probe endogenous complexes afﬁ nity- 
puriﬁ ed from human tissue culture cells. Similar to standard pull- 
down protocols for the analysis of the composition and the 
posttranslational modiﬁ cations of protein complexes, our strategy 
enables the acquisition of distance restraints on protein complexes 
Franz Herzog

261
isolated from their cellular context. This is fundamental for the 
understanding of signaling pathways and their regulatory circuits. 
 Active protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) holoenzymes are het-
erotrimers composed of a catalytic subunit, a scaffold subunit and 
one of a large array of regulatory subunits. Systematic CXMS anal-
ysis of the modular PP2A complexes delineated the topology of a 
PP2A network in human cells by identifying 176 interprotein and 
570 intraprotein cross-links [ 16 ]. For the structural interpretation 
of chemical cross-links, we integrated the detected distance 
restraints with subunit structures and electron microscopy density 
maps through computational molecular modeling. Our structural 
predictions localized protein–protein binding interfaces, suggested 
a mode for targeting the PP2A inhibitor SET to the catalytic center 
of PP2A by the cell cycle adaptor protein shugoshin and described 
the topology of a 1 MDa chaperonin complex bound to its protein 
substrate. This study demonstrated the importance of cross-link 
derived spatial restraints for the hybrid structural analysis of endog-
enous protein complexes.  
2  Materials 
  1.   Flp-In™ T-REx™ HEK293 cells (Life Technologies) for the 
tetracycline inducible expression of N-terminal His 6 -HA- 
StrepII-tagged bait proteins ( see  Note 1 ). 
  2.   Dulbecco’s Modiﬁ ed Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) with high 
glucose,  L -glutamine, and sodium pyruvate (Life Technologies) 
supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) Gold 
(PAA Laboratories). Add 50 ml FBS to 500 ml DMEM in a 
sterile laminar ﬂ ow hood. Mix gently and store at 4 °C.  
  3.   0.05 % Trypsin–EDTA (1×) frozen solution with phenol red 
(Life Technologies). Thaw over night at 4 °C or quickly in 
water bath at 37 °C with intermediate agitation. Store at 4 °C 
or freeze aliquots at −20 °C ( see  Note 2 ).  
  4.   Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (1×) (Life Technologies).  
  5.   Hygromycin B as 50 mg/ml solution and Blasticidin S HCl as 
50 mg powder (Life Technologies). Dissolve blasticidin in 
sterile water or PBS to 10 mg/ml. Store aliquots of hygromy-
cin and blasticidin at −20°C and keep at 4 °C after thawing.  
  6.   Tetracycline hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) as 5 g powder. 
Prepare stock solution by dissolving 2 mg/ml in 95 % (v/v) 
ethanol. Store stock solution in light-protected tube at −20 °C.  
  7.   245 × 245 × 25 mm tissue culture dishes (Bioassay-dishes, 
Nunclon™Δ). 145 × 20 mm cell culture dishes (Greiner 
Bio-One).  
  8.   15 and 50 ml Falcon™ polypropylene tubes (Becton Dickinson).  
2.1  Expression of 
Afﬁ nity-Tagged Bait 
Proteins in HEK293 
Cells
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

262
  1.  Lysis buffer: 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 3 mM 
MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT, 0.1 % (v/v) NP-40, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 
1:500 (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (all Sigma-Aldrich), 
and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitors per 10 ml (Roche).  
  2.  Buffer P: 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 3 mM 
MgCl 2 , 0.02 % NP-40, 5 % glycerol.  
  3.  Buffer X: 25 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 150 mM KCl, 5 % glycerol.  
  4.  Avidin as 50 mg powder (IBA BioTagnology GmbH). Prepare 
25 mg/ml (1.5 mM) stock solution in buffer P.  
  5.   Biotin as 1 g powder (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c). Prepare 
20 mM stock solution in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.2.  
  6.  Strep-Tactin ® 
Sepharose ® 
as 
50 
% 
suspension 
(IBA 
BioTagnology GmbH).  
  7.  Disuccinimidyl suberate isotopically coded (d 0 -DSS:d 12 - 
DSS = 1:1) as powder in 1 mg aliquots (Creative Molecules, 
Inc.). Dissolve 1 mg DSS in 107 or 53.5 μl DMF immediately 
before use generating a 25 or 50 mM stock solution, respec-
tively. Use deionized water or buffer X for dilutions of the 
DSS stock solution.  
  8.   4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer: 250 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 8 % 
(w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 40 % glycerol, 4 % (v/v) 
β-mercapto-ethanol, 0.04 % (w/v) bromophenolblue.  
  9.  NH 4 HCO 3 as powder (Sigma-Aldrich). Store aliquots of 1 M 
stock solution at −20 °C.  
 10.   Manual tissue homogenizer, 15 ml (Sartorius).  
 11.   Bio-Spin chromatography columns (Bio-Rad).  
 12.   15 ml Falcon™ polypropylene tubes (Becton Dickinson). 
1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes (Eppendorf AG).  
 13.   Ni-NTA agarose as 50 % suspension (Qiagen).  
 14.   Thermomixer (Eppendorf AG).  
  1.   Urea as powder (#U6504, Sigma-Aldrich). Prepare 8 M stock 
solution immediately before use.  
  2.   Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) as a 
powder (Sigma-Aldrich). Prepare a 500 mM stock solution in 
1 M NH 4 HCO 3 ( see  Note 3 ). Dilute stock solution with 1 M 
NH 4 HCO 3 to 50 mM TCEP and freeze aliquots at −20 °C.  
  3.  Iodoacetamide as powder (Sigma-Aldrich). Dissolve iodoacet-
amide in deionized water to 100 mM immediately before use.  
  4.  Sequencing grade modiﬁ ed trypsin 20 μg in 50 μl solution 
(Promega AG). Store at −80 °C.  
  5.   Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys-C) as 20 μg powder (Wako 
Chemicals). Store at −20 °C. Dissolve in 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 
to 0.4 μg/μl and store aliquots at −80 °C.  
2.2  Puriﬁ cation and 
Cross-Linking of 
Protein Complexes
2.3  Enrichment and 
MS Analysis of 
Cross-Linked Peptides
Franz Herzog

263
  6.   Triﬂ uoroacetic acid (TFA) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c). Dilute 
with deionized water to 1 % (v/v).  
  7.   1.5 and 2 ml Eppendorf Tubes™ (Eppendorf AG).  
  8.  Formic acid (FA) eluent additive for LC-MS (Sigma-Aldrich).  
  9.  Acetonitrile LC-MS Chromasolv grade (Sigma-Aldrich).  
 10.   Water advanced HPLC grade for gradient analysis (Thermo 
Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
 11.    Buffer A: 3 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.2 % (v/v) formic acid.  
 12.    Buffer B: 45 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % formic acid.  
 13.    Buffer C: 30 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA.  
 14.    Mobile phase A: 2 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % formic acid.  
 15.    Mobile phase B: 98 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % formic acid.  
 16.    SepPak C18, 1cc, 50 mg (Waters).  
 17.    Vacmaster 10 and PTFE stopcock/needle set, vacuum mani-
fold (Biotage Sweden AB).  
 18.    MicroWell™ plates, 96-well (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c). 
 19.    Vacuum concentrator (Labconco).  
 20.    Autosampler vials with caps (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
 21.    ÄKTAmicro equipped with Autosampler A-905, Fraction 
Collector Frac-950 and a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 col-
umn (GE Healthcare).  
 22.    Acclaim* PepMap* RSLC Column, 75 μm inner diameter, 
150 mm length, C18 stationary phase with 2 μm particle size 
and 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁ c).  
 23.   EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC coupled to Orbitrap Elite mass spec-
trometer equipped with Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo 
Fisher Scientiﬁ c). 
  1.   MSConvert [ 17 ] (download from   http://proteowizard.
sourceforge.net/   ). 
  2.   X ! Tandem [ 18 ] (open source  http://www.thegpm.org/
TANDEM/index.html   ) and Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) 
using  PeptideProphet [ 19 ] and  ProteinProphet [ 20 ] (open 
source 
  http://tools.proteomecenter.org/wiki/index.php?
title=Software:TPP   ). 
  3.   Mascot, licensed software (  http://www.matrixscience.com/
search_form_select.html   ). 
  1.  xQuest search engine for cross-link spectra [ 12 ] (download from 
  http://proteomics.ethz.ch/cgi-bin/xquest2_cgi/index.cgi   ).  
2.4  Generation of 
 xQuest Database
2.5  Identiﬁ cation of 
Cross-Link Spectra by 
 xQuest and Manual 
Validation
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

264
3  Methods 
  1.  Culture HEK293 cells in 145 × 20 mm dishes in 20 ml DMEM 
supplemented with 10 % FBS, 100 µg/ml hygromycin B, and 
15 µg/ml blasticidin S at 5 % CO 2  saturation and 37 °C. Let 
cells 
grow 
conﬂ uent 
before 
expanding 
them 
into 
245 × 245 × 25 mm tissue culture dishes.  
  2.  Rinse cells with 10 ml PBS prewarmed to 37 °C. Detach cells 
by 2 min incubation with 3 ml trypsin at 37 °C. Gently resus-
pend cells in 9 ml DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS.  
  3.  Plate cells on a 245 × 245 × 25 mm tissue culture dish by trans-
ferring 6 ml of the cell suspension into 64 ml DMEM supple-
mented with 10 % FBS. Grow cells to 40–50 % conﬂ uency at 
5 % CO 2  saturation and 37 °C.  
  4.   Induce protein expression by addition of the 2 mg/ml tetra-
cycline stock to a ﬁ nal concentration of 1 µg/ml. Predilute 
tetracycline stock solution in DMEM 1:100 and add 3.5 ml to 
one 245 × 245 × 25 mm dish ( see  Note 4 ) and incubate for 
24–28 h at 37 °C.  
  5.   Pour off medium and rinse cells carefully with 20 ml ice-cold 
PBS. Detach cells by pipetting in 20 ml ice-cold PBS. Collect 
cells of two conﬂ uent dishes in 50 ml Falcon tube on ice. 
Pellet cells by centrifugation at 300 ×  g . Wash once by resus-
pending cells in 20 ml ice-cold PBS. Pellet cells again and take 
off the supernatant. Freeze cells in liquid nitrogen and store 
at −80 °C or keep them on ice for protein puriﬁ cation.  
  1.  Thaw frozen HEK293 cells on ice and resuspend them in 
2 pellet volumes of lysis buffer ( see  Note 5 ). Lyse cells with 
2× 15 strokes in the cell homogenizer on ice. Transfer whole 
cell lysate to 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. Pellet cell debris by cen-
trifugation at 16,000 ×  g and 4 °C.  
  2.  Optional: add up to 2 µM avidin to the cleared extract and 
incubate for 20 min at room temperature with rotation ( see 
 Note 6 ).  
  3.  Transfer 0.8 ml Strep-Tactin suspension per 1 ml cell pellet 
into a Bio-Spin column and equilibrate 2× with 1 ml buffer P 
using gravity ﬂ ow. Apply cleared lysate 2× on the Strep-Tactin 
resin and wash 3× with 1 column volume ice-cold buffer P.  
  4.  Prepare a 2 mM biotin solution by diluting the 20 mM stock 
solution in buffer X. Elute bound proteins with 4 times of 1 
bead volume of 2 mM biotin. Pool fractions and take 30 µl 
aliquot for SDS-PAGE (polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) 
analysis.  
  5.   Transfer 60–80 µl Ni-NTA slurry (corresponds to 30–40 µl 
bead volume) per 1 ml cell pellet ( see  Note 7 ) into a 15 ml 
3.1  Expression of 
Afﬁ nity-Tagged Bait 
Proteins in HEK293 
Cells
3.2  Puriﬁ cation and 
Cross-Linking of 
Protein Complexes
Franz Herzog

265
Falcon tube containing 10 ml buffer X. Spin down Ni-NTA 
agarose at 200 ×  g for 1 min. Aspirate supernatant and wash 
agarose with 12 ml ice-cold buffer X. Remove supernatant and 
incubate Ni-NTA beads with the biotin eluate for 1 h with 
end-over- end rotation at 4 °C. Pellet Ni-NTA agarose by cen-
trifugation, take 30 µl supernatant for SDS-PAGE analysis and 
aspirate supernatant. Wash Ni-NTA bound proteins 2 times 
with 12 ml ice- cold buffer X ( see  Note 8 ). 
  6.   Resuspend the 40 µl bead volume of protein bound Ni-NTA 
agarose (for 1 ml cell pellet starting material) in 120 µl buffer 
X and transfer the 25 % slurry into 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. 
Transfer an aliquot of 20 µl slurry for the  xQuest database 
generation into a separate tube.  
  7.   Titrate the cross-linker to protein concentration on beads. 
Pipette aliquots of 10 µl slurry into ten 1.5 ml Eppendorf 
tubes and keep them at room temperature. Add nine different 
dilutions of the DSS stock solution to the beads by resuspend-
ing the beads ( see  Note 9 ). Incubate the reactions at 37 °C in 
a Thermomixer at   1,000 rpm for 30 min. Quench the reac-
tions by adding 5 µl of 4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer.  
  8.   Assess the degree of protein conjugation through chemical 
cross-linking by analyzing the different reactions with SDS- 
PAGE and silver staining. Choose the reaction where the pro-
tein bands just quantitatively shifted as the optimal DSS 
concentration (Fig.  1 ).
  9.   To cross-link the protein preparation for MS analysis resus-
pend 120 µl bead volume of protein bound Ni-NTA agarose 
(for 3 ml cell pellet starting material) in 360 μl buffer X. 
Add the optimal DSS concentration to the slurry, resuspend 
the beads, and incubate at 37 °C in a Thermomixer at 
1,000 rpm for 30 min. Quench the reaction by adding 1 M 
NH 4 HCO 3 to a ﬁ nal concentration of 100 mM and incubate 
for another 10 min.  
  1.   Spin down Ni-NTA agarose bound to cross-linked proteins 
and aspirate supernatant. Resuspend beads in 200 μl 8 M urea, 
add TCEP to a ﬁ nal concentration of 5 mM, and mix at 
1,000 rpm for 20 min at 37 °C in a Thermomixer. Add 10 mM 
iodoacetamide, resuspend beads, and incubate for 40 min at 
room temperature in the dark.  
  2.   Add Lys-C at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and 
incubate in a Thermomixer at 37 °C and 1,000 rpm for 2 h. 
Dilute with 1,400 µl of 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 and transfer the 
reaction into a 2 ml Eppendorf tube. Add trypsin at an enzyme 
to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubate in the Thermomixer 
at 37 °C and 1,000 rpm overnight.  
3.3  Enrichment and 
MS Analysis of 
Cross-Linked Peptides
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

266
  3.   Stop digestion by adding TFA to a ﬁ nal concentration of 0.1 % 
(v/v). Add acetonitrile to a ﬁ nal concentration of 3 % (v/v). 
Pellet Ni-NTA beads by centrifugation at 16,000 ×  g . Transfer 
supernatant into fresh 2 ml Eppendorf tube and spin down 
again at 16,000 ×  g . 
  4.  Assemble SepPak C18 column on the Vacmaster manifold and 
activate the C18 resin for solid phase extraction by passing 
through 1 ml acetonitrile at about two drops per second. Wash 
column with 2 × 1 ml buffer A. Apply acidiﬁ ed protein digest, 
collect the ﬂ owthrough and apply a second time. Wash column 
with at least 2 × with 1 ml buffer A. Elute bound peptides by 
passing through 500 µl buffer B. Dry peptides by evaporating 
the solvent in a vacuum concentrator at 40 °C. Dissolve pep-
tides in 20 μl buffer C and transfer into an autosampler vial.  
  5.   Enrich cross-linked peptides over the non-cross-linked frac-
tion by size exclusion chromatography ( see  Note 10 ) (Fig. 2 ). 
Inject 15 µl onto a Superdex peptide column connected to an 
ÄKTAmicro system. Separate peptides with buffer C at a ﬂ ow 
rate of 50 µl/min. Collect 100 µl fractions every 2 min in a 
96-well plate ( see  Note 11 ). Transfer fractions of cross-linked 
peptides into 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and evaporate solvent in 
 Fig. 1    Titration of DSS to protein concentration. The PP2A regulatory subunit 
2ABG was afﬁ nity-puriﬁ ed from HEK293 cell lysate using a Strep-Tactin column. 
The biotin eluate was applied to Ni-NTA beads (In, input; Sup, supernatant) to 
immobilize 2ABG associated complexes through the N-terminal His 6 -tag. Bound 
proteins were incubated with increasing concentrations of DSS and cross-linked 
proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining. The DSS 
concentration applied to the mass spectrometric identiﬁ cation of cross-linked 
peptides is indicated by the boxed number. Reproduced from ref. [ 16 ] 
 
Franz Herzog

267
the vacuum concentrator. Reconstitute peptide fractions in 
20 µl mobile phase A and transfer into autosampler vials.
  6.   Analyze fractions enriched for cross-linked peptides with liq-
uid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry 
using a EASY-nLC 1000 nano-HPLC system connected to a 
LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (LIT—Orbitrap, 
Linear Ion Trap—Orbitrap).  
  7.   Load a volume corresponding to about 1 µg peptide onto the 
PepMap RSLC column ( see  Note 13 ). Separate peptides at a 
ﬂ ow rate of 300 nl/min by running a gradient from 5 to 35 % 
mobile phase B within 60 min. For the instrument settings for 
peptide ionization and fragmentation by the LTQ Orbitrap 
Elite ( see  Note 14 ). 
 Fig. 2  Enrichment of the cross-linked peptides by size exclusion chromatography. ( a ) The composition of the 
mobile phase and the ﬂ ow rate are optimized for the maximum separation of the three standard peptides. The 
separation of the 3-peptide mixture by size exclusion was monitored by UV absorption at 215 nm (mAU, milli 
absorption units; CV, column volume). ( b ) The protein complexes copuriﬁ ed with His 6 -HA-StrepII-tagged 2ABG 
were cross-linked with DSS and digested using the described Lys-C/trypsin protocol. The proteolytic digest 
was separated by peptide size exclusion chromatography (SEC). The indicated fractions −2, −1, 0, +1, +2 
were analyzed by MS and the cross-links were identiﬁ ed by the search engine  xQuest . ( c ) The bar diagram 
displays the number of unique cross-links (identiﬁ cation with the highest score across all 5 fractions) detected 
in the individual fractions. About 96 % of the interprotein and intraprotein cross-links eluted within 3 fractions 
or 12.5 % of the column volume (CV). The increased number of mono-links in comparison to inter- and intra-
protein cross-links in fraction +2 ( see  Note 12 ) indicate that mono-links were separated to some degree from 
inter- and intraprotein cross-links by size exclusion [ 23 ] 
 
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

268
  1.   Digest the proteins bound to Ni-NTA beads in the 20 μl 
 aliquot taken prior to cross-linking ( see Subheading  3.2 , 
 step 6 ) as described ( see Subheading  3.3 ,  steps 1 and  2 ). 
  2.   Purify the peptides by solid phase extraction as described ( see 
Subheading  3.3 ,  steps 3 and  4 ) and dissolve the dried pep-
tides in 20 µl mobile phase A.  
  3.   Analyze the peptide mixture using the EASY-nLC 1000 nano- 
HPLC system connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spec-
trometer as described ( see Subheading  3.3 ,  steps 6 and  7 ). 
Note that MS2 scans of +2 charged precursors have to be 
enabled ( see  Note 14 ). 
  4.  Convert Thermo Xcalibur .raw ﬁ les into .mzXML or .mgf ﬁ les 
using the  MSConvert  script. Use the following settings: 
Output format (mzXML or mgf), Binary encoding precision 
(32 or 64 bit) and Filters (Peak Picking MS Levels 1–1 or no 
ﬁ lters), respectively, uncheck zlib compression and gzip for the 
generation of both, .mzXML and .mgf ﬁ les. 
  5.  Search .mzXML or .mgf ﬁ les with the  X ! Tandem / TPP  or 
 Mascot software programs and rank the identiﬁ ed proteins 
according to the quantitation values, spectral counts or emPAI, 
respectively. Extract the UniProt entries of the 40 most abun-
dant proteins and retrieve a FASTA database from   http://
www.uniprot.org/   for the xQuest search ( see  Note 15 ).  
  1.   Convert Thermo Xcalibur .raw ﬁ les of the MS analysis of the 
cross-link fractions into .mzXML ﬁ les using the  MSConvert 
script. Use the following settings: Output format (mzXML), 
Binary encoding precision (32 bit) and Filters (Peak Picking 
MS Levels 1–1) and uncheck zlib compression and gzip.  
  2.  Download and install  xQuest by following the detailed instructions 
at   http://proteomics.ethz.ch/cgi-bin/xquest2_cgi/index.cgi   .  
  3.   To run the  xQuest search the following input ﬁ les have to be 
generated:
 (a)  .mzXML dataﬁ le. 
 (b)   xQuest database in .fasta format ( see  Note 16 ).  
 (c)  For the batch analysis of several MS runs the ﬁ lenames 
(without extension and one name per line) have to be 
listed in a .txt ﬁ le named “ﬁ les”. 
 (d)   Retrieve the deﬁ nition ﬁ les xmm.def and xquest. def from 
  http://proteomics.ethz.ch/cgi-bin/xquest2_cgi/ 
howtorun.cgi   . 
 (e)    Modify the parameters according to your MS settings and 
IT infrastructure ( see  Note 17 ). 
 (f)   To perform the  xQuest searches follow the detailed 
instructions 
at 
  http://proteomics.ethz.ch/cgi-bin/
xquest2_cgi/howtorun.cgi   . 
3.4  Generation of 
 xQuest Database
3.5  Identiﬁ cation of 
Cross-Link Spectra by 
 xQuest and Manual 
Validation
Franz Herzog

269
  4.   Upload the results in a web browser by using the results man-
ager. Use the viewer options to ﬁ lter your results (Fig.  3 ).
 (a)    Filter by type (top hit): select interprotein, intraprotein, 
or mono-links. Choose whether target or decoy or both 
cross-link types should be displayed. Decoy hits gener-
ated by the target- decoy method are used to calculate the 
false discovery rate according to ref.  12 . 
 (b)   Filter hits by max ppm (Range): standard values for the 
MS1 mass tolerance window are −5 to +5 ppm. Check 
“All hits” to apply the mass error ﬁ lter to assignments 
that are ranked as second or third hit for this spectrum.  
 (c)   Filter by unique ids (top hit): enables displaying the 
highest- scored hit (identiﬁ cation) for this speciﬁ c cross-
link sequence, in case, this cross-link was identiﬁ ed mul-
tiple times in this analysis.  
 (d)   Show scores (top hit) >: set to preliminary value of 22 and 
displays all ﬁ rst ranked cross-links of the selected type 
until a score of 22. The actual minimal score threshold is 
determined after manual validation ( see  Note 18 ). 
 Fig. 3  xQuest results viewer. The viewer offers a platform for ﬁ ltering the cross-link identiﬁ cations matched to 
the acquired spectra. The most effective ﬁ ltering steps prior to manual validation include selecting the cross-
link type, setting the MS1 mass tolerance window (ppm), displaying only the highest-scored identiﬁ cation 
(unique ids) and setting the minimum threshold score (show scores >) and the maximum deltaS value  
 
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

270
 (e)   The ﬁ ltered results are exported as .tsv ﬁ les to process 
them for manual validation in  Excel . 
  5.   All 1st ranked spectra passing the ﬁ lter step are manually 
validated.
 (a)    The score difference between the ﬁ rst and second ranked 
hit, ∆score, has to be ≥15 %. The ∆score is shown by the 
column deltaS in the results overview that indicates the 
score ratio second/ﬁ rst for the ﬁ rst ranked hit or third/
second for the second ranked hit. First and second ranked 
cross-link assignments indicating linkage of the same two 
peptide sequences that differ in the position of the linked 
lysine in one peptide are excluded from this rule.  
 (b)   To evaluate the spectrum browse the “view” link in the 
results overview (Fig.  3 ). Valid identiﬁ cations have to 
exhibit at least four bond cleavages in total or three adja-
cent ones per peptide and a minimum peptide length of 
six amino acids. Cross-links containing one peptide of ﬁ ve 
amino acids and fulﬁ lling the ﬁ ltering and manual valida-
tion criteria are considered as candidate cross-links taking 
into account that the reduced information content of 
shorter peptides may result in higher false discovery rates.  
4  Notes 
  1.   The generation of these cell lines was described in detail previ-
ously [ 21 ]. In brief, cDNAs of the bait proteins can be retrieved 
in Gateway (Life Technologies) compatible entry vectors from 
existing collections (horfeome v5.1, Open Biosystems,   www.
openbiosystems.com   ) or can be easily introduced into the 
Gateway system by BP clonase recombination (  http://invitrogen.
com  ). ORFs in entry vectors were introduced by LR recombi-
nation into the destination vector that was constructed by 
ligating the Gateway recombination cassette and an N-terminal 
His 6 -HA-StrepII-tag into the polylinker of the pcDNA5/
FRT/TO vector (Life Technologies). Flp-In™ T-REx™ 
HEK293 cells containing a single genomic FRT site and 
expressing the tet repressor protein were used to generate sta-
ble isogenic cell lines for the tetracycline inducible expression 
of tagged bait proteins (  http://invitrogen.com   ).  
  2.   Avoid more than one freeze–thaw cycle of trypsin aliquots.  
  3.   Add 1 M NH 4 HCO 3 dropwise to TCEP powder as there is 
massive CO 2 production due to the acidity of TCEP.  
  4.   Predilution of the tetracycline stock solution prevents high 
local concentration of the chemical on cells.  
  5.   The starting cell pellet volume depends on the cellular 
 abundance of the over-expressed His 6 -HA-StrepII-tagged bait 
Franz Herzog

271
protein. Approximately, 3 ml cell pellet have to be used for 
high abundant bait proteins. For low abundant baits the cell 
pellet volume has to be increased to at least 6–7 ml. One 
245 × 245 × 25 mm dish yields about 0.2–0.4 ml cell pellet.  
  6.   Avidin competes off biotin-containing enzymes and thus 
reduces the levels of contaminating proteins binding to the 
Strep-Tactin resin.  
  7.  Do not increase the volume of Ni-NTA beads for low abundant 
bait proteins above the approximately 120 μl bead volume for 
the 3 ml cell pellet starting material of high abundant proteins.  
  8.   Estimate the protein concentration on beads by SDS-PAGE 
and silver staining. Run 15 μl of biotin elution prior and sub-
sequent to Ni-NTA incubation and 1–2 μl protein bound 
Ni-NTA beads together with a BSA dilution series on SDS- 
PAGE. Estimate the protein concentration by comparing the 
intensities of silver-stained bands [ 22 ]. 
  9.  Use the approximation 1 μg protein ≡ 500 pmol lysine ≡ 500 pmol 
DSS to estimate the equimolar amount of DSS. Use two- to 
threefold steps to calculate higher and lower concentrations for 
the titration series (Fig.  1 ).  
 10.   Optimize the percentage of acetonitrile and the ﬂ ow rate for 
the maximum separation of the three standard peptides (insu-
lin, 5,807 Da; insulin chain A (oxidized), 2,531 Da, angioten-
sin, 1,296 Da; all Sigma-Aldrich) in the range of 
3,000–6,000 Da [ 23 ] (Fig.  2 ).  
 11.    Determine the fractions enriched for cross-linked peptides by 
separating the peptides of cross-linked standard proteins [ 23 ] 
or of your protein complex of interest (Fig.  2 ). Take the frac-
tion of the insulin peak as fraction 0 as well as −2 and −1 (ear-
lier eluting fractions at higher molecular weight) and +1 and 
+2 (later eluting fractions at lower molecular weight) and 
determine the number of non-redundant cross-links in the 
sample identiﬁ ed in each fraction. The majority of cross-links 
have to elute in 2–3 fractions to obtain sufﬁ cient enrichment 
of cross-linked over non-cross-linked peptides.  
 12.   In this analysis only mono-links with charge states ≥ +3 were 
detected. As a signiﬁ cant number of mono-links occur as +2 
charged precursors, the actual number of mono-links in 
 fraction +2 might be higher than indicated.  
  13.  Estimate volume of 1 μg peptide by taking into account the total 
protein amount of the puriﬁ cation and the ratio of the area of the 
fraction to the total area of the size exclusion chromatogram.  
  14.  Ion source and transmission parameters of the mass spectrom-
eter were set to spray voltage = 2 kV, capillary tempera-
ture = 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in 
data-dependent mode, selecting up to ten precursors from an 
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

272
MS 1 scan (resolution = 60,000) in the range of  m / z 400–2,000 
for collision-induced dissociation (CID). Singly (+1) and dou-
bly (+2) charged precursor ions and precursors of unknown 
charge states were rejected. CID was performed for 10 ms 
using 35 % normalized collision energy and the activation  q of 
0.25. Dynamic exclusion was activated with a repeat count of 
1, exclusion duration of 30 s, list size of 500 and the mass win-
dow of ±10 ppm. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or maxi-
mum 10 ms ﬁ ll time) for full scans and 10,000 (or maximum 
100 ms ﬁ ll time) for MS/MS scans, respectively [ 16 ,  23 ].  
 15.   Avoid separators like “.” and “,” and spaces in the protein 
header line.  
 16.   The  xQuest  search requires the generation of a decoy database 
(_decoy.fasta) according to the instructions at   http://pro-
teomics.ethz.ch/cgi-bin/xquest2_cgi/howtorun.cgi.   Copy the 
root paths of the .fasta and _decoy.fasta databases into the 
xquest.def ﬁ le. 
 17.    Deﬁ nition ﬁ le settings used in refs.  12 ,  15 ,  16 : maximum 
number of missed cleavages (excluding the cross-linking 
site) = 2, peptide length = 4–40 amino acids, ﬁ xed modiﬁ ca-
tions = carbamidomethyl-Cys (mass shift = 57.021460 Da), 
variable modiﬁ cations = oxidation-Met (mass shift = 15.99491), 
mass shift of the light cross-linker = 138.068080 Da, mass shift 
of mono-links = 156.078644 and 155.096428 Da, MS 1 toler-
ance = 15 ppm, MS 2 tolerance = 0.2 Da for common ions and 
0.3 Da for cross-link ions, search in ion-tag mode.  
 18.    The calculation of the false discovery rate is discussed in detail 
in refs.  12 ,  16 . 
 Acknowledgments 
 I would like to thank Alexander Leitner for comments on the manu-
script and Thomas Walzthöni and Ruedi Aebersold for support. The 
work in the lab of F.H. is funded by the Bavarian Research Center 
for Molecular Biosystems and by an LMUexcellent Junior grant.  
 References 
  1.  Fabris D, Yu ET (2010) Elucidating the higher- 
order structure of biopolymers by structural 
probing and mass spectrometry: MS3D. J Mass 
Spectrom 45:841–860  
  2.  Rappsilber J, Siniossoglou S, Hurt EC et al 
(2000) A generic strategy to analyze the spatial 
organization of multi- protein complexes by 
cross-linking and mass spectrometry. Anal 
Chem 72:267–275  
  3.  Back JW, de Jong L, Muijsers AO et al (2003) 
Chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry 
for protein structural modeling. J Mol Biol 
331:303–313  
  4.  Sinz A (2005) Chemical cross-linking and 
FTICR mass spectrometry for protein structure 
characterization. Anal Bioanal Chem 381:44–47  
  5.  Leitner A, Walzthoeni T, Kahraman A et al 
(2010) Probing native protein structures by 
Franz Herzog

273
chemical cross-linking, mass spectrometry, 
and bioinformatics. Mol Cell Proteomics 9:
1634–1649  
  6.  Petrotchenko EV, Borchers CH (2010) 
Crosslinking combined with mass spectrome-
try for structural proteomics. Mass spectrome-
try reviews 29:862–876  
  7.  Tang X, Bruce JE (2010) A new cross-linking 
strategy: protein interaction reporter (PIR) 
technology for protein–protein interaction 
studies. Mol Biosyst 6:939–947  
  8.  Kao A, Chiu CL, Vellucci D et al (2011) 
Development of a novel cross-linking strategy 
for fast and accurate identiﬁ cation of cross-
linked peptides of protein complexes. Mol Cell 
Proteomics 10:M110.002212  
  9.  Petrotchenko EV, Serpa JJ, Borchers CH 
(2011) An isotopically coded CID-cleavable 
biotinylated cross-linker for structural pro-
teomics. Mol Cell Proteomics 10:M110.001420  
  10.  Seebacher J, Mallick P, Zhang N et al (2006) 
Protein cross-linking analysis using mass spec-
trometry, isotope- coded cross-linkers, and 
integrated computational data processing. 
J Proteome Res 5:2270–2282  
  11.  Rinner O, Seebacher J, Walzthoeni T et al 
(2008) Identiﬁ cation of cross- linked peptides 
from large sequence databases. Nat Methods 
5:315–318 
  12.  Walzthoeni T, Claassen M, Leitner A et al (2012) 
False discovery rate estimation for cross-linked 
peptides identiﬁ ed by mass spectrometry. Nat 
Methods 9:901–903  
  13.   Jennebach S, Herzog F, Aebersold R et al (2012) 
Crosslinking-MS analysis reveals RNA poly-
merase I domain architecture and basis of rRNA 
cleavage. Nucleic Acids Res 40:5591–5601  
  14.  Lasker K, Förster F, Bohn S et al (2012) 
Molecular architecture of the 26S proteasome 
holocomplex determined by an integrative 
approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:
1380–1387  
  15.  Leitner A, Joachimiak LA, Bracher A et al 
(2012) The molecular architecture of the 
eukaryotic chaperonin TRiC/CCT. Structure 
20:814–825  
  16.  Herzog F, Kahraman A, Boehringer D et al 
(2012) Structural probing of a protein 
 phosphatase 2A network by chemical cross-
linking and mass spectrometry. Science 337:
1348–1352  
  17.  Kessner D, Chambers M, Burke R et al (2008) 
ProteoWizard: open source software for rapid 
proteomics tools development. Bioinformatics 
24:2534–2536  
  18.  Craig R, Beavis RC (2004) TANDEM: match-
ing proteins with tandem mass spectra. 
Bioinformatics 20:1466–1467  
  19.  Keller A, Nesvizhskii AI, Kolker E et al (2002) 
Empirical statistical model to estimate the 
accuracy of peptide identiﬁ cations made by 
MS/MS and database search. Anal Chem 
74:5383–5392  
  20.  Nesvizhskii  AI, Keller A, Kolker E et al (2003) 
A statistical model for identifying proteins by 
tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 75: 
4646–4658  
  21.  Glatter T, Wepf A, Aebersold R et al (2009) An 
integrated workﬂ ow for charting the human 
interaction proteome: insights into the PP2A 
system. Mol Syst Biol 5:237  
  22.  Herzog F, Peters JM (2005) Large-scale puriﬁ -
cation of the vertebrate anaphase-promoting 
complex/cyclosome. Methods Enzymol 398:
175–195  
  23.  Leitner A, Reischl R, Walzthoeni T et al (2012) 
Expanding the chemical cross-linking toolbox 
by the use of multiple proteases and enrich-
ment by size exclusion chromatography. Mol 
Cell Proteomics 11:M111.014126  
Chemical Cross-Linking and Mass Spectrometry of Protein Pull-Downs

 Part III 
 Computational Methods and Structural Data Analyses  

277
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_20, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 20  
 Modeling of Proteins and Their Assemblies 
with the  Integrative Modeling Platform 
 Benjamin  Webb ,  Keren  Lasker ,  Javier  Velázquez-Muriel , 
 Dina  Schneidman-Duhovny ,  Riccardo  Pellarin ,  Massimiliano  Bonomi , 
 Charles  Greenberg ,  Barak  Raveh ,  Elina  Tjioe ,  Daniel  Russel , 
and  Andrej  Sali 
 Abstract 
 To understand the workings of the living cell, we need to characterize protein assemblies that constitute 
the cell (for example, the ribosome, 26S proteasome, and the nuclear pore complex). A reliable high- 
resolution structural characterization of these assemblies is frequently beyond the reach of current experi-
mental methods, such as X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, electron microscopy, footprinting, 
chemical cross-linking, FRET spectroscopy, small angle X-ray scattering, and proteomics. However, the 
information garnered from different methods can be combined and used to build models of the assembly 
structures that are consistent with all of the available datasets, and therefore more accurate, precise, and 
complete. Here, we describe a protocol for this integration, whereby the information is converted to a set 
of spatial restraints and a variety of optimization procedures can be used to generate models that satisfy the 
restraints as well as possible. These generated models can then potentially inform about the precision and 
accuracy of structure determination, the accuracy of the input datasets, and further data generation. We 
also demonstrate the  Integrative Modeling Platform (IMP) software, which provides the necessary compu-
tational framework to implement this protocol, and several applications for speciﬁ c use cases.  
 Key words   Integrative modeling  ,  Protein structure modeling  ,   Proteomics of macromolecular 
 assemblies  ,  X-ray crystallography  ,   Electron microscopy  ,   SAXS 
1  Introduction 
 To understand the function of a macromolecular assembly, we 
must know the structure of its components and the interactions 
between them [ 1 – 4 ]. However, direct experimental determination 
of such a structure is generally rather difﬁ cult. While multiple 
methods do exist for structure determination, each has a drawback. 
For example, crystals suitable for X-ray crystallography cannot 
always be produced, especially for large assemblies of multiple 

278
components [ 5 ]. Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), on the 
other hand, can be used to study large assemblies, but it is gener-
ally limited to worse than atomic resolution [ 6 – 8 ]. Finally, pro-
teomics techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid [ 9 ] and mass 
spectrometry [ 10 ], yield information about the interactions 
between proteins, but not the positions of these proteins within 
the assembly or the structures of the proteins themselves. 
 
 One approach to solve the structures of proteins and their assem-
blies is by integrative modeling, in which information from differ-
ent methods is considered simultaneously during the modeling 
procedure. The approach is brieﬂ y outlined here for clarity; it has 
been covered in greater detail previously [ 11 – 18 ]. These individual 
methods can include experimental techniques, such as X-ray crys-
tallography [ 5 ], nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy 
[ 19 – 21 ], electron microscopy (EM) [ 6 – 8 ], footprinting [ 22 ,  23 ], 
chemical cross-linking [ 24 – 27 ], FRET spectroscopy [ 28 ], small 
angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) [ 29 – 31 ], and proteomics [ 32 ]. 
Theoretical sources of information about the assembly can also be 
incorporated, such as template structures used in comparative 
modeling [ 33 ,  34 ], scoring functions used in molecular docking 
[ 35 ], as well as other statistical preferences [ 36 ,  37 ] and physics- 
based energy functions [ 38 – 40 ]. Different methods yield informa-
tion about different aspects of structure and at different levels of 
resolution. For example, atomic resolution structures may be avail-
able for individual proteins in the assembly; in other cases, only 
their approximate size, approximate shape, or interactions with 
other proteins may be known. Thus, integrative modeling tech-
niques generate models at the resolution that is consistent with the 
input information. An example of a simple integrative approach is 
building a pseudo-atomic model of a large assembly, such as the 
26S proteasome [ 41 – 43 ], by ﬁ tting atomic structures of its sub-
units predicted by comparative protein structure modeling into a 
density map determined by cryo-EM [ 44 ,  45 ]. 
 The integrative modeling procedure used here [ 13 ,  18 ] is sche-
matically shown in Fig.  1 . The ﬁ rst step in the procedure is to col-
lect all experimental, statistical, and physical information that 
describes the system of interest. A suitable representation for the 
system is then chosen and the available information is translated to 
a set of spatial restraints on the components of the system. For 
example, in the case of characterizing the molecular architecture of 
the nuclear pore complex (NPC) [ 13 ,  14 ], atomic structures of the 
protein subunits were not available, but the approximate size and 
shape of each protein was known, so each protein was represented 
as a “string” of connected spheres consistent with the protein size 
and shape. A simple distance between two proteins can be restrained 
by a harmonic function of the distance, while the ﬁ t of a model into 
1.1  Integrative 
Modeling
Benjamin Webb et al.

279
a 3D cryo-EM density map can be restrained by the cross- correlation 
between the map and the computed density of the model. Next, the 
spatial restraints are summed into a single scoring function that can 
be sampled using a variety of optimizers, such as conjugate gradi-
ents, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, and divide-and-conquer 
message-passing methods [ 45 ]. This sampling generates an ensem-
ble of models that are as consistent with the input information as 
possible. In the ﬁ nal step, the ensemble is analyzed to determine, 
for example, whether all of the restraints have been satisﬁ ed or cer-
tain subsets of data conﬂ ict with others. The analysis may generate 
a consensus model, such as the probability density for the location 
of each subunit in the assembly.
 Fig. 1  Integrative modeling protocol. After the datasets to be used are enumerated, a suitable representation 
is chosen for the system, and the input information is converted into spatial restraints. Models are generated 
that are optimally consistent with the input information by optimizing a function of these restraints. Analysis of 
the resulting models informs about the model and data accuracy and may help guide further experiments. The 
protocol is demonstrated with the construction of a bead model of the NPC [ 13 ] 
 
Integrative Modeling Platform

280
 
 We have developed the  Integrative Modeling Platform (IMP) soft-
ware (  http://salilab.org/imp/   ) [ 11 ,  13 – 16 ] to implement the inte-
grative modeling procedure described above. Integrative modeling 
problems vary in size and scope, and thus IMP offers a great deal of 
ﬂ exibility and several abstraction levels as part of a multi- tiered plat-
form (Fig.  2 ). At the lowest level, IMP provides building blocks and 
tools to allow method developers to convert data from new experi-
mental methods into spatial restraints, to implement optimization 
and analysis techniques, and to implement an integrative modeling 
procedure from scratch; the developer can use the C++ and Python 
programming languages to achieve these tasks. Higher abstraction 
levels, designed to be used by IMP users with no programming 
experience, provide less ﬂ exible but more user-friendly applications 
to handle speciﬁ c tasks, such as ﬁ tting of proteins into a density map 
of their assembly, or comparing a structure with the corresponding 
SAXS proﬁ le. IMP is freely available as open source software under 
the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL). 
Integrative modeling, due to its use of multiple sources of informa-
tion, is often a highly collaborative venture, and thus beneﬁ ts from 
openness of the modeling protocols and the software itself.
2  Materials 
 To follow the examples in this discussion, both the IMP software 
itself and a set of suitable input ﬁ les are needed. The IMP software 
can be downloaded from   http://salilab.org/imp/download.html   
and is available in binary form for most common machine types 
and operating systems; alternatively, it can be rebuilt from the 
1.2  Integrative 
Modeling Platform
IMP C++/Python library
restrainer
Simplicity
Expressiveness
Chimera tools/
web services
Domain-specific applications
 Fig. 2  Overview of the IMP software. Components are displayed by simplicity (or user 
friendliness) and expressiveness (or power). The core C++/Python library allows pro-
tocols to be designed from scratch, at a cost of user friendliness; higher-level mod-
ules and applications provide more user-friendly interfaces, at a cost of ﬂ exibility  
 
Benjamin Webb et al.

281
source code; either the stable 2.0 release of IMP, or a recent devel-
opment version, should be used. The example ﬁ les can be down-
loaded 
from 
  http://salilab.org/imp/tutorials/basic_apps.zip   . 
Certain applications also make use of third party software, which 
must be obtained separately from IMP (download locations for 
each software package are shown in subsequent sections). 
 
 Monospaced text is used below for computer ﬁ le and folder/
directory names, command lines, ﬁ le contents, and variable and 
class names.  
3  Methods 
 The core of IMP is the C++/Python library, which provides all of 
the necessary components, as a set of classes and modules, to allow 
method developers to build an integrative modeling protocol from 
scratch. This core can be used either from C++ (by including the 
 IMP.h header ﬁ le and linking against the IMP libraries) or from 
Python (by importing the IMP Python module), and provides 
almost identical functionality in each language, for maximum ﬂ ex-
ibility. In this text, we will demonstrate the IMP applications that 
build on top of this core; the core itself has been demonstrated 
elsewhere [ 46 ] and is further described on the IMP website, 
  http://salilab.org/imp/   . 
 
 One major computational approach to predicting structures of 
protein complexes relies on molecular docking of unbound single- 
component structures. However, even for complexes with two 
proteins, the docking problem remains challenging despite recent 
advances [ 47 ]. The major bottlenecks include dealing with protein 
ﬂ exibility and the absence of an accurate scoring function [ 48 ]. 
 IMP includes an integrative approach to pairwise protein dock-
ing, in which additional experimental information about the protein–
protein complex is incorporated into the docking procedure to greatly 
improve the accuracy of predictions. This method succeeds in produc-
ing a near-native model among the top ten models in 42–82 % of 
cases, while state-of-the-art docking methods succeed only in 30–40 % 
of cases, depending on the benchmark and accuracy criterion [ 49 ]. 
 The protocol proceeds as follows (Fig.  3 ). First, data from one 
or more of ﬁ ve different experiment types are translated into the 
corresponding scoring function terms. These data include (1) the 
pair-distance distribution function of the complex from a SAXS 
proﬁ le, (2) 2D class average images of the complex from negative-
stain EM micrographs (EM2D), (3) a 3D density map of the com-
plex from single-particle negative-stain EM micrographs (EM3D), 
(4) residue type content at the protein interface from NMR 
spectroscopy (NMR-RTC) [ 50 ], and (5) chemical cross- linking 
detected by mass spectrometry (CXMS). These ﬁ ve experimental 
2.1  Typographical 
Conventions
3.1  The IMP C++/
Python Library
3.2  Pairwise 
Protein–Protein 
Docking Integrating 
Data from SAXS 
and EM
Integrative Modeling Platform

282
methods were selected because of their feasibility and efﬁ ciency of 
data collection: a SAXS proﬁ le of the complex in solution can be 
collected in several minutes [ 30 ]; a 3D EM density map can be 
reconstructed from a smaller sample amount than that for SAXS, 
but the data collection process is signiﬁ cantly longer[ 6 ]; 2D class 
averages can be computed from micrographs more easily and rap-
idly than performing a full 3D reconstruction; the composition of 
interface residues from NMR [ 50 ] provides information about the 
interaction interface, unlike the SAXS and EM data; and cross-
linking data [ 51 ] provide information at intermediate resolution 
imposing an upper distance bound on inter-molecular pairs of resi-
dues. Second, complex models are sampled, relying on efﬁ cient 
global search methods developed for pairwise protein docking, fol-
lowed by ﬁ ltering based on ﬁ t to the experimental data, conforma-
tional reﬁ nement, and composite scoring. Third, good-scoring 
representatives of clusters of models are picked as ﬁ nal models.
 Here, we demonstrate the approach by application to the 
PCSK9 antigen–J16 Fab antibody complex. All input ﬁ les for this 
example can be found in the “ idock ” directory of the down-
loaded zipﬁ le.
  1.   Inputs . The primary inputs are the Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[ 52 ] structures of the isolated J16 Fab antibody and PCSK9 
antigen,  antibody_cut.pdb and  2p4e.pdb , respectively; 
they can be found in the downloaded zipﬁ le. We also collected 
SAXS, EM2D, and EM3D data on this protein–protein com-
plex, available in the  iq.dat ,  image_*.pgm , and   complex.
mrc ﬁ les , respectively. Finally, we added missing residues to 
 Fig. 3    Schematic representation of the integrative docking method. The number 
of possible conﬁ gurations for two docked proteins is on the order of ~10 11 (three 
rotational degrees of freedom sampled at 5 ̊intervals and three translational 
degrees of freedom sampled at 1 Å intervals). As the method proceeds, the num-
ber of considered conﬁ gurations decreases 
 
Benjamin Webb et al.

283
both PDB ﬁ les, for use in SAXS scoring, yielding  antibody.
pdb and  pcsk9.pdb ( see  Note 1 ).  
  2.   Docking . We can then carry out all steps of the integrative dock-
ing by running IMP’s  idock.py application ( see  Note 2 ), 
giving it the names of our input ﬁ les: 
  idock.py antibody_cut.pdb 2p4e.pdb --saxs 
iq.dat --em3d complex.mrc --em2d image_1.pgm 
--em2d 
image_2.pgm 
--em2d 
image_3.pgm 
--pixel_size 2.2 --complex_type AA --saxs_
receptor_pdb antibody.pdb --saxs_ligand_pdb 
pcsk9.pdb --precision 2  
 The application makes use of the PatchDock and FireDock pro-
grams for docking and reﬁ nement, which must be obtained 
separately from   http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/   , and the “reduce” 
program for adding hydrogens to PDB ﬁ les, available from 
  http://kinemage.biochem.duke.edu/software/reduce.php   .  
  3.   Results . Once the docking procedure has ﬁ nished, the primary 
output ﬁ le generated is  results_saxs_em3d_em2d.txt , 
the ﬁ rst few lines of which look similar to: 
  # | Score | ﬁ lt| ZScore | SAXS | Zscore | 
EM2D | Zscore | EM3D | Zscore | Energy | 
Zscore | Transformation  
  1 | -5.225 | + | -3.318 | 16.304 | -1.454 | 0.685 
| -1.829 | 0.058 | -1.672 | -20.010 | -0.270 | 
2.4462 0.7439 2.0137 32.0310 36.5010 74.9757  
  2 | -4.453 | + | -2.828 | 17.590 | 0.578 | 
0.698 | -2.521 | 0.064 | -1.243 | -42.220 | 
-1.267 | 0.1525 -1.3733 2.1213 -17.2068 
-10.3519 13.3553  
 Each line corresponds to one model; the models are ranked 
by total score, best ﬁ rst. The individual SAXS, EM2D, and 
EM3D score/z-score pairs are also shown (only docking solu-
tions that were not ﬁ ltered out by any of three data sources—
i.e. they scored well against every source—are included in this 
ﬁ le). The last column is a transformation (three rotation angles 
and a translation vector) that transforms the antibody relative 
to the antigen (the antigen is not transformed).  
 Often, we have available high-resolution (atomic) information for 
the subunits in an assembly, and low-resolution information for the 
assembly as a whole, such as a cryo-EM electron density map. 
A high-resolution model of the whole assembly can thus be 
 constructed by simultaneously ﬁ tting the subunits into the density 
map. Fitting of a single protein into a density map is usually done 
by calculating the electron density map of the protein followed by 
a search for the protein position in the cryo-EM map that 
3.3  Determining 
Macromolecular 
Assembly Structures 
by Fitting Multiple 
Structures into an 
Electron Density Map
Integrative Modeling Platform

284
maximizes the cross-correlation of the two maps. Simultaneously 
ﬁ tting multiple proteins into a given map is signiﬁ cantly more dif-
ﬁ cult though, since an incorrect ﬁ t of one protein will also prevent 
other proteins from being placed correctly. 
 IMP contains a MultiFit [ 44 ,  45 ] application (  http://salilab.
org/multiﬁ t/   ) that can efﬁ ciently solve such multiple ﬁ tting prob-
lems for density map resolutions as low as 25 Å, relying on a gen-
eral divide-and-conquer optimizer DOMINO. The application is 
available both within IMP and as a web interface on the MultiFit 
website. The ﬁ tting protocol is a multi-step procedure that pro-
ceeds via discretization of both the map and the proteins, local 
ﬁ tting of the proteins into the map, and an efﬁ cient combination 
of local ﬁ ts into global solutions (Fig.  4 ). It is also able to incorpo-
rate additional information about interactions between the pro-
teins from proteomics experiments and can take advantage of  C n 
symmetry to generate structures of such symmetric complexes. 
Here, we will demonstrate the use of MultiFit in building a model 
of porcine mitochondrial respiratory complex II (PDB id 3SFD), 
using crystal structures of its four constituent proteins and a 15 Å 
density map of the entire assembly. All input ﬁ les for this procedure 
can be found in the “ multiﬁ t ” subdirectory of the downloaded 
zipﬁ le. The protocol consists of the following steps:
  1.  Setup a subunit list . We create an input ﬁ le listing the subunits 
involved in the complex. The ﬁ le contains one line per compo-
nent with the following information: the name that MultiFit will 
 Fig. 4  The MultiFit protocol [ 45 ]. Protein subunits are ﬁ tted into a density map of the assembly by discretizing both the 
map and the components, locally ﬁ tting each protein, and efﬁ ciently combining the local ﬁ ts into global solutions  
 
Benjamin Webb et al.

285
use for the component, a path to the ﬁ le containing the atomic 
coordinates for the component, and a 0/1 ﬁ tting ﬂ ag indicating 
whether placements of the subunit should be sampled locally (0) 
or globally (1). The default for the ﬁ tting ﬂ ag is 1 (global search). 
If the user has prior knowledge or a good hypothesis as to the 
subunit position, he can provide the proposed subunit place-
ment in the atomic coordinates ﬁ le and ask for a local search. 
 In this example, we assume no prior knowledge and provide 
the following input ﬁ le ( input/3sfd.subunits.txt ): 
  3sfdA ../input/3sfd.A.pdb 1  
  3sfdB ../input/3sfd.B.pdb 1  
  3sfdC ../input/3sfd.C.pdb 1  
  3sfdD ../input/3sfd.D.pdb 1  
  2.   Create input ﬁ les . We generate two input ﬁ les to guide the 
protocol, by running the MultiFit application,  multiﬁ t.py 
( see  Note 3 ). In this case, we use the application’s “param” 
command, by typing on a command line: 
  multiﬁ t.py param -i 3sfd.asmb.input -- 
3sfd.asmb 
input/3sfd.subunits.txt 
30 
input/3sfd_15.mrc 15 3. 335 27.0 -6.0 21.0  
 The ﬁ rst ﬁ le generated by this command,  3sfd.asmb.
input , provides information on each of the subunits and 
their assembly density map, such as names of the ﬁ les from 
which the input structures and map will be read, and those to 
which outputs from later steps will be written. The second ﬁ le, 
 3sfd.asmb.alignment.param , speciﬁ es scoring and 
optimization parameters for each step of the MultiFit applica-
tion. The user is advised to read a detailed description of the 
different parameters on the MultiFit website (  http://salilab.
org/multiﬁ t/   ) for better understanding of the algorithm and 
for troubleshooting difﬁ cult modeling cases. 
 The arguments to the “param” command include the 
spacing, origin, resolution, and density threshold of the input 
density map. The spacing and origin are often stored in the 
map header. To view the map header, run 
  view_density_header.py input/3sfd_15.mrc  
 The resolution is typically not stored in the map header; it 
is usually provided in the corresponding publication and can 
also be found in the corresponding EMDB [ 53 ] entry. A 
threshold is often provided by the author in the EMDB entry 
as “Recommended counter level” under the “Map 
Information” section. Alternatively, IMP provides a utility to 
calculate an approximate counter level based on the molecular 
mass of the complex, which can be run as: 
  estimate_threshold_from_molecular_mass.
py input/3sfd_15.mrc 1092  
Integrative Modeling Platform

286
  3.   Create the assembly anchor graph . We determine a reduced rep-
resentation of the assembly density map using the Gaussian 
Mixture Model, by running: 
  multiﬁ t.py anchors 3sfd.asmb.input 3sfd.
asmb.anchors  
 This command computes a reduced representation of the 
EM map that best reproduces the conﬁ guration of all voxels 
with density above the density threshold provided in the 
 3sfd.asmb.input ﬁ le as a set of 3D Gaussian functions ( see 
 Note 4 ). The reduced representation is written out as a PDB 
ﬁ le containing fake Cα atoms, where each Cα corresponds to 
a single anchor point, and also as a Chimera [ 54 ] cmm ﬁ le.  
  4.   Fit each protein to the map . We ﬁ rst ﬁ t each protein to the map 
using an FFT search either globally or locally: 
  multiﬁ t.py ﬁ t_fft -a 30 -n 1000 -v 60 -c 
6 3sfd.asmb.input  
 The output is a set of candidate ﬁ ts. In each ﬁ le, a single 
subunit is rigidly rotated and translated to ﬁ t into the density 
map. Each ﬁ t is written out as the transformation (rotation 
and translation) required to place the original subunit in the 
density map. The ﬁ tting of a subunit into the density map is 
performed by globally searching for subunit transformations 
yielding high cross-correlation between the subunit and the 
map via a fast Fourier transform. 
 Second, we create a list of valid ﬁ t indexes. By default, this 
list is simply the top 10 hits from ﬁ t_fft, but they could be ﬁ l-
tered by other criteria (e.g., proximity to anchor points) if 
desired. We do this task by running: 
  multiﬁ t.py indexes 3sfd 3sfd.asmb.input 
10 3sfd.indexes.mapping.input  
  5.  Create a proteomics restraint ﬁ le . We create the restraint ﬁ le 
used in the next assembly step ( see  Note 5 ). This ﬁ le 
instructs MultiFit how to combine the individual subunit 
ﬁ ts created above into a global solution of all subunits 
simultaneously ﬁ tted into the map. First, we ask MultiFit to 
generate a basic proteomics ﬁ le, indicating between which 
pairs of proteins a complementarity restraint (i.e., that the 
surfaces of the proteins should ﬁ t and complement each 
other) should be calculated: 
  multiﬁ t.py 
proteomics 
3sfd.asmb.input 
3sfd.asmb.proteomics  
 The user can then add additional information from pro-
teomics experiments to this ﬁ le. Here, we add seven simulated 
residue–residue 
cross-link 
restraints 
as 
indicated 
in 
 input/3sfd.xlinks . We also update the excluded volume 
(EV) pairs to calculate complementarity restraints between pairs 
of proteins as indicated by the cross-link restraints ( see  Note 6 ). 
Benjamin Webb et al.

287
After these additions, the ﬁ nal  3sfd.asmb.proteomics ﬁ le 
is as follows: 
  |proteins|  
  |3sfdA|1|613|nn|nn|  
  |3sfdB|1|239|nn|nn|  
  |3sfdC|1|138|nn|nn|  
  |3sfdD|1|102|nn|nn|  
  |interactions|  
  |residue-xlink|  
  |1|3sfdB|23|3sfdA|456|30|  
  |1|3sfdB|241|3sfdC|112|30|  
  |1|3sfdB|205|3sfdD|37|30|  
  |1|3sfdB|177|3sfdD|99|30|  
  |1|3sfdC|95|3sfdD|132|30|  
  |1|3sfdC|9|3sfdD|37|30|  
  |1|3sfdC|78|3sfdD|128|30|  
  |ev-pairs|  
  |3sfdB|3sfdA|  
  |3sfdB|3sfdC|  
  |3sfdC|3sfdD|  
  6.   Assemble subunits . The ﬁ ts are combined into a set of the best- 
scoring global conﬁ gurations by running: 
  multiﬁ t.py align 3sfd.asmb.input 3sfd.
asmb.proteomics 
3sfd.indexes.mapping.input 
3sfd.asmb.alignment.param 
3sfd.asmb.combi-
nations 3sfd.asmb.combinations.ﬁ t.scores  
 The scoring function used to assess each ﬁ t includes the 
quality- of-ﬁ t of each subunit in the map, the protrusion of 
each subunit out of the map envelope, the shape complemen-
tarity between subunits, as indicated in the proteomics ﬁ le, 
and distance restraints as deﬁ ned by proteomics data, also 
from the proteomics ﬁ le. The optimization avoids exhaustive 
enumeration of all possible mappings of subunits to anchor 
points by means of a branch-and-bound algorithm combined 
with the DOMINO divide-and-conquer message-passing 
optimizer using a discrete sampling space [ 45 ]. 
  7.   Ensemble analysis . First, we cluster the top 100 models such 
that the maximum Cα RMSD between members of a cluster 
is 5 Å: 
  multiﬁ t.py cluster 3sfd.asmb.input 3sfd.
asmb.proteomics 3sfd.asmb.mapping.input 3sfd.
asmb.alignment.param 
3sfd.asmb.combinations 
-r 5 -m 100  
 The ﬁ rst cluster consists of 96 models and the second 
cluster consists of four models. The average Cα RMSD 
between members of the ﬁ rst cluster is 3.4 Å with a standard 
deviation of 0.3 Å. 
Integrative Modeling Platform

288
 The clustering procedure also generates a new combination 
ﬁ le consisting of combinations of the cluster representatives. 
We can further investigate these cluster representatives by 
 calculating scores of individual restraints: 
  multiﬁ t.py score 3sfd.asmb.input 3sfd.asmb.
proteomics 3sfd.indexes.mapping.input 3sfd.
asmb.alignment.param 3sfd.asmb.combinations.
clustered 
3sfd.asmb.combinations.clustered.
scores  
 Finally, we can generate models (as PDB ﬁ les) by running: 
  multiﬁ t.py models 3sfd.asmb.input 3sfd.
asmb.proteomics 
3sfd.indexes.mapping.input 
3sfd.asmb.combinations.clustered 3sfd.model  
 These models can be visualized in any PDB viewer, such as 
Chimera [ 54 ]. 
 
 Obtaining a high-resolution density map by EM requires a large 
number of single-particle images and needs an initial low- resolution 
template density map to perform 3D reconstruction. This procedure 
is not always possible because in difﬁ cult cases the assembly only 
shows a set of preferred orientations during imaging. However, cal-
culating average 2D images (class averages) from the images of sin-
gle particles in the same orientation is relatively simple and fast. IMP 
provides an “EMageFit” application that performs integrative mod-
eling to assemble the subunits of a macromolecular complex using a 
few class averages, in much the same way MultiFit does for density 
maps. The class averages can be combined with maximum distance 
and proximity restraints, such as those from chemical cross-linking 
and proteomics experiments, respectively. Additionally, an excluded 
volume restraint prevents the subunits from overlapping. The opti-
mization procedure is a two-step method consisting of building a set 
of models by Simulated Annealing Monte Carlo (SA-MC) optimiza-
tion followed by a reﬁ nement with DOMINO [ 55 ]. An example of 
the application of EMageFit to the same complex studied above 
with MultiFit can be found in the “ emageﬁ t ” directory of the 
downloaded zipﬁ le ( see  Note 7 ). 
 The inputs for modeling are the three simulated class averages 
of the complex located in the  em_images directory, and the sub-
units to assemble:  3sfdA.pdb ,  3sfdB.pdb ,  3sfdC.pdb , and 
 3sfdD.pdb . The Python ﬁ le  conﬁ g_step_1.py contains all 
the necessary options and restraint speciﬁ cations ( see  Note 8 ). 
Brieﬂ y, the class averages are given in the  em2d_restraints 
variable; four proteomics restraints are speciﬁ ed in the variable 
 pair_score_restraints ; and seven cross-links are speciﬁ ed 
in the variable  xlink_restraints . The SA-MC optimization is 
set as a tempering schedule and the best 50 models are selected for 
reﬁ nement with DOMINO. For an extensive description of all the 
parameters in  conﬁ g_step_1.py see  conﬁ g_example.py . 
3.4  Assembly of 
Macromolecular 
Complexes by 
Satisfaction of Spatial 
Restraints from EM 
Images
Benjamin Webb et al.

289
 Building a model requires four steps: pairwise docking between 
interacting subunits, SA-MC optimization, SA-MC model gather-
ing, and DOMINO sampling.
  1.   Pairwise docking . The pairwise dockings are calculated with 
the program HEXDOCK [ 56 ], which can be obtained from 
  http://hex.loria.fr/   , based on the description of connectivity 
between subunits given by the cross-linking restraints. To per-
form this step, run from the command line: 
  emageﬁ t.py --exp conﬁ g_step_1.py --dock 
--log ﬁ le.log  
 The docking results will be used during the SA-MC optimi-
zation to quickly explore feasible relative positions between pairs 
of components (although helpful, the dockings are not strictly 
required and EMageFit can work without them). The command 
produces multiple ﬁ les: the PDB ﬁ les of the initial docking solu-
tions as estimated from the cross-linking restraints (ending in 
 initial_docking.pdb ); the PDB ﬁ les with the best solu-
tions from HEXDOCK (ending in  hexdock.pdb ); a set of text 
ﬁ les starting with  hex_solutions , containing all the solutions 
from HEXDOCK; and four text ﬁ les starting with  relative_
positions , which contain the relative transformations (in IMP 
convention) between the subunits participating in each pairwise 
docking. The latter ﬁ les are used by the SA-MC optimization. All 
described ﬁ les can also be found in the  outputs directory.  
  2.  SA - MC optimization . The parameters controlling the optimi-
zation are in the  MonteCarloParams class in  conﬁ g_
step_2.py : the proﬁ le of temperatures, the number of 
iterations, number of cycles, and the maximum change in 
position and orientation tolerated for the random moves. 
The parameter  non_relative_move_prob indicates the 
probability for a component of undergoing a random move 
instead of a docking-derived relative move. To ignore all 
docking solutions, or if they are not available, use a value of 
1. Other important variables are  dock_transforms , which 
speciﬁ es the ﬁ les of relative orientations found previously, 
and  anchor , which indicates the components that will not 
move during the SA-MC optimization. The command for 
producing one model is as follows: 
  emageﬁ t.py --exp conﬁ g_step_2.py --o mc_
solution1.db --log ﬁ le.log --monte_carlo −1  
 The output is the ﬁ le  mc_solution1.db , an SQLite 
database with the solution. To generate multiple candidate 
solutions, simply run the script multiple times, changing 
the name of the output ﬁ le from  mc_solution1.db each 
time ( see   Note 9 ). 
Integrative Modeling Platform

290
  3.   Model gathering . Here we gather all the models produced with 
SA-MC: 
  emageﬁ t.py --o monte_carlo_solutions.db 
--gather {all database ﬁ les}  
 Here  {all database ﬁ les} are the databases to 
merge and  monte_carlo_solutions.db is the output 
database with all the merged results. For this example, we have 
already included in the zipﬁ le a ﬁ le  monte_carlo_solu-
tions.db containing 500 models, so you can skip this step if 
desired. 
  4.   DOMINO sampling .  DominoSamplingPositions and 
 DominoParams in  conﬁ g_step_3.py include the relevant 
parameters:  read is the ﬁ le with the SA-MC solutions obtained 
before,  max_number is the maximum number of solutions to 
combine, and  orderby is the name of the restraint used to 
sort the SA-MC solutions. The command is as follows: 
  emageﬁ t.py 
--exp 
conﬁ g_step_3.py 
--o 
 domino_solutions.db --log ﬁ le.log  
 This command will produce a database  domino_ 
solutions.db with all the results. We include the ﬁ le in the 
 outputs directory. 
 The best solutions can be written out in the PDB format. 
To write the ten best models according to the value of the 
em2d restraint, run: 
  emageﬁ t.py 
--exp 
conﬁ g_step_3.py 
--o 
 domino_solutions.db --w 10 –orderby em2d 
--log ﬁ le.log  
 The best solution and its ﬁ t into the density map of the 
 complex are shown in Fig.  5 . Finally, the solutions stored in the 
database can be clustered with the  emageﬁ t_cluster.py 
script. To cluster the ﬁ rst 100 solutions according to the value of 
the em2d restraint and save the results to  clusters.db , use:
  emageﬁ t_cluster.py 
--exp 
conﬁ g_step_3.py 
--db domino_solutions.db --o clusters.db --n 
100 --orderby em2d --log clusters.log --rmsd 10  
 And to write the elements of the ﬁ rst cluster as PDB ﬁ les: 
  emageﬁ t.py --exp conﬁ g_step_3.py --o dom-
ino_solutions.db --wcl clusters.db 1  
 In summary, we have shown with this example how to 
combine multiple pairwise dockings, EM class averages and 
distance restraints for assembling the subunits of a macromo-
lecular complex; integrating new restraints into the optimiza-
tion protocol is also possible.  
Benjamin Webb et al.

291
4  Summary 
 The structures of protein assemblies can typically not be fully char-
acterized with any individual computational or experimental 
method. Integrative modeling aims to solve this problem by com-
bining information from multiple methods to generate structural 
models. Integrative modeling problems can be tackled by satisfac-
tion of spatial restraints, where information for individual restraints 
can come from different methods. In this approach, a suitable rep-
resentation for the system is chosen, the information is converted 
into a set of spatial restraints, the restraints are simultaneously satis-
ﬁ ed as well as possible by optimizing a function that is the sum of 
all restraints, and the resulting models are analyzed. Further exper-
iments as well as the precision and likely accuracy of both the 
model and the data can be informed. IMP is an open source and 
ﬂ exible software package that provides all of the components 
needed to implement an integrative modeling protocol from 
scratch. It also contains higher-level applications and web services 
that can tackle speciﬁ c use cases more conveniently.  
 Fig. 5  Results from the application of EMageFit to the macromolecular complex with PDB id 3SFD (porcine 
mitochondrial respiratory complex II).  Left : The four subunits of the complex, each labeled with their chain 
identiﬁ er.  Center : Model for the complex ﬁ tted into the simulated density map of the native conﬁ guration.  Right : 
Native conﬁ guration of the complex as stored in the PDB ﬁ le 
 
Integrative Modeling Platform

292
5  Notes 
  1.  X-ray crystal structures are often missing coordinates for some 
of the residues. Since a SAXS proﬁ le is typically experimentally 
determined for the entire structure, including these missing 
residues, the X-ray structure will not perfectly ﬁ t the SAXS 
proﬁ le. To improve the SAXS ﬁ t, we added missing loops, 
N-termini, C-termini, and His tags for both structures using 
MODELLER.  
  2.   All of the IMP applications demonstrated here are command 
line tools and must be run by typing at a command line. The 
user is expected to unzip the downloaded zipﬁ le before run-
ning any of the examples, and then to run the command in the 
directory corresponding to the example (“ idock ” in this 
case). Each of the command lines shown in this text should be 
entered as a single line, even though some have been wrapped 
onto multiple lines.  
  3.   For detailed help on each step of the MultiFit protocol, run 
“ multiﬁ t.py help ” from the command line.  
  4.  The default number of Gaussians is the number of compo-
nents. However, if the sizes of the subunits differ, it is recom-
mended to use the  -s option to set the number of residues 
encapsulated in each Gaussian. For example, if you choose 50 
residues per Gaussian, a 170-residue protein should use 3 
Gaussians and a 260-residue protein should use 5 Gaussians.  
  5.  A detailed description of the format of the proteomics ﬁ le can 
be found on the MultiFit website.  
  6.  The restraints will be used to create DOMINO’s junction 
tree. DOMINO works most efﬁ ciently if the size of the inter-
mediate subsets is small. Use the “ multiﬁ t.py merge_
tree ” command to view the tree deﬁ ned by the restraints. To 
reduce the size of the subsets, the user can determine which 
restraints are used to deﬁ ne the merge tree by setting the ﬁ rst 
value in the xlink deﬁ nition. Setting the value to 0 instead of 
the default 1 speciﬁ es that the restraint is evaluated only at the 
root of the tree and not in an intermediate merging step.  
  7.  An extended version of this manual is available on the IMP 
website.  
  8.   We have used different conﬁ guration ﬁ les for each step in this 
example for clarity, but it is possible to use a single one for all 
steps with all the options.  
  9.   Different models are generated each time the script is run, 
because Monte Carlo relies on random moves, the speciﬁ c 
sequence of which is uniquely determined by a random num-
ber seed, and the “ -1 ” argument to the “ --monte-carlo ” 
Benjamin Webb et al.

293
option instructs the script to use the current time as the seed. 
This can be a problem if multiple copies of the script are 
started at exactly the same time (e.g., on a cluster or a multi-
core computer) as they will generate the same model. To avoid 
this scenario or to generate models that can be exactly repro-
duced, replace −1 with a speciﬁ c seed for each model (e.g., 1 
for the ﬁ rst model, 2 for the second, and so on).  
 Acknowledgments 
 We are grateful to all members of our research group, especially to 
Frank Alber, Friedrich Förster, and Bret Peterson who contributed 
to early versions of IMP, and Marc Marti-Renom, Davide Baù, 
Benjamin Schwarz, and Yannick Spill who currently contribute to 
IMP. We also acknowledge support from National Institutes of 
Health (R01 GM54762, U54 RR022220, PN2 EY016525, and 
R01 GM083960) as well as computing hardware support from Ron 
Conway, Mike Homer, Hewlett-Packard, NetApp, IBM, and Intel.  
 References 
  1.  Schmeing TM, Ramakrishnan V (2009) What 
recent ribosome structures have revealed about 
the 
mechanism 
of 
translation. 
Nature 
461:1234–1242 
  2.  Sali A, Glaeser R, Earnest T et al (2003) From 
words to literature in structural proteomics. 
Nature 422:216–225  
  3.  Mitra K, Frank J (2006) Ribosome dynamics: 
insights from atomic structure modeling into 
cryo-electron microscopy maps. Annu Rev 
Biophys Biomol Struct 35:299–317  
  4.  Robinson C, Sali A, Baumeister W (2007) The 
molecular sociology of the cell. Nature 
450:973–982 
  5.  Blundell T, Johnson L (1976) Protein crystal-
lography. Academic, New York  
  6.  Stahlberg H, Walz T (2008) Molecular elec-
tron microscopy: state of the art and current 
challenges. ACS Chem Biol 3:268–281  
  7.  Chiu W, Baker ML, Jiang W et al (2005) 
Electron 
cryomicroscopy 
of 
biological 
machines 
at 
subnanometer 
resolution. 
Structure 13:363–372  
  8.  Lucic V, Leis A, Baumeister W (2008) Cryo- 
electron tomography of cells: connecting struc-
ture and function. Histochem Cell Biol 
130:185–196 
  9.  Parrish JR, Gulyas KD, Finley RL Jr (2006) 
Yeast two-hybrid contributions to interactome 
mapping. Curr Opin Biotechnol 17:387–393  
  10.  Gingras AC, Gstaiger M, Raught B et al (2007) 
Analysis of protein complexes using mass spec-
trometry. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:645–654  
  11.  Russel D, Lasker K, Webb B et al (2012) 
Putting the pieces together: integrative struc-
ture determination of macromolecular assem-
blies. PLoS Biol 10:e1001244  
  12.  Alber F, Kim M, Sali A (2005) Structural char-
acterization of assemblies from overall shape 
and 
subcomplex 
compositions. 
Structure 
13:435–445  
  13.  Alber F, Dokudovskaya S, Veenhoff L et al 
(2007) Determining the architectures of mac-
romolecular assemblies. Nature 450:683–694  
  14.  Alber F, Dokudovskaya S, Veenhoff L et al 
(2007) The molecular architecture of the 
nuclear pore complex. Nature 450:695–701  
  15.   Lasker K, Phillips JL, Russel D et al (2010) 
Integrative structure modeling of macromo-
lecular assemblies from proteomics data. Mol 
Cell Proteomics 9:1689–1702  
  16.  Russel D, Lasker K, Phillips J et al (2009) The 
structural dynamics of macromolecular pro-
cesses. Curr Opin Cell Biol 21:97–108  
  17.  Alber F, Forster F, Korkin D et al (2008) 
Integrating diverse data for structure determi-
nation of macromolecular assemblies. Annu 
Rev Biochem 77:443–477  
  18.  Alber F, Chait BT, Rout MP et al (2008) 
Integrative structure determination of protein 
Integrative Modeling Platform

294
assemblies by satisfaction of spatial restraints. 
In: Panchenko A, Przytycka T (eds) Protein–
protein interactions and networks: identiﬁ ca-
tion, characterization and prediction. Springer, 
London, UK, pp 99–114  
  19.  Bonvin AM, Boelens R, Kaptein R (2005) 
NMR analysis of protein interactions. Curr 
Opin Chem Biol 9:501–508  
  20.  Fiaux J, Bertelsen EB, Horwich AL et al (2002) 
NMR analysis of a 900K GroEL GroES com-
plex. Nature 418:207–211  
  21.  Neudecker P, Lundstrom P, Kay LE (2009) 
Relaxation dispersion NMR spectroscopy as a 
tool for detailed studies of protein folding. 
Biophys J 96:2045–2054  
  22.   Takamoto K, Chance MR (2006) Radiolytic pro-
tein footprinting with mass spectrometry to probe 
the structure of macromolecular complexes. Annu 
Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 35:251–276  
  23.  Guan JQ, Chance MR (2005) Structural pro-
teomics of macromolecular assemblies using 
oxidative footprinting and mass spectrometry. 
Trends Biochem Sci 30:583–592  
  24.  Taverner T, Hernandez H, Sharon M et al 
(2008) Subunit architecture of intact protein 
complexes from mass spectrometry and homol-
ogy modeling. Acc Chem Res 41:617–627  
  25.  Chen ZA, Jawhari A, Fischer L et al (2010) 
Architecture of the RNA polymerase II-TFIIF 
complex revealed by cross-linking and mass 
spectrometry. EMBO J 29:717–726  
  26.  Sinz A (2006) Chemical cross-linking and mass 
spectrometry to map three-dimensional pro-
tein structures and protein-protein interac-
tions. Mass Spectrom Rev 25:663–682  
  27.  Trester-Zedlitz M, Kamada K, Burley SK et al 
(2003) A modular cross-linking approach for 
exploring protein interactions. J Am Chem Soc 
125:2416–2425 
  28.  Joo C, Balci H, Ishitsuka Y et al (2008) 
Advances in single-molecule ﬂ uorescence 
methods for molecular biology. Annu Rev 
Biochem 77:51–76  
  29.  Mertens HD, Svergun DI (2010) Structural 
characterization of proteins and complexes 
using small-angle X-ray solution scattering. 
J Struct Biol 172:128–141  
  30.  Hura GL, Menon AL, Hammel M et al (2009) 
Robust, high-throughput solution structural 
analyses by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). 
Nat Methods 6:606–612  
  31.  Schneidman-Duhovny D, Kim SJ, Sali A 
(2012) Integrative structural modeling with 
small angle X-ray scattering proﬁ les. BMC 
Struct Biol 12:17  
  32.  Berggard T, Linse S, James P (2007) Methods 
for the detection and analysis of protein–protein 
interactions. Proteomics 7:2833–2842  
  33.  Sali A, Blundell TL (1993) Comparative pro-
tein modelling by satisfaction of spatial 
restraints. J Mol Biol 234:779–815  
  34.  Sali A, Blundell T (1994) Comparative protein 
modeling by statisfaction of spatial restraints. 
In: Bohr H, Brunak S (eds) Protein structure 
by distance analysis. Symposium on distance 
based approaches to protein structure determi-
nation. CTR Biol Sequence Anal. Tech Univ 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, pp 64–86  
  35.  Vajda S, Kozakov D (2009) Convergence and 
combination of methods in protein–protein 
docking. Curr Opin Struct Biol 19:164–170  
  36.  Shen MY, Sali A (2006) Statistical potential for 
assessment and prediction of protein struc-
tures. Protein Sci 15:2507–2524  
  37.  Melo F, Sanchez R, Sali A (2002) Statistical 
potentials for fold assessment. Protein Sci 
11:430–448  
  38.  Brooks BR, Brooks CL 3rd, Mackerell AD Jr 
et al (2009) CHARMM: the biomolecular sim-
ulation 
program. 
J 
Comput 
Chem 
30:1545–1614  
  39.  Case DA, Cheatham TE 3rd, Darden T et al 
(2005) The Amber biomolecular simulation 
programs. J Comput Chem 26:1668–1688  
  40.  Christen M, Hunenberger PH, Bakowies D 
et al (2005) The GROMOS software for bio-
molecular simulation: GROMOS05. J Comput 
Chem 26:1719–1751  
  41.  Forster F, Lasker K, Beck F et al (2009) An 
Atomic Model AAA-ATPase/20S core particle 
sub-complex of the 26S proteasome. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun 388:228–233  
  42.  Nickell S, Beck F, Scheres SHW et al (2009) 
Insights into the molecular architecture of the 
26S proteasome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
29:11943–11947  
  43.  Lasker K, Forster F, Bohn S et al (2012) 
Molecular architecture of the 26S proteasome 
holocomplex determined by an integrative 
approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109: 
1380–1387  
  44.  Lasker K, Sali A, Wolfson HJ (2010) 
Determining macromolecular assembly struc-
tures by molecular docking and ﬁ tting into 
an electron density map. Proteins 78:
3205–3211  
  45.  Lasker K, Topf M, Sali A et al (2009) Inferential 
optimization for simultaneous ﬁ tting of multi-
ple components into a cryoEM map of their 
assembly. J Mol Biol 388:180–194  
  46.  Webb B, Lasker K, Schneidman-Duhovny D 
et al (2011) Modeling of proteins and their 
assemblies with the integrative modeling plat-
form. Methods Mol Biol 781:377–397  
  47.  Lensink MF, Wodak SJ (2010) Docking and 
scoring protein interactions: CAPRI 2009. 
Proteins 78:3073–3084  
  48.  Ritchie DW (2008) Recent progress and future 
directions in protein–protein docking. Curr 
Protein Pept Sci 9:1–15  
  49.  Schneidman-Duhovny D, Rossi A, Avila-Sakar 
A et al (2012) A method for integrative struc-
Benjamin Webb et al.

295
ture determination of protein–protein com-
plexes. Bioinformatics 28:3282–3289  
  50.  Reese ML, Dotsch V (2003) Fast mapping of 
protein–protein interfaces by NMR spectros-
copy. J Am Chem Soc 125:14250–14251  
  51.  Rappsilber J (2011) The beginning of a beauti-
ful friendship: cross-linking/mass spectrome-
try and modelling of proteins and multi-protein 
complexes. J Struct Biol 173:530–540  
  52.  Berman HM, Battistuz T, Bhat TN et al (2002) 
The Protein Data Bank. Acta Crystallogr D 
58:899–907 
  53.  Lawson CL, Baker ML, Best C et al (2011) 
EMDataBank.org: 
uniﬁ ed 
data 
resource 
for 
CryoEM. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
39:
D456–D464  
  54.  Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC et al 
(2004) UCSF Chimera – a visualization system 
for exploratory research and analysis. J Comput 
Chem 25:1605–1612  
  55.  Velazquez-Muriel JA, Lasker K, Russel D et al 
(2012) Assembly of macromolecular com-
plexes by satisfaction of spatial restraints from 
electron microscopy images. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 109:18821–18826  
  56.  Ritchie DW, Venkatraman V (2010) Ultra-fast 
FFT protein docking on graphics processors. 
Bioinformatics 26:2398–2405  
Integrative Modeling Platform

297
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_21, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 21  
 The Quality and Validation of Structures from Structural 
Genomics 
 Marcin  J.  Domagalski ,  Heping  Zheng ,  Matthew  D.  Zimmerman , 
 Zbigniew  Dauter ,  Alexander  Wlodawer , and  Wladek  Minor 
 Abstract 
 Quality control of three-dimensional structures of macromolecules is a critical step to ensure the integrity 
of structural biology data, especially those produced by structural genomics centers. Whereas the Protein 
Data Bank (PDB) has proven to be a remarkable success overall, the inconsistent quality of structures 
reveals a lack of universal standards for structure/deposit validation. Here, we review the state-of-the-art 
methods used in macromolecular structure validation, focusing on validation of structures determined by 
X-ray crystallography. We describe some general protocols used in the rebuilding and re-reﬁ nement of 
problematic structural models. We also brieﬂ y discuss some frontier areas of structure validation, including 
reﬁ nement of protein–ligand complexes, automation of structure redetermination, and the use of NMR 
structures and computational models to solve X-ray crystal structures by molecular replacement.  
 Key words   Structure quality  ,   Structure validation  ,  Drug discovery  ,  Data mining  ,  Structural genomics  
1  Introduction 
 Structural genomics (SG) programs have greatly expanded our 
knowledge of the protein structure universe by determining almost 
12,000 three-dimensional structures, which constitute approxi-
mately 14 % of the protein models that have been deposited to the 
Protein Data Bank (PDB) [ 1 ]. The NIGMS Protein Structure 
Initiative and NIAID Structural Genomics Centers for Infectious 
Diseases have alone supported determination of over 7,000 of 
these structures. However, a vast majority of them were not 
described in peer-reviewed articles and, taking into account the 
rate of new structures determined by SG, may never be published. 
Therefore, the scientiﬁ c community will be able to access and eval-
uate them only through the data deposited in the PDB. For that 
reason the criteria that scientiﬁ c community applies to model qual-
ity of SG structures should be stricter than for those coming from 

298
traditional structural biology laboratories. In addition, the overall 
quality of the deposits, including the completeness and accuracy of 
the header information, has to be as high as possible, since the 
remarks in the PDB ﬁ les provide the only source of information 
describing the experimental methods that led to structure determi-
nation. Indeed, the average quality of 3D models coming from SG 
projects seems to be higher [ 2 ] than that of models coming from 
traditional structural biology laboratories. There are two reasons: 
(a) SG projects use very advanced technology and software 
tools, sometimes developed or enhanced by members of SG con-
sortia; and (b) structural biologists at SG centers may be more 
 experienced in structure determination, model reﬁ nement, and 
validation process than scientists working in traditional laborato-
ries. Analysis of the authorship of PDB deposits shows that 54 % of 
all ﬁ rst authors served in this capacity for two or fewer deposits. So 
(perhaps) unlike peer-reviewed publication, PDB deposition seems 
to be an infrequent event in many biological laboratories. In this 
text, we discuss the impact of quality of structural models on bio-
medical research; in particular we address issues that are related to 
data mining and drug discovery research.  
2  Protein Data Bank as a Data Mining Repository 
 The importance and role of the PDB for biomedical research can-
not be overestimated. PDB is a unique repository containing 
atomic structural models of biological macromolecules (protein, 
DNA, and RNA) obtained by X-ray crystallography, NMR spec-
troscopy, electron microscopy, and other techniques. As 88 % of all 
PDB structures were determined by X-ray crystallography, our dis-
cussion of structural quality will focus mainly on this subset of the 
PDB. The PDB deposit for an X-ray diffraction structure usually 
contains three parts: (a) a header with information about diffrac-
tion experiment, structure determination, and reﬁ nement proto-
col; (b) coordinates of the atoms that make up the model of the 
macromolecules, water sites, and other small molecules in the 
structure; and (c) a structure factor ﬁ le that contains diffraction 
data reduced from X-ray diffraction detector images. 
 In an ideal world, the ﬁ rst part (the header) would be equiva-
lent to the “Materials and Methods” section in a typical peer- 
reviewed publication. However, the information in the headers of 
many PDB ﬁ les is often contradictory, erroneous, and/or incom-
plete. The title of a PDB deposit is particularly important, espe-
cially if the deposit does not have a published citation, as it may be 
the only way to clearly identify whether the deposit is relevant to a 
given area of interest. Many structures have headers of the PDB 
ﬁ les containing multiple values of “NULL,” indicating that corre-
sponding experimental data parameters are missing. The large 
2.1  Data Content 
of the PDB
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

299
number of “NULL” data parameters should be alarming as it pos-
sibly indicates negligence and/or a lack of knowledge of how the 
crystallography experiment was performed. The number of 
“NULL” values for structural genomics centers is lower than aver-
age, not only because the depositors are more experienced, but 
because data needed for completing the header are usually readily 
available in, and possibly automatically extracted from, an existing 
database (Fig.  1 ).
 The second part (coordinates of atoms in the macromolecular 
model) is usually the most reliable, as these coordinates are gener-
ated by reﬁ nement programs. However, there is no single standard 
for coordinate quality. For example, there are different methods 
for dealing with portions of crystallographically derived models 
corresponding to regions of weak or absent electron density. In 
some cases, all atoms of an amino acid residue are placed in prob-
able locations regardless of density (with the occupancy parameters 
of atoms outside the map often reduced or set to 0). In others, 
atoms may be omitted from the model—perhaps only amino acid 
main chains are modeled, or only atoms unambiguously  identiﬁ able 
within the map are placed. Both approaches are justiﬁ ed for model-
ing uncertainty in experimental data, but can lead to very different 
results when thus derived coordinates are used as input to other 
 Fig. 1    Average number of missing parameters in the PDB ﬁ le headers for PSI high-throughput (PSI-HT) centers, 
structural genomics worldwide (excluding the PSI-HT centers), and traditional structural biology laboratories. 
A small number of “NULL” values is always present due to generation of PDB ﬁ le headers—not all parameters 
are relevant to all kinds of experiments  
 
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

300
programs that calculate, for example, a charge on the surface of the 
protein. However, it should be noted that many, but not all, pro-
grams that read PDB ﬁ les preprocess coordinates to address some 
of these ambiguities.  
 Although the protein crystallography community (including struc-
tural genomics centers) has had many discussions about model 
quality, it has not agreed on a single, universal standard that mod-
els should meet before deposition. There are many quantitative 
measures that are clearly correlated with model quality, including 
resolution,  R and  R free factors, distribution of deviations from ideal 
geometry, Ramachandran distribution, Molprobity clashscore, 
etc., but no single parameter is sufﬁ cient to conclusively determine 
whether a given structure is of high or low quality. “Quality” can 
also depend on context—the quality of a structural model useful 
for bioinformatics may be very different from its counterpart for in 
silico binding studies, for example. 
 As different depositors have different standards for deposition, 
mining of PDB data is very challenging. Fortunately, the PDB is 
unique among biomedical repositories as it contains experimental 
data as well. Since February 1, 2008 the PDB has required that 
each deposit based on crystallographic data must include a list of 
the structure factors used to build the model. When a structure is 
suspicious, in most cases a PDB user may download the corre-
sponding structure factor ﬁ le and re-reﬁ ne the structure until it 
meets his or her own standards. 
 It is inevitable that there are differences in model quality stan-
dards since, to some degree the structures are based on subjective 
interpretation of experimental data. However, the X-ray diffraction 
models and experimental structure factor data in the PDB are gen-
erally of high quality, especially when compared to data in other 
repositories or databases used in biomedical research. In fact, the 
quality of the models and the ability of PDB users to examine and 
even re-reﬁ ne a 3D model makes protein crystallography a “crown 
jewel” of experimental biomedical research. 
 Whereas there is some inconsistency in model quality due to a 
lack of universal deposition standards, much of this inconsistency is 
also due to the history of the ﬁ eld. For over 40 years more than 
17,000 scientists have deposited models derived from experimental 
X-ray crystallography data of many different resolution limits, 
determined by various methods, and reﬁ ned by many different, 
constantly evolving software packages. The distribution of high- 
resolution limits for all diffraction-based structures deposited in the 
PDB is very broad, as shown in Fig.  2 . Even if the same software 
packages are used, quality of structures strongly depends on the 
design of diffraction experiments, data reduction, structure deter-
mination, reﬁ nement, and validation, particularly if multiple, weakly 
diffracting crystals are used. While the handling of diffraction 
2.2  Inconsistent 
Quality of Models
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

301
experiments clearly depends on the experience and skills of the crys-
tallographers performing them, examination of structures depos-
ited by frequent depositors (i.e., those that are the ﬁ rst authors of 
more than 100 structures) shows that even different deposits pre-
pared by the same person can vary signiﬁ cantly in quality measures 
(Fig.  3 ). Thus one has to acknowledge that the structure quality has 
to be also affected by factors other than experience, such as the 
quality of the experimental data. For example, models derived from 
poor resolution data—an intrinsic property of a crystal over which 
the crystallographer has little or no control—necessarily contain less 
information than a model from high- resolution data.
 All nontrivial data mining requires ﬁ ltering and processing of the 
data in order to obtain reliable results. Much of this “quality con-
trol” work can be done in advance if there is curation, but most 
biomedical databases are either partially curated or not curated at 
all. PDB depositions are partially curated, as the authors receive 
extensive reports about problems in their depositions. The deposi-
tion reports produced by the PDB have steadily improved over the 
years, but there are still some areas for further improvement. For 
example, the current deposition tool (ADIT) does not yet validate 
the geometry of small molecules present in macromolecular crystal 
structures. Moreover, PDB depositors may ignore warnings in the 
report and ask that the model be deposited “as is.” The most com-
mon protocol for ﬁ ltering structures is deﬁ ning a resolution limit 
cutoff for exclusion of lower resolution models from further analy-
sis. In principle, this should be an ideal method, at least for the 
proteinaceous part of a macromolecular model. Unfortunately the 
2.3  Selection of the 
Most Appropriate 
Deposits in PDB 
for Data Mining
 Fig. 2   Normalized distribution of high-resolution limits for X-ray structures solved by PSI high-throughput (PSI-HT) 
centers, structural genomics worldwide excluding PSI-HT, and traditional structural biology laboratories  
 
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

302
high-resolution limit reported in a PDB deposit is not always 
equivalent to the nominal resolution limit of the diffraction data 
obtained from structure factors. In some cases, it appears that 
depositors may have chosen a resolution limit higher than is justi-
ﬁ ed by the data. A signiﬁ cant number of PDB deposits include 
reﬂ ections in the highest resolution shell weaker, on the average, 
than the commonly accepted threshold (mean  I / σ ( I ) ≥ 2.0;  see 
Fig.  4 ) [ 3 ]. (It should be noted that the traditional rule of “mean 
I over sigma ratio greater than 2.0” may not be the ideal way to 
choose a threshold; Karplus and Diederichs [ 4 ] have proposed an 
alternative statistic that advocates extension of the nominal resolu-
tion of a diffraction dataset.) However, analysis of the structure 
factor data in the PDB shows that the mean  I / σ ( I ) in the highest 
resolution shell of many diffraction datasets is as high as 10, sug-
gesting that usable high-resolution reﬂ ections were never  collected, 
 Fig. 3  Selected structure quality metrics of all PDB deposits with the same ﬁ rst author (the author was selected 
randomly from all such authors with >200 deposits). ( a ) Distribution of  R ( red  ) and  R  free ( blue ) as a function of 
resolution, along with trendlines as determined by linear regression. ( b ) Distribution of Molprobity clashscore 
percentile (ranking of “raw” clashscore relative to other structures in the PDB of similar resolution) 
 
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

303
 Fig. 4  Distributions of mean  I / σ ( I ) for the highest resolution shell vs. mean  I / σ ( I ) for all reﬂ ections, as deter-
mined for different sets of structures in the PDB. ( a ) Distribution for all structures determined by X-ray crystal-
lography. ( b ) Distribution for all X-ray structures solved since April 2011. ( c ) Distribution for all X-ray structures 
solved since April 2011 by the four high-throughput PSI centers. On all distributions, the conventional threshold 
of 2.0 of mean  I / σ ( I ) for the highest resolution is marked by a  red line . There are a signiﬁ cant number of struc-
tures where the two values are identical, as well as a number where the mean  I / σ ( I ) for the highest resolution 
shell is greater than the mean for all reﬂ ections, a physically improbable outcome 
 
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

304
despite the tremendous investment of synchrotron beamlines in 
larger and faster detectors.
 Moreover, dependent on the type of data mining analysis 
needed, validation may focus on either the macromolecular or 
small molecule portions of structures. In addition to evaluating 
the agreement between a structure model and the experimental 
data ( R ,  R free ) and the properties of crystal packing (symmetry 
operations, solvent content), it is a common practice that struc-
ture determination, reﬁ nement, and validation in macromolecu-
lar crystallography are heavily (and necessarily) dependent on 
prior chemical knowledge of the subject molecule to deﬁ ne the 
geometry of the corresponding structural features in crystal 
structures [ 5 ]. There has been enormous progress in the develop-
ment of statistics and tools used to verify the models of macro-
molecules in crystal structures, which measure agreement with 
both ideal geometry and experimental electron density. However, 
validation of small molecule models in macromolecular structures 
has lagged behind. Recently Rupp et al. demonstrated that a sig-
niﬁ cant number of PDB deposits have ligands with very weak or 
even no correlation between the small molecule models and the 
electron density maps [ 6 ].  
3  Model Quality 
 The validation tools developed over the years by many software 
authors [ 7 – 12 ], in addition to the in-house tool developed by the 
PDB [ 13 ], have greatly simpliﬁ ed the process of validation of pro-
tein models. Ideal values for bond lengths, bond angles, and dihe-
dral angles within individual amino acid residues and in peptide 
bonds have been well deﬁ ned and are incorporated into these 
 programs [ 5 ]. Common secondary structural elements in protein 
structures (helices, strands, coils) can be deﬁ ned by hydrogen bond 
patterns [ 14 ]. The overall geometrical quality of a protein main 
chain characterized by a Ramachandran plot [ 15 ] is particularly 
valuable for validation because the dihedral angles of individual 
peptides are usually not restrained during reﬁ nement. Potential ste-
ric clashes, which usually indicate problematic regions in a structure 
model, can be identiﬁ ed by Molprobity [ 12 ] and other similar pro-
grams. The agreement between diffraction data (structure factors) 
and a model are described by the  R and  R free factors. PROSESS 
provides cross-validation with similar structures in the PDB to iden-
tify potential problems [ 16 ]. Despite the availability of a large selec-
tion of tools for structure validation, there is still no universal way 
to fully automate the process of model improvement. It is up to the 
crystallographer to utilize these tools routinely to identify potential 
problems and improve model quality after structure validation on a 
case-by-case basis, and it appears that nearly all follow this path. The 
3.1  Overall Model 
Quality in the PDB
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

305
vast majority of models in the PDB are very good, despite the lack 
of precise deﬁ nition of what values of the parameters describing 
structure quality are acceptable for high-quality structures. 
 Another often overlooked issue that may affect structure qual-
ity is that the structure factors are themselves derived quantities and 
thus do not represent the “raw” diffraction data used to determine 
a structure. Structure factors are typically reduced from a set of dif-
fraction images collected in so-called rotation mode, and the way 
how the individual reﬂ ections on the images are indexed, inte-
grated, and scaled together can signiﬁ cantly affect the quality of the 
structure factor amplitudes produced. Traditionally, the large size 
of diffraction image ﬁ les has made it difﬁ cult to preserve (let alone 
distribute) raw diffraction data, but decreases in the cost per tera-
byte of hard drive storage have made storage and distribution of 
diffraction images feasible. Four SG centers, namely CSGID, 
SSGCID, MCSG, and JCSG, have made their diffraction images 
available for download from the respective servers. Diffraction 
images for over 2,200 PDB deposits, which comprise nearly 3 % of 
all X-ray structures in the PDB, are currently accessible. The public 
availability of original images provides an invaluable resource to 
determine if structure factors have been optimally reduced. The 
ability of the scientiﬁ c community to access and evaluate raw, fun-
damental data directly from diffraction experiments makes crystal-
lography arguably one of the most reproducible branches of 
biomedical science, with high transparency and reliability.  
 Small molecules are abundantly represented in the PDB, as 80 % 
of PDB structures contain one or more residues that do not 
belong to polymers of amino acids or nucleic acids, or represent 
ordered water molecules. The presence of ordered small mole-
cules in macromolecular structures usually highlights a speciﬁ c 
area of interest or  biological relevance. Although small molecules 
might be unintentionally introduced during sample preparation, 
the location of a small molecule in a macromolecular structure 
most often represents a binding site (or active site) that has some 
topological (concavity) or physiochemical properties suitable for 
binding. However, validation of small molecule models in protein 
structures is usually more difﬁ cult due to the diversity of small 
compounds and modes of interaction and conformation, i.e., the 
chemical sense of the environment. Moreover, even the use of 
high-resolution diffraction data does not necessarily guarantee 
high quality of the electron density around the small molecule, 
especially when there is always a possibility that the ligand may not 
fully occupy its binding site. For that matter, medium-to-low res-
olution of diffraction data is certainly insufﬁ cient by itself to justify 
the discovery of novel chemistry. 
 Small molecule models require speciﬁ c tools to validate due to 
their chemical diversity and the fact that ligands are not covalently 
3.2  Quality of 
Macromolecular 
Structures Complexed 
with Small Molecules
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

306
bound to macromolecule, which can easily result in ambiguity in 
binding mode [ 17 ]. Geometrical parameters derived from the very 
high-resolution structures in the Cambridge Structure Database 
(CSD) [ 18 ] can be used as restraints in small molecule reﬁ nement 
[ 19 ], but in the case of a small molecule–macromolecule complex 
the procedures implemented to validate atomic resolution small 
molecule structures (such as the ones in the CSD) no longer apply. 
There are two main reasons for this. First, the overall resolution is 
usually signiﬁ cantly lower for a protein–small molecule complex 
compared to the crystal structure of a small molecule alone. 
Second, the binding mode of a small molecule needs to be vali-
dated, in addition to its conformation. Sometimes the models of 
small molecules are incomplete due to the degradation or multiple 
conformations. For that reason, the usage of stricter geometrical 
restraints is a common technique for the reﬁ nement and validation 
of small molecule binding sites in protein–small molecule com-
plexes [ 20 ]. Therefore validation tools that can handle the small 
molecule portion of the complex are less common and often 
require substantial manual input to use. Consequently, the quality 
of small molecule models in PDB varies signiﬁ cantly. Useful tools 
for their validation include Twilight, which evaluates an agreement 
between small molecule models and electron density [ 6 ], and 
PURY, which evaluates the geometry [ 21 ]. 
4  Structure Validation 
 Tools to validate structure quality, both overall and within sub-
strate binding sites, are constantly evolving. However, the optimal 
ways of using these tools vary and are heavily dependent on the 
user’s experience. For example, there is no common standard for a 
comprehensive set of parameters and threshold values to determine 
the validity of all structures. In addition, the standard protocols 
used for validation within most SG consortia are not yet stream-
lined or well deﬁ ned. However, two SG centers, CSGID and 
SSGCID, have agreed that most of their targets should meet a 
common set of criteria. The structures determined within the 
HKL-3000 framework [ 22 ] may be checked by a standard valida-
tion procedure that compares quality parameters with the average 
values of the parameters as derived from structures deposited in the 
PDB during the last 2 years. Such a procedure was applied to and 
tested on more than 2,000 structures. The set of validation param-
eters, as implemented in HKL-3000 [ 22 ], could be easily applied 
to other software packages to standardize the validation process. 
 Structure validation is an ongoing, iterative process where 
model building and reﬁ nement are repeated until validation tools 
and visual inspection no longer reveal any problematic regions that 
can be further improved. However, no validation tools are perfect, 
4.1  Validation Tools
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

307
and none can objectively determine when a model cannot be fur-
ther improved and should be considered “good enough.” Therefore 
differences in knowledge and experience of crystallographers, or 
sometimes even just differences in opinion, may affect the decision 
whether or not a model is completed or should be reﬁ ned further. 
The involvement of a second person to examine and evaluate the 
reﬁ nement of a structural model is usually considered a more objec-
tive approach for structure validation that can partially compensate 
the limits of experience and/or reduce the potential bias that a crys-
tallographer may have during data interpretation. This approach is 
working successfully in a number of centers, including JCSG, 
NYSGRC, and the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC). 
 As evaluated by  R ,  R free , Molprobity clash score, and Twilight 
score for ligands at a given resolution of structures, the average 
quality of structures determined by SG consortia in the PDB is 
signiﬁ cantly higher than the average quality of structures deter-
mined by other structural biologists over the last 2 years (Fig.  5 ). 
This trend is more prominent in overall quality assessment param-
eters such as the Molprobity clash score but is less prominent in 
ligand score, indicating that the availability of tools for a particular 
validation problem varies. Tools for overall validation, such as 
Molprobity or WHAT IF [ 23 ], have been available for a decade, 
whereas the tools for ligand reﬁ nement like Twilight were made 
available only recently. However, in the current year several SG 
structures of proteins complexed with small molecule ligands were 
redeposited, which suggests that SG efforts are promptly taking 
advantage of the new technologies.
 As virtually all crystals of biological macromolecules are formed in 
aqueous solution, ordered water molecules bound to the surfaces 
of proteins and nucleic acids are commonly observed in X-ray crys-
tal structures. However, at the resolutions of most macromolecular 
structures, typically only water oxygen atoms are observed. The 
binding of most waters is relatively weak. For example, NMR relax-
ation data show that nearly all protein surface water molecules have 
binding time scales of less than 100 ns, and molecular dynamics 
calculations predict residence times between 10 and 500 ps [ 24 ]. 
The residence time of even the most buried waters in a small pro-
tein BPTI was <20 ms [ 25 ]. The positions of most ordered crystal-
lographic waters represent local energy minima into which waters 
fall reproducibly, appearing as peaks when averaged over all scatter-
ing events [ 26 ]. Only rarely are crystallographic waters in positions 
where they can form three or four H-bonds to other ordered atoms 
in the structure. It has also been noted that the number of crystal-
lographic waters per residue identiﬁ ed in protein structures is 
inversely proportional to resolution [ 27 ,  28 ]. 
 Although the binding of water molecules in the crystals is 
weak, their accurate modeling is still important for interpretation 
4.2  Validation of 
Water Structure
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

308
of results, because incorporation of ordered waters will improve 
the completeness of the model (and in turn, yield better estimates 
of the phases of the calculated structure factors). Crystallographically 
observed waters are not covalently bonded to the macromolecule 
in a structure, and at most resolution limits only a single peak cor-
responding to the oxygen atom is observed. Thus some spurious, 
“ghost” peaks in an electron density map can be mistakenly inter-
preted as waters, especially in medium-resolution structures. 
There are a number of tools for validating crystallographic water 
positions. For example, the interactive “Check Waters” tool in 
 Fig. 5  ( a ) Distribution of  R  factor vs. resolution for all X-ray structures deposited in the PDB since April 2011. 
Structures solved by SG centers are marked in  red and structures solved by traditional laboratories are in  blue . 
The  lines represent linear regression trend lines for the two sets of structures in the same color scheme. 
( b ) Distribution of  R free factors vs. resolution for all X-ray structures deposited in the PDB since April 2011, using 
the same color scheme as part ( a ) 
 
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

309
HKL- 3000 [ 22 ] allows for effective validation of water molecules 
(Fig.  6 ). This is accomplished by plotting the distribution of 
waters as a function of atomic displacement parameters (or 
B-factors), providing information about the expected number of 
waters given the number of amino acids and resolution, following 
the method of Carugo and Bordo [ 27 ]. With this tool, all water 
molecules with B-factors greater than a user-deﬁ ned threshold can 
be removed by one click.
5  Rebuilding and Re-reﬁ nement of Existing Models 
 As mentioned above, an independent examination of a structure by 
a second researcher may reduce personal bias in data interpreta-
tion. In practice, availability of another expert to examine a struc-
ture is always limited, leading to the presence of a signiﬁ cant 
number of suboptimally reﬁ ned structures in the PDB. For exam-
ple, many structures that were determined in the past were reﬁ ned 
and validated with tools that were quite primitive compared to the 
state-of-the-art tools in use today. Since many of these older struc-
tures describe important proteins and are frequently utilized as the 
basis for designing new experiments, it would be beneﬁ cial to 
revisit them using modern validation tools and reinterpret these 
structures more carefully. This would be especially instructive for 
structures that are used, for example, as test sets for in silico docking 
5.1  The Beneﬁ ts 
of Re-reﬁ nement
 Fig. 6  A screen shot of the “Check waters” tool in HKL-3000 
 
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

310
experiments. Although, on average, SG-determined structures 
have relatively high structural quality, a routine re-reﬁ nement pro-
cess is even more important because the consumer of a structure is 
likely to be less knowledgeable about X-ray crystallography and 
may take the structure “as is” in further biomedical research, e.g., 
as a target for structure-based drug design. Therefore deposition 
of SG structures of suboptimal quality will have a detrimental effect 
on subsequent research.  
 One effort to re-reﬁ ne old crystal structures with new technology on 
a large scale is the PDB-REDO project [ 29 ]. Each structure in the 
PDB for which structure factor data are available is automatically re-
reﬁ ned by a suite of tools using modern structure reﬁ nement and 
validation procedures, and, even more importantly, all of the differ-
ent crystal structures processed by the system are handled uniformly, 
following a standardized reﬁ nement protocol. Even though the out-
come of the reﬁ nement is still somewhat affected by the initial 
model, to a certain extent the PDB-REDO process removes the bias 
due to differences in reﬁ nement techniques used by different crystal-
lographers. As a result, the quality statistics of the re-reﬁ ned struc-
tures are more comparable. Advances in reﬁ nement techniques 
resulted in signiﬁ cant improvement of the reﬁ nement statistics, and 
in most cases, the values of  R and  R free were improved by 2–5 %. 
However, PDB-REDO does not rebuild the original model (i.e., 
remove or add atoms other than in water molecules), which may be 
warranted if the electron density map is signiﬁ cantly improved. 
Whereas automated model building algorithms are becoming avail-
able, it has proven very difﬁ cult to fully automate this process with 
consistently reliable results [ 2 ]. Therefore, improvement in reﬁ ne-
ment protocols alone is not a panacea for maximizing the quality of 
crystal structures. As the majority of serious problems in structures 
that most affect structure quality require rebuilding of the model, 
large-scale automated re-reﬁ nement projects such as PDB-REDO 
are still limited. In addition, the PDB does not provide links to the 
PDB-REDO results. Researchers not familiar with structural biol-
ogy are far more likely to use data from the PDB, so if PDB-REDO 
produces a model of higher quality from the same data, the biomedi-
cal community may never be aware of it. 
 In fact, inconsistencies between databases are some of the most 
signiﬁ cant impediments to effective biomedical data mining and 
research in general.  
 As mentioned earlier, the potential presence of a small molecule 
constitutes a unique feature of the structure of an adjacent macro-
molecule. Given electron density of reasonable quality and the 
sequences of the polypeptides or nucleic acids, it is often relatively 
easy to build or rebuild the macromolecular portions of a struc-
ture, and in many cases this process can be automated (albeit with 
5.2  Automatic 
Re-reﬁ nement: 
PDB-REDO
5.3  Semiautomatic 
Ligand Reassignment
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

311
human supervision) [ 30 ,  31 ]. However, correct identiﬁ cation and 
modeling of ligands is still difﬁ cult to automate, as the ligand 
bound is often unknown a priori and must be identiﬁ ed from an 
enormous and diverse set of endogenous substances. If the identity 
of the ligand is known (or limited to a small set), some tools such 
as RESOLVE [ 32 ], ARP/wARP [ 33 ], and the “Build ligand” tool 
in HKL-3000 [ 22 ] can search that set and automatically place a 
ligand in the map and reﬁ ne it. Careful human examination of the 
search result is still crucial to verify correct placement. However, a 
search of a much larger chemical library is necessarily very compu-
tationally intensive and the approach described above does not 
scale. In contrast other programs such as PHENIX (phenix.ligand_
identiﬁ cation) [ 34 ] or the MCSG-developed LigSearch [ 35 ], 
implement efﬁ cient protocols to search for potential physiological 
or drug-like small molecules in a much larger compound library. 
The potential ligands identiﬁ ed using a protein structure template 
may be very informative and may lead to the discovery of physio-
logical ligands when unexplained electron density cannot be inter-
preted as compounds introduced during the processes of protein 
production or crystallization.  
 Sometimes the structure factors that are deposited in the PDB are 
not sufﬁ cient to redetermine the structure. This is especially true 
when a structure was interpreted in the incorrect space group and 
the results affect the biomedical context of the structure. In such a 
case, the access to the original diffraction images is invaluable. 
Several years ago it was infeasible to store and distribute diffraction 
data, as building the storage and bandwidth infrastructure required 
to make diffraction data readily available to the research  community 
was prohibitively expensive at best and impossible at worst. 
However, as storage media continue to rise in capacity and fall in 
price (as of this writing a 3 TB hard drive costs $130) and high 
bandwidth network connections are ubiquitous; the technical and 
ﬁ nancial barriers become less and less relevant. Application of efﬁ -
cient compression algorithms to diffraction images has further 
pushed the limits. However, the storage of thousands of datasets or 
more makes organization of data critical. As led by the four SG 
centers that make diffraction images available to the public ( see 
Subheading  3.1 above), we may hope that, in the future, deposi-
tion of images in a public repository will become a requirement for 
publicly funded X-ray crystallography research. As shown recently, 
the possibility of reprocessing diffraction data that may not have 
been processed optimally (for example, by extending resolution 
limits and improving data quality) will lead to vastly improved 
models and their better interpretation [ 36 ]. Similar reprocessing 
will be beneﬁ cial in many ways, especially for relatively poorly 
determined structures.  
5.4  Structure 
Redetermination: 
Diffraction Images
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

312
6  NMR Structures 
 The use of NMR-derived models for solving crystal structures has 
been postulated and shown in practice over 20 years ago [ 37 ], but 
to date the success rate of such approaches has been somewhat 
limited. Many NMR models are simply not accurate enough to 
provide sufﬁ cient phasing power for the determination of crystal 
structures by molecular replacement. This is partly due to the 
nature of NMR data, which describe quite accurately local struc-
tures, but may not contain enough information to unambiguously 
assign long-range interactions. However, application of computa-
tional algorithms such as Rosetta has led to vast improvement in 
the success of molecular replacement calculations utilizing NMR 
models [ 38 ]. The Rosetta procedure is now part of standard crys-
tallographic software [ 39 ]. As an example, it has been shown that 
its use, together with the involvement of computer games players 
[ 40 ], made it possible to utilize an NMR model for solving a struc-
ture by molecular replacement after many years of failure [ 41 ,  42 ].  
7  Conclusions and Challenges 
 The current level of understanding of the biochemical mechanisms 
affecting living organisms would not be possible without the revo-
lutionary progress of structural biology. The structures deposited 
in the PDB are only the starting point for many further analyses 
done by hundreds of thousands of scientists in academia and in 
industry. Any inaccuracy in a structure, even a small one, has 
 tremendous potential to generate backlash, as the error may prolif-
erate through all analyses that use data from that structure. In 
other words, a rotten apple can spoil the barrel. In addition, 
 analyses of PDB structures can also be negatively affected by the 
lack of rigorous standards of data for PDB deposition. The X-ray 
diffraction structures determined by structural genomics centers 
worldwide are, on average, of higher quality than structures solved 
in traditional laboratories. Surprisingly, SG centers, who are 
unquestioned leaders in high-throughput and high-quality struc-
ture determination, have not established a precise deﬁ nition of the 
conditions that could be universally used to assess the quality of 
macromolecular structures. Similarly, SG centers have not set a 
standard of deposition which could be adopted by the whole struc-
tural biology community. It is a serious challenge to establish both 
deposition standards and quality metrics, but large-scale SG proj-
ects are in a good position to propose them, due to the large data-
bases that these efforts have generated. This is the key to success of 
all large- scale attempts to analyze the vast treasure which is the PDB.  
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

313
 Acknowledgments 
 The authors would like to thank Maks Chruszcz, Tom Terwilliger, 
Wayne Anderson, Matt Vetting, and Andrzej Joachimiak for valu-
able comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by 
PSI:Biology grants U54 GM094585 and U54 GM094662, as well 
as grant R01 GM053163, and supported in part by the Intramural 
Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center 
for Cancer Research, as well as with federal funds from the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under 
Contract No. HHSN272201200026C.  
 References 
  1.  Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z et al (2000) 
The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Res 
28:235–242 
  2.  Chruszcz M, Domagalski M, Osinski T et al 
(2010) Unmet challenges of structural genom-
ics. Curr Opin Struct Biol 20:587–597  
  3.  Grabowski M, Chruszcz M, Zimmerman MD 
et al (2009) Beneﬁ ts of structural genomics for 
drug discovery research. Infect Disord Drug 
Targets 9:459–474  
  4.  Karplus PA, Diederichs K (2012) Linking crys-
tallographic model and data quality. Science 
336:1030–1033 
  5.  Engh RA, Huber R (1991) Accurate bond and 
angle parameters for X-ray protein-structure 
reﬁ nement. Acta Crystallogr A 47:392–400  
  6.  Pozharski E, Weichenberger CX, Rupp B 
(2013) Techniques, tools and best practices for 
ligand electron-density analysis and results 
from their application to deposited crystal 
structures. Acta Crystallogr D 69:150–167  
  7.  Laskowski RA, MacArthur MW, Moss DS et al 
(1993) PROCHECK—a program to check the 
stereochemical quality of protein structures. 
J Appl Crystallogr 26:283–291  
  8.  Hooft RW, Vriend G, Sander C et al (1996) 
Errors in protein structures. Nature 381:272  
  9.  Oldﬁ eld TJ (1992) SQUID: a program for the 
analysis and display of data from crystallogra-
phy and molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph 
10:247–252 
  10.  Pontius J, Richelle J, Wodak SJ (1996) 
Deviations from standard atomic volumes as a 
quality measure for protein crystal structures. 
J Mol Biol 264:121–136  
  11.   Vaguine AA, Richelle J, Wodak SJ (1999) 
SFCHECK: a uniﬁ ed set of procedures for eval-
uating the quality of macromolecular structure- 
factor data and their agreement with the atomic 
model. Acta Crystallogr D 55:191–205  
  12.  Chen VB, Arendall WB III, Headd JJ et al 
(2010) MolProbity: all-atom structure valida-
tion for macromolecular crystallography. Acta 
Crystallogr D 66:12–21  
  13.  Yang HW, Guranovic V, Dutta S et al (2004) 
Automated and accurate deposition of struc-
tures solved by X-ray diffraction to the protein 
data bank. Acta Crystallogr D 60:1833–1839  
  14.   Colloc’h N, Etchebest C, Thoreau E et al 
(1993) Comparison of three algorithms for the 
assignment of secondary structure in proteins: 
the advantages of a consensus assignment. 
Protein Eng 6:377–382  
  15.  Ramachandran 
GN, 
Ramakrishnan 
C, 
Sasisekharan V (1963) Stereochemistry of 
polypeptide chain conﬁ gurations. J Mol Biol 
7:95–99  
  16.   Berjanskii M, Liang Y, Zhou J et al (2010) 
PROSESS: a protein structure evaluation suite 
and server. Nucleic Acids Res 38:W633–W640  
  17.  Malde AK, Mark AE (2011) Challenges in the 
determination of the binding modes of non- 
standard ligands in X-ray crystal complexes. 
J Comput Aided Mol Des 25:1–12  
  18.   Allen FH (2002) The cambridge structural 
database: a quarter of a million crystal structures 
and rising. Acta Crystallogr B 58:380–388  
  19.  Lebedev AA, Young P, Isupov MN et al (2012) 
JLigand: a graphical tool for the CCP4 tem-
plate-restraint library. Acta Crystallogr D 
68:431–440  
  20.  Gront D, Grabowski M, Zimmerman MD et al 
(2012) Assessing the accuracy of template-
based structure prediction metaservers by com-
parison with structural genomics structures. 
J Struct Funct Genomics 13:213–225  
Quality and Validation of SG Structures 

314
  21.  Andrejasic M, Praaenikar J, Turk D (2008) 
PURY: a database of geometric restraints of 
hetero compounds for reﬁ nement in complexes 
with 
macromolecular 
structures. 
Acta 
Crystallogr D 64:1093–1109  
  22.  Minor W, Cymborowski M, Otwinowski Z 
et al (2006) HKL-3000: the integration of data 
reduction and structure solution—from dif-
fraction images to an initial model in minutes. 
Acta Crystallogr D 62:859–866  
  23.  Vriend G (1990) WHAT IF: a molecular mod-
eling and drug design program. J Mol Graph 
8:52–56, 29 
  24.  Brunne RM, Liepinsh E, Otting G et al (1993) 
Hydration of proteins. A comparison of experi-
mental residence times of water molecules sol-
vating the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 
with theoretical model calculations. J Mol Biol 
231:1040–1048  
  25.  Otting G, Liepinsh E, Wüthrich K (1991) 
Proton-exchange with internal water molecules 
in the protein BPTI in aqueous-solution. J Am 
Chem Soc 113:4363–4364  
  26.  Bryant RG (1996) The dynamics of water–pro-
tein interactions. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol 
Struct 25:29–53  
 27.   Carugo O, Bordo D (1999) How many 
water molecules can be detected by protein 
crystallography? Acta Crystallogr D 55:
479–483  
  28.  Wlodawer A, Minor W, Dauter Z et al (2008) 
Protein 
crystallography 
for 
non- 
crystallographers, or how to get the best (but 
not more) from published macromolecular 
structures. FEBS J 275:1–21  
  29.  Joosten RP, Joosten K, Murshudov GN et al 
(2012) PDB_REDO: constructive validation, 
more than just looking for errors. Acta 
Crystallogr D 68:484–496  
  30.  Terwilliger T (2004) SOLVE and RESOLVE: 
automated structure solution, density modiﬁ -
cation, and model building. J Synchrotron 
Radiat 11:49–52  
  31.  Perrakis A, Morris R, Lamzin VS (1999) 
Automated protein model building combined 
with iterative structure reﬁ nement. Nat Struct 
Biol 6:458–463  
  32.  Terwilliger TC (2003) Improving macromo-
lecular atomic models at moderate resolution 
by automated iterative model building, statisti-
cal density modiﬁ cation and reﬁ nement. Acta 
Crystallogr D 59:1174–1182  
  33.  Langer GG, Evrard GX, Carolan CG et al 
(2012) Fragmentation-tree density representa-
tion for crystallographic modelling of bound 
ligands. J Mol Biol 419:211–222  
  34.  Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkoczi G et al 
(2010) PHENIX: a comprehensive python-
based system for macromolecular structure 
solution. Acta Crystallogr D 66:213–221  
  35.  de Beer TA (2013) LigSearch.   http://www.
ebi.ac.uk/thor nton-sr v/databases/
LigSearch/index.html   . Accessed 23 Apr 2013  
  36.   Perkins A, Gretes MC, Nelson KJ et al (2012) 
Mapping the active site helix-to-strand conver-
sion of CxxxxC peroxiredoxin Q enzymes. 
Biochemistry 51:7638–7650  
  37.  Baldwin ET, Weber IT, St Charles R et al 
(1991) Crystal structure of interleukin 8: sym-
biosis of NMR and crystallography. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 88:502–506  
  38.  Ramelot TA, Raman S, Kuzin AP et al (2009) 
Improving NMR protein structure quality by 
rosetta reﬁ nement: a molecular replacement 
study. Proteins 75:147–167  
  39.  DiMaio F, Terwilliger TC, Read RJ et al (2011) 
Improved molecular replacement by density- 
and energy- guided protein structure optimiza-
tion. Nature 473:540–543  
  40.  Cooper S, Khatib F, Treuille A et al (2010) 
Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer 
online game. Nature 466:756–760  
  41.   Khatib F, DiMaio F, Foldit Contenders Group 
et al (2011) Crystal structure of a monomeric ret-
roviral protease solved by protein folding game 
players. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18:1175–1177  
  42.  Gilski M, Kazmierczyk M, Krzywda S et al 
(2011) High- resolution structure of a retrovi-
ral protease folded as a monomer. Acta 
Crystallogr D 67:907–914  
Marcin J. Domagalski et al.

315
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_22, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 22  
 Navigating the Global Protein–Protein Interaction 
Landscape Using iRefWeb 
 Andrei  L.  Turinsky ,  Sabry  Razick ,  Brian  Turner , 
 Ian  M.  Donaldson , and  Shoshana  J.  Wodak 
 Abstract 
 iRefWeb is a bioinformatics resource that offers access to a large collection of data on protein–protein 
interactions in over a thousand organisms. This collection is consolidated from 14 major public databases 
that curate the scientiﬁ c literature. The collection is enhanced with a range of versatile data ﬁ lters and 
search options that categorize various types of protein–protein interactions and protein complexes. Users 
of iRefWeb are able to retrieve all curated interactions for a given organism or those involving a given 
protein (or a list of proteins), narrow down their search results based on different supporting evidence, and 
assess the reliability of these interactions using various criteria. They may also examine all data and annota-
tions related to any publication that described the interaction-detection experiments. iRefWeb is freely 
available to the research community worldwide at   http://wodaklab.org/iRefWeb   .  
 Key words   Protein–protein interactions  ,   Interaction networks  ,   Proteomics  ,   Literature curation  , 
 IMEx consortium  ,   HUPO PSI-MI standards  ,  Bioinformatics resources  ,   iRefWeb  ,   iRefIndex  
1  Introduction 
 Key cellular processes such as gene transcription, translation, DNA 
repair, chromatin modiﬁ cation, and signal transduction are carried 
out by physically interacting proteins often forming multi-protein 
complexes [ 1 – 3 ]. Characterizing these interactions is therefore a 
crucial step in unraveling biological function at the level of indi-
vidual proteins and of the processes in which they participate. 
Technological advances in the last decade have greatly improved 
our ability to detect protein interactions ( see refs.  4 ,  5 for review). 
This has led to an explosive growth of protein–protein interaction 
(PPI) data derived from many small-scale focused studies, as well 
as from genome-scale interrogations in organisms such as bacteria, 
yeast, ﬂ y, and human [ 6 – 11 ]. 

316
 Curating and archiving PPI data from the scientiﬁ c literature 
and making them readily accessible to the scientiﬁ c community 
has become a priority, prompting the development of a number of 
specialized databases [ 12 ]. Some of these databases reﬂ ect very 
broad curation efforts, such as BioGRID [ 13 ], DIP [ 14 ], IntAct 
[ 15 ], or MINT [ 16 ]. Other database efforts focus on speciﬁ c sub-
sets of PPI, such as those of mammalian protein complexes in 
CORUM [ 17 ], PPI related to innate immune response in 
InnateDB [ 18 ], extracellular matrix interactions in MatrixDB 
[ 19 ], or microbial interactions in MPIDB [ 20 ]. Typically each 
PPI database has its own practices for literature curation and data 
representation, reﬂ ecting the needs and priorities of the corre-
sponding database resource [ 21 ]. 
 Thanks to the Proteomics Standards Initiative and the efforts 
of the IMEx consortium, there has been a considerable effort to 
promote common standards for PPI data representation, common 
curation policies, and common data access via PSICQUIC Web 
services [ 18 ,  22 – 24 ]. Nevertheless, the retrieval of PPI data from 
the different specialized databases remains a tedious task for most 
users, not in the least because PPI retrieved from multiple sources 
often contain redundancies and need to be adequately consoli-
dated. This task is far from trivial: even if two different databases 
curate the same publication, they may still use different aliases for 
the proteins involved, different descriptions for the species of 
origin, and different representations for multi-subunit protein 
complexes [ 25 – 27 ]. 
 In this chapter we describe how the compendium of archived 
PPI can be examined and analyzed using the iRefWeb resource 
[ 28 ]. This resource allows researchers to seamlessly access a 
broad landscape of PPI with all its supporting evidence through 
one Web interface, regardless of the original source database 
that curated the data. This landscape is assembled from 14 
major public databases using iRefIndex, which implements one 
of the most rigorous procedures for consolidating redundant 
PPI records [ 20 ]. Users of iRefWeb may retrieve all archived 
interactions for a given organism, or extract interactions that 
involve a protein (or a list of proteins) of interest. They may 
then apply a set of ﬁ lters to narrow down the search results, tak-
ing into account various PPI attributes such as the organisms of 
origin, the experimental techniques used to detect the interac-
tion, the number of supporting publications, or an estimated 
conﬁ dence score. 
 We start by brieﬂ y describing the nature of the PPI data and 
their supporting evidence, and follow by instructions on how to 
explore the consolidated PPI landscape using the versatile range of 
iRefWeb features.  
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

317
2  The PPI Data and Their Supporting Evidence 
 The PPI data archived in the different specialized “source” data-
bases and consolidated in the iRefWeb resource have been curated 
from published studies that employ a wide range of experimental 
techniques. Large-scale (high throughput) studies use two main 
types of techniques: afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation combined with mass spec-
trometry (AP/MS) (for review  see refs.  2 ,  29 ), which detect multi- 
protein complexes, and techniques that systematically identify 
binary interactions. Methods of the latter category include the 
yeast two hybrid (Y2H) [ 30 ] and Split-Ubiquitin [ 31 ] screens and 
various protein complementation assays (PCA) [ 32 ]. More 
recently, genome-scale descriptions of human PPIs were also 
derived from a massive co-fractionation effort [ 10 ]. Small-scale 
hypothesis-driven studies of speciﬁ c systems tend to use a more 
diverse set of methods, including, in addition to the methods men-
tioned above, various co-immunoprecipitation methods, electro-
phoretic mobility assays, and more rarely, X-ray diffraction, and 
NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) spectroscopy. 
 The PPI data derived from these various studies are described 
as simple links or “interactions” between proteins (e.g., protein A 
interacts with B, C, and D; protein C interacts with proteins A, E, 
F, and G). When a number of proteins are involved, the informa-
tion is commonly represented as a graph (network) of proteins 
(nodes) linked to one another whenever an “interaction” has been 
detected. In PPI data derived from AP/MS or other types of “pull 
down” experiments, a link between two proteins represents a “co- 
complex association.” It indicates that the proteins belong to the 
same complex, but does not guarantee that they make direct physi-
cal contact. On the other hand, in PPI data derived from Y2H and 
related techniques, a reported link between two proteins generally 
indicates that the proteins were found to make a direct physical 
contact. 
 It is also important to realize that different experimental tech-
niques suffer from different biases, and that they tend to probe 
distinct properties of the protein interaction landscape. For 
instance, some methods are geared more towards identifying stable 
interactions, whereas others detect more transient ones ( see ref.  4 
for review). It is therefore not uncommon to ﬁ nd very little overlap 
between genome-scale PPI datasets of the same organism derived 
using methods such as AP/MS, Y2H, and the PCA techniques 
[ 33 ], and hence to consider these datasets as providing comple-
mentary descriptions. 
 The reliability of the derived interactions (or co-complex 
associations) is another outstanding issue. Most of the experimen-
tal techniques for detecting protein interactions produce noisy 
data, e.g. they often detect interactions that do not occur in vivo 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

318
(false positives), and may miss interactions that do occur (false 
negatives). In large-scale studies, noise is usually dealt with by 
deriving reliability scores for individual interactions based on sta-
tistical analyses of the raw data [ 34 – 37 ]. Results are then reported 
in the form of a “high conﬁ dence” subset of PPIs deemed sufﬁ -
ciently reliable, although authors also tend to provide access to 
the raw data, which certain source databases may archive. Small-
scale studies usually do not have statistical reliability scores 
 associated with the PPI data they report, but tend to provide 
 supporting evidence for their ﬁ ndings based on independent 
experimental veriﬁ cations. 
 It has been assumed until recently that literature curated (LC) 
protein interactions data are of higher accuracy than those pro-
duced by high throughput studies, because they are derived from 
carefully crafted focused investigations. But recent analyses of litera-
ture curated PPI data are suggesting that this is no longer the case, 
due in part to improvements in high throughput methods, but also 
to inherent difﬁ culties in extracting relevant information from pub-
lications that report results from small-scale studies [ 26 ,  27 ]. 
 Currently, however, most source databases do not provide reli-
ability scores for the PPI data they store, even when such scores 
have been reported in the original studies. To extract meaningful 
information from the archived data, users (and some databases) 
may therefore choose to rely on simple ﬁ lters, based on the sup-
porting evidence that is usually captured by the source database for 
each archived PPI record. This evidence includes information on 
the type of interaction (e.g. a “direct interaction,” or an “associa-
tion”), on the method used to detect it, and on the corresponding 
literature citation. Most, but not all databases capture this evidence 
using the PSI-MI controlled vocabulary [ 38 ], making it possible to 
apply ﬁ lters requiring that an interaction be reported in at least two 
publications, that it be detected by a given set of methods, or con-
served in another organism, as will be discussed below. 
 iRefWeb computes the MI (MINT-Inspired) score for the 
interactions it consolidates, by closely following an earlier approach 
developed by the MINT database team [ 16 ], which takes into 
account some of the above criteria. The development of scoring 
schemes for literature curated PPI data is a challenging problem, 
which is currently under study. 
 Lastly, it is worth mentioning that interactions derived from 
purely computational procedures [ 39 ], or the so-called genetic 
interactions, which represent phenotype alterations produced by 
the mutation/deletion of one gene in the background of a 
 mutation/deletion of another gene [ 40 – 42 ], are not considered in 
this chapter, mainly because only a small subset of the source data-
bases curate them.  
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

319
3  Materials 
 In this section we describe how the information necessary to query 
the PPI landscape in iRefWeb should be represented. 
 To enable focused iRefWeb searches, prepare a list of identiﬁ ers 
that represent the proteins or genes of interest. As an illustration we 
shall use the human  neural - restrictive silencer factor (NRSF), cur-
rently known as  RE1 - silencing transcription factor (REST). 
 It may also be necessary to examine the speciﬁ c interaction type 
and experimental detection methods used in the original study. To 
ensure that the correct terms are used and their meaning is well 
deﬁ ned, the user should prepare a list of standard terms that con-
form to the Molecular Interaction ontology [ 38 ]. As an illustration 
we shall use the interaction detection method “afﬁ nity chromatog-
raphy technology” and the interaction type “physical association.” 
  1.   Access the UniProtKB database at   http://www.uniprot.org   
[ 43 ] and search for the protein of interest: human NRSF, or 
neural-restrictive silencer factor.  
  2.   Note the current protein name: REST, or  RE1 - silencing tran-
scription factor , instead of NRSF ( see  Note 1 ). 
  3.   Record the UniProtKB entry accession Q13127 and name 
REST_HUMAN, to be used in the iRefWeb search query.  
  1.   Access NCBI Gene database at   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/gene   [ 44 ] and search for the gene of interest: human 
NRSF, or neural-restrictive silencer factor.  
  2.   Note the current gene name: REST, or  RE1 - silencing tran-
scription factor , instead of NRSF (again,  see  Note 1 ). 
  3.   Record the current gene ID 5978 and gene symbol REST, to 
be used in the iRefWeb search query.  
  1.   Access the EBI Ontology Lookup Service at   http://www.ebi.
ac.uk/ontology-lookup/   and select “Molecular Interaction 
(PSI-MI 2.5) [MI].”  
  2.   Search for an interaction detection method of interest, e.g. 
“afﬁ nity chromatography technology” ( see  Note 2 ). 
  3.   Record the identiﬁ er MI:0004 for this MI ontology term, to 
be used in future iRefWeb explorations.  
  4.  Examine the standard deﬁ nition of the term “afﬁ nity chroma-
tography technology,” as well as its various alternative aliases, 
such as “afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation,” to determine whether the term 
was chosen correctly ( see  Note 3 ). 
3.1  Protein 
Identiﬁ ers
3.2  Gene Identiﬁ ers
3.3  Molecular 
Interaction Ontology: 
Interaction 
Detection Method
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

320
  1.  Access the EBI Ontology Lookup Service at   http://www.ebi.
ac.uk/ontology-lookup/   and select “Molecular Interaction 
(PSI-MI 2.5) [MI]” in the drop-down Search Ontology menu.  
  2.   Search for an interaction type of interest, e.g. “physical asso-
ciation” ( see  Note 2 ). 
  3.   Record the interaction-type code MI:0915 for this MI ontol-
ogy term, to be used in future iRefWeb explorations.  
  4.    Examine the term deﬁ nition: “Molecules that are experimentally 
shown to belong to the same functional or structural complex.” 
Decide if the term was chosen correctly ( see  Notes 3 and  4 ).  
4  Methods 
 This section illustrates how to formulate various commonly used 
iRefWeb query options, visualize the results and download the data. 
  1.   Access the iRefWeb search page at   http://wodaklab.org/ 
iRefWeb/search   . 
  2.   In the panel  Search Terms , paste the current gene name into 
the Left search box:  REST ( see  Note 5 ). A popup window 
should appear with the list of matching protein interactors 
found in iRefWeb.  
  3.   Choose the match that corresponds to the desired organism 
( H .  sapiens ), protein identiﬁ er (REST_HUMAN) and gene 
ID (5978).  
  4.  Toggle its checkbox “add to search” and click the button “Add 
your checked selection to your search query terms.” The inter-
actor REST_HUMAN should appear below the search box.  
  5.   Click the  Search button. The Search Results Summary should 
appear at the bottom of the page, listing the PPI that involve 
the human REST protein.  
  1.   In the panel Search Filters, click the link  Expand All Filters . 
The counts next to each ﬁ lter option show the number of PPI 
records that match each ﬁ lter. 
  2.   In the  Organism ﬁ lter panel, select “single organism interac-
tion” to exclude cross-species interactions.  
  3.   In the  Interaction Type panel, select “physical association,” 
which corresponds to the standard term of the MI ontology as 
described in the earlier section. This ﬁ lter operation excludes 
various weak associations, predicted interactions, genetic 
interactions (if any) and interactions for which the type was 
not speciﬁ ed by the source-database curators.  
3.4  Molecular 
Interaction Ontology: 
Interaction Type
4.1  Search for 
Interactions for a 
Given Protein of 
Interest
4.2  Filter and 
Download the 
Interaction Results
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

321
  4.   Click on the Search button to apply the ﬁ lters. The Search 
Results Summary at the bottom of the page should be updated 
to reveal 18 human PPI pairs.  
  5.   Examine the  MI Score and the  MI Percentile columns in the 
results table. The MI score is a crude reliability score associ-
ated with a given PPI. Higher MI scores are assigned to PPI 
supported by multiple publications, detected by multiple 
experimental techniques, or conserved across several organ-
isms. Following the original MINT approach [ 45 ], direct 
physical interactions, as well as interactions supported by low- 
throughput studies, also receive higher scores ( see the example 
in Subheading  4.4 below for further details).  
  6.   Click the  Download Interactome button and select the MINI- TAB 
option in the popup window. The retained interaction pairs will be 
downloaded in a simple tab-delimited text ﬁ le ( see  Notes 6 – 8 ).  
  7.  After exploring the results the user may choose to retain only 
the high-scoring interactions from the retrieved list. To enable 
this option, expand the ﬁ lter panel  MI Organism Percentile , and 
select “50 or more” to exclude low-conﬁ dence interactions that 
fall below the median MI score. Click on the Search button to 
re-apply the ﬁ lters, which should retain only the 12 high- 
conﬁ dence human pairs (Fig.  1 ). Then download this smaller 
list of PPI by using the  Download Interactome button again.
  1.   Click on any of the REST_HUMAN links in the previous 
Search Results table to load the detailed interactor page for this 
protein. The page presents a summary of the PPI and  complexes 
in which REST is involved; a list of its aliases and external ID 
4.3  Visualize the 
Interaction Network
 Fig. 1    Results of the iRefWeb search for the interaction neighborhood of the human REST protein, after applying 
a range of ﬁ lters to exclude cross-organism interactions, low-scoring interactions, and weak-associations 
 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

322
with links to the corresponding databases; and several options 
to explore the REST interaction neighborhood.  
  2.   Click on the link “View a graph of my interaction partners” to 
load  Netility , a Web-based visualization tool based on the 
Cytoscape Web library [ 46 ] that is customized to display 
information from iRefWeb as network graphs. By default this 
graphics tool shows the protein of interest (a circular node); 
the corresponding gene (square node); its disease annotations 
from the DAnCER resource [ 47 ], which are labeled using the 
Medical Subject Headings [ 48 ] standard terminology (paral-
lelogram nodes— see also  Note 9 ); and its homologous genes 
in human and in several model organisms, such as mouse 
 M .  musculus , worm  C .  elegans , ﬂ y  D .  melanogaster , and yeast 
 S .  cerevisiae (square nodes with different label colors). 
It appears that REST is associated with both Neuroblastoma 
[ 49 ,  50 ] and Down Syndrome [ 51 ].  
  3.   To view the protein-interaction network, double-click on the 
REST_HUMAN protein node. This action should expand the 
graph to include additional information about REST: its phys-
ical interaction partners in human and model organisms (cir-
cular nodes), their protein domains (triangular nodes), and 
their Gene Ontology (GO) [ 52 ] annotations (small dark 
labeled circles). The domain- and GO-related data are retrieved 
from external databases and seamlessly integrated into the 
Netility visual engine.  
  4.   To clean up the displayed network, examine the Netility ﬁ lters 
on the left side of the graph, and de-select several annotation 
categories: node types, node organisms, edge labels, domains, 
and “Chromatin Related” labels ( see  Note 9 ). Also, de-select 
GO terms from both Biological Process and Molecular Function 
ontologies to leave only the Cellular Component annotations.  
  5.   In the top left Network Actions panel, select the force-directed 
layout option and click the button to re-apply the layout.  
  6.   Manipulate the graph by dragging its nodes as needed to cre-
ate a visually appealing network image (Fig.  2 ).
  7.   In the top left Network Actions panel, select the PDF format 
and click the Export Network button to save an image ﬁ le 
( see  Note 10 ). 
 The search query of the previous section reveals a presence of sev-
eral different histone deacetylases in the interaction neighborhood 
of the human REST protein. In the following sections we shall 
explore known interactions between REST and various histone 
deacetylases, which appear in several different contexts. We shall 
also examine the evidence of REST-HDAC interactions from 
model organisms such as Mouse and Rat.
4.4  Search for 
Speciﬁ c Interaction 
Partners
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

323
  1.  Clear all search results by clicking the button  Clear / New Search . 
  2.  In the Search Terms panel, input the string  REST into the Left 
search box and select REST_HUMAN, REST_MOUSE and 
REST_RAT.  
  3.  Input the string  HDAC into the  Full Text search box 
( see  Note 11 ).  
  4.   Click the Search button and examine the results, which include 
interactions between REST and histone deacetylases 1,2,4 and 
5 in the three organisms.  
  5.   Observe that the REST-HDAC4 and REST-HDAC5 interac-
tions have been annotated in both Human and Rat.  
  6.   Examine the MI score for the interaction between REST and 
HDAC4 in Human, by clicking on the corresponding score 
value in the Results table. This should load the page  MI Score 
Calculation for that interaction.  
  7.   Click on the  View Details link. The expanded calculation 
results show that this PPI is scored based on the strength of its 
own experimental evidence as well as the experimental evi-
dence of its Rat counterpart ( see  Notes 12 and  13 ). 
 Fig. 2    The interaction neighbors of the human REST protein and the corresponding function and disease annotations. 
The graph shows the interaction partners ( circular nodes ), genes ( square nodes ), disease annotations from the 
DAnCER resource ( parallelograms ), and Gene Ontology cellular-component terms ( small dark circles ). It appears that 
most of the interacting proteins share their cellular localization annotations. Among the human proteins, only those 
with the MI score of at least 0.6 are displayed. The  red color of the nodes indicates their involvement in chromatin 
modiﬁ cation processes. The graph is displayed using the Netility tool in iRefWeb (color ﬁ gure online)  
 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

324
  1.   Return to the search results involving REST and HDAC 
proteins.  
  2.   In the Results table, identify the PPI between Human REST 
and Mouse HDAC1. This interaction is highly unlikely to 
occur in vivo. Nevertheless, it may well be a valid experimental 
result of a study that used orthologous proteins from different 
organisms interchangeably, as is common in experiments 
involving human and murine molecular constructs [ 21 ].  
  3.   Click on the link  1043810 in the Interaction ID column of the 
Results table. This should load the interaction page with anno-
tation details, indicating that this PPI was recorded by the 
BioGRID source database as a result of curating a publication 
with PubMed ID 10570134.  
  4.   In the PubMed ID column, click on the link corresponding to 
PMID 10570134. This should load the  PubMed Annotations 
page, which summarizes the annotations of the corresponding 
publication [ 53 ] performed by each source database.  
  5.   Examine the signiﬁ cant differences between the annotations 
reported by the BioGRID and HPRD teams (Fig.  3 ). The 
HPRD listed a single interaction between human REST and 
human SIN3B, whereas BioGRID recorded interactions 
between human REST and three mouse proteins: Hdac1, 
Sin3a and Sin3b.
  6.   Click on the  Abstract button to reveal the details of the origi-
nal study, which describes the recruitment of mouse Sin3 and 
histone deacetylase complex by REST to repress neuron-
speciﬁ c target genes [ 53 ]. This suggests that the BioGRID 
annotations are perhaps better able to represent the informa-
tion contained in the original paper.  
  1.   Return to the search results involving REST and HDAC proteins.  
  2.   In the Results table, identify the protein complex and click on 
its Interaction ID  682088 to load the detailed annotation page.  
  3.   Examine the annotations and note that the interaction record 
represents an association of 18 different proteins, of which 17 
are from Mouse (including  Rest and  Hdac2 ) and one from 
Human. This co-complex association was detected by a  pull 
down , an afﬁ nity chromatography method in which a protein 
of interest (bait) is typically bound to a column and then chal-
lenged with a solution or cellular extract containing the candi-
date partner proteins (preys). 
  4.   Click on the Source ID link  EBI - 2312516 to access the origi-
nal IntAct annotation. The IntAct represents this co-complex 
either as a single list of 18 participating proteins (  http://www.
ebi.ac.uk/intact/interaction/EBI-2312516   ), or as a so-called 
“spoke expansion” into 17 different bait-prey pairs, where the 
 Nanog protein is the bait ( see  Note 14 ). 
4.5  Compare and 
Contrast the 
Supporting Evidence
4.6  Examine the 
Annotation of Protein 
Complexes
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

325
  5.  Return to the iRefWeb page of the co-complex and click on the 
PubMed ID 17093407 to load the  PubMed Annotations page. 
  6.  Expand the  Abstract button to reveal that the original publica-
tion [ 54 ] explored the protein network in which Nanog oper-
ates in mouse embryonic stem cells. The authors report using 
afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation of Nanog under native conditions followed 
by mass spectrometry to identify its interacting partners.  
  7.   Examine how different source databases—in this case IntAct 
and BioGRID—annotated the original publication. Observe 
that whereas BioGRID reports only binary interactions ( see 
 Notes 15 – 17 ), IntAct reports both binary and multi-protein 
interactions. However, only a handful of the binary pairs are 
annotated by both source databases.  
  8.   To sort the annotations by protein, click on the header of the 
Label column in the Details table. Observe that whereas many 
proteins appearing in [ 54 ] were recorded by both databases, 
some were only recorded by BioGRID (CDK1_MOUSE, 
SMRC1_MOUSE), and others only by IntAct (ELYS_
HUMAN, SALL1_MOUSE).  
 Fig. 3  The iRefWeb  Pubmed Annotations  page for the PubMed ID 10570134 reveals the differences in the 
annotation of a REST-related protein complex by two different source databases 
 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

326
  9.  The curation differences ﬂ agged by the iRefWeb page indicate 
either the ambiguities present in the original publication itself, 
or possible differences in curation practices or policies of the 
annotating source databases. The user may therefore proceed 
to retrieve and examine the original publication in order to 
clarify these differences.  
5  Notes 
  1.  This example demonstrates the problem with using a name or 
alias instead of a proper molecular identiﬁ er: iRefWeb no lon-
ger recognizes NRSF in its alias searches because the alias 
NRSF is now obsolete and has been replaced with REST. 
Although gene and protein names are widely used by biomedi-
cal researchers, it should be considered a good practice to con-
ﬁ rm the current names and molecular identiﬁ ers of the protein 
of interest before initiating the iRefWeb search queries.  
  2.  Alternatively you may access the MI ontology webpage and 
click “Browse,” then progressively expand the root term 
“molecular interaction,” the sub-term “interaction detection 
method” or “interaction type,” etc., until a desired ontology 
term is found in the expanded graph.  
  3.   To further conﬁ rm your selection, click on the Browse button 
to place the term within the MI-ontology hierarchy graph. 
Then examine the section  Term Hierarchy , clicking on both 
 Paths to Root and  Child relationships options. This should help 
to determine whether the desired PPI type or method was 
chosen correctly, or whether any of its speciﬁ c varieties should 
be chosen instead, such as “coimmunoprecipitation” 
(MI:0019), “pull down” (MI:0096), etc.  
  4.  It is also helpful to examine the ontology terms just above and 
just below the category of interest. For example, given the 
ontology term MI:0915 “physical association” (deﬁ ned as 
“molecules that are experimentally shown to belong to the 
same functional or structural complex”), users should be aware 
of its difference from the parent term MI:0914 “association” 
(“molecules that are experimentally shown to be associated 
potentially by sharing just one interactor”) as well as from its 
child term MI:0407 “direct interaction” (“interaction that is 
proven to involve only its interactors”).  
  5.   Instead of the gene or protein name, the user may also provide 
a UniProt entry name or accession, such as REST_HUMAN 
or Q13127. A gene ID 5978 will also be recognized.  
  6.  The MINI-TAB is a simple tab-delimited format that provides 
a minimal description of the retrieved PPI data, namely: the 
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

327
iRefWeb interaction ID, the standard protein IDs of the two 
interacting molecules (e.g., Q13127 and P08047) and their 
iRefWeb interactor IDs. The iRefWeb-speciﬁ c IDs are main-
tained across different versions of the iRefWeb, and may there-
fore be used to form URL links to the iRefWeb interaction or 
interactor records.  
  7.   Another download option is the MITAB, a rich tab-delimited 
format that conforms to the current HUPO PSI-MI stan-
dards. MITAB columns contain a wealth of information about 
each PPI or complex, including the primary and alternative 
aliases for all proteins involved, their organisms, the support-
ing publication ID, various MI ontology terms that describe 
the nature of the interaction, the annotating source database, 
and many more. Beware that the same interaction may appear 
in several MITAB lines due to multiple annotations (different 
source databases, supporting publications, detection methods, 
etc.). The full description of the MITAB format is available at 
  http://ireﬁ ndex.org   . 
  8.   Once the PPI data are downloaded in a tab-delimited format, 
they may be easily imported into the Cytoscape visualization 
package [ 55 ] or any similar bioinformatics software for further 
visualization and analysis.  
  9.   Given the importance of chromatin modiﬁ cations to a variety 
of cellular processes, genes and proteins related to chromatin 
modiﬁ cation are shown in red. This option may be turned off 
by switching off the appropriate Netility ﬁ lter. The corre-
sponding gene nodes are linked to DAnCER, or the Disease- 
Annotated Chromatin Epigenetics Resource [ 47 ], maintained 
by our research team. Clicking on the gene node in the graph 
reveals the link to a DAnCER page of the gene, which con-
tains further functional annotations related to its chromatin- 
modiﬁ cation function and disease associations.  
 10.   Other image formats are available for network export, such as 
the Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG), the Portable Network 
Graphics (PNG), or the eXtensible Graph Markup and 
Modeling Language (XGMML).  
 11.   The user may also input the string HDAC into the RIGHT 
search box and select a range of proteins from the matches 
presented by the popup window.  
 12.   The MI scores are based on the accumulation of appropriately 
weighted “pieces of evidence,” which reﬂ ect the presence of 
multiple supporting publications, multiple experimental detec-
tion techniques, or other organisms in which the PPI is con-
served. Following the MINT approach, the supporting-evidence 
terms for indirect PPI are reduced in half, as are the terms 
derived from high-throughput studies. Thus the MI score 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

328
explicitly favors interactions detected by low-throughput 
experiments (up to 50 PPI). As we have discussed in the intro-
ductory section, the latter may or may not be warranted, given 
the technological advances and statistical techniques used in 
the analysis of high-throughput PPI data. In the example of 
Subheading  4.4 , the evidence for the human REST-HDAC4 
interaction has a weight of 0.5 because the PPI is annotated as 
a physical association (not a direct interaction) detected using 
only one experimental technique (afﬁ nity chromatography 
technology). The corresponding rat PPI also has a weight of 
0.5 for the same reason. Both human and rat interactions 
come from a low-throughput study, otherwise their weights 
would have been further reduced by half.  
 13.   iRefWeb does not compute MI scores to interactions or co- 
complexes that contain proteins from multiple organisms. 
Although some of these cross-organism interactions do occur 
in nature (i.e. between viral and host proteins), many are 
merely artifacts of the study design, in which proteins from 
one organism are used as a convenient substitute for homolo-
gous proteins from a related organism [ 21 ]. 
 14.   As the IntAct Web site points out, binary interactions gener-
ated by co-complex expansion “will very likely generate some 
false positive interactions” but allow the data to be presented 
in a consistent manner.  
  15.  Further exploration of individual PPI pages (by clicking on each 
interaction ID in the ﬁ rst column of the table) would reveal that 
BioGRID annotated all binary interactions from reference [ 54 ] 
as “physical associations” (MI:0915) detected by afﬁ nity 
chromatography technology (MI:0004). In contrast, IntAct 
recorded either “physical associations” or the less stringent 
“associations” (MI:0914), and provided the more speciﬁ c 
descriptions of the chromatography techniques used, such as 
anti-bait or anti-tag coimmunoprecipitation (MI:0006 and 
MI:0007 respectively), pull down (MI:0096), tandem afﬁ nity 
puriﬁ cation (MI:0676), and molecular sieving (MI:0071). This 
difference reﬂ ects the curation policies of the two source 
databases.  
 16.   It is worth noting that BioGRID uses its own Experimental 
Evidence Codes in its original curations, so that the 
BioGRID annotations of reference [ 54 ] are described as 
either “Afﬁ nity Capture-MS” or “Afﬁ nity Capture-Western” 
on the BioGRID Web site. However, for the purpose of data 
export and distribution, the BioGRID team translates both 
of these evidence codes into standard MI ontology terms 
“physical association” (MI:0915) for the interaction type 
and “afﬁ nity chromatography technology” (MI:0004) for 
the interaction detection method.  
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

329
 17.   Differences in co-complex annotation often make it hard to 
identify all complexes related to the protein of interest, such 
as the human REST protein. For example, consider the 
study that examined the REST/RCOR1/histone deacety-
lase repressor complex in cells infected by the herpes simplex 
virus [ 56 ]. Although BioGRID recorded an interaction of 
the REST/RCOR1/HDAC1 complex with a herpesvirus 
protein ICP0, it represented the co-complex using the spoke 
expansion, in which the REST corepressor RCOR1 was used 
as the bait. Hence the search for REST interactions in iRef-
Web returned only the REST-RCOR1 binary pair (interac-
tion ID 721583) instead of the full REST/RCOR1/
HDAC1 complex. Nevertheless, by examining the iRefWeb 
evidence for the PubMed ID 15897453, which supports the 
REST-RCOR1 pair, the users are able to examine the full 
curation data related to reference [ 56 ].  
 Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research (MOP#82940), the Ontario Research Fund, and the 
SickKids Foundation. SJW was Canada Research Chair, Tier 1.  
 References 
  1.  Alberts B (1998) The cell as a collection of 
protein machines: preparing the next genera-
tion of molecular biologists. Cell 92:291–294  
  2.  Kocher T, Superti-Furga G (2007) Mass 
spectrometry- based 
functional 
proteomics: 
from molecular machines to protein networks. 
Nat Methods 4:807–815  
  3.  Chiu W, Baker ML, Almo SC (2006) Structural 
biology of cellular machines. Trends Cell Biol 
16:144–150  
  4.  Shoemaker 
BA, 
Panchenko 
AR 
(2007) 
Deciphering protein–protein interactions. Part 
I. Experimental techniques and databases. 
PLoS Comput Biol 3:e42  
  5.  Phizicky EM, Fields S (1995) Protein–protein 
interactions: methods for detection and analy-
sis. Microbiol Rev 59:94–123  
  6.  Krogan NJ, Cagney G, Yu H et al (2006) 
Global landscape of protein complexes in the 
yeast 
Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. 
Nature 
440:637–643  
  7.  Gavin AC, Bosche M, Krause R et al (2002) 
Functional organization of the yeast proteome 
by systematic analysis of protein complexes. 
Nature 415:141–147  
  8.  Rual JF, Venkatesan K, Hao T et al (2005) 
Towards a proteome-scale map of the human 
protein-protein interaction network. Nature 
437:1173–1178  
  9.  Guruharsha KG, Rual JF, Zhai B et al (2011) 
A protein complex network of Drosophila 
melanogaster. Cell 147:690–703  
  10.   Havugimana PC, Hart GT, Nepusz T et al 
(2012) A census of human soluble protein com-
plexes. Cell 150:1068–1081  
  11.  Butland G, Peregrin-Alvarez JM, Li J et al 
(2005) Interaction network containing con-
served and essential protein complexes in 
Escherichia coli. Nature 433:531–537  
  12.  Bader GD, Cary MP, Sander C (2006) 
Pathguide: a pathway resource list. Nucleic 
Acids Res 34:D504–D506  
  13.  Chatr-Aryamontri 
A, 
Breitkreutz 
BJ, 
Heinicke S et al (2013) The BioGRID interac-
tion database: 2013 update. Nucleic Acids Res 
41:D816–D823  
  14.  Salwinski L, Miller CS, Smith AJ et al (2004) 
The database of interacting proteins: 2004 
update. Nucleic Acids Res 32:D449–D451  
  15.  Kerrien S, Aranda B, Breuza L et al (2012) The 
IntAct molecular interaction database in 2012. 
Nucleic Acids Res 40:D841–D846  
  16.  Ceol A, Chatr Aryamontri A, Licata L et al 
(2010) MINT, the molecular interaction 
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

330
database: 2009 update. Nucleic Acids Res 
38:D532–D539  
  17.  Ruepp A, Waegele B, Lechner M et al (2010) 
CORUM: the comprehensive resource of 
mammalian protein complexes–2009. Nucleic 
Acids Res 38:D497–D501  
  18.  Orchard S, Kerrien S, Jones P et al (2007) 
Submit your interaction data the IMEx way: a 
step by step guide to trouble-free deposition. 
Proteomics 7(Suppl 1):28–34  
  19.  Tarcea VG, Weymouth T, Ade A et al (2009) 
Michigan molecular interactions r2: from inter-
acting proteins to pathways. Nucleic Acids Res 
37:D642–D646 
  20.  Razick S, Magklaras G, Donaldson IM (2008) 
iRefIndex: a consolidated protein interaction 
database with provenance. BMC Bioinformatics 
9:405 
  21.  Turinsky AL, Razick S, Turner B et al (2010) 
Literature curation of protein interactions: 
measuring agreement across major public data-
bases. Database 2010:baq026  
  22.  Chaurasia G, Malhotra S, Russ J et al (2009) 
UniHI 4: new tools for query, analysis and visu-
alization of the human protein-protein interac-
tome. Nucleic Acids Res 37:D657–D660  
  23.  Orchard S, Binz PA, Borchers C et al (2012) 
Ten years of standardizing proteomic data: a 
report on the HUPO- PSI Spring Workshop: 
April 12-14th, 2012, San Diego, USA. 
Proteomics 12:2767–2772  
  24.  Orchard S, Hermjakob H, Apweiler R (2003) 
The proteomics standards initiative. Proteomics 
3:1374–1376 
  25.  Kamburov A, Wierling C, Lehrach H et al 
(2009) ConsensusPathDB – a database for 
integrating human functional interaction net-
works. Nucleic Acids Res 37:D623–D628  
  26.  Cusick ME, Yu H, Smolyar A et al (2009) 
Literature- curated protein interaction datasets. 
Nat Methods 6:39–46  
  27.  Salwinski L, Licata L, Winter A et al (2009) 
Recurated protein interaction datasets. Nat 
Methods 6:860–861  
  28.  Turner B, Razick S, Turinsky AL et al (2010) 
iRefWeb: interactive analysis of consolidated 
protein interaction data and their supporting 
evidence. Database 2010:baq023  
  29.  Gingras AC, Gstaiger M, Raught B et al (2007) 
Analysis of protein complexes using mass spec-
trometry. Nature reviews. Mol Cell Biol 
8:645–654  
   30.  Fields S, Song O (1989) A novel genetic sys-
tem to detect protein–protein interactions. 
Nature 340:245–246  
  31.  Stagljar I, Korostensky C, Johnsson N et al 
(1998) A genetic system based on split-ubiqui-
tin for the analysis of interactions between 
membrane proteins in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 95:5187–5192  
  32.  Morell M, Ventura S, Aviles FX (2009) Protein 
complementation assays: approaches for the in 
vivo analysis of protein interactions. FEBS Lett 
583:1684–1691  
  33.  Wodak SJ, Vlasblom J, Pu S (2011) High- 
throughput analyses and curation of protein 
interactions in yeast. Methods Mol Biol 759: 
381–406  
  34.  Bader JS, Chaudhuri A, Rothberg JM et al 
(2004) Gaining conﬁ dence in high- throughput 
protein interaction networks. Nat Biotechnol 
22:78–85  
  35.  Braun P, Tasan M, Dreze M et al (2009) An 
experimentally derived conﬁ dence score for 
binary 
protein–protein 
interactions. 
Nat 
Methods 6:91–97  
  36.  Kuhner S, van Noort V, Betts MJ et al (2009) 
Proteome organization in a genome-reduced 
bacterium. Science 326:1235–1240  
  37.  Giot L, Bader JS, Brouwer C et al (2003) A 
protein interaction map of Drosophila melano-
gaster. Science 302: 1727–1736  
  38.  Kerrien S, Orchard S, Montecchi-Palazzi L 
et al (2007) Broadening the horizon–level 2.5 
of the HUPO-PSI format for molecular inter-
actions. BMC Biol 5:44  
  39.  Brown KR, Jurisica I (2005) Online predicted 
human interaction database. Bioinformatics 
21:2076–2082  
  40.  Collins SR, Miller KM, Maas NL et al (2007) 
Functional dissection of protein complexes 
involved in yeast chromosome biology using a 
genetic 
interaction 
map. 
Nature 
446:
806–810  
  41.  Lehner B, Crombie C, Tischler J et al (2006) 
Systematic mapping of genetic interactions in 
 Caenorhabditis elegans  identiﬁ es common 
modiﬁ ers of diverse signaling pathways. Nat 
Genet 38:896–903  
 42.  Tong AH, Lesage G, Bader GD et al (2004) 
Global mapping of the yeast genetic interac-
tion network. Science 303:808–813  
   43.  Boutet E, Lieberherr D, Tognolli M et al 
(2007) UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Methods Mol 
Biol 406:89–112  
  44.  Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA et al (2012) 
Database resources of the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Res 
40:D13–D25  
  45.  Ceol A, Chatr-Aryamontri A, Licata L et al 
(2008) Linking entries in protein interaction 
database to structured text: the FEBS Letters 
experiment. FEBS Lett 582:1171–1177  
  46.  Lopes CT, Franz M, Kazi F et al (2010) 
Cytoscape Web: an interactive web-based net-
work browser. Bioinformatics 26:2347–2348  
  47.  Turinsky AL, Turner B, Borja RC et al (2011) 
DAnCER: 
disease-annotated 
chromatin 
 epigenetics resource. Nucleic Acids Res 39:
D889–D894  
Andrei L. Turinsky et al.

331
  48.  Lowe HJ, Barnett GO (1994) Understanding 
and using the medical subject headings 
(MeSH) vocabulary to perform literature 
searches. JAMA 271:1103–1108  
  49.   Gillies SG, Haddley K, Vasiliou SA et al (2011) 
Distinct gene expression proﬁ les directed by 
the isoforms of the transcription factor neu-
ron-restrictive 
silencer 
factor 
in 
human 
SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells. J Mol Neurosci 
44: 77–90  
  50.  Palm K, Metsis M, Timmusk T (1999) Neuron- 
speciﬁ c splicing of zinc ﬁ nger transcription fac-
tor 
REST/NRSF/XBR 
is 
frequent 
in 
neuroblastomas and conserved in human, 
mouse and rat. Brain research. Mol Brain Res 
72:30–39  
  51.  Canzonetta C, Mulligan C, Deutsch S et al 
(2008) DYRK1A- dosage imbalance perturbs 
NRSF/REST levels, deregulating pluripotency 
and embryonic stem cell fate in Down syn-
drome. Am J Hum Genet 83:388–400  
  52.  Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA et al (2000) 
Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁ cation of biol-
ogy. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat 
Genet 25:25–29  
  53.  Naruse Y, Aoki T, Kojima T et al (1999) Neural 
restrictive silencer factor recruits mSin3 and 
histone deacetylase complex to repress neuron-
speciﬁ c target genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
96:13691–13696  
  54.  Wang J, Rao S, Chu J et al (2006) A protein 
interaction network for pluripotency of embry-
onic stem cells. Nature 444:364–368 
  55.  Smoot ME, Ono K, Ruscheinski J et al (2011) 
Cytoscape 2.8: new features for data integra-
tion and network visualization. Bioinformatics 
27:431–432  
  56.   Gu H, Liang Y, Mandel G et al (2005) 
Components of the REST/CoREST/histone 
deacetylase repressor complex are disrupted, 
modiﬁ ed, and translocated in HSV-1-infected 
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:7571–7576  
Navigating Protein Interaction Landscape with iRefWeb 

333
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_23, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 23  
 Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins 
 Marjorie  M.  Harding and  Kun-Yi  Hsin 
 Abstract 
 Modeling and analogy are commonly used to identify the part that a metal may play in the structure or 
function of a new protein which has been recognized by structural genomics. Mespeus (  http://mespeus.
bch.ed.ac.uk/MESPEUS_10/   ) lists metal protein interactions whose geometry has been experimentally 
determined and allows them to be visualized. This can contribute to the modeling process. The use of 
Mespeus is described with a series of examples.  
 Key words   Metal  ,  Metal site  ,   Metal coordination group  ,  Metal site geometry  ,  Metalloprotein  , 
 Metalloprotein structure  ,  Database  
1  Introduction 
 For a substantial number of proteins (probably about 40 % of 
known proteins) one or more metal atoms play a key part in the 
function or structure of the protein, or both. For new proteins, 
recognized through structural genomics, there is no direct evidence 
about the part that metals may play in their structure or function; 
this is usually proposed by modeling and by analogy with known 
proteins. The Mespeus database [ 1 ] of experimentally established 
geometry of metal protein interactions, with its user- friendly Web 
interface, allows interactions to be listed and to be visualized; this 
can make a helpful contribution to the modeling process. 
 The data in the Mespeus database have been extracted from all 
metal containing protein crystal structures determined by diffrac-
tion methods to a resolution of 2.5 Å or better, which were in the 
Protein Data Bank (PDB) [ 2 ] at January 2010; further updates for 
Mespeus are intended. The metals Na, Mg, K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, 
Cu, and Zn are included. Metal–protein interactions are included 
whenever the distance from metal to a protein donor atom (usually 
N, O, or S) is within the expected “target” distance [ 3 ] plus an 
allowance of 0.75 Å for experimental errors in their coordinates. 

334
Interactions of metals with water molecules or non-protein small 
molecules within the protein crystal are also included. 
 Mespeus is thus a useful tool for exploring the variety of metal–
protein interactions or for examining these in particular proteins, 
as shown in the examples below. Mespeus and similar tools have 
already been used to establish mean distances and likely ranges of 
distances for many of the commoner types of interaction; the 
reader may ﬁ nd it useful to look at [ 4 ] for these. 
 For metals not included in Mespeus, or for very recent struc-
tures, “Metal Interactions in Protein Structures” (MIPS, provided 
by the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore [ 5 ]) can be used. 
This database and interface provides information similar to that in 
Mespeus. It covers a wider range of metals, it is up to date, and its 
graphical display is very good. Its search system and the presenta-
tion of results are quite different from Mespeus.  
2  Materials 
 With a Web browser go to   http://mespeus.bch.ed.ac.uk/
MESPEUS_10/   . The browser Mozilla Firefox has been used 
extensively in all the development of Mespeus, but other browsers 
should be equivalent. The Mespeus interface uses Java; you may be 
prompted to download some Java material (from   www.java.com   , 
provided by Oracle).  
3  Methods 
 On the home page note that there is a link to an introduction, 
which has explanations of many of the features. There is also a link 
to Jmol, the package used for graphical display [ 6 ], a reference to 
the original article on Mespeus [ 1 ], and advice on how to query 
the database directly with SQL [ 7 ]. 
 It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the PDB conventions 
of nomenclature. For example Asp, an aspartate residue, coordinates 
to a metal through either OD1 or OD2, the side chain carboxylate 
O’s; His, histidine, through ND or NE of the imidazole group (Nδ or 
Nε); etc. Note that when Tyr, tyrosine, coordinates to metal it is 
through phenolic –O − but this is named OH. Also, in many structures 
it happens that the crystal asymmetric unit (the unique part) contains 
two or more independent protein molecules. Interactions within each 
of these therefore appear in the lists, usually distinguished as molecule 
A, B, etc.; normally they have the same geometry, but experimental 
errors in the atom coordinates lead to small differences in the dis-
tances quoted. ( see  Note 1 , or ref.  4 for more.) 
 From the home page, click on the title, MESPEUS_10; this 
will take you to the main query page (Fig.  1 ).
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin

335
 Fig. 1  Main query page of Mespeus, showing Cu selected as metal, and cysteine as donor group 
 
Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins

336
 On the main query page:
  1.   Select (by a click) the metal, Cu; its box will be ticked; select 
the donor group, S of cysteine; it should be marked with a dot; 
click on search; the results page should appear (Fig.  2 ), includ-
ing the number of hits (898 in this case) and one line of details 
for each. Each hit represents one Cu-S Cys interaction, and the 
items shown are:
 (a)  The Cu–S distance in Å. 
 (b)    The coordination number of the Cu.  
 (c)   Information about the coordination shape (follow   
 in 
column heading for deﬁ nitions).  
 (d)   The metal name with its residue number and chain 
 identiﬁ er, as it appears in the PDB.  
 (e)   The donor atom name, with its residue name, as it appears 
in the PDB.  
 (f)   The PDBID, identifying the protein in the PDB.  
 (g)   The resolution of the structure determination; the lower this 
number the more precise is the determination likely to be.  
 (h)    r.m.s.d. (follow  
 in column heading for deﬁ nition) can 
also be useful as a quality indicator of the metal site 
 geometry reported.  
 (i)  Difference (in Å) from the expected or target distance for 
this interaction.  
  2.   For any one Cu atom in these search results the amino-acid 
residues and other entities (e.g., water molecules) in its coor-
dination group may be displayed by clicking on the metal 
name. Figure  3 (left) is an example, for Cu 156A in 1A3Z, the 
ﬁ rst line of the search results. In this display
 (a)  The whole image can be rotated with left mouse button.  
 (b)   At the bottom of the image, controls allow centering of 
the metal atom, display of donor names, distances to the 
metal atom, angles at the metal atom, or reset.  
 (c)  Jmol facilities can be accessed with the right mouse but-
ton; for example zoom 200 or zoom 400 may be helpful 
before displaying distances or angles.  
 (d)   Atom names can be shown by hovering over the atom 
with the cursor.  
 (e)  Distances can be evaluated; double click on the ﬁ rst atom 
and click on the second; angles similarly.  
 (f)   The whole protein molecule may also be displayed, rotated etc. 
There is an option  Gray   which will show the protein chain 
trace along with this metal coordination group as in Fig  3 
(right) (but it does not show any other metals in the protein).  
3.1  A Simple Search: 
For Interactions of Cu 
with Cysteine 
Side Chains
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin

337
 Fig. 2  Part of results page, from search for Cu with S of cysteine 
 
Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins

338
 (g)  Below the image, coordination number and shape infor-
mation are summarized (and below that is the informa-
tion for this query retrieved by the SQL question to the 
database).  
 If metal to donor atom bonds are not displayed in the 
image;  see  Note 2 . If the coordination number seems 
abnormally low ( see  Note 3 ). 
 (Return to the search results by closing the current tab, 
or selecting the previous tab.)  
  3.  From the search results page (like Fig.  2 ) clicking on the PDBID 
will display the whole protein molecule as in Fig.  4 for the protein 
structure 1E30 (on line 58). One panel shows the protein mole-
cule, which can be manipulated in the same way as the images 
above; there are options for different styles for showing the chain. 
The other panel gives information about the protein and its struc-
ture determination, followed by details of each metal coordina-
tion group in the protein—full metal and donor atom names as 
they are given in the PDB, distances, and  B values (vibration 
parameters) for metal and donor atoms. (The site occupancies 
given are the product of metal and donor site occupancy. Most 
metals have occupancy 1.0; some donor atoms are reported to 
have occupancy less than 1.0, i.e., in the crystal they are present 
at the stated position in some molecules but not others.)
 Fig. 3  Left : Image of one metal coordination group, that of Cu 156A in 1A3Z; in this coordination group there 
are ND atoms from two histidine residues, one S of methionine as well as one S of cysteine.  Right : Image of 
the whole protein molecule, 1A3Z, including Cu 156A and its coordination group.  See Subheading  3.1 ,  step 2 
 
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin

339
 The relationship between metal and protein can often be 
seen clearly by selecting “translucent” or “grey” for the pro-
tein image and then clicking on the metal(s) in the table to the 
right. Alternatively, any one metal coordination group can be 
viewed by clicking on one of its donor groups.  
 This can be useful to select only higher resolution structures, which 
are normally the more accurate ones. From the main query page, 
repeat the search for Cu interactions with S of cysteine, but give 
the maximum resolution (on the second bottom line) as 1.5 Å. 
There are now only 98 hits.  
 Carry out the search for the required kind of distance and the cho-
sen maximum resolution. At the top of the results page click on 
“Means and Distribution” to display mean, standard deviation, 
distribution, etc. 
 If there are inappropriate entries in the list which you wish to 
remove, tick the delete box on the right, return to the top of the 
column and press delete, then recalculate Means and Distribution.  
 On the query page, below the search boxes for different metals, 
the coordination number can be speciﬁ ed, or a range of coordina-
tion numbers can be speciﬁ ed. For some donor groups there are 
additional questions in the new panel; for example with histidine, 
3.2  Search with 
Restricted Resolution 
Range
3.3  Evaluation of 
Average Distances
3.4  Specifying 
Coordination Number 
and Other Properties
 Fig. 4  Display of a selected protein as described in Subheading  3.7 ; the protein structure is 1E30 
 
Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins

340
coordination by the ND atom of the imidazole group, or the NE 
atom, or either can be speciﬁ ed. Note that distinction between 
mono- and bi-dentate carboxylate donors (Asp and Glu) is not 
always clear or unambiguous [ 4 ].  
 On the query page “Other donor atom in the protein molecule” 
may be chosen and for this additional options are shown which 
occur less commonly. If “Donor atom from a non-protein mole-
cule” is chosen the additional options include the water molecule, 
which is very common, and various others. The database includes 
every atom except C, H, or P, found within interacting distance of 
any metal atom; occasionally one will not be a conventional “donor” 
atom, for example short metal–metal contacts are found and listed. 
In the search by name for a non-protein donor group, e.g., ADP, it 
is necessary to give the “het group” name as used in the PDB.  
 Carry out the search required. On the results page, click on the 
option “Download query result” near top of page. The resulting 
ﬁ le has tab delimiters and can be unzipped and fed straight into 
Microsoft EXCEL for further manipulation.  
 This can be done by inserting the PDB Code on the top line of the 
query page. The results are as described in Subheading  3.1 ,  step 3 . 
 In the Mespeus database there is some information that is not acces-
sible through the Web interface, but can be accessed with SQL 
statements; for example a resolution range can be speciﬁ ed, rather 
than just a maximum resolution, or interactions can be selected 
according to the protein class (e.g., isomerase), or the number of 
metal sites in the PDB list of atoms, or the crystallographic space 
group, etc. Some of the results given in ref.  4 were obtained this 
way. Details will be provided on request for SQL access.  
 The procedure in Subheading  3.1 ,  step 3 , shows the composition 
of all the metal coordination groups in one protein. It gives all 
their constituent donor groups and, if the donor groups are part of 
the protein molecule, their positions in the protein chain (i.e., resi-
due numbers). This is for one protein structure at a time. It may 
sometimes be useful to list the information for coordination groups 
in different proteins all together—for surveys, comparisons, etc.; 
this can be done at present with a closely associated Web site. (It is 
hoped that eventually these lists will be updated and incorporated 
into the Mespeus database.)
  (a)   In a new browser window go to   http://mespeus.bch.ed.ac.
uk/tanna/   . 
 (b)   Select item 3, “New lists for 10 Metals.”  
3.5  Other Donor 
Atoms and Groups
3.6  Search Results 
Can Be Downloaded 
for Further Processing
3.7  Search for All 
Metals in One Protein 
Structure
3.8  More Advanced 
Queries Using SQL
3.9  Listing and 
Comparison of 
Coordination Groups 
for Many Proteins
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin

341
  (c)    Choose “ALL METAL COORDINATION GROUPS,” and 
then the required metal, e.g., Mn. A table is shown like that 
in Fig.  5 . There are columns for the metal, and for the set of 
donors which constitute the coordination group given as 
one letter codes (e.g., HHD for His.His.Asp), and for the 
relative positions of the donor residues in the amino-acid 
sequence (sd1, sd2, etc.). Another column gives, in abbrevi-
ated form, details of the non-protein donors in each coordi-
nation group; for example in the last coordination group 
listed in Fig.  5 , Mn is coordinated by aspartate, glutamate, 
and three water molecules; in the ﬁ rst Mn coordination 
group in the list there are four N atoms as non-protein 
donors—this is likely to be a haem group or similar. Other 
columns give coordination number, PDB code, etc.; a fuller 
explanation is given on the Web site, and in the discussion 
and description of coordination groups in ref.  8 .
 (d)   This table of coordination groups can be sorted or manipu-
lated in many ways in EXCEL. (Copy the contents of the Web 
page and paste it into an EXCEL ﬁ le.)  
4  Notes 
  1.   There may be errors and uncertainties in the distances given 
by Mespeus to represent metal–protein interactions. The atom 
coordinates established in protein structure determination are 
subject to experimental errors (as well as to other occasional 
 Fig. 5  Example of parts of listing of metal coordination groups for Mn from   http://mespeus.bch.ed.ac.uk/tanna/
newcngps/mn_cngps_4.htm  — see Subheading  3.9 , and the Web site itself for further explanation 
 
Mespeus—A Database of Metal Interactions with Proteins

342
problems like misidentiﬁ cation of atoms). The resolution of 
the structure determination is a rough guide to the precision 
that can be expected. With 1 Å resolution data the standard 
uncertainty (SU) of an M–O distance can be ~0.07 Å (and 
conﬁ dence limits three times this, ± 0.2 Å); at 2 Å resolution 
the standard uncertainty rises to 0.2–0.4 Å. (More informa-
tion is given in ref.  4 .) 
  2.   Sometimes metal to donor bonds are not displayed in images, 
particularly those where the metal is Na, K, Mg, or Ca. The 
default distances which Jmol [ 6 ] uses to decide whether a 
bond should be drawn are often not completely appropriate 
for protein structures. In the display Jmol can be used to eval-
uate the distances (Subheading  3.1 ,  step 2 e). Distances 
Na–O < 2.6 Å, Mg–O < 2.3 Å, K–O < 3.0 Å or Ca–O < 2.6 Å 
should certainly be considered as major interactions (these val-
ues are the “target distances” [ 2 ] plus an allowance of 0.2 Å 
for coordinate errors); slightly longer distances would repre-
sent weaker interactions. Especially for Na and K these interac-
tions are predominantly electrostatic, rather than the result of 
covalent bond formation ( see ref.  4 ). 
  3.   Occasionally a metal coordination group includes donor atoms 
from 2, 3, or 4 identical protein monomers, related by exact 
crystallographic symmetry;  in this case since the PDB [ 2 ] lists 
only the atoms from one monomer, Mespeus shows an 
incomplete coordination group. (Several insulin structures are 
affected in this way.)  
 Acknowledgements 
 Our thanks are due to Professor M. Walkinshaw and Dr. P. 
Taylor for laboratory space, computer support, and many help-
ful discussions.  
 References 
  1.   Hsin K, Sheng Y, Harding MM et al (2008) 
MESPEUS: a database of the geometry of metal 
sites in proteins. J Appl Cryst 41:963–968  
  2.   Berman H, Henrick K, Nakamura H et al 
(2007) The worldwide protein data bank 
 (wwwPDB): ensuring a single, uniform archive 
of 
PDB 
Data. 
Nucleic 
Acids 
Res 
35:
D301–D303 
  3.   Harding MM (2006) Small revisions to pre-
dicted distances around metal sites in proteins. 
Acta Crystallogr D 62:678–682  
  4.   Harding MM, Nowicki MW, Walkinshaw MD 
(2010) Metals in protein structures: a review of 
their principal features. Cryst Rev 16:247–302  
  5.  Hemavathi K, Kalaivani M, Udayakumar A et al 
(2010) MIPS: metal interactions in protein 
structures. J Appl Cryst 43:196–199  
  6.    http://jmol.sourceforge.net/   (for Jmol)  
  7.    http://www.mysql.com/  (for SQL)  
  8.  Harding MM (2004) The architecture of metal 
coordination 
groups 
in 
proteins. 
Acta 
Crystallogr D 60:849–859  
Marjorie M. Harding and Kun-Yi Hsin

343
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology, 
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_24, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 Chapter 24  
 High-Quality Macromolecular Graphics on Mobile Devices: 
A Quick Starter’s Guide 
 Chin-Pang  Benny  Yiu and  Yu  Wai  Chen 
 Abstract 
 With the rise of tablets, truly portable molecular graphics are now available for wide use by scientists to 
share structural information in real time at a reasonable cost. We have surveyed the existing software avail-
able on Apple iPads and on Android tablets in order to make a recommendation to potential users, primar-
ily based on the product features. Among 12 apps,  iMolview (available on both platforms) stands out to be 
our choice, with  PyMOL app (iOS) a close alternative and  RCSB PDB Mobile viewer / NDKmol (both 
platforms) offering some uniquely useful functions. Finally, we include a tutorial on how to get started 
using  iMolview to do some simple visualization in 10 min.  
 Key words   Protein structure  ,   RCSB PDB  ,   Protein data bank  ,   Macromolecular graphics  ,   Tablets , 
 Mobile devices  ,   iMolview  ,   PyMOL  ,   iPad  ,   iPhone  ,   iOS ,   Android 
1  Introduction 
 Molecular graphics is the language of structural biologists. In the 
past few years, the world witnessed the rise of the thin and light-
weight handheld tablets. These are portable computers in every 
sense, without keyboard or mouse, thanks to a touch-sensitive 
screen. The Apple iPad has a 250 mm (9.7 in.) screen of very high 
sensitivity and resolution (1,024 × 768 for ﬁ rst and second genera-
tions, and iPad mini; 2,048 × 1,536 for third and fourth genera-
tions). Since their inception, iPads have been well received by 
consumers which encouraged software development on the iOS 
(the operating system on Apple mobile devices) platform. On the 
other hand, many rivals to iPads have been developed; these devices 
mostly adopt the Google Android operating system which is based 
on Linux. Together, these mobile devices have completely revolu-
tionized how users interact with computers, in more intuitive ways 
using ﬁ nger gestures. 

344
 In this article, we shall compare the currently available molecu-
lar graphics products on the iPads and the Android tablets. Among 
these, we shall recommend the best all-round graphics software. 
Next we shall discuss how to set up and perform some very basic 
visualization tasks. We aim to get people who are not familiar with 
molecular graphics to start using it on their mobile devices.  
2  Graphics Software 
 The iOS apps (application software on mobile devices) were tested 
on an iPad 2 (16 GB, iOS 6.1) which is the most popular device at 
the time of writing (April, 2013). Most of the software written for the 
iOS should be able to run on an iPhone. Unfortunately, attempts to 
loan newer devices from Apple Europe Ltd. for testing were not 
successful. For the Android platform, we used an inexpensive ($120) 
tablet (8 GB, Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich).  
 We identiﬁ ed 12 mobile graphics apps as listed in Table  1 (see 
Note 6). As we shall reveal, the best apps do not cost more than 
one US dollar. We ﬁ nd it important to consider whether apps are 
under active development because this is related to support, and 
2.1  Hardware Used 
for Testing
2.2  Comparison of 
Graphics Software
 Table 1 
 Basic information of mobile apps for macromolecular graphics 
 App 
 iOS 
 And. 
 Price ($) 
 Developer 
 Version (updated) 
 iMolview 
 ● 
 ● 
 Free (lite) 
 Molsoft 
 1.0/1.2 (5/2013)
1.8.1 (10/2013) 
 ● 
 0.99 (full) 
 PyMOL 
 ● 
 Free 
 Schrödinger 
 1.1.1 (11/2012) 
 RCSB PDB Mobile 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Free 
 RCSB PDB 
 3.15 (9/2013) 
 Ball & Stick 
 ● 
 Free 
 MolySym 
 1.5.2 (9/2013) 
 CueMol viewer 
 ● 
 Free 
 Ryuichiro Ishitani 
 2.1.0.250 (11/2012) 
 Molecules 
 ● 
 Free 
 Sunset Lake 
 2.1 (4/2012) 
 iPharosDreams 
 ● 
 4.99 
 EQUISnZAROO 
 1.0.2 (10/2011) 
 FinMol 
 ● 
 4.99 
 Dubesoft 
 1.00 (2/2012) 
 CMol 
 ● 
 Free 
 Helen Ginn 
 1.3.3 (4/2011) 
 NDKmol/ESmol 
 ● 
 Free 
 biochem_fan 
 0.92/0.74 (11/2012) 
 Jmol MV 
 ● 
 Free 
 Bob Hanson 
 1.1 (12/2011) 
 Atomdroid 
 ● 
 Free 
 CCB Goettingen 
 1.5.0 (6/2012) 
 The respective versions reviewed are the latest at the time of proof (October 2013;  see  Note 7). The price indi-
cated is that advertised on developer’s Web sites ( see  Note 6 ) and may not match the local App Store price. 
“And.” stands for Android. Open circle: beta version available but not tested here  
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen

345
thus the release dates of the latest version are included. For the iOS 
platform, one can assume that apps that have not been updated 
since the introduction of iOS 6, a major operating system upgrade 
in September 2012, are considered not under active development. 
We picked six apps for detailed comparison. Since there are free or 
low-cost apps that perform very well, we did not ﬁ nd it worthwhile 
to pursue the costlier ones. The other apps are not reviewed because 
they are lacking in some important ways ( see  Note 1 ).
 We performed a comparison of the most essential functions 
offered by the six molecular graphics apps (Table  2 ). Note that this 
is a features comparison and computing performance was not vig-
orously tested. The viewer in  RCSB PDB Mobile adopted the same 
software core of  NDKmol so these are reviewed together. All apps 
offer the basic control operations (rotate, translate, zoom, and 
clip), except for  Jmol MV where zoom is not available. We used the 
crystal and NMR structures of the p53 tetramerization domain 
(PDB ID 1AIE and 2J0Z,  see  Note 2 ), a small protein of 31 resi-
dues (monomer) or 124 residues (tetramer) for testing.
 From Table  2 ,  iMolview and  PyMOL compare similarly and 
both offer the full set of features to satisfy most structural biolo-
gists’ needs. We found  iMolview easier to use and it offers an 
extremely useful sequence view which enables quick access to any 
residue in the structure.  PyMOL on desktop computers is one the 
most popular molecular graphics software and its app excels in pro-
ducing ray-traced photorealistic scenes.  Jmol is a reputable Java pro-
gram that is widely used for interactive molecular graphics embedded 
in Web pages. However, at the moment, its app on the Android 
platform ( Jmol MV , for  M olecular  V isualization) is still under devel-
opment, with many useful features only accessible via the command 
console (Table  2 ). Until these are incorporated into a menu-driven 
interface, its use is restricted to  Jmol expert users.  NDKmol and its 
counterpart  RCSB PDB Mobile viewer are unique in being able to 
display the biological assembly of a crystal structure. This is best 
illustrated with PDB ID 1AIE ( see  Note 2 ). While all other apps 
show only the 31-residue monomer in the crystallographic asym-
metric unit,  RCSB PDB Mobile viewer/ NDKmol displays this as a 
tetramer (Fig.  1 ), correctly taking crystallographic symmetry and 
oligomerization information into account.  Ball &  Stick offers an 
interesting feature which allows view sharing with mobile devices in 
proximity and in real time. We tested this and it works very well. 
 CMol , unfortunately, is not under active development and can only 
open/import PDB ﬁ les (e.g., as an e-mail attachment), but cannot 
download from the RCSB Protein Data Bank  .
 The quality of the graphic images produced by various apps is 
ranked in descending order, as follows:  PyMOL (ray tracing, 
Fig.  1a ),  iMolview ,  Ball &  Stick ,  RCSB PDB Mobile viewer/ NDKmol 
(Fig.  1b ),  Jmol MV ,  CMol . 
Mobile Molecular Graphics Software and Primer

346
 Table 2 
 A comparison of main features of six molecular graphics apps 
 Features 
 iMolview a 
 PyMOL 
 RCSB PDB 
Mobile/NDKmol b 
 Ball & Stick 
 Jmol MV 
 CMol 
 Structural object 
styles 
 Ball-and-stick 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Space ﬁ lling 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Ribbon/cartoon 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 Wire/stick 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 Surface 
 ● 
 ● 
 B-factor putty 
 ● 
 ● 
 Custom color 
 Background 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 ● 
 Graphical object 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 ● 
 Label 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Selection 
 To act on a subset 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 ● 
 Sequence view 
 ✪ 
 Biological assembly 
 ✪ 
 Measure 
 Distance, angle 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 View and render 
 Center on atom 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Stereo 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Ray trace 
 ✪ 
 Fog 
 ● 
 ○ 
 ◗ 
 ● 
 Rock/spin 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 ● 
 Load/import 
 PDB 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ○ 
 Local import 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 ● 
 Save/export 
 Dropbox 
 ● 
 ● 
 e-mail 
 ● 
 ● 
 Wi-Fi share 
 ✪ 
 Filled circle : feature available,  ﬁ lled circle with a star : unique feature,  half-ﬁ lled circle : only present in  NDKmol , 
 Open-circle : feature that is problematic or, in  Jmol MV , needs to be invoked manually from the command console 
(i.e., no menu interface). Note that each of these software has additional advanced features (e.g., transparency, 
molecules alignment, scripting) that are not included here, please refer to the respective developer’s Web page 
 a iMolview full version (iOS) 
 b NDKmol and the viewer in the  RCSB PDB Mobile app share the same core  
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen

347
 If one needs a simple tool to import a PDB ﬁ le ( see  Note 2 ) 
and get an overall view of the protein fold with cartoon or ribbon 
style, then any of these apps can serve the purpose. The deciding 
factor of a good structural biologist’s tool is whether it allows the 
user to select a subset of atoms for rendering. For this, only 
 iMolview ,  PyMOL , and  CMol are suitable ( Jmol MV can do that too 
but in a hidden way).  
3  Methods (Using  iMolview ) 
 iMolview can be used with or without Internet. An active connec-
tion is required to download structures from the PDB. After the 
PDB ﬁ le has been imported, structure viewing, analysis and ren-
dering can be performed ofﬂ ine (without Internet). 
 iMolview is available ($0.99) in the Apple App Store for iPhones 
and iPads. There is also a “Lite” (free) version which is available in 
both Apple App Store and in Google Play for Android devices. 
Some features described in the following sections (e.g., molecular 
surface) are only available in the full version.  
  1.  Make sure that there is an active Internet connection 
(Wi-Fi or 3G).  
  2.  Tap the top search bar; and enter some search criteria into it. 
For this tutorial, type “p53 tetramerization.” As the text is 
typed in, a dropdown menu appears listing all the entries that 
3.1  Installation
3.2  Importing 
a PDB Entry
 Fig. 1  PyMOL app and  RCSB PDB Mobile  viewer compared. The crystal structure 
of p53 tetramerization domain (PDB ID 1AIE) rendered in ( a )  PyMOL app (ray 
traced) and ( b )  RCSB PDB Mobile . By default,  RCSB PDB Mobile shows the bio-
logically functional tetrameric arrangement, whereas all other graphics software 
shows the monomer in the crystallographic asymmetric unit 
 
Mobile Molecular Graphics Software and Primer

348
satisfy the search text string. Tap on the third entry starting 
with “2J0Z,” which is the PDB ID ( see  Note 2 ). This is the 
solution NMR structure of the tetramerization domain of the 
p53 tumor suppressor.  
  3.  A representation of the structure appears on the screen (Fig.  2 ). 
The default style is the Richardson protein cartoon ( see  Note 
3 ), colored by secondary structure. At the bottom of the 
screen, the protein sequence is shown, with residue numbers, 
and color-coded to match the coloring scheme of the cartoon. 
Multiple protein chains in the crystal structure (e.g., a, b, c, d 
here) are listed as tabs at the very bottom. One can tab on these 
chain identiﬁ er tabs to quickly show/hide a chain.
 Fig. 2  Default  iMolview display. The default display in  iMolview  of the p53 tetramer-
ization domain (PDB ID 2J0Z) as Richardson secondary-structure cartoon, in a 
white background. At the  bottom of the display screen, the protein sequence is 
shown, with residue numbers and color-coded by secondary structure that matches 
the coloring scheme of the cartoon, and chain tabs (a, b, c, d) at the very bottom  
 
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen

349
   Set the background to white by tapping the Menu button (top right), 
then tap “Color background, and pick white from the palette. 
Tap  Menu button, tap “Tools >”; on the next menu, tap the ﬁ rst 
item “Assign Secondary Structure” (Fig.  3 ).
 Tap  Menu button, tap the grey “Back” button, then tap “Settings 
>”; on the next menu, slide the “Transparent Ribbon”  ON (default 
is OFF; Fig.  4 ).
  1.  At the bottom of the screen, tap and hold the “d” chain of the 
structure. This selects the whole D chain and the selected 
atoms are represented by small green crosses.  
  2.  Tap  Menu button, make sure that you are at the top level of 
the main menu (you will see “Display” as the ﬁ rst item in this 
menu). If you just follow Subheading  3.3.2 above, you will 
ﬁ nd yourself at an inner menu level, then you need to tap the 
 Back button at the top of the menu to return to the top level.  
  3.   To the right of the “Display”, tap the ﬁ fth icon ( see  Note 4 ) 
for surface (Fig.  5 ).
3.3  Viewing with 
Different Styles
3.3.1  Rainbow Coloring 
(Blue to Red) from N- to 
C-Termini
3.3.2  Transparent Items
3.3.3  Molecular Surface
 Fig. 3  Rainbow color display in  iMolview 
 
Mobile Molecular Graphics Software and Primer

350
 On the iPad, this is very easy. Just press on/off button and the 
main button together, a screenshot will be saved to the iPad’s pho-
tos storage. The image can then be shared with other mobile 
devices ( see  Note 5 ). 
4  Conclusion 
 It is very exciting to see portable molecular graphics developed 
into the present state. Finally, scientists can carry molecular models 
around and show these to their colleagues. The models can be 
examined in real time, using natural hand and ﬁ nger manipula-
tions. Among the software available, the low-cost  iMolview tops 
the list because of its user friendliness and it offers the most com-
plete set of functions for visual communication.  PyMOL for iOS is 
not far behind and the developer’s Web site announced that a ver-
sion for Android is under development.  RCSB PDB Mobile for 
Android is currently in alpha testing.  Jmol MV lags behind but it 
3.4  Exporting 
an Image
 Fig. 4  Transparent ribbon display in  iMolview 
 
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen

351
still shows great potential. We expect to see these products, for free 
or at very low costs, come to maturity in the near future. We hope 
that with the primer we have demonstrated how easy it is to use 
 iMolview to create a molecular scene of mixed styles, and it can 
help some colleagues to start using their tablets in visualizing and 
communicating structures.  
5  Notes 
  1.  CueMol viewer app (iOS) is only a viewer for scenes created on 
the desktop versions of  CueMol and does not offer standalone 
graphics capability. Several apps are mainly designed for small 
molecules and lack the full graphical representation styles for 
protein structures—these include  Molecules (iOS) and 
 Atomdriod (Android).  ESmol is the little brother of  NDKmol 
but for supporting old devices.  
 Fig. 5  Composite display in  iMolview . Molecular surface display of the selected 
D chain of 2J0Z. The D chain is accessed by the “d” tab at the  bottom . The mol-
ecule has been zoomed in for full display in this mode using two ﬁ ngers 
 
Mobile Molecular Graphics Software and Primer

352
  2.   PDB ID is a unique 4-alphanumeric character combination 
that is assigned to each deposited structure in the Protein Data 
Bank (  www.rcsb.org   ). This ID is usually found in the manu-
script that describes that particular structure.  
  3.   Richardson cartoon style is a representation of the overall 
backbone structure of the protein, with secondary structural 
elements α-helices shown as coiled ribbons, β-strands shown 
as ﬂ at arrows, and coils/loops shown as thin tubes.  
  4.   The complete “user manual” of  iMolview is accessed by  Menu , 
then “Help” inside the app.  
  5.   The users can transfer PDB ﬁ les or images between mobile 
devices using Bluetooth-based Apps such as  iShareFiles (free), 
without Internet or  Bump (  http://bu.mp   ; free) with Wi-Fi or 
3G.  Bump is cross-platform and can be used for transferring 
ﬁ les between iPhones/iPads, Android devices, and computers. 
Obviously, the ﬁ les can also be sent via e-mail.  
  6.   Developers’ Web sites:
 iMolview :   www.molsoft.com/iMolview.html   
 PyMOL app : pymol.org/mobile  
 RCSB PDB Mobile :   www.rcsb.org/pdb/static.do?p   = mobile/
RCSBapp.html  
 Ball &  Stick :   www.molysym.com   
 CueMol :   www.cuemol.org/en   
 Molecules :   www.sunsetlakesoftware.com/molecules   
 iPharosDreams :   www.pharosdreams.com/mobile3d   
 FinMol :   www.dubesoft.com   
 CMol : cmol.org.uk  
 NDKmol/ESmol : webglmol.sourceforge.jp/android-en.html  
 Jmol MV : jmol.sourceforge.net  
 Atomdroid :   www.uni-goettingen.de/en/123989.html   
  7.   This article was written in the ﬁ rst quarter of 2013 but all 
information has been checked and updated at proofs stage 
(October, 2013).  
 Acknowledgement and Declaration 
 Helen Ginn supplied a trial license of  CMol (now free) for our 
review. In addition, we thank the developers of  iMolview (Andrew 
Orry),  PyMOL (Jason Vertrees),  RCSB PDB Mobile (Greg 
Quinn)/ NDKmol (Takanori Nakane),  Ball &  Stick (Jon Cody 
Haines), and  CMol (Helen Ginn) for responding to our request to 
check the accuracy of Table  2 . The authors share no commercial 
interests on the software or hardware described in this article.  
Chin-Pang Benny Yiu and Yu Wai Chen

353
Yu Wai Chen (ed.), Structural Genomics: General Applications, Methods in Molecular Biology,
vol. 1091, DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2014
 A 
 Active site  .........................................................................3 05 
 Affinity-purification (AP)  ........................38, 40, 47–49, 154, 
156, 170–171, 317, 319, 325, 328  
 Agarose gel  .....................................5 8, 59, 64, 67–69, 71, 98, 
106, 137, 138, 163, 166–167, 175, 180–183  
 Aggregates ........................................8 5, 87, 92, 93, 148, 177, 
224, 250, 253, 254  
 Aggregation  ........................................4 , 34, 39, 93, 184, 248, 
253–255 
 Allolactose  ..........................................................................1 9 
 Amide proton, backbone  ..............................................7 , 230  
 Analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC)  ...............................190  
 Anisotropy 
 data .............................................................................2 05 
 degree of  .....................................................................2 08 
 scaling  .................................................................2 06, 213  
 AP/MS.  See Mass spectrometry, affinity-purification 
(AP/MS) 
 Arabinose  ......................................................... 1 8–20, 23, 26  
 Asymmetric unit  ...............................................3 34, 345, 347  
 Atomic B-factors  ......................................................2 10, 212  
 sharpening  ..........................................................2 10, 212  
 AUC.  See Analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) 
 Auto-induction  ......................................1 7–31, 34, 36, 40, 47  
 Automation  ........................................................2 5, 198, 199  
 B 
 Bac-to-Bac system  ..............................................9 6, 123, 139  
 Bacmid .........................................9 6–99, 103–106, 110, 116, 
117, 128, 129, 138, 139  
 Baculoviral promoters, late  ...............................................1 26 
 Baculovirus expression vector system (BEVS)  .............75, 95, 
96, 102, 107, 123–129, 132  
 Benzonase  ..........................................3 1, 77, 79, 90, 100, 101  
 BEVS.  See Baculovirus expression vector system (BEVS) 
 Binding site  ................................................ 1 8, 230, 305, 306  
 BioGRID  ..........................................3 16, 324, 325, 328, 329  
 Bioinformatics  ......................................................6 , 300, 327  
 Bovine serum albumin (BSA)  ...........................59, 64, 65, 69, 
99, 261, 271 
 Buffer exchange  ............................................................4 0, 50  
 Buffer subtraction  .............................................2 48, 251–254  
 BugBuster  ..............................................3 1, 74, 233, 237, 242  
 C 
 Cambridge Structure Database (CSD) .............................306  
 Cell(s) 
 bacterial   ( see Strains,  E. coli ) 
 insect 
 high five (BTI-Tn-5B1-4)  ......................................96  
 Sf9 or Sf21  .............................................. 96, 107, 125  
 mammalian 
 CHO  ( see Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) 
cells, culture of) 
 Flp-In™ T-REx™ HEK293 cells  .................2 61, 270  
 HEK293  ( see HEK293 cells, culture of) 
 Cell density  ...................................1 8, 30, 108, 114, 118, 120, 
128, 145, 231, 236, 241  
 Cell disruption  ......................................................9 0, 91, 121  
 Cell lysis  .................................... 47, 84, 90, 91, 120, 182, 241  
 Cell viability  .....................................................1 17, 120, 148  
 Cell-free protein expression 
 E. coli ........................................................... 1 51, 153–155  
 vectors   ( see pEU-series; Plasmids) 
 wheat germ  .........................................................1 61, 162  
 Chaperones, bacterial 
 DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE  .............................................1 51, 158  
 GroEL/GroES  ...................................................1 51, 158  
 Chemical cross-linking  .................................... 2 59–272, 278, 
281, 288  
 Chemical shift(s) .................................... 8, 11, 217, 219, 223, 
225, 230, 234, 235, 239, 240, 242  
 perturbation  ........................................ 2 34, 239, 240, 242  
 Chimera, UCSF ........................................................2 86, 288  
 Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, culture of  ................1 44 
 Chromatography 
 affinity  .............................................8 5, 92, 319, 324, 328  
 immobilised metal affinity 
chromatography (IMAC)  ....................47–49, 74, 78, 
85–87, 91, 92, 100, 114, 116, 135, 164, 170, 171, 173  
 ion exchange  ................................7 4, 79, 87, 94, 102, 116  
 size exclusion (SEC)  .................................. 74, 79, 85–87, 
91–94, 102, 116, 135, 182, 248, 266, 267  
 CID.   See Collision-induced-dissociation (CID) 
 Circular dichroism  ............................................................1 84 
 Cloning system 
 Gateway®   ( see Gateway® system) 
 In-Fusion®   ( see In-Fusion®) 
 INDEX 

354 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS: GENERAL APPLICATIONS
 
Index
 Cloning system (Cont.) 
 LIC   ( see Ligation independent cloning (LIC)) 
 SLIC   ( see Sequence and ligation independent cloning 
(SLIC)) 
 CMC.  See Critical micelle concentration (CMC) 
 Co-expression  ................................3 3–36, 134, 144, 152–154  
 Codon bias  ...................................................................7 3, 95  
 Collision-induced-dissociation (CID)  ......................260, 272  
 Colony PCR  ..........................................2 4, 28, 56, 58, 66–68  
 Competent cells  ..........1 8, 29, 42, 45, 59, 70, 75, 97, 136, 138  
 Construct design  ................................................3 –14, 60–62  
 Contaminants  ................................9 2, 93, 179, 181–183, 242  
 Contamination  ............. 1 9, 46–48, 68, 70, 71, 104, 109, 114, 
116, 117, 120, 148, 163, 173, 174, 179, 183, 249  
 Coordination number  .......................................3 36, 338–341  
 Cre recombinase  .......................................................1 26, 139  
 Cre-LoxP fusion  ...............................................................1 26 
 Critical micelle concentration (CMC)  .....................180, 184  
 Cross correlation  ...............................................2 79, 284, 286  
 Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM)  ..............278, 279, 283  
 Cryoprobes  .......................................................................2 38 
 Cryo-protection  ........................................................2 00, 202  
  Crystal harvesting, automated  ..................................1 97–202 
 Crystal mounting  .............................................................1 98 
 CrystalDirect  ............................................................1 97–202 
 Crystallization  .......................3 , 4, 6, 7, 13, 39, 56, 60, 74, 91, 
92, 96, 144, 154, 189–194, 197–202, 246, 311  
 likelihood  ........................................................4 , 189–194  
 CSD.   See Cambridge Structure Database (CSD) 
 CXMS.   See Mass spectrometry, Chemical cross-linking 
 Cytoscape  .................................................................3 22, 327  
 D 
 DAnCER.   See Disease-Annotated Chromatin Epigenetics 
Resource (DAnCER) 
 Data collection  ...........................6 , 8, 11, 197–199, 202, 205, 
211, 220, 222, 224, 225, 247–252, 255, 256, 282  
 Data mining  .....................................................2 98–304, 310  
 Data normalization  ...........................................................1 94 
 Database(s) 
 BioGRID   ( see BioGRID) 
 CSD  ( see Cambridge Structure Database (CSD)) 
 DAnCER   ( see Disease-Annotated Chromatin 
Epigenetics Resource (DAnCER)) 
 HPRD  ( see Human Protein Reference Database 
(HPRD)) 
 IntAct  ( see IntAct) 
 Mespeus   ( see Mespeus) 
 MINT  ( see The Molecular INTeraction 
database (MINT)) 
 MIPS   ( see Metal Interactions in Protein Structures) 
 PDB  ( see Protein Data Bank (PDB)) 
 UniProt   ( see UniProt) 
 Day of proliferation arrest (dpa)  ....................... 128, 129, 135  
 Deep well 24 (DW24)  .......................................... 35, 43, 241  
 DEER.  See Double electron electron resonance (DEER) 
  Denaturation, protein 
 curve  ...................................................................1 92, 193  
 thermal  ...............................................................1 92, 194  
 Detergents ........................................................ 1 72, 179, 180  
 Dialysis  .......................................9 4, 152, 155, 157, 163, 164, 
167–170, 173, 174, 176, 180, 184, 233, 248  
 Differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF)  ..........................190  
 Diffraction anisotropy.   See Anisotropy, data 
 Diffraction images  ............................................2 07, 305, 311  
 Disease-Annotated Chromatin Epigenetics Resource 
(DAnCER)  ..................................... 322, 323, 327  
 Disordered regions  ................................4 , 5, 7, 10, 11, 13, 62  
 Distance restraints  .............2 16, 221–223, 260, 261, 287, 290  
 Disuccinimidyl suberate, d 0 -and d 12 -labeled (d 0 -DSS and 
d 12 -DSS) ................................................. 260, 262  
 DNA ladders  ....................... 5 8, 63, 64, 67, 98, 106, 180, 183  
 DNA polymerase 
 BIOTAQ™ Red  ................................. 5 8, 66, 70, 97, 106  
 Herculase II Fusion  ......................................................5 8 
 Phusion Hot Start  ......................................................2 34 
 Platinum Pfx  .................................................................5 8 
 T4  ( see T4 DNA polymerase) 
 DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE.   See Chaperones, bacterial 
 DNase I  ....................................................................1 80–182 
 n-Dodecyl β- D -maltoside (DDM)  ...............................74, 77  
 Domain boundary  ...........................4 , 12, 13, 35, 56, 62, 143  
 Domain parsing  ........................................................4 , 12–13  
 DOMINO sampling  ................................................2 89, 290  
 Dot-blot screen  .........................................................1 44–147 
 Double electron electron resonance (DEER)  ...........215–225  
 DSF.   See Differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) 
 E 
 Electron density  ........................................ 2 99, 305, 306, 311  
 Electron density map  ........................2 05, 206, 210, 283–288, 
304, 308, 310  
 Electron microscopy (EM)  .......................261, 278, 281–283, 
286, 288–291, 298  
 Electronic paramagnetic resonance (EPR) 
spectroscopy  ............................................2 15–225 
 ELISA.   See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
 Ellipsoidal resolution boundaries  .............. 2 06, 208–211, 213  
 EMageFit  ......................................................... 2 88, 289, 291  
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)  ...............144  
 Expression screening  ............................. 3 3–52, 96, 143–148, 
152, 156, 162, 173, 176  
 in mammalian cell cultures   ( see Dot-blot screen) 
 F 
 Feeding solution  ...............................................1 52, 156, 157  
 FireDock  ..........................................................................2 83 
 Flexible regions  .................................................................2 46 

STRUCTURAL GENOMICS: GENERAL APPLICATIONS
    355
 
Index 
 Fluorescent probe  .....................................................1 90, 194  
 Fluorescent protein(s) 
 cyan (CFP) ................................................. 132–135, 137  
 green (GFP)  ................................145, 168, 174, 176, 177  
 yellow (YFP) ............................... 125, 128, 129, 134, 135  
 Fluorophore  ..............................................................1 90, 194  
 Frozen stock  .......................................................3 1, 107–108  
 Functional screening  .............................................5 6, 74, 144  
 Fusion partner (fusion tag) 
 glutathione-S-transferase (GST)  ............................34, 39  
 hexahistidine (His6) ..................................................... 65 
 histidine-thioredoxin (HIS-TRX) ................................ 38 
 maltose binding protein (MBP)  ....................... 34, 38, 39  
 N -utilizing substance A (NusA)  ....................... 34, 38, 39  
 small ubiquitin-like modifier 
(SUMO) ...............................................  34, 38, 39  
 thioredoxin (TRX)  ............................................ 34, 38, 39  
 G 
 Galactokinase  ...............................................................1 8, 19  
 β-galactosidase  ....................................................................1 9 
 Gateway® system  ........................................................3 8, 270  
 Gel electrophoresis.   See Sodium dodecyl sulfate–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 
 Gel filtration.   See Chromatography, size exclusion 
 Gene of interest (GOI)  ............................56, 57, 61, 68, 103, 
126, 132, 137, 162, 319  
 Gene ontology (GO)  ................................................322, 323  
 Glutathione- S -transferase (GST).   See Fusion partner 
 Glycerol stocks  ...............................4 0, 47, 51–52, 67–68, 71, 
78, 80, 81, 83  
 GroEL/GroES.   See Chaperones, bacterial 
 GST.  See Fusion partner 
 H 
 HEK293 cells, culture of  ......................... 1 44–146, 148, 261, 
264, 266, 270  
 Hexahistidine (His6).   See Fusion partner 
 HEXDOCK .....................................................................2 89 
 Hidden Markov model  ...................................................4 , 12  
 High resolution cutoff  ......................................................2 07 
 High resolution shell  ........................................................2 11 
 HIS-TRX fusion tag.   See Fusion partner 
 Homing endonuclease (HE) site  ..............................1 26, 133  
 Homodimer  ..............................................................2 15–225 
 Homologous recombination 
 Cre-LoxP   ( see Cre-LoxP fusion) 
 Orf1629 and lef2/603 sequences  ................................1 24 
 HPRD.   See Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) 
 Human genome  ..................................................................5 5 
 Human Protein Reference Database 
(HPRD)  ..........................................................324  
 Hydrogen bond  ....................................................7 , 223, 304  
 N -hydroxysuccinimide esters  ............................................2 60 
 I 
 IMAGE cDNA collection ..................................................5 8 
 Imidazole  ........................................4 0, 43, 44, 48, 50, 77–79, 
85, 94, 100–102, 164, 170, 171, 173, 334, 340  
 iMolview  ...................................................................3 44–352 
 IMPs. See Integral membrane proteins (IMPs) 
IMP.   See Integrative modeling platform (IMP) 
 In-Fusion®  .........................................................................56  
 Inclusion bodies  .......................................... 3 9, 179, 182, 183  
 Insoluble proteins  .............................................1 72, 179–186  
 IntAct  ....................................................... 3 16, 324, 325, 328  
 Integral membrane proteins (IMPs)  .............. 56, 96,152, 177  
 Integrative modeling platform (IMP) .......................2 77–293 
 Interaction networks  .................................................3 21–322 
 Intrinsically disordered  .............................................3 , 10, 11  
 iRefIndex  ..........................................................................3 16 
 iRefWeb  ...................................................................3 15–329 
 Isosteric amino acid  ..................................................2 34, 240  
 Isotopic labelling  ..............................................................2 35 
 K 
 Kinetics, chain exchange  ...................................................2 16 
 L 
 lac operon 
 lac repressor  ................................................. 1 8, 19, 28, 65  
 LacY  transporter  ...........................................................1 9 
 Laser photoablation  ..........................................................1 98 
 N -lauroylsarcosine.   See Sarkosyl 
 LC/MS.   See Mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography 
 Ligation independent cloning (LIC)  ......... 55–71,75, 97, 126  
 Light scattering  ............................................ 3 1, 93, 190, 249  
 Liposomes  ........................................................ 1 71, 172, 177  
 LMCPY mixture  ..............................................1 54, 156, 157  
 Low complexity region  .............................................5 , 10, 14  
 LoxP site.   See Cre-LoxP fusion 
 M 
 Maltose binding protein (MBP).   See Fusion partner 
 Mass spectrometry 
 affinity-purification (AP/MS) .................................... 317 
 chemical cross-linking (CXMS)  .................259–272, 281  
 electrospray ionization (ESI)  ..................................50, 88  
 hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX-MS)  ..............5, 7, 
9–11, 14  
 liquid chromatography (LC/MS)  .................................50  
 matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight 
(MALDI-TOF)  ................................................50  
 tandem (MS/MS)  ......................................... 88, 267, 272  
 Maximum resolution  ................................................3 39, 340  
 Medium, culture 
 MD-5051 ......................................................... 23, 25, 30  
 MDA-505 ............................................  20, 23, 25–27, 30  

356 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS: GENERAL APPLICATIONS
 
Index
 Medium, culture (Cont.) 
 MDA-5052 ................................................  23, 25–27, 30  
 MDAG-11 ............................................22, 24, 26, 28, 29  
 MDAG-135 ......................................... 22, 24–26, 30, 31  
 MDASM-5052  ................................................ 24, 25, 30  
 MDG ............................................................... 23, 25, 30  
 minimal  ............................................................2 3, 29, 30  
 SOC .................................. 6 0, 66, 68, 70, 76, 80, 88, 136  
 terrific broth (TB)  ...................34, 76, 81, 83, 84, 90, 136  
 ZYM-505 .....................................................................24  
 ZYM-5052 .............................................................23–26  
 ZYP5052 ..........................................................  36, 38, 39  
 Melting temperature (Tm) ...........................  69, 190, 192, 193  
 Mespeus ....................................................................3 33–342 
 Metal coordination  ...........................................3 36, 338–342  
 Metal Interactions in Protein Structures (MIPS)  .............334  
 Metalloprotein  ..................................................3 38–340, 342  
 Methyl group  ........................................... 2 29–232, 235, 236, 
239, 240, 242 
 Methyl resonances  ....................................................2 30, 236  
 Micelle  ......................................................................1 80, 184  
 Miniprep  .................................................6 7–68, 71, 104, 173  
 MINT.   See The Molecular INTeraction database (MINT) 
 Misfold  ...........................................................................4 , 12  
 Missing coordinates  ..........................................................2 92 
 MITAB format  .................................................................3 27 
 MODELLER  ...................................................................2 92 
 MOI.  See Multiplicity of Infection (MOI) 
 Molecular graphics  ...................................................3 43–352 
 The Molecular INTeraction database (MINT)  ...............316, 
318, 321, 327  
 Molecular interaction ontology  ................................3 19, 320  
 Molecular modeling  ................................. 2 61, 299, 301, 350  
 Molecular replacement  .....................................................3 12 
 Monodisperse  .............................................................7 4, 189  
 MS/MS.   See Mass spectrometry, Tandem 
 MTSL.   See Nitroxide 
 MultiBac  ..................................................1 23, 124, 126–129, 
131–134, 138, 139  
 Multidomain proteins  ...........................................................  4 
 MultiFit  .................................................... 2 84–286, 288, 292  
 Multiple sequence alignment  ....................................4 , 12, 14  
 Multiplication modules  ....................................1 26, 133, 134  
 Multiplicity of Infection (MOI)  ....................... 113, 114, 120  
 Multiprotein complexes  ....................................1 24, 131–140  
 N 
 NanoDrop  ..............................................8 0, 93, 99, 137, 138, 
174, 180–182, 184, 185  
 NDKmol .................................................... 3 44–346, 351, 352  
 NESG.  See Northeastern Structural Genomics 
consortium (NESG) 
 Netility  .............................................................. 3 22, 323, 327  
 Nitroxide  .................................................. 2 22, 223, 225, 230  
 Northeastern Structural Genomics 
consortium (NESG)  .............................4–14, 216  
 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy 
 1 H- 13 C SOFAST-methyl-TROSY  .............................2 38 
 1 H- 15 N HSQC  .................................................8 , 11, 222  
 2D SOFAST-HMQC  ........................ 2 19–221, 223, 225  
 models ................................................................2 38–239 
 Nuclear overhauser effects (NOEs)  .......... 216, 221, 223, 230  
 NusA.  See Fusion partner 
 O 
 Oligomeric state  ...................................................4 0, 92, 246  
 OmniBac system.   See also Tn7 transposition 
 acceptor plasmids 
 pOmniBac1 .......................................................... 126 
 pOmniBac2 .................................................. 125, 126  
 donor plasmids 
 pIDC, pIDK, pIDS  ......................................1 26, 133  
 pOmni-PBac, pPBac, pKL-PBac  .........................1 37 
 Open reading frames (ORF)  ......................... 4, 13, 132–134, 
136, 139, 215  
 Origins of replication (ColE1 and R6Kγ) ........................ 126 
 Oxidation state  .............................................................3 9, 50  
 P 
 Paramagnetic resonance enhancements 
(PREs) .................................................... 215–226 
 PatchDock  ........................................................................2 83 
 pBAD promoter.   See T7 expression system 
 PDB.  See Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
 PDB file header  ................................................................2 99 
 PDB-REDO  ....................................................................3 10 
 PEI.   See Polyethyleneimine (PEI) 
 Perdeuterated proteins  ..............................................2 29, 240  
 Periplasmic expression  ............................................3 3, 35, 36  
 pEU-series  ........................................................................1 63 
 pIDC, pIDK, pIDS.   See OmniBac system, Donor plasmids 
 Plasmids 
 multigene transfer  ...............................................1 23–129 
 OmniBac   ( see OmniBac system) 
 pDEST17OI  ................................................................3 8 
 pET vectors  ............................................................2 4, 26  
 pET-41  .......................................................................240  
 pEU-His-FV  ..............................................................1 72 
 pEU-series  ..................................................................1 63 
 pNIC28-Bsa4  .........................................................61, 65  
 transfer  .................................1 23–129, 132, 134, 136–139  
  Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, SDS.   See Sodium 
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 
 Polyethyleneimine (PEI)  .........................78, 84, 91, 144–146  
 Polyprotein expression  ..............................1 32–134, 136–140  
 Posttranslational modifications (PTMs)  .....................34, 73, 
87, 95, 96, 143, 260  

STRUCTURAL GENOMICS: GENERAL APPLICATIONS
    357
 
Index 
 PREs.  See Paramagnetic resonance enhancements (PREs) 
 Protease inhibitors  ............. 4 0, 77, 79, 90, 100, 101, 111, 262  
 Protease, TEV (Tobacco etch virus NIa)  ..........................132  
 Protein 
 complexes  .................................... 9 6, 151–158, 259–272, 
281, 282, 316, 317, 324–326  
 disorder prediction  ...................................... 4 , 6, 7, 13, 14  
 docking, pairwise  ................................ 2 81–283, 289, 290  
 folding .............................................3 5, 38, 151, 162, 171  
 labeling  ...............................................2 2–25, 28, 30, 175, 
217, 234–237  
 solubility  ............................2 4, 25, 74, 162, 170, 172, 176  
 structure  ................................ 5 , 10, 11, 14, 31, 35, 55, 56, 
95, 177, 215, 216, 225, 230, 278, 297, 304, 305, 
307, 311, 333, 334, 338–342, 347–351  
 Protein complementation assay (PCA)  .............................317  
 Protein Data Bank (PDB) ...................................  6–8, 11–14, 
62, 215, 223, 282–284, 286, 288–291, 297–312, 
333, 334, 336, 338, 340–342, 344–348, 352  
 Protein interaction(s) 
 ligand–protein (protein–ligand)  ..................................194  
 metal–protein (protein–metal) ....................  333, 334, 341  
 protein–protein  ....................................... 3 , 194, 315–329  
 Protein of interest  .....................................1 20, 179, 217, 231, 
237, 242, 319, 320, 322, 324, 326, 329  
 Protein production (expression) 
 in  E. coli ...............................1 0, 17–31, 33–52, 56, 73–95, 
97, 102–104, 115, 136, 138, 139, 143, 153, 158  
 in insect cells  ...................................................5 6, 95–121  
 ( see also Baculovirus expression vector system 
(BEVS)) 
 in mammalian cells  .........................................9 5, 96, 146  
 Proteinase K  ............................................. 1 63, 165, 173, 175  
 Proteoliposome purification  .............................................1 72 
 Proteolysis, in vivo  ............................................................1 35 
 Proteolytic degradation  ...............................................9 0, 162  
 Proteomics .........................................2 78, 284, 286–288, 292  
 PTMs.  See Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) 
 PubMed ............................................................ 3 24, 325, 329  
 PyMOL app ..............................................................3 47, 352  
 Q 
 Quality control  ................................3 7, 40, 50, 119, 254, 301  
 Quality-of-fit  ....................................................................2 87 
 Quantum yields  ................................................................1 90 
 R 
 Radiation damage  ..................................... 1 98, 251, 254, 255  
 Rare codons  ..................................................................3 4, 75  
 RCSB PDB Mobile viewer .........................................3 45, 347  
 Re-refinement.   See Structure, re-refinement 
 Resolution limit  .........2 05–210, 212, 213, 300–302, 308, 311  
 Resonance assignment, sequence-specific  ................2 30, 238, 
240, 242  
 Richardson cartoon ...........................................................3 52 
 RNase A ................................................... 1 62, 173, 180–182  
 Robotic  ..................................................... 1 98, 200–202, 249  
 S 
 S30 extract.   See Cell-free protein expression,  E. coli 
 sacB gene product.   See Ligation independent cloning 
 Sarkosyl  ....................................................................1 79–186 
 SAXS.   See Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) 
 Scoring function  ....................................... 2 78, 279, 281, 287  
 SDS-PAGE.   See Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 
 Secondary structure  ...................4 , 6, 7, 14, 62, 166, 348, 349  
 Seed culture  ............................................................2 2, 24, 31  
 Selenohomocysteine  ...........................................................3 0 
 Selenomethionine (SeMet) .........................22, 24, 25, 28, 30, 
152, 157, 175  
 SELEX.   See Systematic Evolution of Ligands by 
Exponential Enrichment (SELEX) 
 Sequence alignment  .................................... 4 , 12, 14, 62, 234  
 Sequence and ligation independent cloning 
(SLIC)  ...................................... 56, 126, 136–139  
 Sequence-specific assignment.   See Resonance assignment, 
sequence-specific 
 Sequence-Specific Assignment of methyl groups by 
Mutagenesis (SeSAM)  .......................... 231, 232, 
234, 238  
 SGC.  See Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) 
 Shape determination  ................................................2 49–250 
 SIBYLS beamline  .............................................2 47, 255, 256  
 Simulated Annealing Monte Carlo (SA-MC) 
optimization ............................................2 88, 289  
 Site-directed mutagenesis  .................................................2 34 
 Site-directed spin labeling (SDSL)  ..................................217  
 Site-specific transposition.   See Tn7 transposition 
 SLIC.   See Sequence and ligation independent cloning 
(SLIC) 
 Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)  .............. 216, 245–256, 
278, 280–283, 292  
 Small molecules  ......................................... 5 6, 190, 298, 301, 
304–307, 310, 311, 334, 351  
 Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO).  
 See Fusion partner 
 Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
(SDS-PAGE) ................................. 20, 31, 35, 37, 
44, 45, 48–50, 52, 78, 83, 85–87, 89, 92, 101, 112, 
113, 129, 135, 154, 157, 164, 170–173, 177, 182, 
183, 238, 262, 264–266, 271  
 Solution scattering  ............................................................1 84 
 Sonication  ..................................5 2, 74, 90, 91, 111, 121, 241  
 SP6 RNA polymerase  ............................... 1 62, 163, 166, 172  
 Spatial restraints  ....................... 2 59–272, 278–280, 288–291  
 Stable isotopes  ....................................................3 0, 152, 173  
 Stoichiometry  ........................................... 1 32, 152, 153, 158  

358 
  
STRUCTURAL GENOMICS: GENERAL APPLICATIONS
 
Index
 Stop codon  ..................................................... 3 8, 61, 62, 137  
 Strains,  E. coli 
 BL21(DE3)  ..........................................17, 18, 22, 24, 26, 
27, 29, 30, 73, 75, 158, 231, 237  
 BL21(DE3) pLysS  ...........................................3 6, 38, 39  
 BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 .........................  75, 80–81, 89  
 BL21-AI ..........................................1 8, 22–24, 26, 27, 29  
 BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RIL  ....................................1 58 
 C41 (DE3) pRos  ....................................................3 8, 39  
 DH10Bac .....................................................9 7, 102–104  
 DH10EMBacY  ..................................................1 36, 138  
 DH10MultiBac  ..................................................1 36, 138  
 DH10MultiBac Cre  ...............................................1  36, 139  
 HB101 ................................................................ 136, 139  
 Mach1™  .................................................................59, 69  
 Origami (DE3) pLysS  ............................................3 8, 39  
 Rosetta 2(DE3) pLysS  ................... 3 4, 36–38, 41, 45–47  
 TOP10 ............................................................... 136, 139  
 XL1Blue-MR  ...................................................2 2, 26, 29  
 Strep-tactin ........................................2 33, 262, 264, 266, 271  
 Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) ................... 55, 56, 
61, 67, 71, 73, 94, 121, 307  
 Structure 
 determination  .....................4 , 11, 12, 162, 197, 215–226, 
277, 298, 300, 304, 312, 336, 338, 341, 342  
 re-refinement  ......................................................3 09–311 
 refinement  ..................................2 23, 225, 298–300, 304, 
306, 307, 310  
 validation  ....................................................3 04, 306–309  
 Synchrotron  ...............................1 97, 198, 201, 245, 247, 304  
 Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential 
Enrichment (SELEX) ................................ 39, 41  
 T 
 Tandem affinity purification (TAP)  .................................328  
 Tandem recombineering (TR) .......................................... 124 
 T4 DNA ligase  ...................................................5 7, 136, 138  
 T4 DNA polymerase  .................................. 5 6, 57, 59, 65, 69  
 Temperature control  .........................................................2 51 
 T7 expression system 
 pBAD promoter  .....................................................1 8, 27  
 T7 promoter  ...........................................................1 7, 18  
 T7 RNA polymerase  ........................................1 7, 18, 20  
 T7 lac promoter  .......................................................1 8, 23  
 Thermal stability  ......................................................1 89–194 
 Thermofluor  .............................................................1 90, 194  
 Tn7 transposition 
 Tn7 attachment site (mini-attTn7)  ....................133, 140  
 Tn7R and Tn7L DNA sequences  ..............................1 24 
 Touchdown PCR  ..........................................................6 3, 69  
 Transcription-translation 
 coupled ...................................................... 1 51, 152, 154, 
155, 158  
 uncoupled  ...................................................................1 62 
 Transient transfection  ...............................................1 43–148 
 multiplexed, of HEK293 cells  .............................1 43–148 
 Translation, cell-free 
 bilayer .........................................................1 67–169, 174  
 dialysis ................................................................1 67–170 
 Transmembrane region  .........................................................  5 
 Transposition.   See Tn7 transposition 
 U 
 UniProt ............................................................. 2 68, 319, 326  
 V 
 V0 virus  ....................................................................1 27–129 
 Vitamin B 12 ................................................................................................................ 24, 30  
 W 
 Water structure  .........................................................3 07–309 
 Web interface  ........................................... 2 84, 316, 333, 340  
 X 
 X-ray crystallography ..........................4 , 14, 56, 74, 152, 154, 
162, 175, 216, 246, 259, 277, 278, 298, 300, 303, 
310, 311  
 X-ray diffraction, in situ  ...................................................2 02 
 xQuest ................................................................2 60, 263, 265, 
267–270, 272  
 Y 
 Yeast two hybrid (Y2H) .....................................  38, 278, 317   

