Springer Proceedings in Physics 235
Marek Kuś
Bartłomiej Skowron    Editors
Category 
Theory in 
Physics, 
Mathematics, 
and Philosophy

Springer Proceedings in Physics
Volume 235

Indexed by Scopus
The series Springer Proceedings in Physics, founded in 1984, is devoted to timely
reports of state-of-the-art developments in physics and related sciences. Typically
based on material presented at conferences, workshops and similar scientiﬁc
meetings, volumes published in this series will constitute a comprehensive
up-to-date source of reference on a ﬁeld or subﬁeld of relevance in contemporary
physics. Proposals must include the following:
– name, place and date of the scientiﬁc meeting
– a link to the committees (local organization, international advisors etc.)
– scientiﬁc description of the meeting
– list of invited/plenary speakers
– an estimate of the planned proceedings book parameters (number of pages/
articles, requested number of bulk copies, submission deadline).
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/361

Marek Kuś
• Bartłomiej Skowron
Editors
Category Theory in Physics,
Mathematics, and Philosophy
123

Editors
Marek Kuś
Center for Theoretical Physics
Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw, Poland
Faculty of Administration and Social
Sciences, International Center for Formal
Ontology
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
Bartłomiej Skowron
Faculty of Administration and Social
Sciences, International Center for Formal
Ontology
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
ISSN 0930-8989
ISSN 1867-4941
(electronic)
Springer Proceedings in Physics
ISBN 978-3-030-30895-7
ISBN 978-3-030-30896-4
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Introduction
Category theory is becoming increasingly popular in science and philosophy. It is
not only the language of mathematics, as it is still often believed. It provides new
abstract structures, analogies, unifying tools, and a dynamic way of thinking, which
differs from widespread set-theoretical thinking. In 2017, an interdisciplinary
conference entitled Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics, and Philosophy was
held in Warsaw. The conference was organized by the International Center for
Formal Ontology (Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences, Warsaw
University of Technology), the Copernicus Center for Interdisciplinary Studies, the
Center for Theoretical Physics (Polish Academy of Sciences), and the Institute of
Mathematics (Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic). During the conference,
we were looking for common categorical threads in these three areas of knowledge.
The volume we present to the reader is the result of this conference. Category
theory is very abstract, and this is why it naturally corresponds to the ways of
thinking that are present in fundamentally different ﬁelds of science and humanities.
The main thought behind this volume is the conviction that category theory has not
only unifying power within mathematics itself. It has built bridges between modern
physics, mathematics, computer science, philosophy and others. We hope that this
volume will convince the reader—even if only as a mere mental experiment—that it
is worthwhile in his or her scientiﬁc ﬁeld to try to think without objects, but only
with transformations, assuming for a while that to exist in his or her ﬁeld of research
means to remain in a complex network of relationships.
In the opening contribution entitled “Why Categories?” Marek Kuś, Krzysztof
Wójtowicz and Bartłomiej Skowron answer the question of why category theory is
becoming more and more popular in various ﬁelds of knowledge. In particular, we
investigate what makes this theory useful in philosophy and physics. It turns out
that the ontology offered by categories is responsible for this.
Zbigniew Król in his paper “Category Theory and Philosophy” analyzes the
relationship between category theory and philosophy. He addresses many tradi-
tional philosophical questions, including the way of the existence of the
v

mathematical object, Platonism in the philosophy of mathematics, the ontology of
sets and ontology of categories, and the question of epistemic access to mathe-
matical reality. He also points out that category theory can be used for formal
ontology. His philosophical thesis is clear and surprising: category theory is the
most “platonic” mathematical theory. With the approval of one of the reviewers, we
enclosed an anonymous commentary to this article, which discusses the theses
presented by Król.
Krzysztof Wójtowicz in his philosophical paper “Are There Category-
Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?” considers various types of
mathematical explanations of physical phenomena and claims that category theory
has no explanatory power in the standard sense of the word “explanation.”
However, as category theory is a truly abstract ﬁeld, its explanations belong to
metaphysics rather than physics. Category theory being rather an abstract “theory
of theories” contributes to the understanding of physics on a meta-level, but does
not explain in a standard way concrete physical phenomena, as Wójtowicz argues.
In his philosophical paper “The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic
and Poietic Processes,” Józef Lubacz considers two types of human activity:
acquiring knowledge and the sort of activity that results in the creation of artifacts.
Lubacz names the ﬁrst as epistemic activity and the second as poietic activity. Then,
he presents his own metaphysics of the process in which he interprets these two
types of activities. Since category theory is underpinned not by the metaphysics of
substances, but rather by the metaphysics of the process, Lubacz tries to show the
potential for applying the notional framework of category theory to epistemic and
poietic processes.
Zbigniew Semadeni in his contribution “Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics
from a Categorial Standpoint: Is It Related to the Direction of Time?” takes up the
following problem: It is known that in category theory every phenomenon has its
own dual, i.e., every theorem, deﬁnition and proof has its own dual version. In order
to obtain the dual category, it is sufﬁcient to reverse the direction of the arrows.
However, this type of symmetry does not exist in Cantor’s mathematics, i.e., in
mathematics where objects are sets with certain structures. Semadeni argues that the
basis of this asymmetry is the asymmetry of the many-to-one relationship in the
notion of a function. The author also points out that the many-to-one thinking could
be related to the arrow of time.
Neil Dewar, Samuel Fletcher, and Laurenz Hudetz in their paper “Extending
List’s Levels” consider the formal aspects of the relation of supervenience, one
of the most widely discussed relations in contemporary metaphysics. The authors
evoke the formal scheme proposed by Christian List and show how it can be
generalized in order to make greater use of category-theoretic tools and ideas. They
also show how such an extended approach is useful both in the philosophy of
natural sciences and social sciences.
The next three papers contribute to various fundamental problems of physics
concerning the structure of the spacetime. The ﬁrst one, by Krzysztof Bielas and
Jerzy Król entitled “From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth
vi
Introduction

Structure of R4” attacks the problem of the emergence of exotic smooth structures
in four dimensions in category theory terms. The starting point is a categorical
reconstruction of the logical structure of quantum and classical propositional
structures. In the classic case, such a structure corresponds to Boolean algebra,
whereas for the quantum case, the corresponding structure is that of an ortho-
modular lattice. A natural question concerning the determination of an orthomod-
ular lattice by its Boolean subalgebras is answered in terms of the categorical setting
using the concept of the colimit. Bielas and Król show how to transfer such con-
struction into the description of spacetime as a differentiable manifold. As a result,
an exotic smooth structure and, consequently, four-dimensionality appear in a
natural way.
The second contribution concerning a categorical description of “pathological”
properties of the differential structure of spacetime by Michael Heller and Jerzy
Król is devoted to singularities preventing prolongation of some timelike curves.
The authors suggest employing Synthetic Differential Geometry (SDG), based on
category theory and an ensuing intuitionistic logic, to shed new light on the
problem. Such an approach adds to the ordinary differential structure of the real line
new kinds of differentials and allows the authors to construct a model in which it is
possible to “look beyond the singular boundary.”
Synthetic Differential Geometry is also a tool employed by Jerzy Król in his
contribution concerning Perturbative Quantum Gravity. One way of looking at the
problem of quantization of gravity is the following. The right-hand side of the
Einstein equations (the energy–momentum tensor) is determined by quantum ﬁelds
in the spacetime, whereas the left-hand side (the gravity) involves purely classical
quantities (the Ricci and metric tensors). An attempt to quantize ﬂuctuations around
the ﬂat metric, as it is done with other ﬁelds, leads, however, to an incurably
nonrenormalizable theory. Król shows how this incompatibility of Einstein equa-
tions with quantum matter sources can be formulated and partially solved in spaces
described by SDG.
The paper by Nop, Romanowska, and Smith “Category Theory as a Foundation
for the Concept Analysis of Complex Systems and Time Series” deals with an
abstract description of commonly encountered situation in which we have collec-
tions of objects and properties together with a relation that attributing the latter to
the former. The triple consisting of objects, properties, and an attribution relation is
termed a context. Identiﬁcation of the set of all properties common to a subset of
items and, dually, the set of all items possessing all given properties allows for the
introduction of the notion of a concept connected to a given context and a concept
lattice as a set of all concepts of a context. The whole construction has a natural
category theory formulation. The authors show how this static description may be
extended to cases of time-evolving or hierarchical (multilevel) systems and applied,
e.g., to the analysis of time series.
It only remains for us to thank all of the reviewers and commentators. We would
like to express our sincere thanks to Torsten Asselmeyer-Maluga, Tomasz Brengos,
Introduction
vii

Samuel Fletcher, Jerzy Król, Christian List, Marcin Łazarz, Jiří Rosický, Zbigniew
Semadeni, and Piotr Sułkowski for their helpful comments and reviews of the
articles that make up this volume.
Marek Kuś
e-mail: marek.kus@cft.edu.pl
Bartłomiej Skowron
e-mail: b.skowron@ans.pw.edu.pl
viii
Introduction

Contents
1
Why Categories? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Marek Kuś, Bartłomiej Skowron and Krzysztof Wójtowicz
2
Category Theory and Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Zbigniew Król
3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical
Phenomena? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Krzysztof Wójtowicz
4
The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic
Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Józef Lubacz
5
Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics from a Categorial
Standpoint: Is It Related to the Direction of Time? . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Zbigniew Semadeni
6
Extending List’s Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Neil Dewar, Samuel C. Fletcher and Laurenz Hudetz
7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth
Structure of R4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Krzysztof Bielas and Jerzy Król
8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Michael Heller and Jerzy Król
9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic
Spacetimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Jerzy Król
10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept Analysis
of Complex Systems and Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
G. N. Nop, A. B. Romanowska and J. D. H. Smith
ix

Contributors
Krzysztof Bielas University of Information Technology and Management,
Rzeszow, Poland;
Institute of Physics, University of Silesia, Chorzow, Poland
Neil Dewar LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Samuel C. Fletcher University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN,
USA
Michael Heller Copernicus Center for Interdisciplinary Studies, Kraków, Poland
Laurenz Hudetz London School of Economics, London, UK
Jerzy Król University of Information Technology and Management, Rzeszow,
Poland
Zbigniew Król Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences, International
Center for Formal Ontology, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
Marek Kuś Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences, International Center
for Formal Ontology, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland;
Center for Theoretical Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
Józef Lubacz International Center for Formal Ontology, Warsaw University of
Technology, Warsaw, Poland
G. N. Nop Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
A. B. Romanowska Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
Zbigniew Semadeni Institute of Mathematics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw,
Poland
Bartłomiej Skowron Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences, International
Center for Formal Ontology, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
xi

J. D. H. Smith Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
Krzysztof Wójtowicz Department of Logic, Institute of Philosophy, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
xii
Contributors

Chapter 1
Why Categories?
Marek Ku´s, Bartłomiej Skowron and Krzysztof Wójtowicz
The aim of philosophy, abstractly formulated, is to understand
how things in the broadest possible sense of the term hang
together in the broadest possible sense of the term. [35]
Mathematical tools are much richer than our everyday intuitions
and purely verbal distinctions; they are able to reveal
unexpected aspects of reality. [13]
We did not then regard it as a ﬁeld for further research efforts,
but just as a language and an orientation—a limitation which
we followed for a dozen years or so, till the advent of adjoint
funtors. [26]
Abstract In this article we answer the question of why categories are becoming
more and more popular in physics, mathematics and philosophy. The article presents
a review of the role of categories in the philosophy of mathematics, in the foundations
of mathematics, in metaphysics and in quantum mechanics. Our claim is that category
theory is a formal ontology that captures the relational aspects of the given domain
in question.
M. Ku´s · B. Skowron
Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences, International Center for Formal Ontology,
Warsaw University of Technology, pl. Politechniki 1, 00-661 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: b.skowron@ans.pw.edu.pl
M. Ku´s (B)
Center for Theoretical Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: marek.kus@cft.edu.pl
K. Wójtowicz
Institute of Philosophy, University of Warsaw, Krakowskie Przedmie´scie 3, 00-927 Warsaw,
Poland
e-mail: kwojtowi@uw.edu.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_1
1

2
M. Ku´s et al.
1.1
Introduction
Eilenberg and Mac Lane—the founders of category theory (CT)—initially treated
their invention as a useful language for certain mathematical problems. Its intensive
and unexpected development in the twentieth century led to the fact that it was an
increasingly popular theory among mathematicians, computer scientists, physicists,
engineers and philosophers alike. What has made CT so popular and why is it being
used more and more widely in so many different ﬁelds of knowledge? This review
article is supposed to answer—at least partially—this question.
In the second section (following the introduction) we describe the beginnings of
CT. The third section deals with relations between CT and philosophy, and in partic-
ular with philosophical problems concerning the foundations and unity of mathemat-
ics, as well as the problem of structuralism in the philosophy of mathematics. The
third section also describes how CT affects contemporary metaphysics. The fourth
section deals with the role of CT in contemporary physics, in particular quantum
mechanics.
1.2
The Beginnings of Category Theory
Category theory is a joint work of Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane. Their
collaboration in the 1940s led to its creation. More speciﬁcally, the emergence of
category theory was determined by the combination of Mac Lane’s algebraic talent
and Eilenberg’s topological talent. Here, Mac Lane himself recalls the origins of CT
[2, p. 20–1]:
In the spring of 1941 Michigan invited me to give a series of ﬁve or six lectures, so I talked
about group extensions. This was a subject on which I had done some work and it came out
of my earlier work on valuations with [O. F. G.] Schilling. I had calculated a particular group
extension for p-adic solenoids. Eilenberg was in the audience, except at the last lecture,
and made me give the last lecture to him ahead of time. Then he said, “Well, now that
calculation smells like something we do in topology, in a paper of [Norman] Steenrod.” So
we stayed up all night trying to ﬁgure out what the connection was and we discovered one.
We wrote our ﬁrst joint paper on group extensions in homology, which exploited precisely
that connection. It so happened that this was a time when more sophisticated algebraic
techniques were coming into algebraic topology. Sammy knew much more than I did about
the topological background, but I knew about the algebraic techniques and had practice in
elaborate algebraic calculations. So our talents ﬁtted together. That’s how our collaboration
got started. And so it went on for ﬁfteen major papers.
Atﬁrst,itdidnotseemthatCTwouldconstituteaseparateandindependentsubject
of mathematical research. The notion of category was only an auxiliary notion, which
was needed for other purposes—it was just an abstract basis for research on the
phenomenon of natural equivalences. In their joint article General Theory of Natural
Equivalences in 1945, which now serves as a classic reference, Eilenberg and Mac
Lane [10, p. 247] claimed:

1
Why Categories?
3
It should be observed ﬁrst that the whole concept of a category is essentially an auxiliary
one; our basic concepts are essentially those of a functor and of a natural transformation
(...). The idea of a category is required only by the precept that every function should have a
deﬁnite class as domain and a deﬁnite class as range, for the categories are provided as the
domains and ranges of functors. Thus one could drop the category concept altogether and
adopt an even more intuitive standpoint, in which a functor such as “Hom” is not deﬁned
over the category of “all” groups, but for each particular pair of groups which may be given.
The standpoint would sufﬁce for the applications, inasmuch as none of our developments
will involve elaborate constructions on the categories themselves.
Eilenberg and Mac Lane introduced very abstract tools into mathematics, which
seemed even too abstract. Nevertheless, they motivated their work with both technical
merits, which allow for an effective study of the phenomenon of naturality, and
conceptual advantages. They noted that the proposed conception is so general that
it allows for the detection of the same structures in fundamentally different ﬁelds
of mathematics. By ﬁnding new analogies between different ﬁelds of mathematics
it suggests new results. Thanks to the fact that categorical glasses allow for the
observation of the same structures in both topology and algebra, these glasses allow
for a unifying view of mathematics. Already in 1945 it was clear that CT had the
power to unify mathematics.
From an ontological point of view, it can be said that Eilenberg and Mac Lane
have made a certain shift. Well, mathematical objects in practice are considered as if
they were autonomous, separate from other objects. As if they existed as independent
substances, whose interior determines what they really are. It is enough to look inside
to know what properties they have. This is a standard and natural cognitive approach
to mathematical objects. Eilenberg and Mac Lane did it differently, contrary to this
natural and widespread attitude. They suggested that mathematical objects should
always be considered with their surroundings. If we consider groups, we should
consider them together with all homomorphisms, if we consider topological space,
we should consider all homeomorphisms. Therefore, we do not consider objects in
themselves, but consider them simultaneously with morphisms; in other words, we
do not consider individual objects, but categories [10, p. 236].
TheontologicalshiftproposedbythefathersofCThasmanyconsequences.Group
theory in the categorical approach becomes a study of the invariants of the respective
functors. Group theory explores constructions that are covariant or contravariant
under homomorphisms. In their words: “group theory studies functors deﬁned on
well speciﬁed categories of groups, with values in another such category” [10, p.
237]. It was not a completely new approach. The authors themselves have noticed
that this is actually an extension of Klein’s Erlanger Programme. Geometric space
was considered by Klein together with its transformation group, while Eilenberg and
Mac Lane suggested that one should consider the categories together with its algebra
of morphisms.
The proposal of such a general conceptual framework was not obvious at that time.
Mac Lane himself wondered whether categorical concepts had been introduced too
early. Here, again, in his own words [26, p. 334–5]:

4
M. Ku´s et al.
It was perhaps a rash step to introduce so quickly such a sweeping generality—an evident
piece of what was soon to be called “general abstract nonsense.” One of our good friends
(an admirer of Eilenberg) read the paper and told us privately that he thought the paper was
without any content. Eilenberg took care to see to it that the editor of the Transactions sent
the manuscript to a young referee (perhaps one who might be gently bullied). The paper
was accepted by Transactions. I have sometimes wondered what could have happened had
the same paper been submitted by a couple of wholly unknown authors. At any rate, we did
think it was good, and that it provided a handy language to be used by topologists and others,
and that it offered a conceptual view of parts of mathematics, in some way analogous to
Felix Klein’s “Erlanger programme.” We did not then regard it as a ﬁeld for further research
efforts, but just as a language and an orientation—a limitation which we followed for a dozen
years or so, till the advent of adjoint funtors.
Nevertheless, such abstract concepts as category hung in the air somewhere at the
time. What if Eilenberg and Mac Lane hadn’t introduced CT? Mac Lane speculated
that other mathematicians would have done it, unless they were afraid of the excessive
abstraction of the emerging concepts (cf. [28, p. 210]). Among the potential creators
of category theory he listed Claude Chevalley, Heinz Hopf, Norman Steenrod, Henri
Cartan, Charles Ehresmann, and John von Neumann (cf. [18, p. 3]).
Category theory developed very quickly and intensively. As one of the break-
through years for the development of CT Mac Lane [26, p. 346] indicates the
year 1963. It was then that Lawvere’s groundbreaking dissertation appeared, which
contained categorical descriptions of algebraic theories and many other important
ideas. That year also marked the ﬁrst public presentation of the adjoint functor the-
orem by Freyd, Ehresmann published his paper on what we call internal categories,
Mac Lane’s ﬁrst coherence theorem also appeared in 1963. And SGA IV was also
published—the seminar notes from the Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois
Marie run by Alexander Grothendieck. As Mac Lane [26, p. 347] estimates between
1962 and 1967 around 60 people started working in category theory. Already in
1965 in California, at the CT conference, Lawvere delivered the talk “The category
of categories as a foundation of mathematics” [26, p. 351].
Theclassic(stilladvanced)textbookincategorytheoryCategoriesfortheWorking
Mathematician was published by Mac Lane for the ﬁrst time in 1976. In 1992 Mac
Lane, jointly with Ieke Moerdijk, published Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First
Introduction to Topos Theory. In 2017, a textbook for philosophers was published:
Categories for the Working Philosopher, edited by Elaine Landry [19]. In 2006 Steve
Awodey, Mac Lane’s last Ph.D. student, wrote a textbook Category Theory that was
easier to read then the textbook by Mac Lane. That’s why Awodey felt the need to
write a new textbook [3, p. v]:
Why write a new textbook on Category Theory, when we already have Mac Lane’s Categories
for the Working Mathematician? Simply put, because Mac Lane’s book is for the working
(and aspiring) mathematician. What is needed now, after 30 years of spreading into various
other disciplines and places in the curriculum, is a book for everyone else.
Let’s see what CT looks like in Poland. Due to the intensive development of
category theory, students of the ﬁrst years of mathematical studies can now study
CT in some departments in Poland. Categorical terms are often introduced in other

1
Why Categories?
5
courses, e.g. in topological courses. The ﬁrst (and so far the only) CT textbook in
Polish was Wst¸ep do teorii kategorii i funktorów published by Zbigniew Semadeni
and Antoni Wiweger in 1972.
1.3
Category Theory and Philosophy
Category theory, as well as set theory and, unlike algebraic topology, aroused the
interest of philosophers from the very beginning. Already in the classic paper [10,
p. 247] there are comments on the foundations of category theory (but not yet the
foundations of mathematics!), in particular there are references to an unramiﬁed
theory of types or to the Fraenkel–von Neumann–Bernays’ system—these systems
are mentioned as possible solutions for the ontological foundation of categories.
Multidimensional relations occur between category theory and philosophy.1
Below we will restrict ourselves to a brief discussion of four selected themes:
1. the discussion between mathematical structuralism and object realism;
2. the problem of foundations of mathematics;
3. the problem of the unity of mathematics;
4. the role of CT in contemporary metaphysics.
1.3.1
Structuralism Versus Object Realism
One of the fundamental philosophical question concerns the nature of mathematical
concepts—which, under the realistic interpretation, is formulated as the ontological
question concerning the status and properties of mathematical objects. Speaking in
very general terms, the question is, whether mathematical objects have any intrinsic
properties, or whether their properties are purely relative. Earlier we pointed to
this issue when we mentioned the ontological shift of Eilenberg and Mac Lane. A
related question concerns the identity criterion for mathematical objects: is identity
determined by some immanent properties of the objects, or rather purely by the
relations in which this object stands to other mathematical objects?
Mathematical structuralism rejects the view, that there are intrinsic properties.
According to the structuralist point of view, an object is constituted by the relations
to other objects. For instance, the function of a president (of a country or a company)
is deﬁned regardless of the particular person holding the ofﬁce—and only due to the
place within the whole structure (country or company).
Consider natural numbers. According to the structuralist picture, natural numbers
can be characterized only by their role in the natural numbers structure (i.e. in the
ω-sequence). They have no intrinsic properties, and what really matters are only
1In this volume, see [8, 17, 23, 37, 44].

6
M. Ku´s et al.
relationships between natural numbers. Indeed, the question, whether the number 5
hasitspropertiesregardlessoftheexistenceofothernaturalnumbersseemsstrange—
for instance, whether it is still prime. The notion of primeness would not make
sense if only one number existed. This way of thinking is then extended to other
mathematical objects: according to this view, the only properties of mathematical
objects are relational properties—so their identity is determined only via the roles
they play in mathematical structures. We can say, that mathematical objects are
like vertices in a giant graph or—as Mac Lane (see [24, Chap. XII entitled The
Mathematical Network]) would probably say—network.
The argument between structuralist and non-structuralists is a prototypical exam-
ple of an relativist-essentialist argument in metaphysics [34, p. 86]:
Quine has captured the incompleteness of mathematical objects in his doctrine of ontological
relativity: there is no fact of the matter as to whether the ontology of one theory is included
in that of another except relative to an interpretation of the former in the latter. What I have
tried to do so far is show that Quine’s surprising doctrine is what we would expect to hold
in mathematics.
The categorical point of view seems to be particularly well-suited to express the
intuitions of mathematical structuralism. Take a typical expression of the structuralist
position [34, p. 84]:
For me, mathematical objects have no distinguishing characteristics except those they have
by virtue of their relationships to other positions in the structures to which they belong. In
short, I take the geometrical point, the paradigm position, as a paradigmatic mathematical
object.
The familiar illustration of categories in terms of graphs (with black dots and
arrows) suits this view very well. All the black dots look alike—and the only things,
that determines their identity is the place within the graph, in particular the arrows
which connect the dot with the other dots. The properties of objects within a category
are deﬁned only via the respective morphisms. For instance, the “essence” of being
the initial or terminal object is captured by the morphisms—not by any immanent
properties, which are secondary. Also the notion of identity in some sense loses its
meaning, as we only speak of isomorphisms within a category (and this is obviously
a category-relative notion).
Objects and morphisms within the category live on the ﬁrst level of abstraction.
They might be considered to be natural environment(s) for different kinds of math-
ematical objects. But what is much more interesting and conceptually fertile are the
relationships between categories, expressed in terms of functors (and higher-order
constructions, like natural transformations). Categories—in a sense—become “dots”
and are viewed from a higher level.
Coming back to the natural numbers example we can not only think of the par-
ticular numbers as points (“dots”) within a structure (so that the “dots” inherit their
properties from the structure they live in). We can also think of the natural number
structure in terms of its universal properties within a “higher-order structure”, i.e.
the Peano category, as Mazur [29, p. 231–2] claims:

1
Why Categories?
7
This strategy of deﬁning the Natural Numbers as “an” initial object in a category of (what
amounts to) discrete dynamical systems, as we have just done, is revealing, I think; it isolates,
as Peano himself had done, the fundamental role of mere succession in the formulation of
the natural numbers.
A paradigm example of a structure with purely relational properties is a group.
It does not make sense to ask, what the neutral element “really is”: of course, a
group can have many representations (as number, matrices, linear transformations—
and many others), but the “essence” of the neutral element is exactly being neutral
with respect to the operation (and not being a 15 × 15 identity matrix or a certain
function).
1.3.2
The Foundations of Mathematics
The problem of ﬁnding a suitable foundation for the mathematical ediﬁce has been
discussed extensively for at least 150 years—and the crisis in foundations of math-
ematics around 1900 made the topic very hot.2 There are many mathematical dis-
ciplines, which prima facie seem very different—like geometry and algebra in the
historical sense of these terms (today they are of course “entangled” in a profound
way, and the term “algebraic geometry” illustrates that). Do these different disciplines
have common roots?
According to the most widespread view, set theory can serve the role of a founda-
tionaltheory.Indeed,settheoryissostrongandgeneralthatvirtuallyallmathematical
notions previously used by mathematicians in an informal way (e.g. the concepts of:
natural, rational, real, complex numbers; real-valued function; probability; differen-
tiation in the real and complex sense; Banach space; differential manifold, etc.) can
be formally reconstructed in the language of set theory. But there is a tension between
the fact, that mathematical notions can be formally represented in set theory—but on
the other hand, that they have a meaning outside the context of set theory, and lead a
happy life without ever noticing, that (according to some foundationalists) they are
really sets. In fact, mathematical practice does not really need set theory—apart from
some elementary textbook facts.3 More advanced set-theoretic notions (large cardi-
2Perhaps today the discussions are not so emotional, and there is no crisis in sight: even if some
philosophical doubts can be formulated, mathematics seems to be doing well even without any
(ofﬁcial) foundations. But this is more of a pragmatic than a fundamental issue.
3The problem of how much set theory is needed, and whether this set theory is really “set-theoretic
set theory” or perhaps “category-theoretic set theory” is discussed for instance by Colin McLarty
in [30, p. 2]:
All support the claim that mathematicians know and use the concepts and axioms of the
Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets (ETCS), often without knowing or caring that
they are the ETCS axioms.
He examines the example of two standard and inﬂuential textbooks on topology and algebra.
McLarty also claims:

8
M. Ku´s et al.
nal, Boolean-valued model) are very remote from everyday mathematical practice
and play virtually no role there.
A standard illustration are natural numbers. Usually, on the pre-theoretic level, we
consider them to be objects per se—and the computations performed on them have
a “self-contained character”. But from the point of view of the set-theoretic foun-
dations of mathematics, natural numbers are just sets. For instance, in the (rather
standard) von Neumann representation, natural numbers are identiﬁed with ﬁnite
ordinal numbers.4 But there are many representations of this kind, and all of them
are admissible, from the logical point of view.5 But from the point of view of the
working mathematician (for instance, a number theorist), the set-theoretic reduction
of numbers plays no role, as mathematicians obviously do not think of natural num-
bers as being sets obtained from an empty set of set-theoretic operations! Indeed, the
question, whether 0 ∈2 seems rather awkward, and is surely irrelevant for, say, the
Twin Primes Conjecture. So the problem of set-theoretic reduction seems artiﬁcial
from the point of view of mathematical practice: no mathematician is really worried
about the problem of translating the results into some awkward logical notation (into
the language with one two-place predicate ∈, i.e. into set theory).
The foundational enterprise has a theoretic character, just like the formalizabil-
ity postulate: no mathematician bothers with formalizing proofs to the full extent,
however, this postulate (the common belief, that proofs can—in principle—be for-
malized) serves as a kind of methodological warrant. Complaints about the artiﬁcial
character of the reductions can be countered with the observations, that our everyday
habits are not a warrant for methodological correctness. We are free to use informal,
and even metaphorical language even in science—as long as we are aware of the
fact, and are able to provide rigorous paraphrases.
Category theory is believed (perhaps not very widely—but very ﬁrmly!) to be a
good candidate for a foundational theory. But the notion of “foundation” is different
than in the case of set theory. It is not about isolating one single notion or a the-
ory (like “set” and “set theory”) which appears in the ultimate deﬁniendum of all
mathematical notions. This point of view is typical for set-theoretic foundationalism.
Adherents of category-theoretic foundations stress the fact, that CT takes mathemat-
ics “at face value”: mathematical notions are not forced into the Procrustean bed
of set theory (or some other formal theory we choose), but are free to live within
their natural conceptual environment: groups populate the category Grp; topologi-
cal spaces live within T op; partial orders also have their own place to live. Sets are
the category of sets described in ETCS is a closer ﬁt to the practical needs of most mathe-
maticians than is the cumulative hierarchy of sets described in ZFC.
4The empty set becomes 0; the singleton {∅} becomes 1; {∅, {∅}} plays the role of 2, etc. The suc-
cessor functions is deﬁned as a set-theoretic operation: n + 1 = n ∪{n}, and the resulting sequence
of natural numbers is: ∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}, {∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}}, . . .
5An example of a different representation is: ∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, {{{∅}}}, {{{{∅}}}}, . . .—i.e. the empty set
is 0, and the rule for successor is: n + 1 = {n}. This leads to the famous multiple-reduction problem
in philosophy of mathematics (the locus classicus is [5]). As there are many possible reductions,
it is not clear, that any of them is the proper one. So perhaps identifying numbers with sets is not
legitimate.

1
Why Categories?
9
indeed important—they have their category of their own—but this is just one of many
categories, by far neither the only, nor the most important one. The notion of set is
one of many natural mathematical notions—just like the notion of continuity. And
even the logic is not absolute—a topos might have some internal logic, and could
serve as a way of interpreting mathematical notions within it.6
So this way of thinking is not quite reductionist—it might rather be considered
as providing a useful, enlightening template for interpreting mathematical notions—
within their respective domains. This constitutes a strong shift in thinking about
mathematical notions: what is most interesting about them, are their universal prop-
erties. A tensor product is important primarily because it is an object representing
an important functor, not interesting per se. Even the Cartesian product of two sets
is rather viewed as an object with appropriate arrows—and this is important, not the
particular ordered pairs.
An important general insight is therefore perhaps: mathematics does not need
foundation—but organization. As Mac Lane [24, p. 406] put it:
Alternatively, set theory and category theory may be viewed as proposals for the organi-
zation of Mathematics. The canons of set theory provide guides to the formulation of new
concepts and emphasize the extensional character of Mathematics: A “property” is com-
pletely determined by knowing all the elements which have that property. Similarly, the
canons of category theory emphasize the importance of considering not just the objects
but also their morphisms. They also emphasize the use of universal constructions and their
associated adjoint functors.
For Mac Lane, none of these proposals are fully successful. Category theory works
well in algebra and topology, but not so well in analysis. Set theory, for Mac Lane,
contains many artiﬁcial constructions and, as Mac Lane [24, p. 407] has repeatedly
said following Hermann Weyl: “it contains far too much sand”.
CT serves as a method for organizing mathematics rather as a foundation. Never-
theless, CT still has ambitions to replace set theory’s pride of place. In recent years,
homotopy type theory and univalent foundations (HoTT/UF) have been intensively
developed and has become a serious competitor to set theory. In principle, HoTT/UF
can serve as a foundation for mathematics. It is a paradigm that marks a new way
of thinking about the foundations of mathematics, which more faithfully than set
theory, represents everyday mathematical practice (in this respect CT has always
challenged set theory) on the one hand, and on the other HoTT/UF “is suited to
computer systems and has been implemented in existing proof assistants” [42, p. 7].
In homotopy type theory the idea of a collection is realized by a type, just as in set
theory the idea of a collection is realized by a set. The elements of types are points.
A set is made up only of elements, but the type is made up of both points and ways
of identifying points. Two points can be the same in many ways (let’s take the sets
{a, b} and {c, d} as the points and bijection as a relation of being the same, in this
case there is more than one bijection; or: two topological spaces can be homeomor-
phic in many ways), so types also consist of ways in which elements are the same.
6This problem is discussed in the context of Topos Quantum Theory in [44].

10
M. Ku´s et al.
Types are therefore certain spaces, not pure sets, more speciﬁcally they are ω-
grupoids. In set theory the relation of being the same is given a priori, from the
very beginning, as being in a sense ready. In homotopy type theory, if a collection
is considered, reasons for “being the same element” must be considered simultane-
ously. For the foundations of mathematics it is important that the universe of sets is
an appropriate part of the universe of types (through ETCS), therefore the model of
ZFC can be reconstructed in HoTT/UF. Thus, if set theory reconstructs mathematical
objects, then HoTT/UF does it all the more (for a more detailed explanation see a
brief discussion of the idea in [38] and a full presentation of HoTT/UF in [42]).
Undoubtedly HoTT/UF is much richer—ontologically speaking—than set theory
[42, p. 1]:
Homotopy type theory also brings new ideas into the very foundation of mathematics. On
the one hand, there is Voevodsky’s subtle and beautiful univalence axiom. The univalence
axiom implies, in particular, that isomorphic structures can be identiﬁed, a principle that
mathematicians have been happily using on workdays, despite its incompatibility with the
“ofﬁcial” doctrines of conventional foundations. On the other hand, we have higher inductive
types, which provide direct, logical descriptions of some of the basic spaces and construc-
tions of homotopy theory: spheres, cylinders, truncations, localizations, etc. Both ideas are
impossible to capture directly in classical set-theoretic foundations (...).
1.3.3
The Problem with Unifying Mathematics
Category theory takes a bird’s eye view of mathematics. From
high in the sky, details become invisible, but we can spot
patterns that were impossible to detect from ground level. [31]
Notwithstanding the fact, that there are dozens of mathematical disciplines (and hun-
dreds of subdisciplines), it is an empirical datum, that mathematics is a unity. Notions,
methods, theorems are transferred in a very natural way from one mathematical dis-
cipline to another; examples are abundant. But in the history of mathematics, these
theories often emerged as separate disciplines, and great contributions in the history
of mathematics consisted often in transferring concepts from discipline D1 to dis-
cipline D2—applying algebra in geometry to solve classic questions (like the angle
trisection) is the most obvious illustration. This mutual applicability of mathematical
disciplines is almost a “raw data”, a phenomenon which requires an explanation. The
insights from CT might provide it.
From the point of view of reductive foundationalism (for instance—set theoretic),
the answer is very natural: mathematics is a unity just because of the fact that all of
Mathematics can be reduced to the Fundamental Theory (whatever it is). But this is
not exactly what mathematical practice suggests: the mutual applications of diverse
mathematical notions and results is not the result of translating everything into set-
theoretic language, and then proceeding within set theory. The conceptual links are
much more direct, that via a set-theoretic translation.
So, it is natural to ask, whether the phenomenon of unity could be explained
not by postulating a reduction to set theory, but in a more direct way. This is the

1
Why Categories?
11
point of view of CT: the unity of mathematics stems from the fact that all math-
ematical theories and objects live within their natural environment(s) (which are
the respective category/ies)—and the unity is explained by investigating the rela-
tionships between these categories. From this point of view, some notions become
natural, and “environment-relative”—one of the simplest examples is the notion of
isomorphism. In set theory there is an enormous amount of the “implementations” of
this notion (isomorphism of groups is something different than the isomorphism of
rings, even if the underlying set is the same7). In CT the isomorphism between objects
in a category is deﬁned via the properties of the morphisms. And the “transfer” of
isomorphisms between different categories is explained via functorial notions (like
the homeomorphism of topological spaces and algebraic isomorphisms). We might
say, that the “essence” of the familiar notion of isomorphism (in all its variants) is
captured by one category-theoretic deﬁnition.
In the development of mathematics, isolating proper, core notions for a discipline
(e.g. by ﬁnding appropriate primitive notions for an axiomatization) was a natural
problem. Identifying such notions can have great explanatory value, in a sense—
metaphorically speaking—this is about identifying “the essence of the theory”. And
the proper identiﬁcation can lead to a fertile conceptual recasting—being an explana-
tory presentation of a discipline.
This statement is perhaps difﬁcult to grasp in a precise way: what does it mean, that
a theory is presented in an explanatory or a non-explanatory way? An illuminating
example is presented in [32], where Pringsheim’s presentation of complex analysis
is discussed.8 According to Mancosu [32, p. 108]:
The original approach to complex analysis defended by Pringsheim is based on the claim
that only according to his method it is possible to “explain” a great number of results, which
in previous approaches, in particular Cauchy’s, remain mysterious and unexplained.
Of course, this is not a new theory, there are no new theorems—rather, this is
an example of a shift in perspective. Mancosu’s example does not concern CT in
any way—but illustrates the phenomenon. Providing a reformulation of a theory can
provide important insights. And the problem of “immersing” different subjects into
one conceptual system is obviously connected with questions concerning the unity
of a subject.
At this point it is worth mentioning that CT in the person of F. W. Lawvere led to a
peculiardemythologisationofGödel’sfamoustheorems.ItturnsoutthatbothGödel’s
incompleteness theorem and Russell’s paradox, as well as Cantor’s theorem and
Tarski’s undeﬁnability theorem—all these results are instances of a simple categori-
cal construction. An interested reader should take a look at Lawvere’s work in [21],
and a reader who is not familiar with CT yet can easily follow Lawvere’s result, thanks
to N. Yanofsky’s accessible introduction to the subject in [45] without the use of a
CT-toolbox. This observation by Lawvere is a good example of how CT naturally
7Isomorphism of Lie groups as groups is something quite different than their isomorphism as
topological spaces.
8Without going into details, it takes the notion of the mean value of a function as basic—and the
other (standard) deﬁnitions are treated as derived facts.

12
M. Ku´s et al.
ﬁnds surprising similarities between different mathematical phenomena. It is proba-
bly even more surprising that the topological operator of the interior is connected with
the inclusion operator in the same way as the existential quantiﬁer with the general
quantiﬁer—these are the examples of adjoint functors that were noticed in principle
only thanks to CT. An overview of many examples of adjoint functors can be found in
Mac Lane’s classic work Categories for the Working Mathematician [27]. The issue
of adjointness in the foundations of mathematics (understood not as “starting-point”
or “justiﬁcation” but as the study of what is universal in mathematics) is discussed
by Lawvere in his work Adjointness in Foundations [20]. Lawvere shows how one
can understand the game of Formal and Conceptual aspects of mathematics in the
context of their adjointness.
CT is not an object-level theory, it is perhaps rather “a theory of theories”—and
its contributions to our understanding are at a quite abstract level. As Spivak [41, p.
400] put it:
Category theory is not a theory of everything. It is more like, as topologist Jack Morava put it,
(...) “a theory of theories of anything”. In other words, it is a model of models. It leaves each
subject alone to solve its own problems, to sharpen and reﬁne its toolset in the ways it sees
ﬁt. That is, CT does not micromanage in the affairs of any discipline. However, describing
any discipline categorically tends to bring increased conceptual clarity, because conceptual
clarity is CT’s main concern, its domain of expertise. (...) Finally, category theory allows
one to compare different models, thus carrying knowledge from one domain to another, as
long as one can construct the appropriate “analogy”, i.e., functor.
And this might be characteristic of CT: it takes on a new perspective. This new
perspective is indeed an ontological shift that we mentioned earlier. It is a change
of ontological form, whereby form, following Ingarden (in his Controversy over the
Existence of the World [15]) we mean something radically non-qualitative. The form
can be a parthood and a wholehood, a substance and its properties (the form here is
the subject of properties) or exactly relationality, as in the case of CT. Existence in CT
is only and exclusively being in relation. Hence, ontologically speaking, Eilenberg
and Mac Lane made a formal-ontological shift towards pure relationality. This is not
a technical (in the mathematical sense) shift, many mathematicians use both CT and
set theory simultaneously. However, the difference between CT and set theory lies in
the fundamentally different ontology behind them, hence discussions between ﬁerce
category theorists and set theorists resemble discussions between metaphysicists. CT
is essentially a formal metaphysics of mathematics that defends a different vision of
the world.
1.3.4
Category Theory in Metaphysics
Spivak [41, p. 382] pointed out that CT has served science as a modeling language
for various studied phenomena:
There is a good deal of work on using category theory to model high-level conceptual
aspects of scientiﬁc subjects. For example, categories have been used by John Baez to model

1
Why Categories?
13
signal ﬂow and reaction networks, by Abramsky and Coecke to model aspects of quantum
mechanics, and by Lambek to model computer programming languages. At the time of
writing, I believe we are at the early stages of an effort to “categorify” science.
Spivak explaining his proposal—through persuasive examples—claims that CT
is a kind of “mathematical model of mathematical models”. Let’s follow Spivak with
the linearity phenomenon. The vector space R models line-hood, R2 is a model of
plane-hood, etc. Hence, every object in the category of vector spaces V ectR is a
model of linearity. CT, on the other hand, models the relationships between these
models. The category of vector spaces V ectR is also a model, but of a higher order—
it is a model, according to Spivak’s proposal, of linearity itself. Objects of a given
category, i.e. low-level models, are in fact determined by the relations between them,
these relations are captured by CT by studying the category V ectR. Of course, in the
category Cat, composed of all small categories, the phenomena of higher levels are
modeled. In particular, in the Cat there are two categories that represent object-hood
and morpism-hood in the way that R models line-hood.
CT in fact is not the only language to model higher level entities, as Spivak initially
claimed. In fact, CT in his approach is a higher-level formal ontology, i.e. it is a kind
of ontological material that allows us to model many phenomena—and it is much
more than just language. Spivak adopts the Kantian perspective and treats the models
as cognitive products that do not have an independent existence outside our cognitive
apparatus. It is no mystery that this is not the only possible solution. The category
theory can be seen as a pre-conﬁguration of the necessary and possible combinations
of content, or as a network of ideas (an idea in a sense similar to Plato’s idea and
the conception of an idea coined by phenomenologists such as Jean Hering and
Roman Ingarden [15, p. 67–74]) that determines the possible conﬁgurations. Taking
this position, Spivak’s models become concretizations of pure ideal qualities in the
contents of ideas, not just mental representations. However, regardless of ontological
differences, the practice of using CT—adequately described by Spivak—is simply
common in scientiﬁc practice.
The CT thus serves as a modeling tool not only for science but also for philos-
ophy, which is perhaps more important for philosophy itself, because it can lead to
its development (if any development at all would be allowed—some philosophers
complacently claim that practicing philosophy is like shaving every day, nothing con-
structive comes from this, except that you are shaved). We will provide two examples
here of the use of categorical structures as models in philosophical considerations.
As is well known, Plato has divided reality into two parts, into what really exists
(ideas or forms) and into that which only imitates (things). At least since then there
has been a dispute in philosophy about whether and how ideas exist and what is
their relation to the world of real objects. In the twentieth century, Jean Hering and
Roman Ingarden signiﬁcantly developed their theory of ideas. These philosophers
have worked in a phenomenological tradition that is focused on analyzing the content
of what appears in direct experience. Of course, this method, on the one hand, allows
ustofocusonthethingsthemselves(phenomenologistshavespokenofacomingback
to the things themselves), but on the other hand, it excludes many other operations,

14
M. Ku´s et al.
such as modeling in Spivak’s view or the paraphrase method in Ajdukiewicz’s view
(cf. [1]), as well as many others. Mathematical analysis, including mathematical
modeling, has also entered into philosophy, often called mathematical philosophy,
which is promoted e.g. by Hannes Leitgeb (see overview in [22]). Skowron [40],
who tries to defend the contemporary theory of ideas against its critics, has taken
advantage of this opportunity and for this purpose he uses CT.
Manyheavyaccusationshavebeenmadeagainstthetheoryofideassinceitsincep-
tion. Aristotle himself formulated many objections. He claimed that it is problematic
to create many ideas from one (One-Over-Many Argument), he asked whether the
negations of ideas are also ideas (if there is an idea of man, is there an idea of a
non-man?—Negation Argument), he repeated after Plato the Third-Man Argument
which supposedly ridicules the participation of ideas in things. He stated that “[T]o
say that they are patterns and the other things share in them is to use empty words and
poetical metaphors” (Metaphysics, I, 997b 5–12). Using a slightly different modeling
method than the one proposed by Spivak, i.e. an improved method of Ajdukiewicz’s
paraphrases, Skowron rejects these classical arguments against the theory of ideas.
He analyzes the phenomenon of negation using CT in joint paper with Wiesław Kubi´s
[39], by using the notion of n-category he rejects the Third-Man Argument, and he is
using elementary categorical constructions to reject the One-Over-Many Argument.
CT therefore also serves pure metaphysics by providing conceptual and argumen-
tative tools that were not previously available to philosophers, and thus enriches
metaphysical argumentation.
The second example of CT applications in metaphysics is a categorical represen-
tation of Leibniz’s monadology, proposed by Michał Heller. He presents a toy-model
of Leibniz’s monadology. Let Leib be a category with an inﬁnite number of objects.
We can think of these objects as spacetime events. In this category, each object is
connected to each other with only one arrow. Each object in this category is both a
terminal and an initial object (so it’s a null object). It is known that a terminal object is
a unique up to isomorphism, hence all objects in this category are isomorphic. Heller
then makes analogies: let’s think of objects within the category Leib as Leibniz’s
monadas, then we obtain the following dependencies [14, p. 194–5]:
• Leibniz claims that every monad is “a perpetual mirror of the universe” or “each substance
[monad] ‘expresses’ the entire universe”. In Leib every object is a generalized element
of any other object (there is an arrow from every object to every object).
• Leibniz: Monads enjoy a kind of “self-sufﬁciency”, they have “no windows”, “with noth-
ing ‘entering or leaving’, they are ‘the sources of their internal actions”’: in spite of this
“the entire system works harmoniously” (“preestablished harmony”). In Leib: all objects
are isomorphic (are, in a sense, one object).
• Space is entirely relational, or “merely relative; it is ‘order or relation’, without related
bodies it is ‘nothing at all”’. In Leib there is nothing except arrows from any object to
any other object.
Of course, this is only a model, but the study of its properties may lead to the discovery
of further dependencies present in the metaphysics of Leibniz.

1
Why Categories?
15
1.4
Physics: Category Theory as an Ontology Rescuing Tool
Category theory entered physics seemingly only as a new language for old theo-
ries. But, in fact, one of the original purposes of the categorical (topos) approach to
quantum mechanics, as presented in seminal papers of Christopher Isham, Andreas
Döring, and Jeremy Butterﬁeld has been to ﬁnd an alternative logical foundation for
the orthodox quantum theory [9, 16]. The most fundamental result of such a shift
can be brieﬂy explained by the following observations. The classical and quantum
descriptions of the physical world differ considerably on the mathematical level.
Classical systems are described in terms of a phase space, usually a differential
manifold, its (measurable) subsets, coordinate systems, etc. Observables, i.e. phys-
ical quantities that we can measure, or, in general to which we can ascribe certain
numerical values characterizing the observed system, are functions on the phase
space. Observables, such like positions, momenta, energies, angular momenta etc.
are some properties of systems like particles, ensembles of particles, rigid bodies,
etc. They can change in time, but are properties that are possessed by systems alone
and do not depend on whether or not they are actually measured at a particular
moment. Moreover, at least in principle, we can measure them without disturbing
them. Consequently, measurements can be performed in an arbitrary order, or even
simultaneously, and provide the same results. We can thus pose questions about exact
values of, say, the position and the momentum of a particle. Usually, however, due
to e.g. inaccuracies of measurements we inquire into the probability that our particle
is in a certain subset of the phase space. Such a probability is determined by the
volumes of the relevant subsets.
Quantum mechanics offers a completely different picture. Here we do not have
a phase space in the form of a manifold. Instead a system is described in terms
of vectors and operators in a Hilbert space. We may ascribe to each system some
properties that pretend to be the quantum analogues of classical ones like positions,
momenta, angular momenta, energies, etc. (and some others that seem to be of
a purely quantum mechanical nature, like spin, isospin, strangeness, hypercharge
etc.). However, they are no longer intrinsic in the classical sense. They are not
“carried” by a system during its evolution, rather they are “brought to life” by an act
of measurement, which can be interpreted as an impossibility of a non-disturbing
experiment. Each act of measurement disturbs the actual state of a system by bringing
it to another state corresponding to a result of the measurement performed. Hence,
the order in which measurements are taken does matter, and some measurements
can not be taken simultaneously (the uncertainty principle). Moreover, although
results of measurements depend on the actual state of the system prior to the act of
a measurement, they do it only in a probabilistic manner. This is because for each
observable (position, momentum, angular momentum, energy, spin, etc.) there is a
corresponding selfadjoint operator, the eigenvalues of which are possible outcomes
with probabilities depending on the state of a system before the measurement and
the eigenvectors determine possible states after it.

16
M. Ku´s et al.
It is thus clear that it is rather hard to ﬁnd a unifying ontological basis for clas-
sical and quantum physics. The ontological status of such fundamental elements of
physical reality, as positions, momenta, angular momenta, etc. have radically dif-
ferent ontological status in both theories. Whereas they are intrinsic and objective
properties of a physical system, it is not so in quantum theory.
From a purely physical point of view this is not a danger. Ultimately, physics
is an experimental science. It can and should answer experimental questions about
outcomes of various measurements. Such an approach clearly puts more emphasis
on the epistemology, moving apart, or even totally discarding ontological issues.
As an attempt to unify classical and quantum physics on common epistemological
ground one can treat the quantum logic approach that goes back to Birkhoff and von
Neumann [6]. The main idea is to analyze the structure of elementary experimental
question/propositions about a system. In classical physics, elementary propositions
can be reduced to statements that values of observed quantities (coordinates) belong
to a certain subset of the phase space. The logical structure of the set of such proposi-
tions, determined by the rules concerning their negations, conjunctions and disjunc-
tions isomorphically reﬂects the Boole algebra structure of the set of (measurable)
subsets of the phase space. One of the characteristic features of a Boolean structure is
the distributivity law, allowing for the distribution of conjunctions over disjunctions
and vice versa.
In quantum mechanics elementary propositions concern positions of state vectors
(characterizing a state of a system) with respect to eigenspaces of observables (self-
adjoint operators in Hilbert space). As in the classical case we can ask composite
questions corresponding to conjunctions and disjunctions. However, the ensuing log-
ical structure is no longer distributive. The logic of a system described by a Hilbert
space H is represented by the orthomodular lattice of closed subspaces in H . The
involution sending a subspace to its orthogonal complement represents logical nega-
tion, satisfying the law of an excluded middle: measuring the spin of an electron
will yield either ‘up’ or ‘down’, tertium non datur. As said, the resulting lattice is
non-distributive: x-spin up does not imply x-spin up and z-spin up or x-spin up and
z-spin down (the incompatibility of the two measurements is reﬂected by the non-
distributivity of the sub-lattice they ‘generate’, just as by the non-commutativity of
the corresponding sub-algebra of operators). Having the lattice stand for the logic of
the system, one derives its probability theory where states assign ‘probabilities’ to
elements of the lattice, respecting the underlying structure (order and complementa-
tion). These states turn out to coincide with the usual density matrices by a celebrated
theorem of Gleason (as long as dim H ≥3, [11]).
Despite differences in the logical structures of both theories, such an approach
deﬁnitely provides a unifying picture for the whole physics. The differences them-
selves reﬂect precisely the dissimilarities between the two theories. Does it really
mean that we achieved the goal and we can look at classical quantum physics from
the same point of view? For supporters of the purely epistemological approach brieﬂy
described above, most probably yes. But for those who pay more attention to the onto-
logical basis of physical theories it might be disappointing. It seems that category
theory could be called to come to the rescue.

1
Why Categories?
17
In a certain sense, one of the original purposes of the categorical (topos) approach
to quantum mechanics was to ﬁnd a well-behaved phase space for a quantum system,
restoring, at least to some extent, the well understood ontological basis of classical
physics. In addition, it provides at least partial embodiment of Bohr’s idea that the
account of all evidence concerning quantum phenomena, despite their non-classical
character, must be expressed in classical terms [7].
This goal is achieved by replacing the usual non-distributive orthomodular lattices
of Birkhoff and von Neumann with the distributive logic of a, so-called, point-free
space. Distributivity comes then at the price of the absence of the law of the excluded
middle; this is however a feature rather than a ﬂaw, and a characteristic of the true
logic of physical observation (see [43]).
The ﬁrst step along the way is to construct a frame, i.e., a complete distributive
lattice, where ﬁnite meets distribute over arbitrary joins. The lattice of open subsets
of a given topological space provides an example of a frame, moreover one may
view any frame as a ‘pointless topology’, i.e., a virtual space examined only through
its collection of open subsets and the lattice operations on them. This does seem
to correspond to the way a physicist observes the phase space of a system—and
thus to the actual logic of such observations. The use of open subspace reﬂects the
intuitionism of the logic: negation corresponds to taking the interior of the comple-
ment, whence the disjunction of a proposition and its negation need not be true. To
emphasize this interpretation, one deﬁnes the category of locales as the opposite of
the category of frames (recall that the topology functor from topological spaces to
frames is contravariant).9
The whole program can be thus looked upon as a kind of promised restoration of
underlying ontology of both classical and quantum theories in the phase space by
describing it in terms of topoi (sets in the classical and locales in the quantum case). It
can also can be looked upon as a kind of a, previously mentioned, “ontological shift”.
This time, however, the shift does not enrich the ontology, as it was in the case of
mathematical object, but rather impoverishes it, e.g. by denying objective existence,
or at least a primary ontological character, to some properties like positions and
momenta, both in the quantum and the classical picture. This is the price we pay by
an ontological uniﬁcation of both within the category theory.
The power of such an approach is further exhibited by the fact that it applies also
to other theories, different from classical and quantum ones that, to some (limited)
extent can be treated as generalizations of quantum mechanics, the so called non-
signaling theories [33]. Also in this case a generalized phase-space of the type out-
lined above can be constructed resulting in a common representation encompassing
non-signaling, orthodox quantum, and classical systems and potentially interesting
in-betweens [12].
9Actually, the new intuitionistic logic of the quantum system is realized not as a frame (or any
partially ordered set), but rather as a frame object in a suitable topos, intrinsically associated with
the system under consideration. Thus, the meta-logic describing the logic of the system is the internal
logic of a topos. For instance, probability valuations on the frame object are viewed as morphisms
into a real numbers object.

18
M. Ku´s et al.
1.5
Conclusion
The emergence and development of category theory was a kind of formal-ontological
shift. The standard and natural attitude towards the objects, as if they were individual
subjects of properties (as if they were substances and its attributes), was replaced by a
form of pure relationality. Existence which was somehow contained in the object was
replaced by the necessary coexistence with other objects. CT detached existence from
the existing subject, and this is the reason why it still raises some controversy—for
some scholars it is still just abstract nonsense.
This new form of relativity is not pure relativism, as one might think at ﬁrst glance.
CT, on the one hand, got rid of the internal structure of objects, replacing it with an
appropriate place in the network surrounding the object, and on the other hand, it
reached the universal mapping properties, which, being an ontological artifact of CT,
is still awaiting an adequate ontological analysis. Didn’t CT, which in the person of
Saunders Mac Lane had a non-platonic attitude at its core, reach the most platonic
objects in modern mathematics?
Acknowledgements The preparation of this paper was supported by an National Science Centre
grant, number 2016/21/B/HS1/01955.
References
1. K. Ajdukiewicz, A semantical version of the problem of transcendental idealism (originally
published in 1937), in The Scientiﬁc World-Perspective and Other Essays, 1931–1963, ed. by
J. Giedymin (Springer, Netherlands, 1977), pp. 140–154
2. G.L. Alexanderson, A conversation with Saunders Mac Lane, (interview). Coll. Math. J. 20(1),
2–25 (1989)
3. S. Awodey, Category Theory (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2006)
4. S. Awodey, Structuralism, invariance and univalence, in: [19], 58–68
5. P. Benacerraf, What numbers could not be. Philos. Rev. 74, 47–73 (1965)
6. G. Birkhoff, J. von Neumann, The logic of quantum mechanics (Springer, Berlin, 1975)
7. N. Bohr, in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, The Library of Living Philosophers, vol. 7,
ed. by P. A. Schilpp (Open Court, Evanston, IL, 1949), pp. 200–241
8. N. Dewar, S.C. Fletcher, L. Hudetz, Extending List’s Levels, in this volume
9. A. Döring, C.J. Isham, A topos foundation for theories of physics: I. Formal languages for
physics. J. Math. Phys. 49, 053515 (2008)
10. S. Eilenberg, S. Mac Lane, General theory of natural equivalences. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 58,
231–294 (1945)
11. A.M. Gleason, Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. J. Math. Mech. 6(6),
885–893 (1957)
12. J. Gutt, M. Ku´s, Non-signalling boxes and Bohriﬁcation. arXiv:1602.04702
13. M. Heller, Analogy, Identity, Equivalence. Complexity and Analogy in Science, Pontiﬁcal
Academy of Sciences. Acta 22, 257–266 (2014). www.pas.va/content/dam/accademia/pdf/
acta22/acta22-heller.pdf
14. M. Heller, Category Theory and the Philosophy of Space, in Filozoﬁa matematyki i informatyki,
ed. by R. Murawski (Copernicus Center Press, Krakow, 2015), pp. 185–200
15. R. Ingarden, Controversy over the Existence of the World, vol. I (Peter Lang D, Frankfurt am
Main, 2013)

1
Why Categories?
19
16. C.J. Isham, J. Butterﬁeld, A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker theorem: I. Quantum
states as generalised valuations. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 37, 2669–2733 (1998)
17. Z. Król, Category Theory and Philosophy, in this volume
18. S.S. Kutateladze, Saunders Mac Lane, the Knight of Mathematics. Sci. Math. Jpn. 63(1), 4–8
(2005). arXiv:math/0507203
19. E. Landry (ed.), Categories for the Working Philosopher (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2017)
20. W. Lawvere, Adjointness in Foundations. Dialectica 23(3–4), 28–296 (1969). (see also Reprints
in Theory and Applications of Categories. No. 16, 1–16 (2006))
21. W. Lawvere, Diagonal arguments and cartesian closed categories. Theory Appl. Categ. 15,
1–13 (2006)
22. H. Leitgeb, Scientiﬁc philosophy, mathematical philosophy. Metaphilosophy 44, 267–275
(2013)
23. J. Lubacz, The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic Processes, in this
volume
24. S. Mac Lane, Mathematics: Form and Function (Springer, Berlin, 1986)
25. S. Mac Lane, The protean character of mathematics, in The Space of Mathematics. Philosophi-
cal, Epistemological, and Historical Explorations, ed. by J. Echeverria, A. Ibarra, T. Mormann
(Walter De Gruyter, Berlin, 1992), pp. 3–13
26. S. Mac Lane, Concepts and Categories in Perspective, in A Century of Mathematics in America,
Part I, volume 1 of History of Mathematics, ed. by P. Duren, R. Askey, U. Merzbach (American
Mathematical Society, Providence, 1988), pp. 323–365
27. S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician (Springer, Berlin, 1998)
28. S. Mac Lane, A Mathematical Autobiography (A K Peters, Wellesley, 2005)
29. B. Mazur, When is one thing equal to some other thing? in Proof and Other Dilemmas: Math-
ematics and Philosophy, ed. by B. Gold, R. Simons (Spectrum, 2008), pp. 221–241
30. C. McLarty, The roles of set theories in mathematics, in: [19] pp. 1–17
31. T. Leinster, Basic Category Theory, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 143
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014), also available as: arXiv:1612.09375v1
32. P. Mancosu, Mathematical explanation: problems and prospects. Topoi 20, 97–117 (2001)
33. S. Popescu, D. Rohrlich, Quantum nonlocality as an axiom. Found. Phys. 24(3), 379–385
(1994)
34. M.D. Resnik, Structural Relativity. Philosophia Mathematica 4, 83 (1996)
35. W. Sellars, Philosophy and the scientiﬁc image of man, in Science, Perception and Reality
(Routledge & Kegan Paul, Abingdon-on-Thames, 1963)
36. Z. Semadeni, A. Wiweger, Wst¸ep do teorii kategorii i funktorów (Polskie Wydawnictwo
Naukowe, Warszawa, 1972)
37. Z. Semadeni, Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics from a Categorial Standpoint: Is It Related
to the Direction of Time?, in this volume
38. M. Shulman, Homotopy TypeTheory: A Synthetic Approach to Higher Equalities, in: [19], pp.
36–57
39. B. Skowron, W. Kubi´s, Negating as turning upside down. Stud. Log., Gramm. Rhetor. 54(67),
115–129 (2018)
40. B. Skowron, Using Mathematical Modeling as an Example of Qualitative Reasoning in Meta-
physics. A Note on a Defense of the Theory of Ideas. Ann. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. 7, 65–68
(2015). https://doi.org/10.15439/978-83-60810-78-1
41. D. Spivak, Categories as mathematical models, in: [19], pp. 381–401
42. Univalent Foundations Program, Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of Mathe-
matics, 1st edn (2003). http://homotopytypetheory.org/book/
43. S. Vickers, Topology via logic (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996)
44. K. Wójtowicz, Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?, in this
volume
45. N.S. Yanofsky, A Universal Approach to Self-Referential Paradoxes, Incompleteness and Fixed
Points. Bull. Symb. Log. 9(3), 362–386 (2003)

Chapter 2
Category Theory and Philosophy
Zbigniew Król
Abstract This paper considers the role that category theory can play in philosophy.
Category theory is a source of problems, methods and inspiration when it comes
to considering both some new and some longstanding philosophical issues. Among
the former, the paper draws attention to the ontological interaction between cate-
gories and sets, as well as the quantiﬁcational criterion of being—to mention just
two. Among the latter, it highlights the problem of cognitive access to mathemat-
ical objects, and that of the way in which such objects exist. In the context of the
development and the ontology of mathematics, I argue in favour of the thesis that
category theory is the most “platonic” theory in mathematics. I also point out that
category theory impacts signiﬁcantly upon many standard philosophical positions,
providing many counter-examples to popular, often repeated, yet unjustiﬁed philo-
sophical claims. The inﬂuence of category theory on the foundations and ontology
of mathematics is also brieﬂy explored here.
2.1
General Remarks Concerning Category Theory (CT)
First of all, CT proposes not just a new theory or domain of mathematics: it furnishes
a new conceptual framework for it. The tools of CT make it possible to speak about
and study all (?) kinds of formal mathematical theory, because of the fact that CT is
also a foundation for mathematics. Any (?) mathematical object can be investigated
with the use of CT, while it is also a fundamental mathematical theory, in that it
enables not only the translation of each and every (?) theory into CT-form but also
makes it possible to investigate every (?) kind of mathematical object with the use
of the CT conceptual apparatus. Moreover, CT enables one to study mutual relations
within the network of mathematical theories, or even of mathematical domains. This
last remark concerns the same kind of mathematical object (or theory), such as the
Z. Król (B)
International Center for Formal Ontology, Faculty of Administration and Social Sciences,
Warsaw University of Technology, Warszawa, Poland
e-mail: zbigkrol@wp.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_2
21

22
Z. Król
category of all small (or large) groups, sets, algebraic structures or models of theories,
aswellasdifferentkinds,suchasthecategoryofallcategoriesorconnectionsbetween
categories consisting of different objects.
One can describe Set Theory (ST) in a similar way. Obviously, CT and ST are
not singular formal theories, but rather open domains accompanied by the relevant
methods and styles of consideration, together with some basic concepts which can be
investigated within many different formal theories. CT would only be a new language
for all (?) of mathematics if every ST-description of an object had an equivalent
CT-description, and vice versa. However, the sentence above is not true, because
one can construct mathematical situations where the objects have some different
properties that are not discernible from the CT-point of view. The same holds for
some (not only ST-) extensional theories and some intensional properties.
To almost every statement concerning the hypothetical properties of CT and its
role in mathematics there corresponds a very strong meta-theorem (cf. the examples
mentioned above). At the same time, in my opinion, these theorems are not true in
general—thus I have placed a question mark in some places above. They are only true
in some situations and given some assumptions, because it is possible to construct
counter-examples to the unlimited versions of these theorems.
ST and CT are affected by much the same kinds of well-known problem and
antinomy. For example, is everything a set, or is every mathematical object a set
with some additional structure? The answer, moreover, is the same in ST as in CT:
i.e. “no”. For instance, it is possible to express in ST such sentences as “x is not
a set” or “x is not an element of any set and x has no elements”. It is also clear
that it is something different to speak about one ST-theory, such as a theory of the
foundations of mathematics, than it is to talk about multiple different ST-theories
in which locally mathematical objects can be “immersed”. In my opinion, it is not
even the case that “all (a priori possible) mathematics” is locally an instance of ST.
Many counterexamples can be constructed with the use of alter-theories to different
ST- and CT-theories. The alter-theory to a given axiomatic theory, whose axioms
are logically independent, is a theory whose axioms are negations of the original
axioms. In every theory based on an independent and consistent set of axioms, one
can replace any axiom by its negation and the resulting theory will also be consistent.
In the case of ﬁrst-order theories such as ZF(C), PA, or the elementary theory of the
category of sets (ETCS), there exists an alter-theory with many interesting properties
and models.1 Alter-ZFC cannot have models describable in ZFC, if both theories are
consistent. Thus, if every object is locally describable in ZFC (a CT-theory, …), what
are the objects of alter-ZFC (alter-CT-theory, …)?
Hence, it would be far better to speak about ST- and CT-reductions of mathe-
matics, or ST- and CT-interpretations of mathematics, that are limited in their power
of expression. Moreover, such interpretations are not conservative in mathemati-
cal content. For instance, it is not exactly or ideally the same to speak about such
fundamental mathematical objects as, for instance, natural numbers, in ST, CT or
Peano Arithmetic (PA). In different CT-structures, e.g. in the different kinds of topoi,
1However, some alter-theories of sophisticated theories are trivial.

2
Category Theory and Philosophy
23
natural numbers exhibit some standard as well as non-standard properties, including
many unexpected or exotic properties. Set theoretical deﬁnitions of natural numbers
treat (i.e. interpret) those numbers as sets. Thus, within, say, ZF(C), one can ask “if
2 is an element of 4”, which is not a property of numbers from the intuitive point of
view, and is meaningless in PA. Therefore, each interpretation extends and changes
the interpreted concepts, and adds something new to them. PA seems to be closer
in that respect to our intuitions. In general, there is a philosophical question to be
asked here: do such objects exist independently of the theories known to us—or,
if/when the theories contain non-equivalent descriptions of the objects, which theory
(and language or conceptual frame) is the real and proper means for describing the
numbers and other mathematical objects? Put another way: has any mathematical
theory been discerned as describing mathematical objects and truths? Such a theory
would be an ontologically discerned theory, in the sense that it would be the basic
theory for ontological considerations. ST and CT do not themselves furnish such
absolute mathematical means and theories.
There are some advantages of CT in comparison to ST. For instance, in CT it is
easy to study the interrelations between different mathematical theories and domains.
Mathematics, from this point of view, is not based on one fundamental theory, but
seems to be an expanding network of different structures and corresponding theories
which can be locally inquired into along the lines furnished by CT.
2.2
CT and Some Classical Problems in Philosophy
My intention here is to keep matters brief by conﬁning myself to some general
remarks, highlighting just some selected general philosophical problems whose anal-
ysis CT may prove relevant and useful to. Thus, rather than seeking to cover the
numerous problems arising in the philosophy of mathematics or logic as they relate
to CT, I shall just focus on addressing certain longstanding problems in philosophy
from this perspective.
Mathematics, from its early beginnings, has been the main source of examples
and archetypical patterns for some of the solutions proposed in general philosophy.
Philosophyhasitselfbeencloselyconnectedwithmathematics,withthedevelopment
of mathematics having had a major impact on the development of philosophy and
vice versa: consider, for instance, the philosophies of Plato, Aristotle, Neoplatonism,
Descartes, Newton, Berkeley, Hume, Locke, Kant, Mill, Frege, and others. Thus,
mathematics shows up at the very centre of philosophical considerations, and both
its actual use and our reﬂections upon it lie right at the heart of philosophy.
The emergence of new mathematical theories such as ST, of formalized math-
ematical and other languages, and of non-Euclidean geometries, have all exerted
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence upon philosophy. On the other hand, both old and new ten-
dencies in philosophy—such as platonism, phenomenology and intuitionism—have
inﬂuenced pure mathematics. From this point of view, it seems interesting to take
into consideration the possible impact of CT on philosophy.

24
Z. Król
First of all, there are many works in CT which are philosophically interesting per
se—such as, for instance, the works of William Lawvere concerning categorical set
theory. On the other hand, many classical problems in philosophy can be analyzed
in the context of formal ontology using mathematics, logic and formal methods.
Therefore, CT can be seen as a new method in formal ontology and philosophy, and
especially in analytical philosophy. Some of the deep-level results emerging on a
CT-based treatment differ from what they would be on an ST-approach. CT is not
merely a new language, useful for describing the same problems or objects that can
be expressed when we employ ST-based tools. This last fact is a consequence of many
general properties of CT: such as, for instance, the abovementioned, non-conservative
description of mathematical objects within different theories and structures, or the
use of intuitionistic logic. There is, then, most certainly room for the application
of CT in philosophy and formal ontology. However, such an approach is not yet
especially popular amongst philosophers.2
2.2.1
CT and Ontology
(a) One of the most important ontological problems is the topic addressed in the
debate concerning ontological monism versus pluralism. Are there only sensual
or physical (material) objects? Is there only one way of being: i.e. do only mate-
rial or real objects exist? CT can enhance our discussions about, and possibly
even help solve, many such questions. However, at the same time this is so in a
very limited way: it is only useful in the construction of some counterexamples
to certain particular standpoints. For instance, the central position in analytical
philosophy keeps Quine’s quantiﬁcational criterion of existence (QCE), albeit
with some variations. Quine argued for monism. There have been some experi-
ments introducing theories with multiple different existential quantiﬁers that can
correspond to certain different ways of being. Such theories can be discussed
with the use of CT—cf. [9]. The analysis demonstrates that different quantiﬁers,
as well as QCE, are irrelevant in ontology and rather give rise to technical and
logical problems on their own account—ones which are certainly most interest-
ing from a mathematical point of view, but which cannot be said to enrich pure
ontology. Below are two examples illustrating the possibility of constructing
CT-counterexamples to QCE:
(1’) There are categories in which quantiﬁers are not interpretable, e.g. categories
of cartesian closed categories.
(2’) In the case of some formulae in the Zariski topos, one encounters the follow-
ing:∃x. ∼∼F(x),Asiswell-known, F(x)statestheexistenceofsomeinvertible
inﬁnitesimals. However, one cannot infer from the above that ∃x.F(x) in this
topos. Thus, we are faced with the situation that some so-called inhabitant indi-
viduals (which are accessible after the application of forcing in the Basel topos)
2See the various works listed in the bibliography: for instance, [11].

2
Category Theory and Philosophy
25
can be added, but it is impossible to express this fact against the background of
QCE. This leads to the construction of a Basel topos in which one can express
this fact—i.e. that ∃x.F(x)—cf. [16, pp. 285–292, 65].
(b) The above-mentioned modern questions are connected with the old problem
of platonism in philosophy and mathematics. The development of mathematics
made it possible to try to describe and answer many questions, such as what
kind of beings are mathematical objects? The original answer to the ﬁrst of
those questions was the one given by the Pythagoreans: i.e. that “everything is
a number”, and because “number” for the Greeks only meant “natural number”
(“1” was not a number, but the principle of the generation of numbers, and they
did not know “0”), some problems soon emerged. If everything in the world
is a number, then especially everything in mathematics must be a number, and
especially every geometrical object will be a number. However, the discovery of
incommensurability demonstrates that if the side of a square is a number “1”, the
diagonal cannot be a number, because this number would have to be even and odd
simultaneously, which is impossible. Therefore, the ancient mathematicians tried
to construct a single mathematical theory in which everything is a natural number
or is describable with the use of natural numbers. They considered many variants:
for example, the introduction of more than one series of natural numbers, each
with its own unit “1”, incommensurable with other “1’s”. Theaetetus of Athens
demonstrated that it is not possible to describe the totality of lines (ﬁnite sections)
in geometry with the use of a ﬁnite number of “copies” of natural numbers
[cf. Book X of Euclid’s Elements, and [8, Chap.4 and 5]]. Modern versions
of the above problem take the form of such putative answers as “everything
is a set”, or “everything is a category”, both of which have their own well-
known difﬁculties, such as the ST- and CT-antinomies. Such answers are rather
restrictive from the point of view of pure mathematics and mathematical practice.
They are also irrelevant from the point of view of the history of mathematics.
For instance, it is quite artiﬁcial to analyze ancient mathematics with the use of
modern algebra, ST, or CT. Moreover, the application of modern tools to ancient
mathematics in some cases renders the (ancient) problems under consideration
more difﬁcult and complicated than they were on the original (ancient) approach.
One such example is the problem of change of the basic line in the classiﬁcation
of incommensurable lines in Book X of Elements [8, Chap.4]. The modern
notation is ineffective and too complicated when it comes to the analysis of
this problem. ST- and CT-reductions of mathematics seem to indicate that the
ancient mathematicians also took into consideration some sets or categories,
albeit subconsciously and without any explicit mention of the fact that they
were doing so. Historical analyses indicate that the objects they were engaged
in considering were, intensionally, entirely different from sets or categories.
For instance, the ﬁrst explicit treatment of geometrical objects as sets of points
originated in 1804 with Bolzano [2]. Even the well-known treatment of a (real)
line as a real axis only became possible after Cantor’s treatment of this problem.
Hence, it would be better to speak about ST- and CT-interpretations of the mathe-
maticaluniversethanabout“reductions”.WhatImeanisthatsuchinterpretations

26
Z. Król
cannot resolve the problem of what the subject matter of mathematics is and what
mathematical objects are from an ontological point of view. The most relevant
answer to these questions is that there are many different objects or universes
of mathematical discourse and we can grasp the mutual relations between them.
Given such a goal and approach, CT seems highly appropriate.
Coming back to platonism, CT cannot give us more information about the way
in which mathematical objects exist. On the other hand, it can show that there are
many mutually irreducible mathematical objects, even from the point of view of
extensional theories.3
(c) Turning to the next point in this review of the potential impact of CT in the ﬁeld
of ontology, it is necessary to indicate some ontological consequences stemming
from the sheer fact of the internal ontological properties of CT. CT is the most
“platonic” theory (or way of thinking) that there is in mathematics, not just ahis-
torically speaking, but also from a historical point of view. Mathematical platon-
ism is usually considered to be the conviction that there are—or the acceptance
of the existence of—ideal, atemporal, eternal, non-physical, unchanging objects
(beings), where these are taken to be the subject matter of mathematics. Such a
conviction, to be sure, can be explicit or implicit. In cases where such convictions
are explicit, they would appear to be external to mathematics and inessential to
the creation of mathematical knowledge itself. The most important are those
implicit platonic convictions which manifest themselves in determinate meth-
ods of mathematical inquiry, or in some special way of being of the subject who
creates mathematics. A well-known example of such implicit platonic convic-
tions is given in the form of the problem of the decimal expansion of the number
π: is there a sequence “0123456789”? If somebody thinks that the answer is
either “yes” or “no”, he or she holds an implicitly platonic commitment. Behind
this kind of platonism lie various strictly determined methods, such as the use
of the law of the excluded middle, indirect proofs, classical logic, etc. Some of
those methods are “less mathematical”—such as, for instance, the possibility of
“seeing a given theory from the outside”, or the appeal to mathematical intuition.
The reader can ﬁnd more examples in [6], as well as in existing literature [1].
From this point of view, CT is even more platonic (non-constructive) than ZFC,
NBG, etc. It makes use, in an almost unlimited way, of the possibility of “seeing”
theories and objects “from the outside”: each and every category of object is set
up as consisting of objects which, at least usually, are developed mathematical
structures of some sort—e.g., groups, algebras—and deﬁnes external relations
involving them. CT, then, treats mathematical objects as already existing, and
ready-to-use: “Let Ens be the category of all sets, Set that of all small sets, Mon
that of all small monoids, Cat that of all small categories, …” At the same time,
one can consider functors, arrows, etc. between everything—large or small cat-
egories. CT uses non-constructive totalities of objects, and it is its basic method
to assume the existence of such totalities and discern the relations between them.
3I explain more precisely what “extensional theories” are in [7, 8].

2
Category Theory and Philosophy
27
Such a possibility enables the use of mathematical intuition—see the material
devoted to epistemology below.
On the other hand, the internal logic, in the most important cases, is intuitionistic.
Topoi furnish models for intuitionistic logic of any order. CT demonstrates the
fruitfulness and effectiveness of this sort of platonic approach, in which one can
inquire into limits affecting the use of different kinds of logic in mathematics.
More speciﬁcally, CT enables the study of limits that bear on platonism and
platonic methods.
CT allows us to study platonism in physics. We have already said that CT treats
mathematical objects as already existing and ready-to-use. In the same way, in
physics, mathematical objects are ready-to-use in the absence of formal theories.
For instance, natural numbers are “in use” in quantum physics (the numbering of
quantum states) as if they were unique—i.e. independent of the models provided
by certain formal theories. Therefore, we have a model-theoretic approach to
quantum gravity which is similar to, or “translatable” into, topos-theoretic lan-
guage and a topos-theoretic approach (Isham).4
In brief, then, CT cannot add anything more to our purely ontological considera-
tionsconcerningthemodeofexistenceofmathematicsandmathematicalobjects.The
objects of the CT-universe are, in the same way, abstract or ideal or non-physical—
as objects of set theory or algebraic structures, or the objects considered in ancient
mathematics (squares, numbers, triangles, lines, circles, etc.). However, CT falsiﬁes
some “ontological” views, such as set-theoretic platonism (i.e. the thesis that “every-
thing is a set” and, consequent upon this, the claim that the question “What exists in
mathematics?” has an answer independent of the content of the/a universe of sets.
The foundations of mathematics can be interpreted ontologically as an experiment of
sorts, aimed at determining what the basic concepts and structures—i.e. beings—in
mathematics are. However, there is an inﬁnite number of possible foundations of
mathematics, and from that fact follows the impossibility of using CT to deﬁne the
ontological content of the mathematical universe.
2.2.2
CT and Epistemology
In my view, CT points towards the possibility of inquiring into the same mathematical
objects from radically different perspectives, appealing to very different intuitions.
Thus, CT adds something essential to classical, purely epistemological inquiries
dealing with our epistemic access to mathematical reality. However, given that it
concerns our epistemic access to the different ways of being of the subject matter of
mathematics, we should recall that the objects of the CT-universe are abstract, ideal
or non-physical in much the same way as the objects of set theory and algebraic
structures, or those considered in ancient mathematics (squares, numbers, triangles,
lines, circles, etc.), are. Therefore, both the objects of CT and CT itself are given to the
4Cf., for instance, [3–5, 10].

28
Z. Król
conscious subject in the same type of phenomenological act as other mathematical
or abstract objects. These objects, then, are intentional objects.5
At the same time, one can consider whether CT-objects are given in the same kind
of conscious act as sets, algebraic objects, and so on: i.e. whether there are epistemic
and phenomenological differences in respect of our conscious access to different
types of object in mathematics. Nobody has yet considered the above question. The
results and theoretical apparatus elaborated upon in Husserl’s Logical Investigations
can be useful here. Thus, in epistemology, CT can be called upon mainly as a source of
examples in philosophical case studies. Meanwhile, it is possible to model and study
many epistemological problems in formal ontology and CT. Problems pertaining to
the limits of the use of language in philosophy and, especially, in epistemology, which
can be treated with the use of CT and other formal methods, belong to this problem
set. Nevertheless, in my opinion, such an approach is rather external to epistemology
and its essential methods and problems.
The next group of examples of questions which can be investigated with the use
of CT are as follows:
1. Is the structure of reality the same (isomorphic, “similar”, etc.) to the structure of
a language or a theory?
2. Is the structure (subject) of mathematics the same or “similar”, or does it corre-
spond to, the structure of the language in which one conducts mathematics?
3. Is there any form or subject matter of mathematics that is given to us without
involving any sort of language?
What is mathematical intuition? How does it operate? And how is epistemic access
to mathematical reality possible? These are major questions, not only in the philoso-
phy of mathematics but also in general epistemology. The best way to approach them
is via phenomenology and hermeneutics. Nevertheless, the possibility of discovering
something in mathematics in a non-formal or intuitive way rests on the possibility of
making use of some objects from formal theories in an informal way. One can elab-
orate some unspeciﬁed “points” taken from a model of a formal theory and imagine
that these are not “points”, but rather other full-blooded objects: groups, algebras, or
categories. For instance, it is possible to imagine that, in a real line, the initial “points”
are substituted by some groups, linear spaces or structures. Thus, it is possible to
investigate some objects in which some other objects are immersed or have been sub-
stituted, which are therefore things which possess some properties inexpressible in
the initial theories. There are plenty of kinds of such substitutional theories and “sub-
stitutional models”. For instance, global homogeneous substitutional models (where
one substitutes for every “point”, or other objects, in the initial theory the same kind
of objects described in other theories), or local homogeneous ones (where one sub-
stitutes the same kind of objects only for some chosen “points”), or global and local
non-homogeneous substitutional models, as well as self-substitutions (where we use
5For Ingarden, mathematical objects are ideas with rigid essences. However, in the opinion of
Ingarden, sets are only some sort of purely intentional object, without any such rigid essences. There
is a difference between Husserl’s and Ingarden’s conceptions of intentionality. In the following, I
prefer the concept of intentionality given in Husserl’s Logical Investigations.

2
Category Theory and Philosophy
29
in the substitution objects deﬁned in the initial theory—for instance, substituting for
every point in a Euclidean plane a straight line). There is a well-deﬁned description of
such models in CT. For instance, to every global substitution there corresponds a bun-
dle where the initial set of “points” is a set of indexes and the objects to be substituted
are members of a stalk space. Thus, there is a natural topos-structure correspond-
ing to a global substitution. More information about these kinds of model, together
with their possible applications and indications concerning CT-formalization, can be
found in [9].
2.2.3
CT and Epistemology Contd.: Theories of the
Development of Mathematics and Science
CT, conceived and pursued in terms of case studies of various sorts, yields fun-
damental information concerning both the a priori status of mathematics and the
laws involved in the development of mathematics. These kinds of results are also
important from a general epistemic point of view. Beyond this, CT demonstrates that
there are alternative formulations of some basic mathematical theories which start
from different intuitions. For instance, ﬁrst-order descriptions of the Set-category
and ZFC are equivalent—the models are, in a sense, equivalent. The ETCS (Law-
vere) starts without the concepts of ∈-relation or element, or of the set as a collection
of elements. The above example demonstrates that, from an a priori point of view,
set theory could have appeared ﬁrst as an ETCS in the history of mathematic, and
that the creation of Cantor’s, Dedekind’s or Frege’s set theories (as well as any other
mathematical theory) is determined not only by a priori considerations, but also by
social, cultural, historical, etc., factors.
Thus, CT demonstrates that mathematics is, in a sense, independent of the intu-
itions underlying its creation. However, it is impossible to create something in math-
ematics that is entirely without any intuitive content or convictions. Thus, CT could
furnish many case studies relevant to the problem of what the connection might be
linking mathematics with primordial intuitions. Again, in my opinion, the basic tools
needed are those provided by the methods and philosophical approach presented in
Husserl’s Logical Investigations (passim).
The next example of such a case study would be this: that it is possible to demon-
strate that ancient geometry, as known from Euclid’s Elements, has an alternative
formulation based on different intuitions. Every theorem from Book I of Elements
can be obtained without the intuitions concerning points, lines, circles, triangles,
etc.—cf. [8].
The ﬁnal possibility I wish to touch upon here is that of studying the logical
structure of the brain (or, if the reader prefers, the mind) and its neural activity,
insofar as these can be effectively modelled in CT. Thus, CT could prove to be a

30
Z. Król
useful tool in cognitive studies, and in naturalistic and causality-based approaches
to epistemological matters.6
2.3
Conclusion
Our most important conclusion here is that CT cannot replace purely philosoph-
ical methods in ontology and epistemology—especially phenomenological ones.
Nevertheless, it is an extremely useful and effective tool in formal ontology—one
irreducible to other formal tools, such as ST and its language and methods. It is a
great source of counterexamples which can falsify many standpoints in philosophy—
especially in ontology and analytical philosophy. The initial emergence of CT,
together with its subsequent development and achievements, are a rich source of
possible case studies that have the potential to cast light on a number of philosoph-
ical problems, not only in pure ontology and epistemology, but also pertaining to
the laws involved in the development of mathematics, knowledge and science in the
context of the use of mathematical intuition. In my view, then, it is impossible to
work competently with many problems in the philosophy of science, the philoso-
phy of mathematics, or analytical philosophy—especially where the ontology and
epistemology of mathematics are concerned—without having in one’s possession at
least an elementary knowledge of the methods and accomplishments of CT.
Appendix: The Commentary of an Anonymous Reviewer
The paper deals with very important and so far only partially explored topic of rela-
tions between category theory (CT) and philosophy. There are (as far as I know) not
many works in this ﬁeld. On the other side, many existing mathematical papers on CT
contain strongly philosophical parts (e.g. Lawvere). Nevertheless, there is a shortage
of systematic studies of CT and philosophy. The Author presents several examples,
both in philosophy and mathematics, where such studies could be performed.
InparticularIamawareoftheAuthor’sworkonaltertheorieswhicharementioned
in this paper. Let me comment on this point more carefully. In general an alter-
theory is built as an associated theory to any existing axiomatic theory with recursive
set of axioms, consistent and logically independent. Then one can negate one or
more of these axioms which leads to the variety of possible alter theories. It is
quite surprising that such set of alter-theories can be used as a tool for exploring
the original theory. I think that this is also very nontrivial construction regarding
existence in mathematics and possibly in philosophy. This also sheds some light on a
would-be formal theory for ontology (at least in mathematics). To explain these points
let me consider a model M of ZF(C). Then one can modify slightly the procedure
6Cf. the possibilities opened in [12–14]. See also [15, 17, 18].

2
Category Theory and Philosophy
31
of building an alter-theory: It relies rather on creating both the (model of a) theory
and the (model of the) alter-theory. Historically such an approach has been realized
by forcing extensions of M. There typically appear independent sentences on ZF(C)
in the extensions, e.g. continuum hypothesis in one extension and its negation in the
other. One extension can be seen as the model for a theory and the other for the alter-
theory. One can ask the question: Is there anything fundamental for mathematics in
the entire procedure of creating the pairs (Theory, Alter-theory) as above? Recent
results of Joel Hamkins (e.g. [20]) show that the entire structure of the set of such
forcing extensions (partial order) is a fundamental entity in mathematics, called the
multiverse. The best recognized multiverse is the one where the initial model M
is countable transitive and the forcing extensions are just Cohen extensions. The
true challenge would be to recognize the multiverse starting from the constructible
universeL.Buttheultimategoalwouldbetoinvestigatethemultiversecorresponding
to the universe V of sets of von Neumann. By now it remains among very ambitious,
thoughbeyondcurrentpossibilities,aimsoftheapproach.Inthiswaytheprocedureof
passing to the pairs (Theory, Alter-theory) by means of forcing extensions appears
as fundamental in foundations of mathematics. Finally, the categoriﬁcation of the
multiverse is possible and would lead to another interesting connections between
CT, set theory and foundations of mathematics.
Regarding existence in mathematics let us make a simple observation: Given
ZF(C) model M we can add extra axioms which leads to the more powerful capabil-
ities for proving the existence of certain objects. The profound example is that of the
large cardinal axioms added to ZF(C). Then one can prove the existence of things
such as 0#. They correspond to real numbers which are not present in any forcing
extension of M but exist in R in V under suitable large cardinal hypothesis (LC).
Without LC, 0# does not exist. Another example is the constructible axiom V = L
added to ZFC. In such models, nonconstructible reals certainly do not exist and their
existence relates again to LC when L ⊂V (under L ̸= V ).
The question is whether there are any fundamental model M and ’the most fun-
damental’ LC axioms which would be ’the best’ for the entire mathematics. If they
exist, this could shed light on a would-be formal theory for ontology in mathematics.
As argued by Hugh Woodin, one candidate for such a formal theory could be certain
extension of L by all real numbers, i.e. L(R); then, LC is given by a suitable set
of Woodin cardinals (see e.g. [21]). The point is that L(R) is stable under forcing
extensions and it survives the modiﬁcations. This seems to be a very fundamental
approach in mathematics, which leaves space also for categorical reformulation (cf.
[19]). In all cases discussed above, an important thing was the behaviour of the
models under forcing extensions. They can be seen alternatively as certain instances
of alter-theories. However, building alter-theories seems to be a wider and simpler
procedure than forcing extensions and consequently a less speciﬁc one. However, it
is quite interesting that such simple point of view exists at all, referring directly to
deep questions in mathematics.
Even though the above remarks are of rather purely mathematical nature, they
carry also potential for philosophy. However, I am not competent enough to decide
precisely this case. Similarly, I do not know whether these remarks should inﬂuence

32
Z. Król
the current chapter or should be considered rather in a separate work. I will leave
this issue to the Author’s judgement.
References
1. P. Bernays, Sur le platonisme dans les mathématiques. L’Enseignement Math. 34, 52–69 (1935)
2. B. Bolzano, Betrachtungen über einige Gegenstände der Elementargeometrie (Karl Barth,
Prague, 1804)
3. A. Döring, C.J. Isham, A topos foundation for theories of physics: Ii. daseinisation and the
liberation of quantum theory. J. Math. Phys. 49(5), 053516 (2008)
4. A. Döring, C.J. Isham, A topos foundation for theories of physics: I. formal languages for
physics. J. Math. Phys. 49(5), 053515 (2008)
5. J. Król, Model-theoretical approach to quantum gravity. Ph.D. thesis, the Institute of Physics
at the University of Silesia, Katowice (2005)
6. Z. Król, Platonizm Matematyczny i Hermeneutyka (Wyd. IFiS PAN, Warszawa, 2006)
7. Z. Król, Uwagi o stylu historycznym matematyki i rozwoju matematyki, in ´Swiaty matem-
atyki, Tworzenie czy odkrywanie?, ed. by I. Bondecka-Krzykowska, J. Pogonowski (Pozna´n,
Wydawnictwo Naukowe UAM, 2010), pp. 203–234
8. Z. Król, Platonism and the Development of Mathematics: Inﬁnity and Geometry (Wyd. IFiS
PAN, Warszawa, 2015)
9. Z. Król, J. Lubacz, What do we need many existential quantiﬁers for? Some remarks concerning
existential quantiﬁcation, monism and ontological pluralism. manuscript
10. J. Król, Exotic smoothness and noncommutative spaces. The model-theoretical approach.
Found. Phys. 34(5), 843–869 (2004)
11. E. Landry, Categories for the Working Philosopher (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017)
12. W.S. McCulloch, Machines that think and want, in Brain and behavior: A Symposium. Com-
parative Psychology Monographs, vol. 20, chapter 1, ed. by W.C. Halstead (University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1950), pp. 39–50
13. W.S. McCulloch, Agathe tyche of nervous nets—the lucky reckoners, in National Physical
Laboratory Symposium, chapter 2, vol. 10 (1959), pp. 613–625
14. W.S. McCulloch, W. Pitts, A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bull.
Math. Biophys. 5(4), 115–133 (1943)
15. J.M. Mira, Symbols versus connections: 50 years of artiﬁcial intelligence. Neurocomputing
71(4–6), 671–680 (2008)
16. I. Moerdijk, G.E. Reyes, Models for Smooth Inﬁnitesimal Analysis (Springer, New York, 1991)
17. D.H. Perkel, Logical neurons: the enigmatic legacy of warren mcculloch. Trends Neurosci.
11(1), 9–12 (1988)
18. H. Von Foerster, Computation in neural nets, in Understanding Understanding (Springer, New
York, 2003), pp. 21–100
19. J. Adamek, J. Rosicky, Locally Presentable and Accessible Categories. London Mathematical
Society Lecture Notes Series, vol. 189 (Cambridge, 1994)
20. J.D. Hamkins, The set-theoretic multiverse. Rev. Symb. Logic. 5, 416–449 (2012)
21. W.H. Woodin, The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonstationary Ideal, 2nd
edn. (De Gruyter, Berlin, 2010)

Chapter 3
Are There Category-Theoretical
Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
Krzysztof Wójtowicz
Abstract The problem of mathematical explanations in science has been discussed
extensively in the philosophical literature in recent years. This paper is devoted to the
question of whether category theory can offer explanations of physical phenomena.
My claim is that it cannot. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that CT contributes to
our understanding of physics, therefore in this paper I discuss whether this fact can be
accounted for in terms of explanatory value. I argue that investigating the (possible)
explanatory virtues of CT is important for the discussion concerning mathematical
explanations on an abstract level. So, it contributes not only to understanding the role
of CT in physics, but also to elucidation of the notion of mathematical explanation
in science.
3.1
Introduction
Category theory (I will use the acronym CT throughout the text) is a well-established
branch of mathematics that impacts many mathematical disciplines (e.g. differential
geometry, algebraic topology or computer science), and also physics (these applica-
tions are covered elsewhere in this volume). Enthusiasts of CT claim that it provides
sound foundations for mathematics that are different from the standard set-theoretic
foundations. CT has also an important impact on the philosophy of mathematics
as many authors claim it to be the proper expression of structuralistic intuitions
concerning mathematical ontology. The philosophical impact of category theory is
not restricted to the philosophy of mathematics as it provides important conceptual
tools with which to discuss fundamental metaphysical concepts such as identity or
analogy.
One of the fundamental philosophical questions concerning mathematics is its
role in scientiﬁc explanations. This topic has been widely discussed in recent years,
and the aim of this paper is to examine the status of CT in this respect. The problem
K. Wójtowicz (B)
Department of Logic, Institute of Philosophy, Warsaw University, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: kwojtowi@uw.edu.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_3
33

34
K. Wójtowicz
of possible category-theoretic explanations in science is a special case of the more
general problem of the explanatory role of mathematics in science. This is a ﬁercely
debated topic; an example of an important contribution is [15], which addresses
the problem of whether there are genuine mathematical explanations in science, i.e.
whether mathematics an sich has explanatory power.1 At ﬁrst sight the answer seems
obvious as mathematics is crucial for modern science and we cannot even imagine
physics (chemistry, biology, ecology, economics. . .) without it. But the problem is
more subtle: the omnipresence of mathematics in science does not entail that it
plays an explanatory role. We might think of mathematics as of an auxiliary system
that is devoid of content, or we might conceive it just as a convenient (perhaps
even necessary) way of representing (“indexing”) phenomena, but without inherent
explanatory virtues.
The discussion is not settled, but in this paper I assume that the notion of mathe-
matical explanation is sound: (at least some) mathematical notions, techniques and
disciplines can provide explanations of physical phenomena, but it is clear that math-
ematical disciplines profoundly differ in their potential applicability. Obviously, dif-
ferential equations are much more likely to do some explanatory job in physics than
set theory, which deals with (for example) the relative consistency of large cardinal
axioms, or embeddings of inner models. A natural question is whether category the-
oryalsoplays apart inthis explanatorywork, i.e. does it offer anykindof explanations
in science?
I think that it is not explanatory in the sense which seems to be standard in the
philosophical literature; however, this negative claim is a good starting point for the
discussion concerning the epistemic contributions of category theory, in particular
its (perhaps nonstandard) explanatory role. This statement might be re-interpreted
in a “dual form” as a claim concerning the notion of explanation.2 This issue really
involves two sub-problems: (1) What is the role of CT in physics? (2) How do we
interpret the notion of “mathematical explanation in science”? These two questions
might be viewed as a special case of more general problems: (1) Does theory T have
any explanatory contributions for (within) science S? (2) What do we mean by “the
explanatory contribution of T within S”?
So, analyzing the (possible) explanatory role of CT also contributes to our under-
standing of the notion of explanation. Indeed, CT shows its power in the context
of fundamental issues that do not represent concrete phenomena and which should
perhaps be considered metaphysical rather than physical—its strength is revealed on
a deep conceptual level.3
In part (1) (Mathematical explanations of physical phenomena) the problem of
the explanatory role of mathematics in science is discussed. I present some classic
1An up-to-date presentation with an extensive bibliography is [19].
2So, this “dual form” is something like this: assuming CT has no explanatory force, what does this
fact tell us about the notion of explanation?
3CT might be helpful in elucidating philosophical notions, perhaps even by providing formal expli-
cations. These investigations exceed the scope of this article (some of the issues are hinted at in
[13]).

3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
35
examples; in particular, I mention topological explanation as an important case that
is a “contrast class” for the hypothetical category-theoretical explanations. I argue
for the thesis that no category-theoretic explanations in physics can be found—at
least not in the sense which seems to be standard in the literature on mathematical
explanations in physics. So, the role of CT can be claimed to be explanatory only if
the notion of explanation is understood in a different way.
In part (2) (Category theory in physics), I discuss (as an example) Isham’s program
of Topos Quantum Theory (TQT) and claim that it shows that the epistemic virtues of
category theory are located on the metalevel: it might therefore be called “a theory of
theories” [25, p. 400] rather than a theory about a particular subject. I also comment
on the problem of whether gaining metatheoretical knowledge can contribute to our
understanding on the object level. Finally, I argue that the explanatory contributions
of CT have a philosophical rather than a speciﬁc scientiﬁc character.
A short conclusion (part 3) concludes the text.
3.2
Mathematical Explanations of Physical Phenomena
Recently, the problem of the explanatory role of mathematics within physics (and
science in general) has received much attention.4 The question is whether there are
any mathematical explanations in science, i.e. whether it is mathematics which pro-
vides explanatory power. This is a subtle problem as we have to distinguish between
scientiﬁc explanations that merely make use of mathematics, and explanations where
mathematics does the genuine explanatory work.
Perhaps mathematics cannot by deﬁnition explain anything as it only serves as a
tool for capturing and expressing relationships between physical phenomena without
making any genuine contribution—no “added value”. The use of mathematics in
such procedures might even be necessary, but it is rather a kind of map with a merely
representative role. The problem is intricate: are there physical properties of physical
objects which are not expressible in purely physicalist language?5 According to
the doctrine of “abstract expressivism”, mathematics has a very special function: it
makes it possible to express claims about the physical world which would not be
4I refer to the philosophical literature concerning the problem of mathematical explanations of
physical phenomena (and mathematical explanations in science in general). Even if there is dis-
agreement concerning the very existence of mathematical explanations, there seems to be a kind of
consensus concerning the problem of what they might be (if they existed).
5The notion of a purely physicalist language might not appear to be very clear. For instance, we
might think even of the language of calculus as physicalist (at least to some extent), as the notion
of derivative has a very clear physical inspiration and interpretation. More abstract mathematical
theories do not have such direct connections to observations and the physical meaning of terms can
be understood only indirectly. The term “nominalistic language” could be used here, as it seems
to be better deﬁned in philosophical literature; however, the discussion of this topic is outside the
scope of this paper.

36
K. Wójtowicz
expressible otherwise.6 The literature on the subject is immense, so I am only able to
give a few examples without going into details; they vary in their technical intricacy
(some being very elementary), but all are meant to illustrate a general phenomenon:
when looking for an explanation of some physical fact, we turn our attention to the
mathematical structure of the problem rather than to the network of causal relations,
the underlying mechanisms, the particular course of events etc. For instance, the fact
that the famous Seven Bridges of Königsberg cannot be crossed in such a way that
every bridge is crossed exactly once is explained by a simple theorem in graph theory,
not by examining the physical properties of the bridges (e.g. the material they are
made of, their dimensions, their temperature distribution, the mental processes that
accompany the attempts, etc.). Similarly, the structure of honeycombs is explained
by a mathematical theorem: hexagonal tiling minimizes the total perimeter length
[6], therefore bees do not waste wax and they gain an evolutionary advantage.7
An important class that is receiving growing attention is topological explana-
tions, which are found in biology, ecology, medicine, brain sciences and even social
science.8 Some accounts of theories of scientiﬁc explanation focus on exhibiting
concrete causal dependencies (i.e. identifying the causal nexus of the phenomena),
in particular on the mechanisms that underlie particular processes. These theories are
contrasted with topological explanations. Kosti´c gives a clear characteristic: “Very
abstractly, the mechanistic explanation describes entities and activities that are orga-
nized to produce something or to perform a process or a function. Different levels
of organization or properties of the same system can be explained by describing
different mechanisms. In contrast, topological explanations explain by a reference
to structural or mathematical properties of the system (e.g. graph-theoretical prop-
erties, topological features, or properties of mathematical structures in general), and
abstract away from the details of particular causal interactions or mechanisms” [12,
p. 2].
Topological explanations have some important features which make them espe-
cially interesting for our discussion.9 They are abstract (as they refer to abstract,
mathematical properties of the system), but still retain strong and direct links with
the physical situation in question. In a sense, they provide a contrast class for the
(hypothetic) category-theoretical explanations. Huneman characterizes the general
6“Numbers enable us to make claims which […] we […] would otherwise have trouble putting into
words” [28, p. 230]. Of course, what is important here is not numbers as such, as numbers are very
simple mathematical objects. What is at play is the usually very abstract mathematical structures
that provide the expressive power of the theory: “Let ‘abstract expressionism’ be the doctrine that
mathematics is useful in science because it helps us to say things about concrete objects which it
would otherwise be more difﬁcult, or perhaps impossible, for us to say.” [16, p. 600].
7However, Räz argues (very convincingly), that this example rests on a misunderstanding and offers
a different account, albeit in the spirit of mechanistic explanations [23, 24].
8Darrason [1] presents many examples of topological explanations within medical genetics and
network medicine. Very “down-to-earth” examples (e.g. epidemiology or urban trafﬁc density) and
a discussion can be found in [22].
9It is disputed whether these explanations are really different from mechanistic ones, but this issue
will not be discussed here.

3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
37
features of topological explanations in the following way (in the context of biology):
“a topological explanation is an explanation in which a feature, a trait, a property or
an outcome X of a system S is explained by the fact that it possesses speciﬁc topo-
logical properties” [10, p. 117]. So, we can reformulate the question and ask whether
anything similar can be offered by category theory, i.e. can we explain a physical
phenomenon by the fact that the system possesses speciﬁc category-theoretical prop-
erties? In other words, is there some inherently category-theoretical theorem which
canbeappliedtophysicalsituationsinawaysimilartotheexamplesdiscussedabove?
It is important to stress that there is a tension between genuinely category-theoretical
contributions (which inherently use category-theoretical notions) and classic results
that are merely expressed in a different language.10
I assume in this paper (as a working hypothesis) that the notion of mathematical
explanation in science (physics, biology, chemistry, medicine, cognitive science,
etc.) is sound, i.e. that there are genuine mathematical explanations in science. All
the examples given above involve quite “down-to-earth” mathematical theorems (and
theories). This is also exempliﬁed by topological explanations as many results which
are important for topological explanations stem from topological graph theory.11 In
these applications, mathematics often directly represents physical objects (as might
happen, for example, in the case of combinatorial problems, e.g. a graph representing
the bridges in Königsberg), or describes, for instance, the phase space of possible
states or the space of possible trajectories which are linked with a physical system
in a natural way.12 We might say that the level of abstractness is not very high and
mathematics is applied to a given physical situation in a rather direct way.13
But no examples of an explanatory relation in this sense can be given for cat-
egory theory. We can imagine a situation in which a physicist is helpless in mod-
eling/explaining a physical phenomenon (e.g. heat transport), and a mathematician
trained in, for example, stochastic differential equations provides tools to solve the
problem in such a way that the model makes it possible to build a more effective
engine. But it is very improbable that such direct help could be provided by a cate-
gory theorist. This is not surprising: CT offers very general (and very subtle) methods
for analyzing concepts on a high level of abstractness. So, it is useful for high-level
10Marquis discusses this problem in some detail, in particular he observes that CT is often regarded
as just “a useful tool to organize, present and develop certain areas of mathematics that are usually
considered as being already given in a different setting” [20, p. 250]. Even if such results can be
reformulated—“translated” into CT—it does not make them “inherently category-theoretical”. (For
examples of such reformulations of ordinary mathematical theorems, see for instance [9]).
11Some general, “topological” properties of nets are used to explain phenomena in biology or
ecology. Nets are a very concrete mathematical object in the sense that we can even point to
exempliﬁcations of such structures in our world in a straightforward way (so we can think of a kind
of isomorphism). This approach was started by [26].
12The particular case of phase spaces is discussed, for instance, in [18].
13If we think of the connections between mathematics and the world in a deep sense, Heisenberg’s
famous quotation “In fact the smallest units of matter are not physical objects in the ordinary sense;
they are forms, ideas which can be expressed unambiguously only in mathematical language”. From
this point of view, the distinction between physical and mathematical objects becomes blurred, and
loosely speaking the ultimate structure of reality is the reality of mathematical facts.

38
K. Wójtowicz
(broadly speaking—meta-theoretical) analysis, but not on the level of describing par-
ticular physical phenomena (like heat transport in a rod or the shape of honeycomb
cells). It is well-suited to analyzing fundamental properties of conceptual systems,
theories or models.
The relationship between the notions of explaining and predicting is subtle, and
certainly they cannot be identiﬁed. But it seems that there is a “minimal predictive
input”: if a model has no predictive potential at all, it is doubtful whether it really has
explanatory character. And in this respect CT has not much to offer when modeling
very concrete physical phenomena.
So, my claim is that in this sense there are no category-theoretical explanations
of physical phenomena, in spite of there being mathematical explanations. But cat-
egory theory already has an established position in physics and its role seems to be
growing.14 The claim that CT does not enhance our understanding of science would
clearly be false, so the interesting question is what kind of epistemic contribution
does CT offer: perhaps it is a different kind of explanation? If so, in which sense
does it explain, and what are the explananda? Analyzing the role of category theory
also contributes to our understanding of the notion of explanation.
3.3
Category Theory in Physics
I focus on a special example of the category-theoretic contribution to physics, namely
Topos Quantum Theory.15 I do not even dare to speculate whether there are any
chances for this account to become commonly accepted or whether it will be consid-
ered just a theoretical curiosity of no impact on the practice of theoretical physics,16
but it exempliﬁes a possible role of CT: I think that it is particularly well-suited for
the purpose of analyzing possible epistemic contributions of CT, and in particular to
attempts to understand the explanatory role it might play.
Broadly speaking, the aim of TQT is to present a counterpart of the standard
version of quantum theory, but couched in category-theoretical terms, in particular
using the notions from topos theory. We might say that physical theories are expressed
inadifferentlanguage,thistranslationbeingduetothespecialpropertiesoftopoi.The
fact that every topos has an internal language is a crucial fact: “Thus constructing a
theory of physics is equivalent to ﬁnding a suitable translation of the system language,
L(S), to the language, L(τ), of an appropriate topos τ” [2, p. 43].
14In [7] we ﬁnd several articles concerning different category-theoretical ideas in modern physics
[14] gives a broad perspective on the applications of category-theoretical notions in different areas
of physics, mathematics and philosophy.
15This is the program of Isham, Döring, Butterﬁeld and other investigators; see for instance [2, 3]
(and subsequent papers); [5].
16I think that for some (many?) physicists, investigations of this kind will forever remain “abstract
nonsense”—devoid of physical meaning—while for others such investigations lie at the heart of
modern physics.

3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
39
The motivation for developing TQT can be called methodological or even philo-
sophical as the authors argue for a “neo-realist” physics: “So, in toto what we seek
is a formalism that is (i) free of prima facie prejudices about the nature of the values
of physical quantities—in particular, there should be no fundamental use of real or
complex numbers; and (ii) ‘realist’, in at least the minimal sense that propositions
are meaningful and are assigned ‘truth values’, not just instrumentalist probabilities
of what would happen if appropriate measurements are made.” [2, p. 11].17
One of the reasons that a realist interpretation of quantum mechanics is not readily
available (or perhaps is even impossible) is the famous Kochen–Specker theorem,18
which is formulated and proved within standard mathematics, in particular in the
environment of (standard) real and complex numbers. It is important to stress that
the reasons are internal for mathematics, i.e. it is mathematics itself which imposes
certain restrictions. So, it is difﬁcult (or perhaps even impossible) to distinguish the
features of the physical world from the features of mathematical formalism that are
responsible for this non-realist interpretation of quantum mechanics.
In order to overcome these difﬁculties, some authors propose “transferring” the
standard theories into a different mathematical environment, i.e. into topos theory.
From their perspective, standard physics can be viewed as just a special case of a
more general approach: it operates within Sets, which is just one of many possible
topoi. A reformulation within a more general framework is meant to be “neo-realist”
“in the sense that physical quantities are represented by arrows Aφ : Σφ →Rφ and
propositions are represented by sub-objects of Σφ, the set of which is a Heyting alge-
bra. In this sense, these topos-based theories all ‘look’ like classical physics, except
of course that, generally speaking, the topos concerned is not Sets” [3, p. 26]. Of
course, several technical difﬁculties have to be overcome, but once TQT is available
it offers a way of giving a (neo-)realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. “This
neo-realism is the conceptual fruit of the fact that, from a categorial perspective, a
physical theory expressed in a topos ‘looks’ like classical physics expressed in the
topos of sets” [2, p. 14].
Obviously, these theories are formulated on a very general abstract level. They
are not concerned with explanations in the (standard) sense characterized in Part 1:
they do not aim to explain concrete, down-to-earth physical (biological, medical)
phenomena in terms of, for instance, variational principles, ﬁxed-point theorems,
properties of differential equations, limit theorems for stochastic processes, etc. In
17Flori gives a succinct characterization of realism in the context of physics which is very convenient
for our purposes: “By a ‘realist’ theory we mean one in which the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) propositions form a Boolean algebra and (ii) propositions can always be assessed to be either
true or false. As will be delineated in the following, in the topos approach to quantum theory both
of these conditions are relaxed, leading to what Isham and Döring called a neo-realist theory” [5,
p. 3].
18“However, standard quantum theory precludes any such naive realist interpretation of the relation
between formalism and the physical world. And this obstruction comes from mathematical formal-
ism itself in the guise of the famous Kochen–Specker theorem which asserts the impossibility of
assigning values to all physical quantities whilst, at the same time, preserving the functional rela-
tions between them” [2, p. 49]. For a presentation and discussion of the Kochen–Specker theorem,
see e.g. [8].

40
K. Wójtowicz
particular, we would hardly expect new predictions to be made (at the empirically
accessible level).19 On the other hand, it cannot be denied that category-theoretic
accounts impact our understanding of physical theories. So, what is their explanatory
contribution? It is reasonable to claim that the (possible) explanatory contribution is
located on the metatheoretical rather than the theoretical level.
Consider a toy example concerning number theory: for instance, investigations
into the structure of prime numbers.20 Do we really better understand prime numbers
after we make ﬁndings concerning non-standard models for PA? Broadly speaking,
there are two answers: (1) No, not in the least! We are interested in the relevant,
mathematical phenomena, i.e. in the behavior of genuine natural numbers, not in
artifacts of weak theories. So, we should rather look for “The Theory of Genuine
Numbers” and not bother about its (impoverished) variants and their pathological
models. (2) Yes, and it is crucial! In this way we learn something about the place of our
understanding of natural numbers within the “space of possible conceptualizations”.
Metamathematical investigations concerning non-standard models for PA might also
yield new purely mathematical results: there are examples of mathematical problems
being solved with metamathematical (for instance, model-theoretical) methods.21
This is a simple example, but it exhibits the general problem: how does analysis of
the “space of possible descriptions/theoretical accounts” enhance our understanding
of the phenomena in question, i.e. on the object level? Metatheoretical reﬂection on
the status and properties of the conceptual system constitutes the most important part
of what we call “the philosophy of X”.
Turning back to TQT, it might be claimed that it reveals the true reasons why a
realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics is (at least) difﬁcult, or perhaps even
impossible (as the Kochen–Specker theorem is claimed to show): the reason is that
standard formulations “live” in the very special topos of classical sets, which imposes
limitations on the possibilities of interpreting the notion of physical proposition. In
particular, the disturbing Kochen–Specker theorem can be loosely interpreted as an
accidental feature of the standard topos (Sets). After getting rid of these limitations, a
novel formulation (and interpretation) can be found. Such contributions have a clear
metatheoretical character: they do not focus on concrete phenomena, but rather on
the ways of conceptualizing the problem.22
19At least today. One day even very abstract results in CT might have such predictive power;
however, this is just a speculative remark—it seems much more probable that CT will remain at the
level of a “theory of theories”.
20These facts might have bearing on the security of banking systems (so in this sense, number-
theoretic problems have a physical interpretation) or at least some (indirect) impact on the real
world.
21Similarly, we describe a mechanical phenomenon by a differential equation (and this is empirically
adequate). We can also analyze this equation within a non-standard setting, e.g. within non-standard
analysis. Would these investigations contribute to our understanding of the phenomenon, given there
are no empirically detectable differences (e.g. different predictions)?
22One important philosophical issue is the realism/antirealism problem (also in quantum mechan-
ics), but this does not affect the problem of applying the theory as a predictive tool (where empirical

3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
41
Undeniably, there is an increase in understanding, but can it be accounted for in
terms of the notion of explanation? Ultimately, the answer depends on the general
attitude towards the role and epistemic input of metatheoretical investigations. The
contributions of CT are to be found on the metatheoretical level, and even if they
do not play any explanatory role in the standard sense, they might contribute to our
philosophical or maybe metaphysical understanding both of the world and of our
methodology of doing science. The level of generality is high, so it is perhaps more
justiﬁed to consider these explanations as belonging to metaphysics (or philosophy
of science), rather than to physics per se. But regardless of the answer, these investi-
gations contribute to a better understanding of the very notion of realism and of the
related question: what features of standard mathematics make the realistic approach
to quantum mechanics difﬁcult?
3.4
Conclusion
The answer to the main question depends on our understanding of the notion of
mathematical explanation. I argued for the thesis that in the most standard sense
encountered in the philosophical literature, CT offers no explanations of physical
phenomena: it operates on a very high level of generality, and it offers no tools
for describing (and, in particular, predicting) speciﬁc phenomena. In comparison
with, for example, topological graph theory (which provides an important class of
mathematical explanations), it really seems to be a kind of “abstract nonsense”.
However, CT undoubtedly offers important tools for analyzing concepts and the-
ories. In particular, TQT contributes to a better understanding of the question of
which features of physical theories (couched in standard mathematical formalism)
are a hindrance for the realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. Being “a theory
of theories” rather than an object-level theory, it contributes to our understanding of
physics, albeit on a very profound and abstract level.23 It could be fruitful to con-
front it with the idea of abstract explanations in science. Broadly speaking, these
are explanations expressed in the form of abstract properties: “Abstract explanations
involve an appeal to a more abstract entity than the state of affairs being explained.
I show that the abstract entity need not be causally relevant to the explanandum for
accuracy is the criterion). So, these deep issues might not have any direct impact on practical matters,
but they are nevertheless important for the understanding of the ﬁeld.
23“Category theory is not a theory of everything. It is more like, as topologist Jack Morava put
it, […] “a theory of theories of anything”. In other words, it is a model of models. It leaves each
subject alone to solve its own problems, to sharpen and reﬁne its toolset in the ways it sees ﬁt. That
is, CT does not micromanage in the affairs of any discipline. However, describing any discipline
categorically tends to bring increased conceptual clarity, because conceptual clarity is CT’s main
concern, its domain of expertise. …Finally, category theory allows one to compare different models,
thus carrying knowledge from one domain to another, as long as one can construct the appropriate
“analogy”, i.e., functor” [25, p. 400].

42
K. Wójtowicz
its features to be explanatorily relevant” [21, p. 857].24 Using this terminology, we
might think of CT as providing “meta-abstract properties”, i.e. higher-level abstract
properties that concern not even abstract properties of the phenomena, but abstract
properties of the conceptual systems and theories that describe the phenomena. So,
CT offers “meta-abstract explanations”. In particular the fact that quantum physics
is not easily compatible with realist interpretation (or is perhaps even incompatible)
is explained by the “meta-abstract property” of topos Sets. Whether this is in any
sense also a property of the world is to be discussed, but surely it brings about some
understanding of the conceptual systems we use.
It is somewhat paradoxical that the formalism which aims at a (neo-)realistic
description of the quantum world uses non-classical logic.25 This stands in contrast
to the approaches to the realism/antirealism issue, which deﬁne this distinction in
semantic terms (the bivalence of classical logic being a deﬁning property of real-
ism). Assume that it is not possible to remain within classical mathematics (and
physics) and give a coherent realist interpretation of quantum mechanics. Does this
claim express a claim about the physical world which is not otherwise expressible
(see footnote 5), or is it just a claim concerning formalism? Or perhaps it is rather
a contribution to our understanding of the notion of “realistic theory”? At the fun-
damental level, the borderline between questions that belong to physics proper or to
methodology and philosophy is somehow blurred. The explanandum is not a particu-
lar physical phenomenon, but a methodological phenomenon: in the discussed case,
it is the impossibility of giving a coherent realistic interpretation of QM. So perhaps
the explanatory contribution of CT should be called philosophical or metaphysical,
rather than physical. Its explanatory force is revealed on a very abstract level of
analysis.
Acknowledgements The preparation of this paper was supported by an National Science Centre
grant 2016/21/B/HS1/01955. I would like to thank Professor Zbigniew Semadeni for his very helpful
comments.
References
1. M. Darrason, Mechanistic and topological explanations in medicine: the case of medical genet-
ics and network medicine. Synthese 195(1), 147–173 (2018)
2. A. Döring, C. Isham, “What is a thing?”: topos theory in the foundations of physics, in New
Structures for Physics, vol. 813, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics, ed. by B. Coecke (Springer,
Heidelberg, 2008), pp. 753–937. arXiv:0803.0417
24Program explanations (conceived as a kind of abstract explanation) might also be mentioned in
this context. A seminal paper is [11]; the authors claim that “not efﬁcacious itself, the abstract
property was such that its realization ensured that there was an efﬁcacious property in the ofﬁng”
[11, p. 114]. For the application of this account to mathematics, see [17]; for a discussion in the
context of relativistic computation, see [27].
25However, it is not obvious that TQT achieves its own aim of being a realist theory; for a critical
assessment, cf. [4].

3
Are There Category-Theoretical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?
43
3. A. Döring, C. Isham, A topos foundation for theories of physics: I. formal languages for physics.
J. Math. Phys. 49(5) (2008)
4. B. Eva, Topos theoretic quantum realism. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 68(4), 1149–1181 (2017)
5. C. Flori, A First Course in Topos Quantum Theory, vol. 868, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics
(Springer, Berlin, 2013)
6. T.C. Hales, The honeycomb conjecture. Discret. Comput. Geom. 25(1), 1–22 (2001)
7. H. Halvorson (ed.), Deep Beauty Understanding the Quantum World Through Mathematical
Innovation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011)
8. Held C, The Kochen-Specker theorem, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. by
E.N. Zalta, spring 2018 edn (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2018)
9. H. Herrlich, H-E. Porst (eds.), Category Theory at Work (Heldermann Verlag, Berlin, 1991)
10. P. Huneman, Diversifying the picture of explanations in biological sciences: ways of combining
topology with mechanisms. Synthese 195(1), 115–146 (2018)
11. F. Jackson, P. Pettit, Program explanation: a general perspective. Analysis 50(2), 107–117
(1990)
12. D. Kosti´c, Mechanistic and topological explanations: an introduction. Synthese 195(1), 1–10
(2018)
13. M. Ku´s, B. Skowron, K. Wójtowicz, Why Categories? (2019), in this volume
14. E. Landry, Categories for the Working Philosopher (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017)
15. M. Lange, What makes a scientiﬁc explanation distinctively mathematical? Br. J. Philos. Sci.
64(3), 485–511 (2013)
16. D. Liggins, Abstract expressionism and the communication problem. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 65(3),
599–620 (2013)
17. A. Lyon, Mathematical explanations of empirical facts, and mathematical realism. Australas.
J. Philos. 90(3), 559–578 (2012)
18. A. Lyon, M. Colyvan, The explanatory power of phase spaces. Philos. Math. 16(2), 227–243
(2008)
19. P. Mancosu. Explanation in mathematics, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. by
E.N. Zalta, summer 2018 edn. (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2018)
20. J-P. Marquis. What is category theory? in What is category theory?, ed. by G. Sica (Polimetrica
International Scientiﬁc Publisher, Monza/Italy, 2006), pp. 221–255
21. C. Pincock, Abstract explanations in science. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 66(4), 857–882 (2015)
22. C. Rathkopf, Network representation and complex systems. Synthese 195(1), 55–78 (2018)
23. T. Räz, On the application of the honeycomb conjecture to the bee’s honeycomb. Philos. Math.
21(3), 351–360 (2013)
24. T. Räz, The silent hexagon: explaining comb structures. Synthese 194(5), 1703–1724 (2017)
25. D. Spivak. Categories as mathematical models, in Categories for the Working Philosopher, ed.
by E. Landry (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017), pp. 381–401
26. D.J. Watts, S.H. Strogatz, Nature 393(6684), 440 (1998)
27. K. Wójtowicz, The signiﬁcance of relativistic computation for philosophy of mathematics. In
Hajnal Andréka and István Németi on Unity of Science: From Computing to Relativity Theory
through Algebraic Logic (to appear), Madarasz J., Szekely G. (eds.), Springer-Verlag (2019)
28. S. Yablo, Abstract objects: a case study. Philos. Issues 12, 220–240 (2002)

Chapter 4
The Application of Category Theory
to Epistemic and Poietic Processes
Józef Lubacz
Abstract The goal of this paper is to explore the potential for applying the notional
framework of category theory to some aspects of human activity associated with
acquiring knowledge (epistemic activity), as well as to activity of a sort resulting
in the creation of artefacts of any kind (poietic activity). These kinds of activity are
conceptualized as processes. The ideas and constitutive components of epistemic and
poietic processes are introduced, and against this background possible applications
of category theory to the analysis and monitoring of progress in the unfolding of
such processes is considered.
4.1
Introduction
The terms epistemic process and poietic process are used to refer to two types of
human activity: namely, that which aims at acquiring knowledge and that which
results in artefacts. While this broad interpretation of the ancient Greek terms epis-
teme and poiesis is not quite in accordance with their original meaning and appli-
cation, we have nevertheless chosen to employ them here because we have found
no better alternative—especially where the term poiesis is concerned (such that it
would be on a par with the more well-established episteme).
Acquiring knowledge is something that pertains to both natural matters and arte-
facts of any kind (be they technological, economic, social, cultural, artistic, etc.).
The activity resulting in speciﬁc artefacts requires a special kind of knowledge
(i.e. technical knowledge), and many forms of knowledge (e.g., scientiﬁc knowl-
edge) are themselves artefactual, so in principle, epistemic and poietic activities are
not independent. We shall not attempt to explore the ancient Greek understanding
of episteme as knowledge associated with achieving truth, as opposed to phrone-
sis (practical knowledge), techne (arts-and-crafts-based knowledge), nous (intuitive
knowledge) and sophia (wisdom); this is because viewed from the standpoint of
J. Lubacz (B)
International Center for Formal Ontology, Warsaw University of Technology, Warszawa, Poland
e-mail: jl@tele.pw.edu.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_4
45

46
J. Lubacz
our own sophisticated and diversiﬁed contemporary understanding of the relations
between knowledge and truth, such an opposition does not seem tenable [4]. We
shall also not seek to address the problem of distinguishing natural objects from
artefacts, on account of the fact that ﬁnding general criteria of demarcation for this
has proved problematic [6], and is anyway becoming of diminishing importance in
modern societies populated not just by “pure artefacts”, but also by hybrids of the
latter and natural objects.
Epistemic and poietic activities will be conceptualized here as processes. We
do not seek to formalize the notion of process, but we will distinguish the pattern
accordingtowhichaprocessevolvesfromtheactualization ofthatpatternresultingin
consecutive states of the process. We do not attempt to determine whether the process
pertains to an individual subjective activity, or to some collective intersubjective
activity, and we also do not refer to any “paradigms” or “programs” of activity. What
we shall be focusing on is the constitutive elements of the patterns of epistemic and
poietic processes, and relations between the two types of process. In other words,
our aim is to consider general, generic properties of such processes.
We believe that exploring the relevance of category theory (CT) to epistemic and
poietic processes can furnish a somewhat different perspective on the role and appli-
cations of the theory to that which emerges when it is considered in relation to math-
ematics, logic, physics or computer science. In particular, this is a consequence of
the emphasis placed on the interrelation of epistemic and poietic processes—which,
according to our best knowledge, is seldom noticed or analysed. Where reﬂection on
knowledge acquisition is concerned, most of the currently predominant tendencies
concentrate on such traditional epistemological issues as the theoretical versus the
empirical, realism versus antirealism, perception versus observables, observables
versus unobservables, theories versus models, etc. Moreover, these longstanding
problems may themselves be considered from the perspective of epistemic and poi-
etic processes.
4.2
Epistemic and Poietic Processes
Philosophical thought concerning observed processes of change pertaining to various
aspects of the world and its inhabitants has a long tradition; in Western philosophy
its origin is usually associated with Heraclitus. Process philosophy, especially as
a consequence of its revival in the last century, has become a complex and highly
diversiﬁed ﬁeld of reﬂection [8]. Because of this diversiﬁcation, there seems to be
no agreed-upon, paradigmatic conceptualization of the notion of process. Process
philosophy has developed partly in opposition to the longstanding and historically
dominant tradition of philosophical reﬂection focused on essences of things. Both
essentialist philosophy and process philosophy centre on ontological and metaphys-
ical questions whose applicability to the issues essentially involved where epistemic
and poietic processes are concerned is limited. More inspiration and ideas can be
drawn from epistemology, but only rather indirectly, because epistemic issues have

4
The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic Processes
47
seldom had as their focus the processual and methodological aspects of acquiring
knowledge—apart from those well-known aspects considered by the likes of Popper,
Kuhn, Lakatos and Feyerabend, of course. In the case of poietic processes, one of the
main sources of inspiration and ideas is, not surprisingly, to be found in engineering
and design methodologies [5].
In most of the reﬂections of process philosophy, some process is invoked to
describe and interpret changes in regard to some states of affairs pertaining to some
entities or phenomena. Such changes, if observable, must somehow be distinguished.
We shall refer to such distinguishable characteristics of changes as states of a process.
The succession of states may be considered as appearing in continuous or discrete
temporal moments.1 Should we need to distinguish some special moments of time,
such as are associated with certain special conditions internal or external to the pro-
cess (associated, for example, with predeﬁned states of the process or predeﬁned
time-limits in achieving some states), then the latter may be interpreted as embedded
in the former.
The above is, in effect, a conceptualization of the dynamicity of a process. We
assume that the dynamic features of a process—i.e. the transition from one state to
another—takes place according to some pattern which is regarded as a static con-
stituent of a process. The relation between the statics and the dynamics of processes
may be interpreted by analogy with some classical philosophical concepts: for exam-
ple, with Aristotle’s potency and actualization, or Heidegger’s analysis of being and
Being. If the pattern of the process is interpreted as the essence of that process,
then the relation between the dynamic and the static features of processes may be
considered a nexus between essentialism and processism. These issues, however, lie
beyond the scope of this paper.
In general, the pattern of a process may be time-dependent, and thus exhibit some
form of dynamicity. In the following, we shall not ignore this, but will assume that
the pattern does not change within time-intervals long enough to enable meaningful
analysis of the interplay of the pattern and its actualization that results in dynamic
features of the process. The notion of a process pattern may be variously interpreted.
If a process is used to conceptualize, for instance, the evolution of nature, then the
existence of a pattern may be doubted in circumstances where the dynamicity of
the changes is considered to come from a pure interaction of some sub-processes
which themselves exhibit no predeﬁned patterns. At the same time, this position is
only tenable if it refers to a pattern deﬁned a priori. However, one cannot reasonably
claim that processes are pattern-free on an a posteriori basis, as that would mean
that the process state transitions are “completely random”: i.e. that no regularities
whatsoever can be detected. The problem with this is that “complete randomness”
is a theoretical notion, and so is unrealistic when applied to the conceptualization of
real-world processes (such as the evolution of species or the phenomena of quantum
mechanics).
1In general, states of a process need not appear in time: a succession of such states can be indexed
in an abstract way—i.e. in a time-independent fashion. We shall, however, not enter further into
discussion of this issue.

48
J. Lubacz
With the above clariﬁcation in place, we may now proceed to introduce the pro-
posed conceptual structure of the pattern and dynamicity of epistemic and poietic
processes. We shall not aim at achieving a formalized deﬁnition, but rather concen-
trate on the intuitive side. First of all, it is necessary to clarify how a static process
pattern (PP) results in a given succession of state transformations—with the latter
being further referred to as a process-actualization (PA). If no divine intervention is
assumed, then a PP causes a PA as an effect of some direct or indirect (e.g. machine-
aided) human intervention, this intervention being called the animation of a process
(AP). The PA results from the PP as an effect of the AP. Animation will be the nexus
between the static and dynamic features of epistemic and poietic processes.2
Let us ﬁrst consider poietic processes. The actualization of a process (PA) may
be divided into two consecutive time-related phases (borrowing standard terms from
engineering): the design phase and the implementation phase. In the design phase
what is to be implemented (i.e. brought into existence or reality, realized) is described
in some way; in the implementation phase the description is transformed into the
object of description. The implementation transforms, so to say, “words into ﬂesh”,
which is a quite miraculous activity, and one which even St. John did not explain.
(Well, he didn’t have to!)3 We likewise shall not go into this intriguing issue, and so
shall concentrate on the design phase.
We propose to conceptualize the design phase of a poietic process as follows:
• OP—description of the object of poiesis, i.e. of what is to be implemented.
• PO—description of how the implemented object is perceived (directly, or indi-
rectly with some observational and/or experimental aids).
• QC—description of the evaluative and qualitative criteria of the poietic process,
pertaining to OP and PO, and to the required relation between OP and PO.
• No particular form of the descriptions is assumed, as the form may, and in reality it
does, depend on the type of the object of poiesis and on the adopted methodology
of design.
• The OP plays the role of a prescription for the object of poiesis.
• PO serves as the reference point with respect to which the implemented object is
evaluated using QC criteria (i.e. the evaluation is indirect).
• The state-transformation of the process is interpreted as the change of OP, PO and
QC: individually, pair-wise, or all three together.
• When the design process is initiated, the PO is empty (contains no information)
until the designed object is implemented. The transformations of OP in this time-
interval (e.g., adding, in effect, new aspects and details to the description) are
evaluated with respect to criteria whose role is to monitor the required features of
OP in accordance with some predeﬁned methodological paradigm; such criteria
form a subset of QC, further referred to as design-QC (d-QC). The d-QC criteria
are also active when the PO is not empty.
2We should mention that in some applications, especially in information science and engineering,
patterns are considered types subject to instantiation rather than animation.
3Paraphrasing the “word into ﬂesh” metaphor, the epistemic process may be said to transform “ﬂesh
into word”.

4
The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic Processes
49
• The remaining criteria of the QC pertain to the required relation of OP and PO,
which for a poietic process establishes some predeﬁned interpretation of how well
the implemented object satisﬁes the OP—i.e. the prescription. The latter criteria
will be referred to as poietic-satisfaction-QC (s-QC).
• The PO is constructed during the evolution of the process alongside the activity
of evaluating the object being implemented (as the intermediate and/or ﬁnal result
of the implementation). In some domains of application of poietic processes (and
also epistemic processes), the activity of evaluation is referred to in terms of testing
(active or passive), veriﬁcation and validation.
In the above conceptualization, it is assumed that the poietic process results in
some entity that is external to the mind: i.e. that the object of poiesis is not a mental
product. This is assumed also with respect to the objects of epistemic processes con-
sidered below. In fact this assumption can be dropped, resulting only in some quite
non-essential alterations to the conceptual framework introduced. We will not, how-
ever, consider such a scenario, as it requires the introduction of some phenomeno-
logical and quasi-phenomenological notions pertaining to forms of consciousness
[4]—something which goes beyond the scope of what is directly relevant to the main
issues of this paper.
We shall use the conceptual framework introduced for poietic processes, after
some additional interpretation and modiﬁcations, for epistemic processes, too (i.e.
processes of acquiring knowledge). The notion of knowledge is a complex notion
which may be understood in various ways—in a narrower and a broader sense, from
various viewpoints, and with various aspects being taken into account [4]. Here,
we shall restrict our considerations to those forms of knowledge contemporarily
associated with science and technology: i.e. forms of knowledge thought reliable in
the sense that they are subject to objectiﬁed criteria of “quality”. Obviously, this kind
of knowledge may be treated as acquired through some form of poietic process: i.e.
a processes of constructing artefacts.
Given the above, an epistemic process can be conceptualized as shown below.
Here, the abbreviations used earlier for components of poietic processes will be
appended with a letter “e” (OPe substitutes for OP, POe substitutes for PO, etc.).
• The product of an epistemic process is a description OPe of an object of some
episteme—i.e. of something that acquiring knowledge aims at. In contrast to the
OP description of the poietic process, which performs the role of a prescription,
OPe may be said to play the role of a particular way of expressing some hypothesis
or other.
• OPe is evaluated in terms of the description POe of how the object of the episteme
is perceived (directly, or indirectly with some observational and/or experimental
aids).
• The evaluation employs qualitative criteria QCe, pertaining to OPe and POe, as
well as to the required relation between OPe and POe.
• POe, like PO, is constructed during the course of the evolution of the epistemic
process, together with the evaluation of OPe in terms of POe—i.e. the evaluation
of the hypothesis as expressed in OPe.

50
J. Lubacz
• The evaluation refers to some predeﬁned criteria of epistemic-satisfaction s-QCe,
for how well the OPe hypothesis corresponds to what is expressed in POe.
• Note that OPe is evaluated in terms of POe, in contrast to the case of poietic
processes, in which PO is evaluated in terms of OP.4
• As with the role of the design d-QC criteria for poietic processes, the d-QCe criteria
are used to monitor the required features of the evolution of the epistemic process
in accordance with some predeﬁned methodological paradigm.
Epistemic processes have thus been conceptualized as a special, modiﬁed case of
poietic processes; yet we could have approached this the other way around, deﬁning
poietic processes as derivative of epistemic processes. Whatever the case, however,
such a procedure emphasizes the close conceptual relationship between the two. Note
that this also comes to light when we consider that the construction of PO and POe,
and the evaluation of such processes, involves activity of both an epistemic and a poi-
etic character. The two types of processes are thus interdependent; nevertheless, they
can and should be distinguished for theoretical reasons and for practical purposes.
4.3
The Potential of Category Theory
With the preparatory considerations explored in the preceding sections now in place,
we are in a position to consider the application of category theory (CT) to epistemic
and poietic processes. Over the course of the several decades of its development, CT
has been applied not only to purely mathematical issues, but also to logic, physics,
computer science and philosophy, as evidenced by the publication of this volume.
This demonstrates, so to say, the conceptual power and potential of CT, which seem
to have been foreseen by the founding fathers of the theory in their seminal paper [1]:
emphasis was put there on the problem of how different kinds of generally understood
mathematical structure could be mapped one to another, the structures were named
“categories”, and the name chosen for the mappings was “functors”.5 We wish to
stress the generality of the original conception of CT, as it is precisely this generality
that is the source of the usefulness of CT to different areas of research, including
those dealing with epistemic and poietic processes themselves.
Above all, however, it must be clearly stated that the apparatus of CT can only be
employed for those conceptual components of epistemic and poietic processes which
are expressible in some formal language and form—based, possibly indirectly, on
some formalism of mathematics and/or logic. Obviously, this is not the case for all
areas of science and technology (not to mention, for instance, artistic activity) in
which epistemic and poietic processes function. In the area of science, physics is
least problematic in this respect; on the other hand, it may be difﬁcult to use CT to
4This resembles, respectively, the mind-world and world-mind “directions of ﬁt” discussed by
Searle [7].
5Theterm“functor”wasapparentlyemployedearlierbyCarnap,whiletheuseoftheterm“category”
was probably inspired by Aristotle or Kant.

4
The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic Processes
51
conceptualize the epistemic processes associated with some important aspects of,
say, biology and economics. This pertains also to those poietic processes that are
such as to render the formulation of design objectives and features with OP, PO and
QC in a formalized way is difﬁcult or even unrealistic.6 In most real-life design, and
the implementation associated with most artefacts, such features are expressed in a
mixture of formal and natural language. Bearing this in mind, in order to make CT
practically applicable, the non-formalized constituents of OP, PO and QC should
be clearly distinguished—at least for those kinds and aspects of artefacts that can
be formalized. Another issue is that some diverse aspects of artefacts may require
a different formalization language and form: e.g., physical and functional aspects,
which cannot be uniﬁed in one common, uniform formalism [3]. In that case, the CT
formalism will have to be applied separately to each aspect.
Keeping in mind the above constraints, we shall now consider those fundamental
concepts of CT that, together with its basic formalism, can apparently be adapted—
with appropriate interpretation, modiﬁcation, or extension—to epistemic and poietic
processes.
During the transition of a poietic process from state to state, the prescription OP of
the designed entity7 undergoes consecutive transformations: e.g., OP1 →1 OP2 →2
OP3 →3 . . . The question is this: do the consecutive versions of OP describe the
same entity? This is a special case of the question of identity, which has a long
tradition in philosophy. If all the instances of OPi are expressed as categories, and
the arrows are functors (morphisms), then the answer to the question could be as
follows: what is preserved in the sequence are some structural features determined
by the OPi and the kind of mapping between them determined by the →i. The
answer thus pertains only to the structural features of the entities designed, so the
next question could be this: is the preservation of structural features enough to give
a positive answer to the identity question? Well, the answer may depend on the
kind of entity being designed. Consider, for example, entities that are common in
information and communication technology: i.e. objects that are a composition of
software and hardware. The software component determines the functionality of
the entity, while the hardware is the component which enables animation of the
functionality. Many aspects of functionality may be expressed in terms of structural
relations between speciﬁc morphisms of a category. Thus, the identity question may
potentially be positively answered with respect to functionality with the aid of a CT
conceptualization. The hardware component is another issue—touched on in passing
below. Note only that in many cases the objective of the design is to determine
functionality in a way that is independent of implementation, in order to allow for
different hardware realizations of the functionality [2].
The identity issue pertains to epistemic processes in a similar way, although
not in quite the same sense. Here a sequence of descriptions OPe1 →e1 OPe2 →
6Note, however, that even in the case of works of art some features can formalized: e.g. rules of
perspective in paintings.
7In the following we use the expression “designed entity” instead of “object of design”, in order to
avoid confusion with objects of categories.

52
J. Lubacz
e2 OPe3 →e3 . . . may be interpreted as pertaining to some development of a hypoth-
esis, expressed in some particular way or other (in the form of a theory, set of sen-
tences, model, etc.), that is about the entities to which the process pertains. CT may
be helpful in determining the criteria of identity appropriate for some aspect or phe-
nomenon associated with the entity being considered. We can also ask whether, or
on what conditions, the sequence converges; this is in essence a version of one of
the classical problems of epistemology. Note that such a problem does not arise in
poietic processes. Indeed, there is also another classical problem of epistemology
that does not pertain to such processes: the problem of competing theories. In the
latter case, with the help of a CT conceptualization, one can consider criteria that
would allow one to judge whether the competing theories pertain to the same entity,
or are compatible in some sense; this is a variant of the general problem of identity.
Resolving the problems considered above would require one to construct some
super-structures pertaining to functors—categories of functors, of a kind appropriate
for epistemic and poietic processes. It is important to take account of the fact that
the above identity problems are naturally associated with evaluating and monitoring
the progress of a process towards desired ends: i.e. with testing, veriﬁcation and
validation. The methodological aspects of the progress of the sequence OP1 →1
OP2 →2 OP3 →3 . . . is monitored with respect to the d-QC criteria in the case of
a poietic process, and with respect to the d-QCe criteria in the case of the OPe1 →
e1 OPe2 →e2 OPe3 →e3 . . . sequence of an epistemic process.
TheconsecutiveelementsoftheOPe1 →e1 OPe2 →e2 OPe3 →e3 . . .sequence
are also evaluated with respect to the POe description with the s-QCe criteria, in order
to ensure that the process meets the desired epistemic goal. In the case of a poietic
process it is the PO that is evaluated with respect to the consecutive elements of the
OP1 →1 OP2 →2 OP3 →3 . . . sequence with the s-QC criteria, in order to ensure
that the process results in the implantation of the designed artefact. The application
of the CT conceptualization raises problems essentially analogous to those described
above.
Note that so far we have not mentioned objects of categories. The fact that objects
can be eliminated from the deﬁnition of a category has interesting implications.
With respect to poietic processes this allows for the possibility of maintaining a state
of ignorance concerning the inner structure of objects—something which, as was
mentioned above, is instrumental in separating the functional features of the designed
entities from the enablers of the functions (e.g., separation of software from hardware
in the design). Note that from this perspective, the classical essentialism versus
structuralism controversy loses much of its supposed importance and relevance.
In the case of epistemic processes, the irrelevance of the inner structure of objects
of categories has other interesting consequences, which are related to the problem
of observables versus unobservables. In principle, the POe is a direct or indirect
description of observables, while the OPe description may refer to observables, but
also to unobservables (where the status of the latter may be only temporary). It seems
that CT conceptualization would be well suited to expressing such circumstances
with the aid of functors: the objects of the OPe category that are assumed to be
unobservable can be mapped onto observable objects of the POe category. This kind

4
The Application of Category Theory to Epistemic and Poietic Processes
53
of mapping is especially important when it comes to evaluating an OPe description
with respect to a POe description with the s-QCe criteria.
We have not sought to suggest any speciﬁc features of categories that would be
suitable when seen from the perspective of the problems presented above. This is
partly because much surely depends on the particular type and area of application
of the epistemic and poietic processes in question, but also because we believe that
CT conceptualization will prove ﬂexible enough to be adapted to a broad range of
particularities. An example of this ﬂexibility is the application of special kinds of
category—namely, topoi—to the investigation of the new and intriguing concepts
involved in quantizing gravity. From the perspective of the problems touched on in
this paper, it will be especially interesting to consider topoi for which, in principle,
the logical law of excluded middle is substituted with some alternative of, say, an
intuitionistic sort, in order to take account of real-life testing procedures that yield
such results as “pass”, “fail” or “cannot decide”.
A ﬁnal comment: every category may be interpreted in terms of a graph (objects
= nodes, morphisms = oriented edges), with functors treated as mappings between
such graphs. This is a useful circumstance because—as has been well documented—
graph-based presentations tend to enhance our capacity for comprehending even the
most complex conceptual constructs.
References
1. S. Eilenberg, S. MacLane, General theory of natural equivalences. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 58(2),
231–294 (1945)
2. W. Houkes, P.E. Vermaas, Technical Functions: On the Use and Design of Artefacts, vol. 1
(Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin, 2010)
3. P. Kroes, Engineering and the dual nature of technical artefacts. Camb. J. Econ. 34(1), 51–62
(2009)
4. Z. Król, J. Lubacz, The subject’s forms of knowledge and the question of being, in Contemporary
Polish Ontology, ed. by B. Skowron (De Gruyter, Berlin, 2019)
5. G. Parsons, The Philosophy of Design, vol. 1 (Polity Press, Cambridge, 2016)
6. B. Preston, Artifact, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2018th edn., ed. by E.N. Zalta
(Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2018)
7. J.R. Searle, Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1983)
8. J. Seibt, Process philosophy, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2018th edn., ed. by
E.N. Zalta (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2018)

Chapter 5
Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics
from a Categorial Standpoint: Is It
Related to the Direction of Time?
Zbigniew Semadeni
Abstract Category theory is symmetric in the sense that all deﬁnitions, theorems
and proofs have uniquely deﬁned duals, obtained by formal reversing of arrows. In
contrast, the products and coproducts in typical categories whose objects are sets
endowed with basic algebraic, topological etc. structures of Cantorian Mathematics
show a speciﬁc lack of symmetry. A philosophical question is raised: What features of
mathematics and mathematical thinking are related to this phenomenon? Some hints
suggest that this is related to the role of the concept of a function in mathematics and
the domination of many-to-one thinking. This in turn may be attributed to implicit
thinking in terms “causes precede the effects” and to the arrow of time.
5.1
Introduction
Initially (since 1945) category theory was regarded as a convenient conceptual lan-
guage for certain aspects of mathematical theories. Later, however, new ideas devel-
oped by Lawvere and others showed that topos theory could provide a uniﬁed frame-
workforsettheory,logicandagoodpartofmathematics[13].Consequently,category
theory was viewed as a new contender for a foundation of mathematics along with
set theory, or—as Mac Lane would put it—as a proposal for the organization of
Mathematics [17, pp. 398–407], [18, p. 331].
The purpose of this paper1 is to use categorial concepts to highlight a certain
feature of Cantorian Mathematics; this term refers here to basic mathematical struc-
tures of algebra, topology, functional analysis etc. expressed in terms of set theory,
as they were conceived prior to the emergence of category theory, i.e., by the middle
1The present paper is based on a talk delivered at the conference “Category Theory in Physics,
Mathematics and Philosophy” held at the Warsaw University of Technology, 16–17 November
2017. Some ideas presented here were published in [23].
Z. Semadeni (B)
Institute of Mathematics, University of Warsaw, ul. Banacha 2, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: semadeni@mimuw.edu.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_5
55

56
Z. Semadeni
of the 20th century. We will consider categories in which objects are sets2 provided
with speciﬁc structures, while morphisms are structure preserving maps (homomor-
phisms, continuous maps etc.).
General category theory is fully symmetric in the sense that each deﬁnition, each
theorem and each proof has its uniquely deﬁned dual, obtained by the process:
reverse all arrows, that is, by the following replacements in the theory:
• each expression of the type αβ = γ is replaced by βα = γ;
• in each morphism the word “domain” is replaced by “codomain” and “codomain”
is replaced by “domain”, that is, each α: A →B is replaced by α: B →A;
• arrows and composites are reversed, while the logical terms are unchanged
[15], [16, pp. 31–33], [24].
Each statement of the theory has a unique dual statement, e.g., the dual of “α is
monic” (i.e., is a monomorphism) is “α is epic”, and vice versa; the dual of “A is an
initial object” is “A is a terminal object”; the dual of a product is a coproduct.
In an axiom system for category theory, the dual of each axiom is also an axiom.
Consequently, in any proof of a theorem, replacing each statement by its dual gives
a valid proof of the dual theorem. This is the duality principle in category theory.
We will show that—from this point of view—Cantorian mathematics is speciﬁ-
cally asymmetric.
5.2
Products and Coproducts
As a crucial example we consider the notion of a product of an indexed family
of objects {At}t∈T in a category E, deﬁned as an object P together with a family
{πt : P →At}t∈T of morphisms (called projections) having the unique factorization
property: for every object X and every family of morphisms {ξt : X →At}t∈T there
exists a unique morphism θ: X →P such that the diagrams commute, i.e., πtθ = ξt
for t ∈T . If a product exists, it is unique up to commuting isomorphism.
A coproduct (also called a categorial sum) of a family of objects {At}t∈T is deﬁned
dually as an object S together with a family {σt : At →S}t∈T of morphisms (called
injections) such that for every object X and every family of morphisms {ξt : At →
X}t∈T there exists a unique morphism θ: S →X such that θσt = ξt for t ∈T .
5.2.1
Products in Certain Categories of Sets with Structures
Most of the following examples are concrete categories, i.e., categories E equipped
with a faithful functor U : E →Set. Symbols of speciﬁc categories used here gen-
2It is assumed here that all sets, functions, topological spaces etc. considered here are small sets,
[16, p. 22].

5
Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics from a Categorial Standpoint …
57
erally follow those of [16, p. 12]. In the category Set of (small) sets and functions,
the product of {At}t∈T is the cartesian product A = 
t∈T At with the coordinate
projections πt : A →At (t ∈T ).
In the category Top of topological spaces and continuous maps, in its full subcat-
egory Comp of compact Hausdorff spaces, in the category Set∗of sets with selected
base-points and base-point preserving functions, in the analogous category Top∗,
in the category Ord of partially ordered sets and non-decreasing maps, in the cate-
gories Grp, Ab and AbComp of groups (resp. abelian groups and compact abelian
groups) and their homomorphisms (resp. continuous homomorphisms)—in all these
categories the product 
t∈T At is the cartesian product endowed with a suitable
structure (in Ord it is the cardinal product in the sense of [2, I. Sect.7], [24, 3.3.8]).
The category Ban1 of Banach spaces and linear contractions, i.e., linear operators
of norm ∥T ∥≤1 (called also short linear operators), may appear to be an exception
to the rule, as the cartesian product of inﬁnitely many Banach spaces is not a Banach
space. In fact, their product is the ℓ∞-product consisting of all {xt}t∈T , xt ∈Xt, such
that supt∈T ∥xt∥< ∞. However, this exception may be regarded as spurious. If we
adjust the concept of the carrier of the Banach space structure, replacing the whole
vector space X by its closed unit ball {x ∈X : ∥x∥≤1} (which actually determines
the geometric structure of the whole space) and replacing the category Ban1 by the
category Ban⃝of closed unit balls and restrictions of linear contractions, then the
product object becomes simply the cartesian product of balls.
Another exception is the category AbTor of abelian torsion groups. The direct
product A = 
t∈T At of such groups need not be a torsion group, e.g., Z2 × Z3 ×
Z5 × ... However, the torsion-subgroup P of A consisting of all torsion elements
(i.e., all elements of ﬁnite order) is a product in AbTor, [1, 10.20].
5.2.2
Coproducts in the Same Categories
In contrast to the preceding, coproducts may be markedly different from each other.
This is clearly shown in the following Table5.1.
In the categories Set, Top, Top∗, Comp and Set∗coproducts are based on the same
construction, namely on the disjoint union A = 
t∈T At, deﬁned as 
t∈T (At × {t}),
with obvious injections σt : At →A. In Top the coproduct 
t∈T At is equipped with
thedisjointuniontopology[6,Chap.2,Sects.2,4];inTop∗thecoproductisthewedge
sum, i.e., the quotient of the disjoint union obtained by identifying the base points to
a single point; in Comp copoducts are the Stone– ˇCech compactiﬁcations of disjoint
unions. In Ord it is the cardinal sum [2, I. Sect.7], [24, 3.3.10].
However, in other categories coproducts may differ basically. In Grp the coprod-
uct is the free product of groups, whereas in its full subcategory Ab the coproduct
is the direct sum  At (called also the external direct sum); thus the Ab-coproduct
of two copies of the cyclic group Z is commutative, whereas their Grp-coproduct is
not commutative (moreover, its center is trivial).

58
Z. Semadeni
Table5.1 Intheleft-handcolumntherearesymbolsofcategoriestogetherwithconcisedescriptions
of their objects and morphisms. In the middle column, for each category there is a description of
products. Conspicuously, the cartesian product  appears in each cell with exception of Banach
spaces and commutative C∗-algebras (however this difference disappears when one changes the
deﬁnition of the carrier of the object taking the closed unit ball instead of the whole vector space).
In the right-hand column there are descriptions of respective coproducts. There are six distinct types
of them: coproducts related to the disjoint union  At; free products  At of groups; coproducts
related to directs sums  At of abelian groups; coproducts related to tensor products  At of
rings; ℓ1-sums; a speciﬁc construction for automata
Symbol of the category
objects, morphisms
Product of a family {At}t∈T
of objects
Coproduct of a family
{At}t∈T of objects
Set
sets
functions
Cartesian product

t∈T
At
Disjoint union
	
t∈T
At =

t∈T

At × {t} 
Top
topological spaces
continuous maps
Cartesian product

At with product topology
Disjoint union
	
At
At × {t} open-and-closed
Top•
pointed topological spaces
based maps
Cartesian product

At
with base point {•t}t∈T
Wedge sum

At =
 	
At

∼
with quotient topology
Comp
compact spaces
continuous maps
Cartesian product

At
with product topology
Stone- ˇCech compactiﬁcation
of the disjoint union
β
 	
At

Gr
groups
homomorphisms
Cartesian product

At
multiplication componentwise
Free product

At
group of words
Ab
abelian groups
homomorphisms
Cartesian product

At
addition componentwise
(external) direct sum
At
xt = et for almost all t
Abcomp
compact abelian groups
continuous homomorphisms
Cartesian product  At
product topology
addition componentwise
Bohr compactiﬁcation of the
direct sum At with
coproduct topology
CRng
commutative rings (with units)
unit-preserving
homomorphisms
Cartesian product  Rt
addition and multiplication
componentwise
Tensor product Rt of rings
Ban1
Banach spaces
linear operators ||T || ≤1
ℓ∞-product
the set of all {xt}t∈T
satisfying supt∈T ||xt|| < ∞
ℓ1-sum
the set of all {xt}t∈T
satisfying 
t∈T ||xt|| < ∞
C∗algcom1
commutative C∗-algebras
unit-preserving homom
ℓ∞-product
the set of all {xt}t∈T
satisfying supt∈T ||xt|| < ∞
Injective tensor product 

At
Aut
Mealy automata
⟨X, S, Y, δ, λ⟩
where δ : S × X →S
λ : S × X →Y

At,

St,

Yt
induced map δ
induced map λ
A construction in terms of
disjoint sums of ﬁnite
cartesian products

5
Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics from a Categorial Standpoint …
59
In AbComp the coproduct is the Bohr compactiﬁcation [12], [9, p. 430], [10], [22,
pp.249–254]ofthedirectsum At,providedwithacoproducttopology[19].Thisis
particularly interesting in view of the Pontryagin duality. A locally compact abelian
group G is compact if and only if its dual group 
G (the group of characters, i.e.,
continuous homomorphisms G →R/Z) is discrete [14, Chap. VII], [9, Sect.24];
consequently, the category Ab (which may be regarded as that of discrete abelian
groups) is equivalent (in the sense of [16, IV.4]) to the opposite category (i.e., dual)
of AbComp. Thus, one might expect a somehow “dual behavior” of their products
and coproducts; yet, the products in both categories are akin to Cartesian products
and coproducts to direct sums.
InthecategoryC∗algcom1 ofcommutativeC∗-algebraswithunitsandtheirhomo-
morphisms, the product is an ℓ∞-product while the coproduct is the injective tensor
product 

At (calledalsotheweaktensorproduct),[22,pp.355–361].BytheGelfand
duality theorem, C∗algcom1 is equivalent to the dual of Comp [22, Sects.10.2, 12.6,
13.3], so the situation is analogous to that with products and coproducts in Ab and
AbComp.
In the category CRng of commutative rings with units and unit-preserving ring
homomorphisms the product of a family {Rt}t∈T is—as in any category of algebras
of the same type—the Cartesian product A =  At with suitable operations and
coordinate projections, whereas the coproduct of this family is the tensor product of
rings Rt (i.e., the tensor product over Z for rings as Z-algebras, [21, p. 65]).
In the category Ban1 of Banach spaces and linear contractions the coproduct of a
family {Xt}t∈T is its ℓ1-sum consisting of all {xt}t∈T such that 
t∈T ∥xt∥< ∞.
In the category Aut of ﬁnite Mealy automata ⟨X, S, Y, δ, λ⟩(where S denotes a
set of states, X is an input alphabet, Y is an output alphabet, δ : S × X →S is a
transition function, λ : S × X →Y is an output function and morphisms are triples
ξ : X1 →X2, σ: S1 →S2, η: Y1 →Y2 such that suitable diagrams commute), the
product of ⟨Xt, St, Yt, δt, λt⟩is the triple  Xt,  Xt,  Xt with the induced maps
δ, λ and is related to that in Set, [5]. However, coproducts are sophisticated and quite
different [25], [24, 2.4.7, 3.3.15].
5.2.3
Recapitulation of Main Points
The forgetful functors from each of the categories considered above to Set (or to
Set × Set × Set in case of automata) commute with products and do not commute
with coproducts.
A similar asymmetry, albeit in a much milder form, concerns equalizers and
coequalizers [24, Sect.3.5].
A consequence of the above asymmetry product–coproduct is an analogous asym-
metry of limits (called also inverse limits or projective limits) and colimits (direct
limits or inductive limits) of diagrams [16, pp. 62–72].
One may distinguish two kinds of categorial duality. One, which may be labeled
as syntactic, mentioned above, is based on the formal replacing of each morphism
αβ (in a category E) by βα. The other, which may be labeled as functional (and

60
Z. Semadeni
is an anti-equivalence, i.e., equivalence with the opposite category Eop), is based
on constructions related to some contravariant hom-functor homE(−, E0). The ﬁrst
kind is signiﬁcant in the general theory, whereas the second yields better insight into
speciﬁc categories, like those discussed here.
5.3
A Philosophical Discussion
At this point a philosophical question arises: What features of Cantorian Mathematics
lie behind this asymmetry?
Clearly, the membership relation: element–set, x ∈X is a basic asymmetry. How-
ever, this explanation is not adequate here, as the following examples show.
Let Rel denote the category of sets and binary relations. Objects are sets, a mor-
phism R : A →B is a triple (R, A, B) where R ⊆A × B. If S ⊆B × C is another
such relation, the composite morphism is (S ◦R, A, C), where
S ◦R = {(a, c) ∈A × C | ∃b∈B(a, b) ∈R and (b, c) ∈S}.
The empty set is the zero object. The coproduct of a family {At}t∈T of objects in Rel
is the disjoint union A = 
t∈T At with obvious injections σt : At →A. The product
is the same disjoint union A =  At with morphisms πt : A →At deﬁned as the
inverse relations πt = σ−1
t
for t ∈T . The categorial symmetry of Rel suggests itself.
If a set P is partially ordered by a relation ≤and is regarded as a category in
which the morphisms a →b are exactly those pairs (a, b) for which a ≤b and if
the greatest lower bound inf{at}t∈T of a family exists, then it is the product of that
family. Analogously, sup{at}t∈T is the coproduct. Here again the symmetry is clear.
The last two examples suggest that the product-coproduct asymmetry of the
categories shown in the table above follows from the asymmetry of many-to-one
relationship in the notion of a function f : X →Y.
Now the next question arises as to why such many→one thinking predominates
in Mathematics. Certainly it is deeply rooted in our minds. It is so in early arithmetic
as, e.g., in 4 + 3 = 7 the natural direction is from numbers 4, 3 to the sum 7. The
opposite relation—decomposing a number into summands—is also important but
deﬁnitely secondary. Most computations lead from given data to a result. Solving
an equation appears to be a way backwards. In calculus, functions play a vital role,
whereas their multivalued inverse relations are used only occasionally.
In the real life causes precede the effects [20, Chap.7]. This is implicit in common
thinking, manifests in ordinary language, and also shapes mathematical thinking. It
is subordinated to the psychological arrow of time which—according to Hawking
[8, Chap.9]—is determined by the thermodynamic arrow of time. It is likely an
evolutionary effect in mathematical thought.
In a preliminary search, in the context of discovery, the mathematician’s think-
ing may have no preconceived direction, but systematic reasoning (as in a proof)
has a clear direction (the case of backward reasoning, from the consequent to the
antecedent, is usually an intentional, conscious reversing of the direction).

5
Asymmetry of Cantorian Mathematics from a Categorial Standpoint …
61
The concept of a function has two aspects: dynamic and static. The ﬁrst, related
to change and motion, was implicit in Newton’s approach, continued till the 19th
century, and still somehow inﬂuences the thinking in terms of functional depen-
dence. Also an “input/output machine” approach, with permissible inputs and the
corresponding outputs, is dynamic.
The static conception of a function developed slowly from Euler’s analytic form to
Dedekind’s modern, purely logical and completely general notion of a many-to-one
mapping from a set to a set [3, Chap.V–VII], [7, pp. 228–232].
By its very nature, set theory is static. In the set-theoretical approach, the dynamic
conception of a function is replaced by a static relation, conceived as a set of pairs.
Time, which played the role of a distinct variable in the 18th and 19th century,
became one of the space coordinates in Rn [17, pp. 123–133]. Moreover, the New
Math movements of the 1960s contributed to the attitude that time belongs to physics.
On the other hand, even if formally Mathematics expressed in terms of set theory
appears static, Cantorian models of physical processes represent a dynamic world.
The author is indebted to Prof. Jiˇrí Rosický for paying attention to some important
aspects of the question considered in the paper. Most of the examples discussed here
are of an “algebraic” nature, i.e., they are given by operations whose general form is
T A →A where T : Set →Set is a functor. But there are also structures of “coal-
gebraic” nature given by A →T A, [4]. In such a case, coproducts are preserved but
not products. A typical example are transition systems given by A →P A, where P
is the power-set functor [11, part on non-deterministic automata]. Thus, the asymme-
try considered in this paper applies to the “algebraic” part of Cantorian Mathemat-
ics while an opposite asymmetry applies to the “coalgebraic” part of mathematics.
The former is predominant in classical mathematics (particularly in applications
to physics) while coalgebraic part is mostly stimulated by Computer Science. The
opposite one-to-many relation, for example decomposing a number into summands
or multi-valued inverse of a function, is considered as being important but secondary
in Cantorian Mathematics. While many-to-one is typical to it, one-to-many is typical
to coalgebraic mathematical theories. The example of transition systems shows that
one-to-many is not always given by some many-to-one. Here, it reﬂects the non-
deterministic nature of a process where one has more ways how to go from a state
of the system to another state.
The general theory of coalgebras requires category theory. Before the appearance
of the latter, mathematicians could deal only with asymmetric Cantorian Mathemat-
ics; the coalgebraic part was hidden.
References
1. J. Adáimek, H. Herrlich, G. Strecker, Abstract and Concrete Categories (Wiley, New York,
1990). http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf
2. G. Birkhoff, Lattice Theory. American Mathematical Society, vol. 25, 2nd ed. (Colloquium
Publications, New York, 1948)

62
Z. Semadeni
3. C.B. Boyer, The History of the Calculus and its Conceptual Development (Dover Publications,
New York, 1959)
4. Coalgebra. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coalgebra
5. H. Ehrig, M. Pfender, Kategorien und Automaten (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1972)
6. R. Engelking, General Topology, Monograﬁe Matematyczne, vol. 60 (PWN-Polish Scientiﬁc
Publishers, Warszawa, 1977)
7. J. Ferreirós, Labyrinth of Thought. A History of Set Theory and its Role in Modern Mathematics
(Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1999)
8. S.W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time: from the Big Bang to Black Holes (Bantam Books,
Toronto, 1988)
9. E. Hewitt, K.A. Ross, Abstract Harmonic Analysis, vol. I (Springer, Berlin-Göttingen-
Heidelberg, 1963)
10. P.J. Higgins, Coproducts of topological Abelian groups. J. Algebra 44(1), 152–159 (1977)
11. B. Jacobs, Introduction to Coalgebra: Towards Mathematics of States and Observation. Cam-
bridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2016). http://www.cs.ru.nl/B.Jacobs/CLG/JacobsCoalgebraIntro.pdf
12. S. Kaplan, Extensions of the Pontrjagin duality I: inﬁnite products. Duke Math. J. 15, 649–658
(1948)
13. F.W. Lawvere (ed.), Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and Logic. Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
vol. 274 (Springer, Berlin–Heidelberg–New York, 1972)
14. L.H. Loomis, An Introduction to Abstract Harmonic Analysis (Van Nostrand, Toronto-New
York-London, 1953)
15. S. Mac Lane, Duality for groups. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 56, 485–516 (1950). https://
projecteuclid.org/download/pdf_1/euclid.bams/1183515045
16. S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1971)
17. S. Mac Lane, Mathematics. Form and Function (Springer Verlag, New York-Berlin-Heidelberg,
1986)
18. S. Mac Lane, I. Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic. A First Introduction to Topos Theory
(Universitext, Springer, 1992)
19. P. Nickolas, Coproducts of abelian topological groups. Topol. Appl. 120(3), 403–426 (2002)
20. R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989)
21. H. Schubert, Categories (Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1972)
22. Z. Semadeni, Banach Spaces of Continuous Functions. vol. I. Monograﬁe Matematyczne. vol.
55 (PWN-Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers, Warszawa, 1971)
23. Z. Semadeni, Is the Cantorian mathematics symmetric?, in Theory of Sets and Topology. In
Honour of Felix Hausdorff (1868–1942) ed. by G. Asser et al. (VEB Deutscher Verlag Wis-
senschaften, Berlin, 1972), pp. 467–471
24. Z. Semadeni, A. Wiweger, Einführung in die Theorie der Kategorien und Funktoren, Teubner-
Texte zur Mathematik. BSB B. G. Teubner Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig (1979). http://d-nb.
info/800278038 [translated from the Polish second edition]
25. A. Wiweger, On coproducts of automata. Bull. Acad. Polonaise Sci. 21, 753–758 (1973)

Chapter 6
Extending List’s Levels
Neil Dewar, Samuel C. Fletcher and Laurenz Hudetz
Abstract Christian List (Noûs, forthcoming, 2018, [24]) has recently proposed a
category-theoretic model of a system of levels, applying it to various pertinent meta-
physical questions. We modify and extend this framework to correct some minor
defects and better adapt it to application in philosophy of science. This includes
a richer use of category theoretic ideas and some illustrations using social choice
theory.
6.1
List’s Descriptive, Explanatory, and Ontological Levels
In general, a system of levels for List [24] is a preordered class: that is, a class L
equipped with a reﬂexive and transitive binary relation ≤. The elements of L are to
be interpreted as levels, and the binary relation ≤as the relation of supervenience:
L ≤L′ means L′ supervenes on L. Thus, requiring that ≤be a preorder amounts
to assuming that every level supervenes upon itself, and if the level L1 supervenes
on the level L2, and L2 on the level L3, then L1 supervenes on L3. In requiring
only these characteristics, List is deliberately opting for a fairly weak conception
of supervenience. For instance, it is possible to have two distinct levels within the
system, neither of which supervene upon the other, or to have two distinct levels both
of which supervene upon the other.
This framework gives us the resources to consider certain relationships between
systems of levels. Given two systems of levels L and L ′, a function f : L →L ′
N. Dewar
LMU Munich, Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1, 80539 Munich, Germany
e-mail: neil.dewar@lrz.uni-muenchen.de
S. C. Fletcher (B)
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, 271 19th Ave S, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
e-mail: scﬂetch@umn.edu
L. Hudetz
London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK
e-mail: l.hudetz@lse.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_6
63

64
N. Dewar et al.
is a monotonic map if it preserves the order relation: i.e., for any levels L1, L2 ∈L ,
if L1 ≤L2 then f (L1) ≤f (L2). If there are monotonic maps f : L →L ′ and
f ′ : L ′ →L that are mutually inverse to one another, then L and L ′ are said
to be isomorphic, or structurally equivalent. If L ⊆L ′ and there is some map
f : L →L ′ suchthat L1 ≤L2 ifandonlyif f (L1) ≤f (L2),thenL isasubsystem
of L ′.
Such is List’s general framework. There is one signiﬁcant difference between our
presentation of this framework so far and his: we have not yet mentioned categories at
all. Although we will start to use category-theoretic language below, we have avoided
it so far to make clear that the abstract framework in his [24] can be understood
without category theory.
Let us now turn to more speciﬁc kinds of systems of levels. First, consider the
case of a system of ontological levels. In such a system, each level is associated
(or identiﬁed) with a set of possible worlds for that level. If one level supervenes
upon another, then there is a (unique) supervenience map from the subvenient level
to the supervenient level; this map is required to be surjective.1 We also impose the
following two requirements:
1. for any level L, the identity map is the supervenience map from L to itself; and
2. if σ is the supervenience map from L1 to L2, and σ ′ is the supervenience map
from L2 to L3, then σ ′ ◦σ is the supervenience map from L1 to L3.
More compactly stated, a system of ontological levels forms a concrete posetal
category in which every function is surjective. To say that it is a concrete category
means that it is a class of sets, equipped with functions between those sets that are
closed under composition and include all identity functions. To say that it is a posetal
category means that between any two sets, there is at most one function. Although
this compact description uses category-theoretic apparatus, it only does so in the
form of appeal to concrete categories (i.e., categories of sets and functions). This
means that the category-theoretic language provides a convenient way to express
our requirements, rather than being an indispensable tool; if desired, we could do
everything purely in set-theoretic terms, as our initial description of a system of levels
in terms of a preordered class evinces.2
Two speciﬁc kinds of systems of ontological levels are worth mentioning. The
ﬁrst is what List calls a system of levels of grain. For this, we take as given a set Ω
of “possible worlds”. Each level in the system is given by some partition of Ω: one
such partition supervenes upon another just in case every cell of the former is a union
of cells of the latter, with the supervenience map taking each “ﬁne-grained” cell to
the “coarse-grained” cell of which it is a part. Since any such map is guaranteed to
be surjective, it follows that a system of levels of grain is an ontological system of
levels.
1In Sect.6.3 we will consider whether this requirement is justiﬁed.
2Of course, there is a sense in which this is true for any application of category-theoretic apparatus,
at least insofar as one can represent a category as a set-theoretic structure. But this trivial sense is
not the one we have in mind here.

6
Extending List’s Levels
65
List [24, p. 10] claims that even though “a system of ontological levels is for-
mally more general than a system of levels of grain, there exists a functor from any
system of ontological levels to some system of levels of grain.” In case the system
of ontological levels has a lowest level—a level on which all others supervene—the
desired functor maps that level bijectively onto a class representing the lowest-level
possible worlds, and all other levels are mapped to partitions of these worlds induced
by the supervenience maps of the system of ontological levels. In case there is no
lowest level, List proposes to construct one formally using an inverse limit of the
ontological levels. “For a posetal category,” he writes, “an inverse limit can always
be constructed, though we need not interpret it as anything more than a mathematical
construct.”
This last statement must be qualiﬁed, however. Inverse limits are deﬁned only
for posetal categories each pair of whose elements has a greatest lower bound [1,
p. 194],3 so an inverse limit can be constructed in a system of ontological levels
when any two levels have a common level on which they both supervene that itself
supervenes on all such common subvenient levels. A simple example of a system
of levels in which this does not occur consists of two levels, L1 and L2, that only
supervene on themselves. No inverse limit can be constructed for this system, and it
does not mirror any system of levels of grain.
Perhaps there is some other construction that allows one to exhibit a functor from
a large class of—if not any—system of ontological levels to some system of levels
of grain. In the previous simple example, for instance, it is quite natural to deﬁne a
system of levels that adds a new level to L1 and L2, whose worlds are the Cartesian
product of the worlds of each of those two levels, and a pair of supervenience maps
for the two components’ projection maps.4 This could then be generalized to any
system of ontological levels that has a set-sized number of “lowest levels,” and might
be given a category theoretic expression using enriched categories. But as systems of
ontological levels are currently deﬁned, they includes systems with a (proper) class
of lowest levels, whose worlds cannot be so combined into a set-sized Cartesian
product.
The second speciﬁc kind of system of ontological levels that List considers is
a system of descriptive levels—roughly, a system of ontological levels in which
each level is the set of worlds describable in a speciﬁc language. More precisely, a
language L is deﬁned as a set of elements—formal expressions called sentences—
that are equipped with a negation operator ¬ : L →L and a bifurcation of the power
set P(L) into two, labeled “consistent” and “inconsistent.” It is required in particular
that:
1. any set containing a sentence and its negation is inconsistent;
3In more detail, an inverse limit in a category C can be characterized as the limit of a functor from
a partially ordered set, considered as a small category, to C, and such limits exist when C has small
products and equalizers [9, Theorem 2.8.1]. Posetal categories trivially always have equalizers, but
their products are just greatest lower bounds.
4Thanks to Christian List for this suggestion. Note that the Cartesian product is the product in the
category of sets, not in a posetal category—see footnote 3.

66
N. Dewar et al.
2. inconsistency is preserved by taking supersets;
3. ∅is consistent; and
4. every consistent set is contained in a maximal consistent set (i.e., a consistent set
containing, for every sentence φ ∈L, either φ or ¬φ).
The ontology for L, denoted ΩL, is deﬁned as the set of all maximal consistent
subsets of L. Each such subset (i.e., each element of ΩL) is a world. A sentence
φ ∈L is said to be true at a world w ∈ΩL if φ ∈w, and the propositional content
of φ, denoted [[φ]], is deﬁned as the set of all worlds at which φ is true.
A system of descriptive levels is thus a system of ontological levels, each of which
is the ontology of some language. Within such a system, a higher-level sentence
φ′ ∈L′ is deﬁned (by List) to be reducible to a lower-level sentence φ ∈L if and only
if the propositional content of φ is the inverse image of φ′ under σ, the supervenience
map from ΩL to ΩL′. And he deﬁnes the higher level of description L′ to be reducible
to the lower level of description L if every sentence of the higher level’s associated
language L′ is reducible to some sentence of the lower level’s associated language
L.
Note that, so deﬁned, not every system of descriptive levels will be one in which
the higher levels reduce to the lower levels: as List observes, this provides a sense in
which supervenience does not entail reduction. For a concrete example [13], let L′
be the propositional language for level L′ whose only sentence-letter is F, and let
L be the propositional language for level L with sentence-letters {P0, P1, . . . }, each
equipped with the standard notion of consistency. ΩL′ only contains two worlds: ωF,
which contains F, and ω¬F, which contains ¬F. Let ω ∈ΩL be the world containing
every Pi. Deﬁne σ : ΩL →ΩL′ as follows: for any ω ∈ΩL,
σ(ω) :=

ωF
if ω = ω,
ω¬F
otherwise.
Then the levels ΩL and ΩL′ equipped with the maps σ, IdΩL, and IdΩL′ constitute a
system of descriptive levels.
Now observe that σ −1([[F]]) = {ω}. But {ω} is not a deﬁnable subset of ΩL
since there is no sentence φ ∈L such that [[φ]] = {ω}.5 So the sentence F ∈L′ is
not reducible to any sentence in L; thus, L′ is not reducible to L. We will discuss
in Sect.6.2, however, what sort of conditions we could place on supervenience that
would associate it with reduction.
5Proof Suppose for reductio that [[φ]] = {ω}. Since φ is a ﬁnite sentence, not every sentence letter
can occur in it. So suppose Pi does not occur in φ. Then since ω |= φ, it must be the case that
ω′ |= φ, where ω′ is just like ω save that Pi /∈ω′ (as the truth value of a sentence in propositional
logic is dependent only on the truth values of the sentence letters occurring in it). But then ω′ ∈[[φ]],
although ω′ ̸= ω, so we have a contradiction.
□

6
Extending List’s Levels
67
6.2
Supervenience and Reduction
As discussed in Sect.6.1, for List, supervenience need not entail reduction, in the
sense that there can be systems of levels of description in which the levels are not
reducible to one another. In this section, we look at how, by imposing certain assump-
tions on the system of descriptive levels, we can recover this entailment.
Before we begin, one preliminary observation is in order. For List, the worlds in
a system of levels of description are identiﬁed as maximally consistent sets of sen-
tences of a formal language, where the notion of a “language” is left very abstract.
In this section’s analysis, we will assume that the languages we are working with are
ﬁrst-order languages; this will play an important role when we invoke Beth’s theo-
rem. However, the languages may be many-sorted. We will also identify the worlds
with models of the language, rather than maximal consistent sets of sentences—note
that maximal consistent sets of sentences correspond to equivalence classes of ele-
mentarily equivalent models. This assumption is more for convenience than anything
else; we do not believe that anything of great signiﬁcance hangs on it.
Now, consider two levels of description L and L′ associated with languages L
and L′, respectively. Let σ be a supervenience map from L to L′. We assume two
conditions on the relationship between these levels. First, we assume that they are
compatible with respect to σ, in the sense that if the vocabularies of L and L′ intersect,
then for any ω ∈ΩL, ω|L∩L′ = σ(ω)|L∩L′. This has the consequence that for any
ω ∈ΩL, we can deﬁne a unique expansion to a structure of signature L ∪L′: let
ω + σ(ω) be the structure such that for any symbol S in the vocabulary of L ∪L′
(including sort symbols),
Sω+σ(ω) =

Sω
if S ∈L,
Sσ(ω)
if S ∈L′.
Let ΩL + ΩL′ := {ω + σ(ω) : ω ∈ΩL}. This can be viewed as the union of the two
levels relative to the supervenience map σ. Note that when its antecedent is satisﬁed,
this assumption entails that ω and σ(ω) share a domain: or, in other words, that the
lower-level theory already asserts the existence of higher-level objects (but without
explicitly saying what they are like). Such an assumption is reasonably plausible if
(for instance) we take the lower-level theory to include some kind of mereological
theory that asserts the existence of mereological sums or fusions. Alternatively, one
could seek to weaken this assumption by invoking methods for deﬁning new sorts6;
although such a project would be interesting, we do not undertake it here.
Our second assumption is that this class is characterizable, in the sense that there
is a set of sentences T such that ΩL + ΩL′ = Mod(T ). This means that the union of
the two levels comprises worlds that can be characterized as those in which certain
6See, in particular, [2, 6].

68
N. Dewar et al.
sentences in the union of their languages are true. This assumption is reasonably
strong: in the context of psychology and physics, for example, it amounts to the
assertion that there is some joint psycho-physical theory such that a distribution of
psychological and physical facts is possible if and only if it is in accord with the joint
theory. However, it is still nontrivially distinct from directly assuming reducibility.
One way to obtain such a joint theory would be to conjoin our psychological and
physical theories with a set of bridge laws connecting them; but the assumption of
characterizability does not presume that the joint theory takes this “pre-reduced”
form. Note further that, in general, assuming characterizability will mean that the
antecedent of the ﬁrst assumption is satisﬁed: that is, that there is at least one sort
of object that both levels describe (and so, per the ﬁrst assumption, about which
they agree). This is plausible for realistic cases, in which we expect the two levels of
description to share at least some vocabulary (e.g., empirical or observational terms).
Given these assumptions, it follows that the vocabulary of the higher level L′ is
implicitly deﬁned by T in terms of the lower-level vocabulary L: that is,
Proposition 1 For any models ω1 and ω2 of T , if ω1|L = ω2|L then ω1 = ω2.
Proof Suppose that ω1|L = ω2|L. By the assumption of characterizability, there
are ω1, ω2 ∈ΩL such that ω1 = ω1 + σ(ω1) and ω2 = ω2 + σ(ω2). It follows that
ωi|L = ωi and ωi|L′ = σ(ωi) (for i = 1, 2). Hence,
ω2|L′ = σ(ω2) = σ(ω2|L) = σ(ω1|L) = σ(ω1) = ω1|L′.
Thus, ω1 = ω2.
□
Next, by Beth’s theorem, it follows that L′ is explicitly deﬁned by T in terms of
L.7 In the case of single-sorted languages, this means that for any (n-place) relation
symbol R of L′, there is an L-formula τR such that T ⊢∀x1 . . . ∀xn(Rx1 . . . xn ↔
τR(x1, . . . , xn)) and similarly for other kinds of symbols. The case of many-sorted
languages is a bit more complex.8 But it follows in either case that for every L′-
sentence φ′, there is an L-sentence φ such that T ⊢(φ′ ↔φ). So φ′ reduces to φ.
Hence, it follows that L′ reduces to L.
Thus, although supervenience maps between different levels (in general) are not
associated with reduction, any supervenience map which fulﬁlls our assumptions of
compatibility and characterizability will be so associated.
An alternative way of establishing a relationship between supervenience and
reduction proceeds not by imposing constraints on the supervenience map between
levels, but rather by treating supervenience as a feature of sets of properties rather
than worlds. Note that this is more in line with how supervenience is often deﬁned
in the literature: for example, as the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy’s entry on
Supervenience [26] begins, “A set of properties A supervenes upon another set B
7For discussion of Beth’s theorem, see [17].
8For a generalisation of Beth’s theorem to many-sorted logics, see [2].

6
Extending List’s Levels
69
just in case no two things can differ with respect to A-properties without also differ-
ing with respect to their B-properties.” In other words, the A-properties supervene
upon the B-properties if any two possible worlds which have the same distribution
of B-properties also have the same distribution of A-properties.
To make things more precise, let us focus on the notion of strong global super-
venience [26, Sect. 4.3.2]: the A-properties strongly globally supervene upon the
B-properties if and only if for any worlds w1 and w2, any B-preserving isomorphism
between w1 and w2 is an A-preserving isomorphism between them.9 Let us suppose
that the A-properties are those expressed by a higher-level language L′, and the B-
properties are those expressed by a lower-level language L. And suppose that our
worlds (structures of signature L ∪L′) are characterizable, where this means the
same thing as before: there is a theory T such that the worlds are the models of the
theory. It then follows that
Proposition 2 The A-properties strongly globally supervene on the B-properties if
and only if T implicitly deﬁnes L′ in terms of L.
Proof From left to right, suppose that the A-properties supervene upon the B-
properties: that is, that for any worlds (models of T ) ω1 and ω2, if f is an isomorphism
from ω1|L to ω2|L, then f is an isomorphism from ω1 to ω2. Now suppose further
that we have two models ω1 and ω2 such that ω1|L = ω2|L. Clearly, then, the identity
is an isomorphism between ω1|L ω2|L, hence must be an isomorphism between ω1
and ω2; it follows that ω1 = ω2. So T implicitly deﬁnes L′ in terms of L.
From right to left, suppose that T implicitly deﬁnes L′ in terms of L, and let
ω1 and ω2 be models of T such that f is an isomorphism from ω1|L to ω2|L. For
reductio, suppose that f is not an isomorphism from ω1 to ω2, so for some R ∈L′,
f [Rω1] ̸= Rω2. But now deﬁne ω′
1 as follows: it has the same domain as ω2, and
for every P ∈L ∪L′, Pω′
1 = f [Pω1]. By construction, f is an isomorphism from
ω1 to ω′
1.10 So ω′
1 is a model of T . And since f is an isomorphism from ω1|L to
ω2|L, it follows that ω′
1|L = ω2|L, and so that ω′
1 = ω2. But then it follows that
Rω′
1 = f [Rω1] = Rω2, so we have obtained a contradiction. Hence, f must be an
isomorphism from ω1 to ω2.
□
From here, the analysis goes as before (i.e. via Beth’s theorem): hence, if the
higher-level properties supervene upon the lower-level properties, then (at least for
onenaturalwayofformalizingwhatthismeans)itwillbeaccompaniedbyareduction
from the higher level to the lower level.
9As McLaughlin and Bennett [26] discuss, there are other notions of global supervenience one can
deﬁne. For a compelling case that strong global supervenience is the most appropriate precisiﬁcation
of the intuitive notion of global supervenience, see Shagrir [32].
10This is an instance of what Button and Walsh [11] call the “push-through” construction.

70
N. Dewar et al.
6.3
Extensions: Partial and Non-surjective Maps
The ﬁrst extension to List’s framework we consider will be to partial supervenience
maps. To motivate it, consider the case of a system of ontological levels as described
in Sect.6.1. These levels consist of possible worlds, each of which provides a full
speciﬁcation of the facts particular to that level. List takes the maps between levels,
representing supervenience relations, to be functions, explaining that
Supervenience means that each lower-level world determines a corresponding higher-level
world: the lower-level facts, say the physical ones, determine the higher-level facts, say the
chemical ones. By ﬁxing all physical properties, we necessarily ﬁx all chemical properties,
in this example [24, p. 7].
However, the glosses before and after the colon are not equivalent: that the chemical
facts, say, may supervene on the physical facts just means that there cannot be any
difference between two chemical worlds without a difference between the physical
worlds in the chemical worlds’ supervenience bases—the preimages of the superve-
nience map on the two chemical worlds. But this is entirely compatible with there
being some physical worlds that do not determine any non-trivial chemical worlds—
worlds for which the empty set is not a logical model of any of their descriptions.
Indeed, we expect there not to be any non-trivial chemical facts at all determined by
those of a roiling quantum vacuum, or any non-trivial biological facts at all deter-
mined by the chemical facts of the atmosphere of Venus. Insofar as each of these
is respectively a way a physical and chemical world could be, there can be physi-
cal worlds on which no non-trivial chemical world supervenes, chemical worlds on
which no non-trivial biological world supervenes, etc.
List [24, p. 9] already cites approvingly a similar remark by Kim11 regarding the
difﬁculties of entity-based (rather than world-based) conceptions of levels, so this
small extension seems welcome. Indeed, one can easily integrate into the deﬁnition
of a system of ontological levels its consequence that the supervenience maps need
only be partial: their domains of deﬁnition needn’t be all the worlds at a level. (This
doesn’t by itself conﬂict with any of the formal properties deﬁning a system of levels
as a posetal category, but one must decide exactly how to model a category with
partial morphisms: see, e.g., Cocketta and and Lackb [12, Sect. 1] for references
to a number of options.) Since a system of levels of description is just a system of
ontological levels with added structure, the same conclusion applies for them. The
procedure for embedding, via a functor, a system of ontological levels into a system
of levels of grain also remains the same; the image under the functor of any partial
supervenience map will have some equivalence class of worlds in its lower-level
domain that will just not have any image in the higher-level codomain within the
system of levels of grain.
One way to regain totality for the supervenience maps would be to introduce a null
world at each level, a world devoid of non-trivial facts. Then one could extend each
11Namely, that “not every ‘complex’ of ‘lower-grade’ entities will be a higher entity; there is no
useful sense in which a slab of marble is a higher entity than the smaller marble parts that make it
up” [20, p. 11].

6
Extending List’s Levels
71
previously partial supervenience function by mapping all the elements previously
outside its domain of deﬁnition to the null world in its codomain. For consistency,
the image of any null world under a supervenience map would then have to be a
null world. This is coherent with the interpretation of the maps: a world devoid of
non-trivial physical facts determines a world devoid of non-trivial chemical facts,
and there can be no difference in the latter without a difference in the former—i.e.,
without the introduction of some non-trivial physical facts or other. However, such
null worlds should be interpreted cautiously: if one wants the worlds at a level to be
models of a theory describing that level, the null world will not be included if the
theory has any existentially quantiﬁed axioms. So it probably should receive a ﬁxed
interpretation as a technical convenience rather than as a genuine possible world.
This second extension is to non-surjective supervenience maps. Now, List claims
surjectivity just follows from the meaning of supervenience12:
To say that the chemical level supervenes on the physical, or that the biological supervenes
on the chemical, is to say that the class S of supervenience mappings contains one such
mapping, σ : Ω →Ω′, from the relevant lower level to the high one, where σ maps each
lower-level world ω ∈Ω to the higher-level world ω′ ∈Ω′. We then call ω a lower-level
realizer of ω′. The surjectivity of σ means that there are no possible worlds at the higher
level that lack a possible lower-level realizer [24, p. 8].
So it does; but why should the formal apparatus of a system of levels necessarily
commit to the metaphysical thesis that the whole higher level does so supervene?
Even though we take the supervenience of levels to be plausible, we do not think that
characterizing systems of levels require assuming it. Indeed, dropping this assump-
tion, one ﬁnds the interpretation of the levels, the worlds comprising them, and the
supervenience maps between them to be hardly different.
The key insight for this is that a supervenience map relates collections of facts
at a lower level to facts at a higher level, hence need not relate all worlds at either
level at all. If a supervenience map is not surjective, then there will be at least some
higher level world that does not supervene on any lower level world in the map’s
domain. But still the map characterizes exactly which higher-level properties (and
worlds) supervene on lower-level ones. That it is not surjective is just to indicate
precisely which of these higher-level properties do not so supervene. The map rep-
resents a higher level supervening on a lower level if and only if it is surjective. This
is important for applications in philosophy of science: When the worlds of levels
are models of empirical theories, the failure of surjectivity indicates that the pos-
sibilities that a higher-level theory describes outstrip those that one committed to
level-supervenience would expect. This can motivate revising the higher-level the-
ory by restricting what it allows as possible, or generalizing the lower-level theory to
allow more possibilities that could provide new supervenience bases for higher-level
possibilities.
Furthermore, examples of non-surjective supervenience maps can be found in
systems of different geometric levels, each of which is able to describe a wide range
12For emphasis we have italicized the word “each” in the passage.

72
N. Dewar et al.
of geometric possibilities.13 Let us focus on the metric and the topological levels.
There is a robust sense in which topological properties (such as being an open set
or being a continuous function) supervene on metric properties (distances between
points). Every metric naturally induces a topology and isometric metric spaces induce
homeomorphic topological spaces. So in the jargon of possible worlds, sameness of
worlds on the subvening metric level entails sameness of worlds on the supervening
topological level. However, the supervenience map from the metric to the topological
level (which sends each metric space to the topological space induced by it) is not
surjective because not all topological spaces are metrizable. The topological level of
description is essentially more general than the metric level, but nonetheless there is
a supervenience map between them. Dropping the constraint of surjectivity enables
us to capture such cases of supervenience. Thus, the framework gains expressive
power without losing any advantages.
One further consequence of dropping surjectivity for the supervenience maps con-
cerns List’s argument for the possibility of mutually supervening but non-identical
levels in a system of ontological levels. Suppose that in such a system σ : Ω →Ω′
and σ ′ : Ω′ →Ω are supervenience maps. Then by the deﬁnition of a category,
the maps are closed under associative composition, so σ ◦σ ′ : Ω →Ω is a super-
venience map. But because the category is posetal, there can be at most map with
domain and codomain Ω, namely the identity 1Ω. Hence σ ◦σ ′ = 1Ω. It follows
that σ and σ ′ must be total and surjective.14 Moreover, if σ and σ ′ are total and
surjective then σ ◦σ ′ = 1Ω. This is as expected: two ontological levels are isomor-
phic in a system of levels if and only if they supervene on the other as a whole. So
if a supervenience map is ever identiﬁed as non-surjective (or partial), the levels it
relates cannot be isomorphic.
Like with the ﬁrst extension to partial maps, these insights about systems of
ontological levels apply equally to systems of levels of description, although the
application to systems of levels of grain requires a bit more work—it also requires
adopting the ﬁrst extension. To do this, one must consider the partition at each level
to include one special equivalence class, the class of worlds not included at that
level. Then, if two levels of grain are related by a supervenience map, that map must
exclude the equivalence class of worlds not included at the level of its domain within
its domain of deﬁnition. (Of course, other equivalence classes could fall outside its
domain of deﬁnition, too.) Moreover, instead of requiring the domain of the map
to be at least as ﬁne-grained as the codomain, one only requires that the domain of
deﬁnition be at least as ﬁne-grained as the image of the map. Outside the image, the
elements of the codomain need bear no relationship of reﬁnement to those of the
domain.
13For a philosophical investigation of the notion of geometric possibility and its role in the
relationism-substantivalism debate, see Belot [7].
14If σ were not total, then 1Ω could not be; if σ ′ were not surjective, then 1Ω could not be. The
same reasoning applies mutatis mutandis to σ ′ ◦σ = 1Ω′. Hence, each of σ and σ ′ is both total
and surjective.

6
Extending List’s Levels
73
6.4
Levels as Categories
Another way of extending List’s framework is to give a richer account of the internal
structure of levels of description. In particular, it can be fruitful to view levels of
description as categories of structures.15 As we will see below, this account is more
suitable to capture important scientiﬁc levels of description and it establishes a close
connection between List’s work and current developments in philosophy of science.
More precisely, our proposal is to represent a level of description, L, as a pair
⟨L, Ω⟩consisting of a description language, L, and a category, Ω, of L-structures.16
This account differs from List’s own account of levels of description in two ways.
1. The objects in Ω are L-structures rather than maximally consistent sets of L-
sentences. This is not a big difference. But, among other things, it allows one
to apply model-theoretic notions (such as homomorphism, embedding, isomor-
phism, etc.) without further ado.
2. Ω is a category rather than a bare class. So to specify a level of description, one
does not only specify its structures but also the morphisms (admissible transfor-
mations) between these structures. Which morphisms to choose is in general not
determined by the language L alone. The choice of morphisms in Ω is linked
to an interpretive choice concerning the description language. It reﬂects which
expressions of L are taken to be meaningful within the level L. The idea is that
an L-expression is only meaningful within L if its extension is invariant under
the morphisms in Ω.
A major advantage of this account is that it enables us to deal with levels of description
on which there is a non-trivial distinction between meaningful and non-meaningful
expressions. Levels of description of this kind are prevalent both in the natural and
social sciences because scientiﬁc languages often contain auxiliary vocabulary or use
numerical descriptions that may be transformed according to certain rules without
changing in content.
Let us consider an example from social choice theory: descriptions of individual
welfare along the lines of Sen [31]. In contrast to Arrow’s ordinal framework [3],
Sen’s framework rests on a numerical description of the welfare of individuals under
given alternatives. We reconstruct a level of description of welfare Lwf = ⟨Lwf, Ωwf⟩
along these lines to illustrate the proposed account.
The language Lwf comprises the following descriptive symbols: (1) a sort symbol
I for individuals, (2) a sort symbol A for alternatives, and (3) a function symbol
W of type I × A →R. If i and a are terms of the sorts I and A, respectively, then
Wi(a) is a term of sort R. It stands for the degree of i’s welfare under alternative a. Of
course, the language also has mathematical auxiliary symbols such as R, +, ·, <, etc.
Moreover, we assume that the language has the usual logical vocabulary (connectives,
quantiﬁers, and variables) and formation rules for formulas.
15So on this account, systems of levels of description can be viewed as categories of categories.
16We use the term “L-structure” in its usual model-theoretic sense. So an L-structure is an assign-
ment of extensions to the descriptive symbols of L.

74
N. Dewar et al.
An object in Ωwf is an Lwf-structure that consists essentially of a ﬁnite set of
individuals, a ﬁnite set of alternatives and a welfare proﬁle for these individuals and
alternatives. To put it more rigorously, the objects in Ωwf are those Lwf-structures,
ω, such that (a) ω expands the standard model of the auxiliary mathematical part of
the vocabulary (including the ﬁeld of real numbers), and (b) I ω and Aω—the sets
associated to I and A in the structure ω—are both ﬁnite.
Which morphisms to include in Ωwf depends on which expressions of Lwf one
considers to be meaningful. List [23] gives a concise overview of various positions,
each of which depends on the extent to which interpersonal comparisons of welfare
are considered as meaningful and on which level of measurement (ordinal, interval,
or ratio) welfare data are taken to reside. For instance, many economists (including
Arrow) consider only ordinal intrapersonal comparisons of welfare as meaningful.17
According to this view, the formula “Wi(a) < Wi(a)” is meaningful. In contrast,
the formula “Wi(a) < W j(a) ∧i ̸= j” is not meaningful because it amounts to an
interpersonal comparison of welfare. And “Wi(a) = 2 · Wi(b)” is also not meaning-
ful because it goes beyond a comparison of order. On the other end of the spectrum,
one ﬁnds the view that full interpersonal comparisons are meaningful and welfare can
be measured on a ratio scale. According to this view, both “Wi(a) < W j(a) ∧i ̸= j”
and “Wi(a) = 2 · Wi(b)” are meaningful.
Muchdependsonwhichdescriptionsaretakenasmeaningful.Alevelofnumerical
welfare descriptions where only ordinal intrapersonal comparisons count as mean-
ingful boils down to a purely ordinal level of description of welfare along the lines of
Arrow [3]. The meaningful numerical statements of the form “Wi(a) < Wi(b)” can
be reduced to statements about individual preference orderings of the form “individ-
ual i prefers alternative a to alternative b” (or, in short: “a ≺i b”). In contrast, a level
of numerical welfare descriptions where interpersonal ratio comparisons of welfare
count as meaningful is an essentially more ﬁne-grained level of description. Thus,
even if levels of description have the same underlying language and structures, they
are not necessarily the same. One also needs to specify what counts as meaningful
to identify a level.
As alluded to above, different standards of meaningfulness can be captured in
terms of choices of morphisms. To discuss such choices in our present example, the
notion of a transformation of structures is useful. Given structures ω1, ω2 ∈Ωwf with
the same set of individuals Ind := I ω1 = I ω2 and the same set of alternatives Alt :=
Aω1 = Aω2, we call a family { fi}i∈Ind of functions from R to R a transformation of
ω1 into ω2 just in case for all i ∈Ind,
fi ◦W ω1
i
= W ω2
i .
Now the question of which welfare comparisons one considers to be meaningful boils
down to the question of which transformations one considers to be admissible in the
17For a discussion of the thesis that interpersonal comparisons of utility are meaningless and the
inference that such comparisons are therefore impossible, see List [22].

6
Extending List’s Levels
75
sense that they do not change any meaningful features of welfare proﬁle structures.
The admissible transformation are then taken as morphisms in the category.
To capture the idea that only ordinal intrapersonal comparisons of welfare are
meaningful, one takes all positive monotonic transformations as morphisms (cf. Sen
[31, Chap. 7*]). More precisely, one takes { fi}i∈Ind as a morphism from ω1 to ω2
just in case it is a transformation of ω1 into ω2 such that, for all i ∈Ind, fi is a
positive monotonic function. To capture the ideas that full interpersonal and ratio
comparisons are meaningful, one takes { fi}i∈Ind as a morphism from ω1 to ω2 just
in case it is a transformation of ω1 into ω2 such that for some α > 0, fi(x) = α · x
for all x ∈R and all i ∈Ind. Let ΩONC
wf
be the category with the former choice of
morphisms and ΩRFC
wf
the category with the latter.18 Then, according to our proposal,
⟨Lwf, ΩONC
wf
⟩and ⟨Lwf, ΩRFC
wf ⟩are different levels of description. This illustrates how
taking morphisms into account allows us to capture differences between levels of
description even if they have the same underlying language and structures.
Let us now turn to supervenience in the extended framework. Since levels of
description are treated as categories of structures, supervenience relations between
them are best viewed as functors. Note that any functor maps isomorphic objects to
isomorphic objects.19 This coheres with the idea of global supervenience, that same-
ness of worlds on the subvening level implies sameness of worlds on the supervening
level.
But more importantly, viewing supervenience relations as functors allows us to
shed more light on List’s requirement of surjectivity. First, it is important to dis-
tinguish between surjectivity and essential surjectivity. A functor F : Ω →
Ω is
essentially surjective if and only if every object ω in 
Ω is isomorphic to F(ω) for
some object ω in Ω. From a category-theoretic point of view, essential surjectivity
is a fruitful notion. In contrast, surjectivity simpliciter is much too strict. If a level
of description is such that every structure has several representationally equivalent
variants, there is no good reason to require that a supervenience map from a lower
level to this level be surjective. Requiring this would preclude cases of supervenience
where a level on which every structure has several representationally equivalent vari-
ants supervenes on a level without (an at least equal number of) these variants. A
given structure ω at the subvening level would correspond to many representationally
equivalent structures at the supervening level. However, a supervenience map can
send ω only to one of those. So the others cannot be in the image of the map. Ruling
out such cases would be a serious limitation. It would, for instance, make it impossi-
ble to capture cases in which non-quantitative descriptions determine corresponding
quantitative descriptions up to certain transformations. But many important cases
of supervenience between levels of description are of this type, especially those
18“ONC” stands for “ordinal measurability with no interpersonal comparability” and “RFC” is
short for “ratio-scale measurability with full interpersonal comparability.” These acronyms are due
to List [23].
19If F is a functor from the category Ω to the category Ω′ and ω1 is isomorphic to ω2 in Ω, then
F(ω1) is isomorphic to F(ω2) in Ω′.

76
N. Dewar et al.
given by theorems in measurement theory that exhibit the existence of numerical
representations and their uniqueness up to certain transformations [21, 33, 34].
This suggests that surjectivity has to be given up regardless of the arguments
given in Sect.6.3. So even if one would like to adhere to the idea that every world
on the supervening level must have a corresponding world on the subvening level,
one should better explicate this idea in terms of essential surjectivity rather than
surjectivity simpliciter. In view of that, it becomes clear that the arguments in Sect.6.3
are in fact arguments in favor of dropping even essential surjectivity.
And it makes sense to go even further. There is no principled reason why a sys-
tem of levels should only incorporate supervenience functors and no other functors
between levels. From the perspective of the proposed extension of List’s account, it
makes sense to include all functors between levels of description as arrows in the
category of system of levels. Then, rather than excluding and thereby neglecting
many functors from the start, one may explore and classify the entire zoo of functors
between levels. For example, one may ask which functors should count as reduction
functors and which should be seen merely as supervenience functors. Or by dropping
uniqueness of arrows between levels, one can investigate cases of multiple reducibil-
ity: that is, different ways of reducing a higher level to a lower level (analogous to
different ways of reducing arithmetic to set theory).20
Here is an example to illustrate how this could look like. Political scientists
describe individual preferences on different levels. On one level, one can describe
each individual’s preference scores for the alternatives in question. On another level,
one can describe which alternatives each individual approves of. The structures of
the former level are all logically possible preference proﬁle scores for a set of alter-
natives, and a set of individuals. The structures of the latter level are all possible
approval proﬁles for such sets. Now, one can reduce the level of approval descrip-
tions to the level of preference score descriptions by setting a threshold t such that
all alternatives with a preference score above t are taken as approved of. Thus every
preference score proﬁle gives rise to an associated approval proﬁle. Relative to this
supervenience map, statements of the form “individual i approves of alternative a”
reduce to statements of the form “individual i’s preference score of alternative a
is above t”. The crucial point is that there are different choices of thresholds that
succeed equally well at reconstructing all approval proﬁles from preference score
proﬁles. So there are multiple reductions of the level of approval descriptions to the
level of preference score descriptions. However, a given approval proﬁle will in gen-
eral correspond to different preference score proﬁles under different reductions. So
there are substantial differences between such reductions. But it is not clear a priori
which reductions are “better” than others and in which respects. In such cases, it
20One might seek to model multiple realizability in this way: for example, perhaps one successful
reduction translates “pain” by “ﬁring of C-ﬁbres” whilst another translates “pain” by “ﬁring of
D-ﬁbres” (where, let us suppose, human brains have C-ﬁbres and Martian brains have D-ﬁbres).
However, it is not clear to us what the prospects for this manoeuvre might be; note that neither
translation will map the true higher-level claim “both humans and Martians experience pain” to a
true lower-level claim.

6
Extending List’s Levels
77
makes sense to investigate a variety of possible reductions within a system of levels
of description.
To sum up, we propose to generalize List’s framework in two ways: (1) we con-
strue levels of description as categories rather than bare classes, and supervenience
relations as functors; (2) we allow all sorts of functors to be included in a system
of levels of description. An advantage of this radical generalization is that it makes
the rich toolbox of category-theoretic concepts available for the analysis of levels of
description and their relations. For example, the concepts of natural transformation,
equivalence, duality, adjunction, and forgetful functor lend themselves well to this
endeavour.
This point also plays an essential role in a new strand of research in philosophy
of science which uses these category-theoretic concepts to study relations between
physical theories (where scientiﬁc theories are represented as categories of struc-
tures).21 The proposed generalization of List’s framework establishes a close con-
nection to this new work in philosophy of science. Many results from this literature
can be viewed as results about how certain types of physical descriptions are related
to each other and, thus, how our current system of levels of physical descriptions is
structured. But the fruitfulness of the generalized framework is not limited to physics
or the natural sciences. As our examples above indicate, the same methods may be
applied to levels of description that belong to the social sciences (e.g., economics
or political science). We believe that extending and generalizing List’s framework
makes it better applicable to and, thus, more relevant for philosophy of science in
general.
Let us illustrate how the above-mentioned category-theoretic concepts can be used
to analyze inter-level relations. As pointed out above, welfare can be described on
a quantitative level (in terms of real-valued welfare functions) and on a qualitative
level (in terms of mere preference orderings). Let ⟨Lord, Ωord⟩be the ordinal level of
description. Each object of Ωord is a structure consisting of a ﬁnite set of individuals,
a ﬁnite set of alternatives, and an assignment of a weak ordering over the alternatives
to each individual. To reﬂect that the identities of alternatives and individuals are
in general signiﬁcant, Ωord contains only identity morphisms. Suppose the ordinal
level ⟨Lord, Ωord⟩supervenes on the quantitative level ⟨Lwf, ΩRFC
wf ⟩via a superve-
nience functor F that maps every welfare proﬁle ω in ΩRFC
wf
to the induced proﬁle
of preference orderings ω′ in Ωord and all morphisms between objects ω1 and ω2 in
ΩRFC
wf
to the identity morphism on F(ω1) = F(ω2) in Ωord. Then there is a sense
in which qualitative descriptions neglect or “forget” some information available on
the quantitative level. This informal idea is captured formally by the fact that the
supervenience functor F is what is called a forgetful functor in category theory. In
category theory, there is also a way of making precise what a functor forgets in terms
of its formal properties.22 In this case, the supervenience functor is essentially sur-
21See for example Halvorson and Tsementzis [18] and Hudetz [19].
22Baez, Bartels, and Dolan [4] have developed a classiﬁcation of functors with respect to whether
they forget structure, properties, or stuff in terms of whether they are full, faithful, or essentially
surjective. For a nice overview and further applications in physics, see Weatherall [36].

78
N. Dewar et al.
jective and also full (i.e., surjective on morphisms). But it is neither faithful (injective
on morphisms) nor essentially injective on objects. In technical terms, the functor
forgets “stuff”—intuitively speaking: the set of possible degrees of welfare.
But note that this analysis is more subtle than the obvious point that ⟨Lwf, ΩRFC
wf ⟩
uses numbers while ⟨Lord, Ωord⟩does not. That ⟨Lwf, ΩRFC
wf ⟩uses numbers is not
the point here. The level ⟨Lwf, ΩONC
wf
⟩of numerical welfare descriptions where only
ordinal intrapersonal comparisons are taken as meaningful also uses numbers but it
should count as equivalent to the purely ordinal level ⟨Lord, Ωord⟩. And, indeed, their
equivalence can be captured in category-theoretic terms using the notion of an equiv-
alence of categories. An equivalence between categories C and D is a pair of functors
F : C ⇄D : G that are essentially inverse to each other.23 That there is an equiva-
lence of categories between ⟨Lwf, ΩONC
wf
⟩and ⟨Lord, Ωord⟩can be demonstrated easily
by invoking the representation theorem for weak preference orderings. Examples of
category-theoretic equivalences abound in the philosophy of physics literature. See,
for example, Barrett’s work [5] on Hamiltonian and Lagrangian descriptions of clas-
sical mechanical systems or Weatherall’s work [35, 37] on classical ﬁeld theories.
Another relation which is naturally captured in category-theoretic terms is that of
duality between levels of description. Categories C and D are dual to each other if
and only if there is an equivalence between C and Dop, where Dop is the opposite
of the category D and it is given by reversing all the morphisms in D. One often
ﬁnd dualities between algebraic and topological/geometric levels of description. For
example, Rosenstock, Barrett, and Weatherall [29] show that the usual manifold
formulation of general relativity is dual to the algebraic formulation in terms of
Einstein algebras in the sense that these theories have dual categories of structures.
Another important category-theoretic concept is that of adjunction. Although this
notion is hard to grasp on a pre-theoretic level, it may still be fruitful for analyzing
relations between levels of description. In our context, adjunction can be roughly
understood as a special type of supervenience where the supervenience functor is
accompanied by a second functor in the other direction: its adjoint. As Feintzeig
[15] has shown, the concept of adjunction captures the relationship between the
level of inﬁnite (limiting) quantum systems and the level of ﬁnite quantum systems
in quantum statistical mechanics. The basic idea is that the properties of inﬁnite
quantum systems are determined in a speciﬁc way by the properties of their ﬁnite
subsystems. This illustrates that the generalized framework allows one to transfer
technical concepts to new domains of application where they can be used to capture
relationsbetweenlevelsofdescriptionforwhichwewouldotherwiselackappropriate
concepts.
23This means that their composition FG is naturally isomorphic to the identity functor on C and
GF is naturally isomorphic to the identity functor on D.

6
Extending List’s Levels
79
6.5
Conclusions and Prospects
In Sect.6.1, we reviewed List’s levels formalism [24], focusing on his account of
systems of ontological levels, in particular systems of levels of grain and systems
of descriptive levels. One of the results of this review was to qualify his claim that
any system of ontological levels can be mapped functorially into some system of
levels of grain: this is true only for systems of ontological levels that are downward-
directed, i.e., for which each pair of levels has a common subvenient level that
supervenes on all such common levels. In Sect.6.2, we examined the relation between
supervenience and reduction in this formalism. We showed that while in general
supervenience does not imply reduction, it does so imply it when the levels related
by the supervenience map are compatible and jointly characterizable. Compatibility
requires, roughly speaking, that levels of description related by a supervenience map
agreewitheachotherasfarassharedvocabularyisconcerned.Jointcharacterizability
relative to a supervenience map is a strong condition. It holds when the union of two
levels of description relative to a supervenience map admits of a description itself.
But in many cases of supervenience between scientiﬁc levels of description, this can
be expected. So it is quite plausible that in many cases of interest, supervenience and
reduction of levels go hand in hand.
After this analysis, in Sect.6.3 we proposed two extensions of systems of onto-
logical levels by weakening List’s characterization of their supervenience maps as
surjective functions. First, we proposed considering merely partial (instead of total)
functions, motivated by the idea that not every lower-level world ought to give rise to
some higher-level world. The totality of the supervenience maps could be recovered
by introducing null worlds at each level, but in many cases such worlds would have to
be interpreted with caution, perhaps as just mathematical conveniences. Second, we
proposed dropping the requirement of surjectivity. While this requirement is plau-
sible for ontological naturalists, we do not think that it should be encoded into the
deﬁnition of a system of levels, which, as a formal tool, ought to be propounded as
neutrally as is feasible regarding substantive philosophical positions. Moreover, it
also ﬁts better with philosophy of science applications, as discussed in Sect.6.4, in
which it is more fruitful to consider a level not as a bare class (of possible worlds),
but as a category itself whose objects are structures of some language. This allows
one to distinguish levels of description even when they have the same language and
the same structures. We illustrated this with an example of two social choice theories
whose models were identical but whose isomorphism classes were distinct. More-
over, since one may have isomorphic but distinct models in a level, one might only
require that the image of lower-level models under a supervenience map intersect
with each isomorphism class of models of the higher level (i.e., the level that is
the codomain of the map). These investigations also follow up on a comment made
brieﬂy in Sect.6.1, that List’s framework can be well-characterized without the use
of category theory, which just provides a compact description and interpretive gloss
for it. By contrast, taking levels as categories themselves demands a more robust use
of categorial ideas that could also prove to be more fruitful.

80
N. Dewar et al.
It also suggests accordingly several directions for future research, of which we
mention two. First, more examples should be formalized within the generalized
framework to test its fruitfulness, ﬂexibility, and power. Obvious candidates include
levels described by:
• physical theories, such as thermodynamics and statistical mechanics [14], and
quantum and classical mechanics [8];
• biological theories, such as classical and molecular genetics, levels of selection,
and developmental biology and genetics [10]; and
• theories in political science (and other social sciences) that describe individuals,
on the one hand, and groups, on the other [25].
Second, as mentioned in Sect.6.4, one can generalize the framework of posetal cat-
egories to include many types of functorial relationships between levels besides
supervenience. List already mentions reduction as one sort that can be deﬁned for
systems of levels of description, but the sort of reduction he has in mind (as alluded
in Sect.6.2) follows one of the oldest versions of the Nagelian model for reduction
[27], understood as deductibility allowing for deﬁnitional extension and bridge laws
induced through the supervenience maps. Already in 1967 Schaffner [30] (foreshad-
owed by Nagel [28] himself) suggested that reduction needs to accommodate the
way different theories (here describing different levels) are related by approxima-
tions. But supervenience maps seem entirely inapt to capture these. Perhaps there is
some more expansive functorial relationship that can capture these notions of reduc-
tion that seem more central to science, such as those suggested by recent work on
topological (and topologically inspired) structures on models of theories [16].
Acknowledgements ND is primarily responsible for Sects.6.1 and 6.2. SCF is primarily respon-
sible for Sects.6.3 and 6.5 and for general editing, and secondarily responsible for Sect.6.1. LH is
primarily responsible for Sect.6.4 and for Proposition 1, and secondarily responsible for Sect.6.3
and general editing. All authors thank Katie Robertson for many insightful conversations leading to
the genesis of this essay, Tomasz Brengos and Christian List for encouraging comments on a previ-
ous version, and the audience and organizers of the workshop “New Perspectives on Inter-Theory
Reduction” in Salzburg in November, 2017. SCF acknowledges partial support through a Marie
Curie International Incoming Fellowship (PIIF-GA-2013-628533).
References
1. J. Adámek, H. Herrlich, G.E. Strecker, Abstract and concrete categories: the joy of cats, Online
edn. (2004), http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc
2. H. Andréka, J.X. Madarász, I. Németi, Deﬁning new universes in many-sorted logic (2008),
https://old.renyi.hu/pub/algebraic-logic/kurzus10/amn-deﬁ.pdf. Unpublished manuscript
3. K. Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (Wiley, New York, 1951)
4. J. Baez, T. Bartel, J. Dolan, Property, structure, and stuff (2004), http://math.ucr.edu/home/
baez/qg-spring2004/discussion.html
5. T.W. Barrett, Equivalent and inequivalent formulations of classical mechanics. Br. J. Philos.
Sci. forthcoming (2018). https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axy017
6. T.W. Barrett, H. Halvorson, Morita equivalence. Rev. Symb. Log. 9(3), 556–582 (2016)

6
Extending List’s Levels
81
7. G. Belot, Geometric Possibility (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011)
8. A.Bokulich,ReexaminingtheQuantum-ClassicalRelation(CambridgeUniversityPress,Cam-
bridge, 2008)
9. F. Borceux, Handbook of Categorical Algebra, Vol. 1: Basic Category Theory (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1994)
10. I. Brigandt, A. Love, Reductionism in biology, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Spring 2017 edn., ed. by E.N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University (2017)
11. T. Button, S. Walsh, Structure and categoricity: determinacy of reference and truth value in the
philosophy of mathematics. Philos. Math. 24(3), 283–307 (2016)
12. J.R.B. Cocketta, S. Lackb, Restriction categories I: categories of partial maps. Theor. Comput.
Sci. 270(1–2), 223–259 (2002)
13. N. Dewar, Supervenience, reduction, and translation. Philos. Sci. forthcoming (2018). http://
philsci-archive.pitt.edu/15304/
14. G. Emch, C. Liu, The Logic of Thermostatistical Physics (Springer, Berlin, 2002)
15. B.H. Feintzeig, Deduction and deﬁnability in inﬁnite statistical systems. Synthese 196(5),
1831–1861 (2019)
16. S.C. Fletcher, Similarity structure on scientiﬁc theories, in Topological Philosophy, ed. by
B. Skowron (de Gruyter, Berlin, forthcoming)
17. H. Halvorson, The Logic in Philosophy of Science. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2019)
18. H. Halvorson, D. Tsementzis, Categories of scientiﬁc theories, in Categories for the Working
Philosopher, ed. by E. Landry (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017), pp. 402–429
19. L. Hudetz, Deﬁnable categorical equivalence. Philos. Sci. 86(1), 47–75 (2019)
20. J. Kim, The layered model: metaphysical considerations. Philos. Explor. 5(1), 2–20 (2002)
21. D.H. Krantz, R.D. Luce, P. Suppes, A. Tversky, Foundations of Measurement, Vol. II: Additive
and Polynomial Representation (Academic, San Diego, 1989)
22. C. List, Are interpersonal comparisons of utility indeterminate? Erkenntnis 58(2), 229–260
(2003)
23. C. List, Social choice theory, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2013 edn.,
ed. by E.N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University (2013)
24. C. List, Levels: descriptive, explanatory, and ontological. Noûs forthcoming (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1111/nous.12241
25. C. List, K. Spiekermann, Methodological individualism and holism in political science: a
reconciliation. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 107(4), 629–643 (2013)
26. B. McLaughlin, K. Bennett, Supervenience, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Spring 2018 edn., ed. by E.N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University (2018)
27. E. Nagel, The meaning of reduction in the natural sciences, in Science and Civilization, ed. by
R.C. Stouffer (University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1949), pp. 99–135
28. E. Nagel, The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation (Harcourt,
Brace & World, New York, 1961)
29. S. Rosenstock, T.W. Barrett, J.O. Weatherall, On Einstein algebras and relativistic spacetimes.
Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 52, 309–316 (2015)
30. K. Schaffner, Approaches to reduction. Philos. Sci. 34, 137–147 (1967)
31. A.K. Sen, Collective Choice and Social Welfare (Holden-Day, San Francisco, 1970)
32. O. Shagrir, Concepts of supervenience revisited. Erkenntnis 78(2), 469–485 (2013)
33. P. Suppes, Representation and Invariance of Scientiﬁc Structures (CSLI Publications, Stanford,
2002)
34. P. Suppes, D.H. Krantz, R.D. Luce, A. Tversky, Foundations of Measurement, Vol. III: Repre-
sentation, Axiomatization and Invariance (Academic, San Diego, 1990)
35. J.O. Weatherall, Are Newtonian gravitation and geometrized Newtonian gravitation theoreti-
cally equivalent? Erkenntnis 81(5), 1073–1091 (2016)
36. J.O. Weatherall, Understanding gauge. Philos. Sci. 83(5), 1039–1049 (2016)
37. J.O. Weatherall, Category theory and the foundations of classical space-time theories, in Cate-
gories for the Working Philosopher, ed. by E. Landry (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017),
pp. 329–348

Chapter 7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice
of Projections to Smooth Structure of R4
Krzysztof Bielas and Jerzy Król
Abstract Mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics provides an interesting
way of thinking not only about real numbers in general, but also about the phe-
nomenon of exotic smoothness. The main point of departure is a set of Boolean
algebras contained in the quantum-mechanical lattice of projections, used to build
various Boolean-valued models of ZFC, thus “universes for mathematics” in the
usual sense. As each of them provides its own notion of real numbers, it gives a
rather unique opportunity for considering exotic smoothness questions. It is not a
surprise that an important step in the construction is a mapping between Boolean
algebras and structures built upon reals, such as manifold covers. The present work
aims at a categorical perspective on this subject. In particular, it points at the col-
imit object in various categories as a principle of combining subobjects into a single
structure.
7.1
Introduction
The relation between quantum and classical theories has been undoubtedly a per-
sistent and demanding problem in theoretical physics for decades. Among various
approaches that have been made through years, the perspective of quantum reality
perceived through “classical glasses”, or classical reference frames (as famously
adviced by Niels Bohr), seemed to be well-suited to ﬁnd its rigorous mathematical
formulation (cf. [22]). This hope has been driven e.g. by a long-standing research on
the interplay between logical structures of classical and quantum theories. While the
K. Bielas (B) · J. Król
University of Information Technology and Management, ul. Sucharskiego 2, 35-225 Rzeszow,
Poland
e-mail: krzysiek.bielas@gmail.com
J. Król
e-mail: iriking@wp.pl
K. Bielas
Institute of Physics, University of Silesia, ul. 75 Pułku Piechoty 1, 41-500 Chorzow, Poland
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_7
83

84
K. Bielas and J. Król
former comprise mainly Boolean algebras, the latter deal with various nondistributive
generalizations thereof, such as orthomodular lattices, effect algebras, orthoalgebras
etc. (for an exhaustive literature concerning quantum logics see [31]). Importantly,
these can be often “coordinatized” by their classical counterparts, and it is the part
of a broader, ongoing subject of determining general algebraic objects, such as C∗-
algebras, by their respective commutative substructures [16, 38].
Meanwhile,ithasbecomeawidelyacceptedcosmologicalscenariothatourspace-
time started from some initial quantum system S and evolved to a large-scale smooth
4-manifold M. While the choice M ≃hom R4 seems to be the simplest, it also turns
out to be the most complicated one from the point of view of smooth structures.
In fact, the variety of smooth structures that can be put on R4 diverges drastically,
and one ﬁnds uncountably many nondiffeomorphic (exotic) smooth manifolds, each
homeomorphic to R4 [15, 36]. Their physical (including cosmological) signiﬁcance
has been a matter of vast research [1–7, 12, 17, 34]. In particular, let us point to the
recent work [25] that merges seemingly distinct pictures of classical and quantum
physics as follows.
Let H be a complex, separable Hilbert space associated to the initial quantum sys-
tem S. As such, H carries an orthomodular lattice (OML) L of projections on closed
linear subspaces of H with a family of its Boolean subalgebras {Bi|Bi ⊆L}. The
latter give rise to a family of Boolean-valued models of ZFC, denoted V B, together
with distinct objects of real numbers RB. Then, assuming the smoothness of space-
time M to originate from S, one gains an opportunity to follow Bohr’s philosophy
and parametrize spacetime by charts associated to local, Boolean reference frames.
An immediate result is that one cannot cover whole manifold with a one-element
smooth atlas, just as one cannot cover an OML L with a single Boolean algebra,
unless L is distributive. Since M ≃hom R4 and standard smooth R4 is the only one
that admits a single-chart atlas, the conclusion is that M has to be exotic smooth (for
more detailed, model-theoretical perspective on this construction, cf. [25]).
Presently, we elaborate on the intermediate part of above parametrization, that
was not shown explicitly in [25]. In more detail, we propose the category theory
to be a guiding principle in recognizing suitable structures on the “quantum” side
(an OML L and its Boolean subalgebras) and corresponding ones on the “classical”
side (an atlas of a spacetime manifold M). Also, an appropriate map between said
domains seems to be best identiﬁed in the categorical setup. The present work may
be considered as a point of departure for further analysis; more thorough study will
be given in separate work [9].
7.2
Quantum Mechanics—Preliminaries
To begin with, let S be a quantum-mechanical system and H its associated Hilbert
space of states. Then, the observables are represented by self-adjoint elements of a
C∗-algebra B(H ) of bounded operators on H . One could also start with an abstract
C∗-algebra A and then deﬁne states of S as positive, normed linear functionals on

7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth …
85
A. The equivalence of the approaches is provided through the celebrated Gleasons’s
theorem which sets the one-to-one correspondence between states ω : A →C and
density operators (i.e. positive trace class operators of trace one) ρω ∈A by
ω(a) = tr(ρωa) for any a ∈A,
(7.1)
as long as dim(H ) > 2 [11]). Further standard axiomatics for empirical content of
quantum mechanics such as Born rule etc. will not bother us here (but see e.g. [11]
for a proper background).
It is well known that one of the main features of quantum mechanics is that
the observables do not commute in general, in contrast with the content of classical
theories. This is obviously reﬂected in the type of algebraic structures at hand in either
case. Accordingly, a great deal of research has been devoted to the question of to what
extent quantum entities, such as C∗-algebras, von Neumann algebras, or OML’s, are
determined by their respective classical (i.e. commutative) subobjects, and what are
their interrelations. This subject has been attractive from the point of view of both
pure mathematics and physics. For example, the Gelfand duality states that there
is a duality between the categories of commutative C∗-algebras with ∗-morphisms
and compact Hausdorff spaces with continuous maps. Then, the Gelfand spectrum
Σ(A) for a general (possibly noncommutative) C∗-algebra A is to be considered as
a prototype of a quantum generalized space [21].
In physics, the case of OML’s led to the discussion on how this situation resembles
local reference frames in special relativity [8, 14] or its possible role in quantization
of gravity [14]. In the following we motivate the choice of OML’s, rather than general
operator algebras, to be appropriate representatives of quantum systems.
Among the observables there is a class of operators of special importance: these
are the projection operators (projections) (recall that p : H →H is a projection
whenever p2 = p = p†). The signiﬁcance of projections in the formulation of a
quantum theory lies in the fact that every observable a : H →H can be recovered
from them by the so-called spectral theorem [37]
Theorem 1 For every family {ai}i∈I of self-adjoint pairwise commuting operators,
there exists a complete Boolean algebra of projections B such that given the spectral
decompositions of each ai
ai =

λdei
λ ,
it holds that ∀i ∈I(dei
λ ∈B)
(more on the Boolean algebras of projections one ﬁnds in the following).
At the same time, projections can be considered as yes-no propositions about the
system with an associated H and, being in one-to-one correspondence with closed
subspaces of H , they form a complete orthomodular lattice
L ≡(L, ∨, ∧, ¬, 0, 1)
(7.2)

86
K. Bielas and J. Król
with join, meet and complement deﬁned by

pi = pM where M is the closed linear span of

ran(pi),

pi = pM where M =

ran(pi),
¬p = 1 −p,
and 0, 1 elements as zero and identity operators on H , respectively [8]. Unsurpris-
ingly, the above operations are to be understood as logical connectives “and”, “or”
and “not” together with values 0—false and 1—true. The structure of L appeared
for the ﬁrst time in the context of quantum mechanics thanks to the seminal work of
Birkhoff and von Neumann [10]. This way, it gave rise to the ﬁrst incarnation of the
so-called quantum logic, now considered to be a standard choice among other logics
for quantum theory that have been proposed since then, cf. [31].
For the sake of clarity, let us mark the main differences that the logic of a classical
theory exhibits with the above. It is perfectly valid and general to think of any clas-
sical system with conﬁguration space X in terms of its phase space (more precisely,
a cotangent bundle T ∗X) together with yes-no proposition represented by charac-
teristic functions {χU} (projections) of measurable sets U ⊆T ∗X. The one-to-one
correspondence between {χU} and U ⊆T ∗X provides that everything comes under
the rules of classical logic, i.e. that of a Boolean algebras. On the other hand, it is
well known that the quantum lattice L is not Boolean whenever dim(H ) > 2 (for
a simple illustration of non-distributivity, consider dim(H ) = 3 and three mutually
orthogonal projections).
7.3
Boolean Subalgebras of L
In all its quantumness, L contains plethora of Boolean algebras, although none of
them covers whole L at once (recall that B ⊆L is a Boolean subalgebra of L when-
ever B ≡(B, 0, 1, ∨|B , ∧|B , ¬|B) is a Boolean algebra). Let BSub(L) denote the
set of all Boolean subalgebras of L, partially ordered by inclusion. A trivial example
of an element of BSub(L) is B2 = {0, 1}. Another class of examples would be the
family of Bp = {0, p, ¬p, 1}, p ∈L which shows that every p ∈L is contained in
at least one element of BSub(L). A somewhat more involved example would be an
atomless Boolean algebra BQ containing the spectral family of a position operator
Q. By Zorn’s lemma it follows that every B ∈BSub(L) is contained in some (not
necessarily unique) maximal B′ ∈BSub(L); such maximal elements of BSub(L) are
called blocks and L can be decomposed into them in an obvious way [35].
Let us now formulate explicitly what we mean by “Boolean reference frames”
throughout the paper; the language of homomorphisms between appropriate logical
structures seem to be the most instructive here. Recall that one of the versions of
the Kochen–Specker theorem claims that whenever dim(H ) > 2, then L admits

7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth …
87
no global truth-valuation, i.e. there is no homomorphism L →B2 [32]. This is to
be understood as the impossibility to give a truth-valuation to all propositions that
can be made about a general quantum system [24]; in fact, the existence of such a
global valuation ω : B →B2 is equivalent to ω being a dispersion-free on B (i.e.
∀p ∈B(ω(p2) = ω(p)2) [13]). On the other hand, dispersion-free states on B are the
ones that posess determined value on any observable with a spectral decomposition
in B (see Theorem 1). This way, each Boolean subalgebra B ∈BSub(L) is to be
considered as a local, classical frame of reference for a quantum system with the
associated lattice L.
The inverse problem of a block decomposition answers the question, whether
given a family B of Boolean algebras, they give rise to an OML. The usual way to
combine the elements of B is called the pasting of B [23, 35]; this can be done in
more than one way, the most primitive one being the {0, 1}-pasting, i.e. gluing the
elements of B by identifying their least and greatest elements.
Now, in the category-theoretic context we would like to identify appropriate cate-
gory to speak about any OML and its Boolean subalgebras. Let OML be a category
of orthomodular lattices as objects and lattice homomorphisms as arrows and let
BSub(L) be deﬁned as above; trivially BSub(L) turns into poset subcategory (every
Boolean algebra is a distributive orthomodular lattice at ﬁrst). The ﬁrst goal would
be to combine the elements of BSub(L) into a larger entity, presumably the L itself.
In category theory, this happens often by means of a (co)product, or more generally
by a (co)limit. In the context of OML it proceeds as follows. Let
D = {B →L|B ∈BSub(L)}
(7.3)
be a diagram in OML that consists of inclusion arrows into L. This makes D a
cocone in OML; a limit for D can be deﬁned to be a terminal object in the category
of cocones over D.
Here it is perhaps worth mentioning that one of the weak points of OML indicated
frequently [33] is the lack of tensor products, namely given L1, L2 ∈Ob(OML) it
does not necessarily hold that L1 ⊗L2 ∈Ob(OML). This is the consequence of the
fact that the category OML is not (co)complete.
Fortunately, following [38] it is possible to extend OML to a category PBool of
partial Boolean algebras as objects and appropriate homomorphisms as arrows. It is
not necessary to include the exact deﬁnition for PBool for the purpose of the present
work. Let us summarize this by two statements: ﬁrst, objects in PBool are “partial
algebras” B with a Boolean algebra structure deﬁned only “locally”, i.e. on proper
subsets of B (these are then called the total subalgebras). Secondly, PBool is a slight
generalization of OML (in particular, every object of OML is an object of PBool
and OML is a subcategory of PBool). Moreover, as PBool is (co)complete, one goes
to all (co)limits freely (particularly in the case of (7.3)) and obtains the following
[38].
Theorem 2 Every partial Boolean algebra is a colimit of its (ﬁnitely generated)
total subalgebras.

88
K. Bielas and J. Król
Applying this to our speciﬁc case, we state the following
Corollary 1 Every orthomodular lattice is a colimit of its (ﬁnitely generated)
Boolean subalgebras (in the category PBool).
Let us remark that this is a nice categorical generalization of the result of Harding
[20] stating that every orthomodular lattice is determined up to isomorphisms by
its semilattice of Boolean subalgebras BSub(L). Since (co)limits are always unique
up to an isomorphism in any category by deﬁnition, the above result follows easily
from Corollary 1.
Once again, let us remind that this class of results singles out the algebras for logic
of a quantum theory (i.e. those with logical operations deﬁned upon, e.g. orthomod-
ular lattices, partial Boolean algebras etc.) . On the opposite, general C∗-algebras or
von Neumann algebras cannot be determined by their commutative subalgebras; this
can be done e.g. only up to a commutator (or the so-called Jordan structure), cf. [16,
29].
Let us now turn to the case of classical physics, namely the smooth spacetime
structure, to be formulated in the language of differential geometry.
7.4
The Smooth Structure of a Spacetime
We have seen already that an orthomodular lattice of projections L arises in the
context of quantum mechanics as a colimit of its Boolean subalgebras in the category
PBool. In the following we will try to transfer the structure into the description of
spacetime as a differentiable manifold. Presumably, having the category PBool on the
quantum side, one could proceed “classically” in the following way. Consider some
broad category such as the category n-Mfd of smooth n-manifolds and smooth maps
between them. Although these lack many categorical constructs, including general
colimits, we will see that every object in n-Mfd can be decomposed analogically to
the quantum case of an OML L.
Let us start with a brief reminder of basic deﬁnitions [30], in order to grasp its cat-
egorical reformulation better. Therefore, we say (X, {Ui, φi}) is an n-dimensional
differentiable (smooth) manifold if (X, {Ui, φi}) is an n-dimensional topological
manifold with an atlas {Ui} (i.e. {Ui} cover X and each φ : Ui →Rn is a homeo-
morphism) and each φi ◦φ−1
j , whenever deﬁned, is smooth. Equivalently, one can
think of a smooth manifold M as follows: given an atlas { fi : M ⊇Ui →Vi ⊆Rn}
it holds that
M =

Vi/ ∼
(7.4)
where fi(p) ∼f j(p) whenever p ∈Ui ∩U j. This is especially well-suited form for
further investigation.
Recall that in the previous section it was described how to construct an orthomod-
ular lattice from its Boolean subalgebras, and the procedure was identiﬁed through
a colimit object in PBool. We have already discussed above that, from the physics

7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth …
89
viewpoint, Boolean subalgebras provide the system of classical reference frames for
a given quantum system, and this can be argued on various levels. Crucially, if the
quantum system is to be understood as the initial singularity S, a ﬁrst guess would
be that formally S may give rise to a differential structure of spacetime M. Then a
rather natural question is whether it is possible to transfer the colimit in PBool to
appropriate colimit by means of M.
To identify category-theoretic construction that lurks behind a smooth manifold,
consider the following illustrative example [28], to be generalized afterwards. Let
M = S2 and observe that M may be viewed in a two-fold way: the ﬁrst would be
through an equalizer
S2
R3
R
s
t
where
s(x, y, z) = x2 + y2 + z2
and
t(x, y, z) = 1
(7.5)
(the sphere equation x2 + y2 + z2 = 1 is captured by the commutativity of the above
diagram). The second approach to parametrize S2 would be through a coequalizer
S1 × (0, 1)
D ⊔D
S2
where D is a two-dimensional disk (the quotient by the glued part of D ∪D is
provided again by the commutativity of the above diagram).
To stay independent of any coordinate system, while keeping in mind that we
would like to parametrize the general manifold by respective subobjects, we will
stick to the second picture, and ask if there is an appropriate construction for any
atlas in general. The answer is not only positive; it agrees with the object met earlier
in the context of an OML, i.e. that of a pasting [27]:
Theorem 3 Let Un be a subcategory of n-Mfd consisting of all open subsets of Rn
and smooth maps between them. Then every object in n-Mfd is a pasting of objects
from Un.
Again, transferring the notion of a pasting into category theory and generalizing
the coequalizer diagram of S2, we obtain the following [26].
Corollary 2 Any object M in n-Mfd is a coequalizer
 Wi j
 Wi
M
where Wi = fi(Vi) and Wi j = fi(Vi ∩Vj).
Therefore, we arrived at the following conclusion: given a smooth manifold, it is
always the colimit of its atlas.

90
K. Bielas and J. Król
7.5
Correspondence: From L to Smooth Structures
Finally, an interesting question is how to relate above categorical structures on both
quantum and classical spacetime side. Firstly, given a quantum-mechanical system
S with an associated Hilbert space H and its OML L, suppose we demand for each
B ∈BSub(L) a corresponding atlas element UB of a spacetime M that originated
from S. As one cannot cover an OML L with a single Boolean algebra structure in
the general case, one also will not cover whole M with a single chart, and we obtain
the following [25].
Corollary 3 WiththeabovecorrespondenceBSub(L) ∋B →UB ⊆M andassum-
ing M ≃hom Rn, we conclude that M has to be exotic smooth and n = 4.
Now, it is interesting whether the colimit correspondence is of functorial character,
i.e. to what extent one can assign to Boolean frames of reference (i.e. objects in
BSub(L) and trivially in PBool) open subsets of Rn (i.e. objects in Un and trivially
in n-Mfd), such that the assignment obeys the rules of a (covariant) functor F :
PBool →n-Mfd:
F(B) = UB ∈Ob(Un) ⊆Ob(n-Mfd)
and
F( f ) ∈Arr(n-Mfd)
(7.6)
for any B ∈Ob(PBool) and f ∈Arr(PBool), together with F( f ◦g) = F( f ) ◦
F(g). (Note that in the extension of this setting, global automorphisms of L should
correspond to diffeomorphisms of the whole M.) We point out that the existence of
such a functor F is an open issue left for future research [9]; nevertheless we indicate
two points that may be important in the construction thereof.
First, let us recall that BSub(L) is not only a mere posetal category; it consti-
tutes also a meet-semilattice. In other words, for any B1, B2 ∈BSub(L) we have
B1 ∧B2 := B1 ∩B2 ∈BSub(L). In category-theoretic terms, that is to say that the
pullback
B1 ∩B2
B2
B1
L
always exists. For an analogous result in the context of smooth manifolds, we have
to go to a subcategory para-n-Mfd of paracompact manifolds (in fact, this is the
usual category to talk about spacetime in the standard approach). Then, one can
show that each object in para-n-Mfd admits a good open cover, i.e. given any X ∈
Ob(para-n-Mfd),allitschartintersectionsarediffeomorphictoRn.Therefore,under
the functor F|para-n-Mfd an intersection of elements of BSub(L) should correspond
again to an object in Un.
Second, let us consider [39] with the construction of adjoint functors
L : Set[Bor(R)/B]op
[Bor(R)/L] : R

7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth …
91
This gives an opportunity of studying a “quantum” comma category [Bor(R)/L]
in terms of presheaves on a “classical” [Bor(R)/B] and vice versa. As the objects
of [Bor(R)/L] are obviously the arrows of PBool, it seems reasonable to look for
analogous adjoint in the category n-Mfd [9].
7.6
Discussion
This work puts some initial remarks on the possibility that the smooth structure of
a manifold X can be studied through a category-theoretic correspondence between
X, together with its atlas of charts, and some quantum (i.e. noncommutative) object
parametrized by its classical (i.e. commutative) subobjects. The ﬁrst and immediate
conclusion is that, when applied to the physical choice X ≃hom Rn, it results in exotic
smooth structure of X, and therefore its four-dimensionality. Thus, the procedure
accounts for the fact that globally we parametrize our spacetime with four variables:
one time t and three space directions x, y, z. Moreover, it should be emphasized that
this happens purely on the grounds of quantum-mechanical view of the initial state
of the Universe.
One should make a distinction about the cardinality of the smooth atlas of exotic
R4. In the case of small R4 (i.e. embeddable in S4) there always appear Casson
handles—inﬁnite geometric constructions with the topological interior homeomor-
phic to R4. Any stage n ∈N, representing the level of Casson handle, corresponds
to a 3-submanifold Yn of R4 deﬁning the sequence {Yn}n∈N of 3-submanifolds. This
sequence deﬁnes a highly nontrivial foliation of the entire R4 (see e.g. [1]). In par-
ticular, the C∗-algebra of tensor densities of the foliation contains the von Neuman
factor III1. On the other side, the foliation and the sequence {Yn}n∈N are responsible
for the inﬁnite atlases of small exotic R4’s. Namely, there does not exist any time
coordinate in any Yn that could be properly extended over Yn+1, hence R4 needs at
least countably inﬁnitely many charts in the atlas. As Freedman and Taylor showed
[19] there exists the universal exotic R4 into which any other exotic R4 embeds. This
would indicate the necessity of considering also uncountable atlasses. Thus covering
the universal R4 by uncountable atlas generated from L deﬁnes, in principle, covers
of other exotic R4’s as submanifolds. Accordingly, it agrees with the general remark
on the cardinality of BSub(L): whenever dim(H ) = ∞, there is uncountably many
noncommuting projections on H , hence also uncountably many blocks in L. How-
ever, there remains the case of an exotic R4 with a ﬁnite atlas, which is not covered by
this approach. In fact, we do not know whether such R4’s exist at all. If positive, there
would exist an exotic 4-disk and exotic S4 as well. At the same time, it is equivalent
to the negation of the (unresolved so far) 4-dimensional smooth Poincaré conjecture.
Thus the case of ﬁnite atlases of exotic R4’s needs some other tools and should be
tackled separately. In the language of OML’s, apart from the ﬁnite-lattice trivial case,
this issue should be translated to the so-called block-ﬁnite lattices. Consequently, it
would be an interesting and challenging task to ﬁnd indications for this case also
deriving from the quantum-mechanical operator algebras perspective.

92
K. Bielas and J. Król
Having formulated all of these in the language of category theory, one obtains an
opportunity to use it in its full power and explore the functoriality between PBool
and n-Mfd. Particularly, it would be interesting to study smooth invariants of general
four-dimensional manifolds from this perspective. We already referred to the fact that
automorphisms (more generally, homomorphisms) of Boolean subalgebras should
correspond to diffeomorphisms of charts of X; globally, automorphisms of an OML
L would correspond to diffeomorphisms of whole X. This is potentially a very fertile
area of research, since set- and model-theoretical tools seem to be inevitable in the
study of the objects related Aut(L) (in the last two decades one could observe a real
explosion of new results concerning the applications of sophisticated set-theoretical
methods to automorphisms of a Calkin C∗-algebra and, at the same time, of a Boolean
algebra P(ω)/ﬁn (for a thorough discussion see [18]). The task of connecting these
to the study of smooth manifolds invariants seems to be a very promising area of
research.
Acknowledgements The authors are indebted to Torsten Asselmeyer-Maluga for very important
questions regarding exotic smoothness that improved the text.
References
1. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, Smooth quantum gravity: exotic smoothness and quantum gravity, in
At the Frontier of Spacetime, ed. by T. Asselmeyer-Maluga (Springer, Cham, Switzerland,
2016), pp. 247–308
2. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, C.H. Brans, Cosmological anomalies and exotic smoothness structures.
Gen. Rel. Grav. 34, 1767–1771 (2002)
3. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, C.H. Brans, Exotic Smoothness and Physics (World Scientiﬁc Singa-
pore, Singapore, 2007)
4. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, J. Król, On the origin of inﬂation by using exotic smoothness. https://
arxiv.org/abs/1301.3628
5. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, J. Król, Inﬂation and topological phase transition driven by exotic
smoothness. Adv. High Energy Phys. 2014, 1–14 (2014)
6. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, J. Król, How to obtain a cosmological constant from small exotic R4.
Phys. Dark Universe 19, 66–77 (2018)
7. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, J. Król, A topological approach to Neutrino masses by using exotic
smoothness. Mod. Phys. Let. A 34(13), 1950097 (2019)
8. J.L. Bell, Set Theory: Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 2005)
9. K. Bielas, J. Król, A category-theoretic view on the smooth manifold coordinatization by
Boolean subalgebras of an orthomodular lattice of projections (in preparation)
10. G. Birkhoff, J. von Neumann, The Logic of quantum mechanics. Ann. Math. 37, 823–843
(1936)
11. P. Bongaarts, Quantum Theory—A Mathematical Approach. (Springer International Publishing
Switzerland 2015)
12. C.H. Brans, Localized exotic smoothness. Class. Quant. Grav. 11, 1785–1792 (1994)
13. M.L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Greechie, Reasoning in Quantum Theory: Sharp and
Unsharp Quantum Logics (Springer, Netherlands, 2004)
14. M. Davis, A relativity principle in quantum mechanics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 16, 867874 (1977)

7
From Quantum-Mechanical Lattice of Projections to Smooth …
93
15. S. De Michelis, M. Freedman, Uncountably many exotic R4’s in standard 4-space. J. Diff.
Geom. 35, 219–254 (1992)
16. A. Döring, J. Harding, Abelian subalgebras and the Jordan structure of a von Neumann algebra.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1009.4945
17. G. Etesi, Exotica and the status of the strong cosmic censor conjecture in four dimensions.
Class. Quantum Grav. 34(24), 245010-1-245010-26 (2017)
18. I. Farah, E. Wofsey, Set theory and operator algebras, in Appalachian Set Theory, ed. by J.
Cummings, E. Schimmerling (Cambridge University Press, 2012), pp. 63–120
19. M.H. Freedman, L.R. Taylor, A universal smoothing of four- space. J. Diff. Geom. 24(1), 6978
(1986)
20. J. Harding, M. Navara, Subalgebras of orthomodular lattices. Order 28, 549563 (2011)
21. C. Heunen, N.P. Landsman, B. Spitters, S. Wolters, The Gelfand spectrum of a noncommutative
C∗-algebra: a topos-theoretic approach. J. Aust. Math. Soc. 90, 39–52 (2011)
22. C. Heunen, N.P. Landsman, Spitters, B: a topos for Algebraic Quantum Theory. Commun.
Math. Phys. 291, 63–110 (2009)
23. G. Kalmbach, Orthomodular Lattices (Academic Press, London, 1983)
24. V. Karakostas, E. Zaﬁris, Contextual semantics in quantum mechanics from a categorical point
of view. Synthese 194, 847886 (2017)
25. J. Król, T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, K. Bielas, From quantum to cosmological regime. The role of
forcing and exotic 4-smoothness. Universe 3, 31 (2017)
26. A. Kupers, Lectures on diffeomorphism groups of manifolds. http://www.math.harvard.edu/
~kupers/teaching/272x/book.pdf
27. T. Leinster, Higher Operads Higher Categories (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2004)
28. T. Leinster, Basic Category Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014)
29. A.J. Lindenhovius, Classifying ﬁnite-dimensional C*-algebras by posets of their commutative
C*-subalgebras. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 54, 46154635 (2015)
30. M. Nakahara, Geometry Topology and Physics (IoP Publishing London, 2003)
31. M. Paviˇci´c, Bibliography on quantum logics and related structures. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 31,
373455 (1992)
32. H. Primas, Chemistry, chanics and Reductionism—Perspectives in Theoretical Chemistry
(Quantum MSpringer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1983)
33. C.H. Randall, D.J. Foulis, Tensor products of quantum logics do not exist. Notices of the
American Math. Soc. 26 (1979)
34. J. Sładkowski, Gravity on exotic R4 with few symmetries. Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 10, 311–313
(2001)
35. Svozil, K, Quantum Logic. (Springer, Singapore, 1998)
36. C.H. Taubes, Gauge theory on asymptotically periodic 4-manifolds. J. Diff. Geom. 25, 363–430
(1987)
37. G. Takeuti, Two Applications of Logic to Mathematics (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1978)
38. B. van den Berg, C. Heunen, Noncommutativity as a colimit. Appl. Categor. Struct. 20, 393–414
(2012)
39. E. Zaﬁris, Boolean coverings of quantum observable structure: a setting for an abstract differ-
ential geometric mechanism. J. Geom. Phys. 50, 99–114 (2004)

Chapter 8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary
Michael Heller and Jerzy Król
Abstract In General Relativity, a space-time M is regarded as singular if there is an
obstacle that prevents an incomplete curve in M from being continued. Such a space-
time is completed to form ¯M = M ∪∂M where ∂M is a singular boundary of M. The
standardgeometrictoolson M donotallowone“tocrosstheboundary”.However,the
so-called Synthetic Differential Geometry (SDG), a categorical version of standard
differential geometry based on intuitionistic logic, has at its disposal tools permitting
this to be done. Owing to the existence of inﬁnitesimals, one is able to penetrate
“germs of manifolds” that are not visible from the standard perspective. We present a
simplemodelshowingwhathappens“beyondtheboundary”andwhenthesingularity
is ﬁnally attained. The model is purely mathematical and is mathematically rigorous
but it does not pretend, at its present stage, to refer to the physical universe.
8.1
Introduction
There is a general agreement among specialists that “to say that a space-time is sin-
gular means that there is some positive obstacle that prevents an incomplete curve
continuing” [2].1 Very roughly speaking, there are two kinds of such obstacles: (1)
some magnitudes, such as curvature or some scalars constructed from it, become
unbounded along a timelike curve before it ends, or (2) a pathological behaviour
of the differential structure of space-time prevents a timelike curve from being
1The present paper is based on a talk delivered at the conference “Category Theory in Physics,
Mathematics and Philosophy” held at the Warsaw University of Technology, 16–17 November
2017.
M. Heller (B)
Copernicus Center for Interdisciplinary Studies, ul. Szczepa´nska 1/5, 31-011 Cracow, Poland
e-mail: mheller@wsd.tarnow.pl
J. Król
University of Information Technology and Management, ul. Sucharskiego 2, 35–225 Rzeszów,
Poland
e-mail: iriking@wp.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_8
95

96
M. Heller and J. Król
prolonged. The book by Clarke [2] is almost exclusively devoted to making pre-
cise and understanding the second of these obstructions. In the present paper, we
continue this line of research but we essentially change the method of investigation.
In the meantime (after the publication of Clarke’s book) a new approach in math-
ematics has matured that not so much solves but rather circumvents many of the
problems related to differentiability. We have in mind the so-called Synthetic Differ-
ential Geometry (SDG), an “extension” of the usual differential geometry, based on
category theory (for which the fundamental monographs are [5, 6, 8]). The fact that
this approach enforces the employment of intuitionistic logic results in the enriching
of the real line R with various kinds of inﬁnitesimals. We may imagine that they con-
stitute the entire world inside every point of R, a sort of a ﬁber over x ∈R. Owing to
the existence of inﬁnitesimals, differentiation becomes a purely algebraic operation
and every function is differentiable as many times as required. This creates a unique
opportunity to tackle the problem of space-time prolongations2 and singularities in
General Relativity (GR).
Weapproachthisproblemalongthefollowinglines.InSect.8.2,wegivenecessary
preliminaries: we deﬁne these kinds of inﬁnitesimals that are used in the sequel, we
deﬁne the “kth order neighbouring relation”, and the concept of the monad in terms
of it—a kind of minimal portion of space. We also quote some of its properties.
In Sect.8.3, we present an “inﬁnitesimal version” of the usual differential mani-
fold concept, called the formal n-dimensional manifold. In such a formal manifold,
monads are domains of local maps.
In Sect.8.4, we present a model which shows, by incorporating the machinery
sketched in the previous sections, what happens “beyond” the singular boundary
∂M of space-time M. We assume that this boundary contains a strong curvature
singularity such as the Big Bang type of singularity.
We add two appendices. The ﬁrst appendix gives a more detailed mathematical
description of how the transition from M to ∂M could look like. The second appendix
presents a concept that could be useful in studying the dynamics of monads.
Although our model attempts to imitate, for pedagogical reasons, the standard evo-
lution of the Friedman–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) cosmological model,
it does not pretend to describe the actual evolution of the universe. At its present
stage of development it is nothing more than a toy model.
2Usually, in differential geometry, one extends a semi-Riemannian manifold so that certain incom-
plete curves are given complete extensions. Here we prolong a space-time manifold by putting it,
with the help of a suitable functor, in a category which is a model for SDG.

8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary
97
8.2
Preliminaries
In SDG, one considers various kinds of inﬁnitesimals.3 Let us denote by R the real
line R enriched by inﬁnitesimals.4 In the present study, we focus on the following
ones
D = {x ∈R|x2 = 0},
Dk = {x ∈R|xk+1 = 0}, k = 1, 2, 3, ...,
D(n) = {(x1, ..., xn) ∈Rn|xix j = 0, ∀i, j = 1, 2, 3, ..., n},
Dk(n) = {(x1, ..., xn) ∈Rn| the product of any k + 1 of xi is 0},
and ﬁnally,
(D∞)n =
∞

k=1
Dk(n).
We can also deﬁne D(V ) and Dk(V ) for any ﬁnite dimensional vector space V
(which is an R-module isomorphic to some Rn) [6, p. 15].
We can imagine inﬁnitesimals as internal “degrees of freedom” of a single point
of R.5
In what follows, our important tool is the “kth order neighbouring relation”,
deﬁned as
u ∼k v ⇔u −v ∈Dk(V ),
for u, v ∈V . This relation is reﬂexive and symmetric, but it is not transitive; instead
we have
(u ∼k v ∧v ∼l w) ⇒(u ∼k+l w).
We assume that everything in this section happens in a “suitable” category E .
“Suitable” means a category equipped, among others, with a commutative ring object
R, usually a topos. We further assume that the category M of manifolds (and smooth
functions) can be regarded as a subcategory of E . Let M be an n-dimensional (formal)
manifold considered as an object of E . We are interested in the “smallest neighbour-
hoods” in M. A good tool to investigate such neighbourhoods is the neighbourhood
relation ∼k but it should ﬁrst be generalized to the manifold context. Let x, y ∈M
and k be a non-negative natural number; the relation x ∼k y holds in M iff there
3In general, inﬁnitesimal objects are identiﬁed with the spectra of Weil algebras; see Appendix 1.
4R is a commutative ring but not a ﬁeld. From the perspective of the category of sets, R is R ⊕
ϵR ⊕..., with ϵ the dual number, which is a Weil algebra. In the axiomatic presentation of SDG, R
is a ring which in some categories, serving as models of a given axiomatic system, can be local or
not.
5In the category of sets, R is represented as R ⊕ϵR ⊕... and this has a structure of a bundle with
base R.

98
M. Heller and J. Król
exists a coordinate chart f : U →M such that U ⊆Rn is open6 and in U one has
x′ ∼k y′ with f (x′) = x and f (y′) = y. If k = 1, we simply write x ∼y.
Let M be a manifold and x, y, z ∈M. The neighbouring relations ∼k satisfy the
following conditions
1. x ∼0 y iff x = y (reﬂexivity).
2. x ∼k y implies y ∼l x if k ≤l (symmetry),
3. x ∼k y and y ∼l z implies x ∼k+l z (quasi-triangle formula).
Since these conditions are akin to the usual concept of distance, we can deﬁne a
“quasi-distance” function in the following way
dist(x, y) ≤k iff x ∼k y.
Since Dk(n) ⊆Dl(n) if k ≤l, the function “dist” determines a “size” of an object
Dk(n). Let us also notice that this quasi-metric is “quantised” (discrete) since it has
its values in N.7
Now, we deﬁne a few key concepts for our further considerations.
Let x ∈M. The k-monad around x is deﬁned to be
Mk(x) := {y ∈M|x ∼k y} ⊆M.
If k = 1, we write M (x). We also deﬁne M∞= ∪∞
i=1Mi and assume that x ∼∞y
makes sense. We obviously have y ∈Mk(x) ⇔x ∈Mk(y). If f : M →N is a map
between manifolds M and N then x ∼k y implies f (x) ∼k f (y), since in SDG every
map f : Dk →R such that 0 →0, factorizes through Dk [5, Cor. 6.2].
The “kth neighbourhood of the diagonal”, M(k) ⊆M × M, is deﬁned to be
M(k) := {(x, y) ∈M × M|x ∼k y}.
If V is an n-dimensional vector space, there is a canonical isomorphism
M(k) ∼= M × Dk(V )
given by
(x, y) →(x, y −x),
and consequently there is an isomorphism between Mk(x) and Dk(V ) [6, p. 39]. Let
us also notice that the quasi-distance dist(d1, d2) ≤k introduces a partial order in
M∞(x) (by inclusions).
6If V is a ﬁnite dimensional vector space, U ⊆V is formally open if x ∈U and y ∼k x implies
y ∈U. In general, the problem of topology in SDG is a tricky problem (see [1], however, for
our case it is enough to consult [6]). Anyway, in a category like E topology is well deﬁned (see
[8, p. 120]).
7“...this ‘dist’-function is almost like an N-valued metric” [6, p. 83].

8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary
99
8.3
Manifold down to the Smallest Scale
The existence of inﬁnitesimals essentially enriches the structure of differential
manifolds. It enables the following deﬁnition ([4], see also [6, pp. 68–71]). An
object M in the category E is said to be a k-formal n-dimensional manifold if,
for each x ∈M, there exists a monad Mk(x), isomorphic to Dk(n), and a map
f : Mk(x) →M. A bijective map Dk(n) →Mk(x) onto a monad around x, map-
ping 0 to x, is said to be a k-frame at x. k can assume the value ∞. If M∞(x), we
speak of a formal n-dimensional manifold (without specifying k).
It can easily be seen that Rn, for every n, is a formal n-dimensional manifold, and
the monad M∞(v) around v ∈Rn is M∞(v) = v + D∞(n).
We have the following natural, but important, results.
If M and N areformalmanifoldsofdimensionsm andn,respectively,then M × N
is an (m + n)-dimensional formal manifold; and the monad around (x, y) ∈M × N
is M (x) × M (y) which is isomorphic to D∞(m + n).
If M is a formal n-dimensional manifold, then its tangent bundle M D is a
(2n)-dimensional formal manifold [4, Proposition 1.4].
8.4
A Model
Let us consider a singular space-time; it is singular in the sense that it contains at
least one incomplete (timelike or null geodesic) curve that cannot be continued in
any extension of this space-time. The regular (non-singular) part of this space-time
forms a differential manifold M. We deﬁne the completion of M as ¯M = M ∪∂M
and call ∂M the singular boundary of M. We assume that this boundary is attainable
from M, i.e. that M is open and dense in ¯M. Details of this construction are of no
importance for our further analysis (several proposals are known, such as g-boundary,
b-boundary, causal boundary, and others [2, 3]).
A singular boundary can contain, besides endpoints of inextendible curves that
cannot be continued in any extension of space-time, also endpoints of curves that can
be continued in some of its extensions, and “points at inﬁnity”. In what follows, we
assume, for simplicity, that ∂M contains only the endpoints of inextendible curves
that cannot be continued in any extension of space-time.
For the sake of concreteness, let us think about the FLRW space-time with the
Big Bang singularity (strong curvature singularity) in the beginning (the central
Schwarzschild singularity would also ﬁt the picture), and let us contemplate the
evolution of the universe back in time. Everything happens according to the standard
cosmological model. The universe shrinks, subsequent cosmic eras succeed each
other. Finally, the contraction attains the state in which differential properties of space
time break down completely. The universe leaves the “manifold region” M and enters
its boundary ∂M. This means that the standard smooth manifold description breaks
down, and we assume that at this stage the category E takes over (see Appendix 1).
The contraction has reached such a degree that inﬁnitesimals enter into play. We can

100
M. Heller and J. Król
thus employ methods of SDG to gain an insight into what is going on. The general
picture that emerges is the following.
After crossing ∂M, domains U of local charts (already in the category E ) become
inﬁnitesimal, and the manifold becomes a 4-dimensional formal manifold as deﬁned
in Sect.8.3. Local charts are now of the form M∞(x) →M (the fact that we use
the same letter for denoting the space-time manifold and the formal manifold should
not lead to misunderstandings). But the universe continues shrinking, and ﬁnally its
size reduces to a single monad M∞(x0).8 The contraction goes on, but now only
in the sense of the metric dist(d1, d2) ≤k, d1, d2 ∈M∞(x0). This means that the
differentiability properties are lower and lower, and we obtain a decreasing sequence
M∞(x0), . . . , Mk(x0), Mk−1(x0), Mk−2(x0), . . . .
Finally, when the contraction produces M0(x0), the process comes to a halt,
sinceM0(x0) = {y ∈R|x0 ∼0 y}which,inturngives x0 = y,andallquasi-distances
dist(x0, y) reduce to zero.
It is instructive to follow the entire process starting from the zero-state. It seems
natural to regard the increasing sequence of ks as a sort of quantised time. If this
seems too farfetched, one can treat “time” as just the name of a parameter. However,
it is important to notice that k, in fact, means the “degree of differentiability”, the
place at which the Taylor expansion truncates (all higher order terms vanish). Each
subsequent instant of this time improves the differential properties of the process.
It is astonishing that the transition from k = 0 to k = 1 is so exuberantly reach.
Having at our disposal the very ﬁrst degree of differentiability, we can do large
parts of afﬁne geometry, afﬁne connection included, combinatorial differential forms,
tangent bundle and lot of differential geometry (in fact, a substantial part of Kock’s
seminal SDG monograph [6] is limited to exploring the geometry of the ﬁrst order
neighbourhoods).
Of course, when we jump to k = 2, differentially-geometric properties substan-
tially improve. Some aspects of metric geometry come into force [6, Chap. 8].
For doing k-jet theory, we evidently need a sufﬁciently high k.
Finally, when k →∞, we end up in M∞(x0) and we have differentiability of
inﬁnite degree. As the universe expands, it goes through the phase of a formal man-
ifold, and when inﬁnitesimals cease to play any role (because of the expansion),
the standard smooth manifold regime takes over. In the language of the space-time
boundary, this means that the universe goes from ∂M to M. It is here that we should
place the transition from the category E to the category SET, and possibly identify
this with what physicists call Planck’s threshold.
Acknowledgements The authors express their thanks to Professor Samuel Fletcher for his pene-
trating remarks which helped to improve the paper.
8Perhaps an explanation is here helpful. A formal manifold can be deﬁned as an object M for
which there exists a family of jointly surjective maps { fi : Ui →M}i∈I [5, p. 68]. The “shrinking
of the size” means that we formally reduce the family to a single map f p : Up →M, p ∈I, i.e.
the formal manifold is reduced to Up, but Up is now M∞(x0) where x0 is a global point at the
boundary (the unique global point at the monad).

8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary
101
8.1
Appendix: Through the Boundary
In this appendix, we give a short mathematical description of what the transition
from M to ∂M could look like. The crucial point is that if we go from space-time
M to its singular boundary ∂M, we must switch from the category SET of sets and
maps between sets as morphisms to a suitable category, to which we have assigned
the symbol E , the internal logic of which is intuitionistic what enables inﬁnitesimals
to appear.
Space-time M is supposed, as always, to be a smooth paracompact manifold.
First, we move from its description in terms of maps and atlases to the functional
description in terms of the algebraC∞(M) of smooth functions on M. This is possible
owing to the generalized Gelfand-Naimark theorem which asserts that the category
of locally compact Hausdorff spaces and proper continuous maps is anti-equivalent
to the category of commutative C∗-algebras and nondegenerate morphisms [7]. We
recall that map φ : X →Y between locally compact Hausdorff spaces is said to
be proper if, for any compact K ⊂Y, φ−1(K) is compact in X. And a morphism
ψ : A →B between C∗-algebras is said to be nondegenerate, if the linear span of
all expressions of the form ψ(a)b, a ∈A, b ∈B, is dense in B. Two categories G
and H are said to be anti-equivalent (or dual) if there exist contravariant functors
α : G →H and β : H →G such that α ◦β and β ◦α are naturally isomorphic to
idH and idG, respectively.
We now look at C∞(M) from another perspective. A smooth algebra (or C∞-
ring) is an algebra A over R for which the product · : R × R →R lifts to the algebra
product A × A →A, and also every smooth map f : Rn × Rm lifts to a map A( f ) :
An →Am, in such a way that projections, identities and compositions are preserved.
Formally, such a smooth algebra is a functor from the category Cart of Cartesian
spaces to the category SET,
A : Cart →SET,
that preserves ﬁnite products. The category of such functors as objects and natural
transformations between them as morphisms is denoted by C∞-Alg [8, pp. 15–16].
If M ∈M is a smooth manifold then the functor
C∞(M) = HomM(M, −)
is a smooth algebra C∞(M). Considering an object (here a smooth manifold) in
another category may not be a superﬁcial change. Changing a categorical context
can not only provide new tools of investigation, but can also affect the properties of
the object itself. Let us pursue this line of research.
A smooth algebra A is said to be ﬁnitely generated if it is of the form C∞(Rn)/I,
for n ∈N and an ideal I; if additionally I is ﬁnitely generated, A is said to be ﬁnitely
presented. For every smooth manifold M, the smooth algebra C∞(M) is ﬁnitely
presented [8, p. 25].

102
M. Heller and J. Król
Finitely generated smooth algebras and C∞-homomorphisms between them as
morphisms form a category denoted by FGAlg (see [8, p. 21]). We deﬁne the category
LOC (of loci) as the opposite category with respect to FGAlg. The objects of LOC are
the same as those of FGAlg (if A ∈FGAlg, we shall write l A when A is considered as
an object of LOC), but morphisms are reversed. Since the functor from the manifold
categoryMtoC∞-Alg,givenby M →C∞(M),iscontravariant,toobtainthecorrect
variance, we switch to the category LOC. And indeed, we have the covariant functor
s : M →LOC, given by M →lC∞(M) which, importantly, is full and faithful [8,
p. 60].
This switching of the categorical environment produces radical changes. A new
element that appears in this context is the so-called Weil algebra. It is a ﬁnite dimen-
sional R-algebra W having a maximal ideal I such that W/I ≃R with I n = 0 for
somen ∈N.Ithasauniquesmoothalgebrastructureandisﬁnitelypresented.Objects
of LOC (smooth loci) corresponding to Weil algebras are inﬁnitesimal spaces. In this
way, inﬁnitesimals appear in our model. We immediately have: C∞(R) ∈LOC is a
real line enriched with inﬁnitesimals which we denote by R.
However, s(M), the image of M under the functor s, is much richer than M. It
contains inﬁnitesimal portions of a manifold or spaces which can be called “germs
of a manifold”. To deﬁne them, let us notice that if l A = C∞(Rn)/I then p : 1 →
lC∞(Rn) is a point of l A, where 1 = lC∞(R0). Let now p ∈R. We deﬁne the germ
C∞
p (R) of R at p to be {s(U)|p ∈U open in R}. And analogously for p ∈Rn. We
are now ready to deﬁne the germ of l A at p ∈Rn as lC∞
p (Rn) ∩l A. This of course
remains valid if l A = s(M).
Let us consider a function f : M →R, and the germ f p of this function at p ∈M
(in the usual sense). This germ can now be identiﬁed with the restriction of the
function f to the germ of the manifold M at p (for details of which see [8, p. 64]).
Usually, to improve the geometric properties of a given model,9 one once again
changes the category LOC to the category SETLOCop of presheaves on LOC or to
some of its subcategories [8]. In our case, this does not seem indispensable since
LOC has good properties if limited to “sufﬁciently small” spaces [8, p. 71].
8.2
Appendix: Non-holonomous Monads
In studying interactions between different levels of differentiability in a monad, the
following concept is useful.
Let M be a (formal) manifold, and let us consider a sequence k1, . . . , kr of non-
negative integers. Let us also consider the set M(k1,...,kr) ⊆Mr+1, the elements of
which are r + 1-tuples
X = (x0, k1, . . . , kr)
9For instance, to have a Cartesian closed category with power objects.

8
Beyond the Space-Time Boundary
103
such that
x0 ∼k1 x1 ∼k2 . . . ∼r x.
If r = 1, we recover Mk1. Assigning to such an r + 1-tuple its ﬁrst element x0 (when
x0 varies over M), we obtain a bundle M(k1,...,kr) →M over M. The ﬁber over x = x0
of this bundle is called the non-holonomous (k1, . . . , kr)-monad around x and is
denoted by Mk1,...,kr (x). There exists a map
M(k1,...,kr)(x) →M(k1+...+kr)
transforming non-holonomous monads into ordinary (holonomous) ones (for more
see [6, pp. 86–88]).
References
1. M. Bunge, F. Gago, Synthetic Differential Topology (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2018)
2. C.J.S. Clarke, The Analysis of Space-Time Singularities (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1993)
3. C.T.J. Dodson, Space-time edge geometry. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 17(6), 389–504 (1978)
4. A. Kock, Formal manifolds and synthetic theory of jet bundles. Cahiers de topologie et géometrie
différentielle catégoriques 21(3), 227–246 (1980)
5. A. Kock, Synthetic Differential Geometry, 2nd edn. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2006)
6. A. Kock, Synthetic Geometry of Manifolds (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009)
7. N.P. Landsman, Lecture Notes on C∗-Algebras and K-Theory, http://www.math.nus.edu.sg/
~matwml/Research_Materials/Operator
8. I. Moerdijk, G.E. Reyes, Models for Smooth Inﬁnitesimal Analysis (Springer, New York, 2010)

Chapter 9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum
Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
Jerzy Król
Abstract Synthetic differential geometry allows for inﬁnitesimal monads in the
usual structure of Minkowski spacetime M4. Gravity, as a ﬁeld deﬁned on M4, can
explore monads. Moreover, at high energies gravity shows its quantum character
and interacts via interchanging gravitons on monads. Such deﬁned interactions lead
to important consequences. Pure perturbative quantum gravity (QG) on synthetic
spacetimes is ﬁnite. Certain supersymmetric perturbative QG’s with matter are also
ﬁnite on the synthetic spacetime with monads. The case of non-supersymmetric
perturbative QG with matter is not solved decisively here. However, at least for the
two cases above, classical gravitational interactions are deﬁned via quantization of
the theories which solves the conundrum of incompatibility of Einstein equations
with quantum matter sources.
9.1
Introduction
Einstein equations (EE) with a cosmological constant Λ
Rμν −1
2 Rgμν + Λgμν = 8πG
c4 Tμν
teach us that geometry of spacetime, i.e. the metric gμν at the left hand side, is deter-
mined by the distribution of matter and energy at the right hand side. The energy-
momentum tensor Tμν is, however, determined by quantum ﬁelds in spacetime while
gμν as well as the Ricci tensor Rμν and the scalar tensor R are purely classical objects.
Attempts to quantize general relativity (GR) as a 4-dimensional quantum ﬁeld the-
ory (QFT) on Minkowski spacetime have failed. Thus we would be left with the
J. Król (B)
University of Information Technology and Management, ul. Sucharskiego 2,
35-225 Rzeszów, Poland
e-mail: iriking@wp.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_9
105

106
J. Król
uncomfortable situation of not knowing the quantum shape of the gravitational ﬁeld
while all other ﬁelds of matter, appearing in EE via Tμν, are quantum ﬁelds obtained
by well-deﬁned quantization of their classical counterparts. This is a kind of incon-
sistency of the equations facing the quantum realm of the world. It should be cured
somehow if one thinks seriously about a consistent theory unifying gravity with other
forces. One reason allowing for considering gravity as purely classical, even at regime
where other interactions are quantum, is the incredible weakness of the gravitational
interactions compared to the others. In such case we would be left with classical
spacetimedeﬁnedbyEEandvariousﬁeldswhichundergoroutinequantizationproce-
dures known from QFT. One approach to quantizing gravity is taking the background
spacetime, which can be chosen to be Minkowski 4-dimensional smooth manifold
M4, and let the metric ﬂuctuate. Thus the ﬂat metric ημν = diag(−1, +1, +1, +1)
allows for the ﬂuctuations hμν such that a general metric reads
gμν = ημν + hμν .
Then one tries to quantize hμν as any other ﬁeld on M4. The quantization should
lead eventually to a perturbative quantum gravity in dimension 4—the miracle object
which, unfortunately, does not seem to exist. The main problem is that Feynman dia-
grams of this theory, which are main tool of any perturbative QFT, are generically
divergent and the divergences can not be cured by any known process of renormal-
ization. One reason for that is the nonlinear interaction of gravity with itself and with
any other form of energy. Another problem is the dimensional nature of the gravi-
tational coupling constant, i.e. the Newton constant G. More precise description of
that behavior is as follows (e.g. [17])
• Pure perturbative QG, i.e. Tμν = 0 and the only quantized ﬁeld is hμν, is ﬁnite
at one loop. It is divergent at two and more loops and it is a nonrenormalizable
theory.
• Perturbative QG with matter ﬁelds (Tμν ̸= 0) is divergent already at one loop and
it is a nonrenormalizable theory.
Thus one meets two seemingly unavoidable obstacles when trying to describe grav-
ity as a fundamental theory. One is the inherent nonrenormalizability of pure or
matter perturbative QG, i.e. quantized GR in dimension 4, while the second is incon-
sistency of EE where gravity remains classical and the other ﬁelds are quantized.
Additionally, and connected with the above, one does not have clear insights on what
nonperturbative 4-dimensional QG would be like.1 In this chapter we address all
three above issues but with quite unusual technique based on synthetic differential
geometry (SDG).
1Loop QG does not seem to be a complete nonperturbative QG since it breaks full 4-dimensional
diffeomorphism invariance.

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
107
9.2
Synthetic Differential Geometry, Spacetime and
Gravity
Classical gravity is inherently and inseparably connected with the geometric structure
of spacetime. That is why we expect that they strongly inﬂuence each other also at the
quantum regime. Even though spacetime may not exist at all, or may be substantially
modiﬁed as a smooth manifold at the Planck regime, the modiﬁcation should follow
from what happens with gravity at such regime. Here we present main ideas behind
synthetic enrichment of the spacetime structure and its inﬂuence on the issue of
existence of a theory of quantum gravity. Details will be presented in the forthcoming
paper with Michael Heller.
9.2.1
SDG and the Perturbative QG
Any theory in mathematics is formulated by using certain formal language and cor-
responding logic. Almost all mathematics can be expressed in the language of set
theory i.e. in the language that all of Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms of set theory are
written in plus, optionally, the axiom of choice (AC). The logic is the classical ﬁrst
order predicate logic. From the point of view of category theory these two concepts
are not independent but rather they create the category SET with its internal logic
being the classical logic and the class of objects comprising all sets with morphisms
being functions. This dependence of logic and sets can be further studied from the
point of view of different categories than SET. In particular, weakening the logic by
strict refraining from the use of AC is paralleled by the strict avoiding the excluded
middle law, i.e. assuming that for any sentence p, the sentence p ∨¬p can be ‘not
true’, i.e. p ∨¬p ≤1. Such logic without excluded middle law and set theory with-
out AC is characteristic for intuitionistic reasoning or logic. This stays in sharp
contrast to classical logic and set theory of SET. Categories where it is possible are
known as toposes. The particularly well recognized and studied class of toposes are
Grothendieck toposes. Their internal logic is again intuitionistic, but they also have
canonically deﬁned object of natural and real numbers as certain varying sheaves
of sets (rather than constant sets in SET). Without incorporating the intuitionistic
reasoning one can not enter the world in which N and R show impossible (from
the classical point of view) properties. One crucial example below is the existence
of intuitionistic real numbers d ∈R for which dk = 0 with d ̸= 0, k ∈N \ {0}. The
’collection’ of such reals comprises the subobject of R (in special toposes) called
k-monads. The suitably modiﬁed differential geometry in toposes allowing for mon-
ads is just synthetic differential geometry and the corresponding methods of such
toposes are called synthetic. Main objective of this paper is to allow for such weak-
ening of logic and set theory in physical theories and to study the consequences of
such choice. The particularly well-deﬁned area of applicability of synthetic methods
will appear to be perturbative quantum gravity.

108
J. Król
Let us be more precise. In classical mathematics the real line R is the model of the
theory of complete ordered ﬁelds. Leaving aside the axiom of choice and the excluded
middle law as above and thus working in intuitionistic environment we have plenty
of categories—toposes where the internal mathematics becomes intuitionistic. In
particular, in Grothendieck toposes there are objects of natural N, and real numbers
R. R is usually a ring which can be tailored as local and Archimedean (in some
toposes) and contains inﬁnitesimal subobjects Dk ⊂R of inﬁnitesimal ‘elements’
[15]
Dk = {d ∈R : dk+1 = 0}, k = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
For any ﬁnite dimensional vector space V ≃Rn we can consider Dk(V ) = {d =
(d1, . . . , dn) ∈Rn : di ∈Dk, i = 1, 2, . . . , n} which means d ∈Dn
k . In what follows
we assume that a topos E allows for developing internally all the machinery of SDG
and considering R as the ‘real line’. It follows that the products Rn parameterize
locally the spacetime domains (in n dimensions), thus monads in such spacetime
appear. These monads, in turn, are parameterized by Dn
k [12, 13]. More precisely, let
M be a n-dimensional manifold in E and x ∈M. The k-monad around x is deﬁned
to be
Mk(x) := {y ∈M|x ∼k y} ⊆M
where x ∼k y ⇐⇒x −y ∈Dn
k so that there is an isomorphism between Mk(x)
and Dk(V ) with Dn
k by sending Dk(V ) ∋0 →x ∈Mk(x) [13, p. 39].
On the other hand, working entirely in SET, the objects Dk above can be repre-
sented as maximal ideals in the smooth quotient ring (Weil algebra) C∞(R)/(xk+1)
of the ring of smooth real functions on R by the ideal (xk+1) generated by xk+1, i.e.
xk+1 = 0 (see the Appendix A and [15]). The object (ring) R of real numbers in E
is represented in SET as C∞(R). Using the notation for the generator of the ideals
as ε (the dual number) we write
D1 = εR
D2 = εR ⊕ε2R
Dk = εR ⊕· · · ⊕εkR, k = 1, 2, . . .
(9.1)
There exists a subtle interplay between the internal to E and external in SET presen-
tations of the object Dk. Namely, given a physical theory on the spacetime M with
monads M (x), x ∈M one faces important problems (in what follows we use the
same letter M also for Minkowski spacetime). One is the issue of Poincaré invariance
of the theory on M. Another, related with the ﬁrst, is the question about physical
ﬁelds propagating over monads and the physical effects of such propagation. How-
ever, there is one big meta-question: how is it possible that we enter the intuitionistic
reasoning allowing for monads in a topos, thus leaving the usual SET environment
and what is the impact of that leave on the smooth structure of spacetime. We analyze
ﬁrst two questions in the case of perturbative quantum gravity when Minkowski M4

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
109
is replaced by the synthetic spacetime. The meta-question will be addressed in the
forthcoming paper and we will give here only short commentaries.
Physical ﬁelds are deﬁned as certain functions on spacetime. The linearization of
gravity, i.e. hμν is also deﬁned on M4 hence we neglect GR at this stage and try to
quantize hμν on ﬂat M4. This leads to the program of the covariant (Lorentz invariant)
perturbative QG as ﬁrstly proposed and developed by Feynman [8, 9] (see also [7]
and modern presentation [16]). There are known difﬁculties with renormalizability
of such theory mentioned in the Introduction. Let us deﬁne such theory on synthetic
spacetime with monads. To this end we consider gravitational linearized ﬁeld hμν as
capable of exploring the monads possibly at sufﬁciently high energies, i.e. of the order
of Planck energy or higher. The main point is that hμν interacts with itself and with
other ﬁelds on monads, which constrains the vertices of the corresponding Feynman
diagrams to live entirely on monads. The decomposition gμν = ημν +
√
8πG · hμν,
where
√
8πG is the gravitational coupling constant, shows that in the units ℏ= c = 1
the Newton constant has units of [m2]. The dual numbers ε on a monad (9.1) have
natural units of the length [m] and thus the Newton constant on a monad is represented
as a quantity proportional to ε2 having natural dimension of [m2]. Let it be G · ε2.
However, it follows that
(
√
G)k+1 = 0 on Dk, k = 1, 2, . . . .
The minimal choice is k = 2 since then G3/2 = 0 =⇒G2 = 0, while on D1,
√
G
2 =
0 = G meaning that there are no gravitational interactions on D2. Thus our ﬁrst rule
is that, at high energies, G lives on D2 as the (quantity proportional to) squared dual
number.
Let us apply this to the pure general relativity given by the Einstein Lagrangian
(e.g. [7, p.86])
L =
1
16πG2
 √gRd4x.
Under linearization of gμν and taking into account that any n-graviton, n = 1, 2, . . .,
interaction vertex should appear in the Lagrangian, and using f =
√
8πG for the
coupling constant, we obtain the following expression [7]
1
16πG2
√gR[ε] = f 0 · L(2) + f · L(3) + f 2 · L(4) + · · · + f n−2 · L(n) + . . . .
(9.2)
By the rule sending G to G · ε2 we have
√
8πG = f →f · ε on D2, and we obtain
the expansion on monads in the form
1
16πG2
√gR[ε] = ( f · ε)0L(2) + ( f · ε)L(3) + ( f · ε)2L(4) =
L(2) + ( f · ε)L(3) + ( f · ε)2L(4) ∈R ⊕R[ε] ⊕R[ε2] = R ⊕D2.
which terminates at 4-vertex since εk = 0, k ≥3.

110
J. Król
The next step would be to build Feynman diagrams of this theory. Given 4-graviton
vertex, it gives contribution ∼f 2 but trying to attach another 4-vertex in a tree dia-
gram, it gives another factor ∼f 2 which together give rise to ∼f 4. When present
on the same monad, it has to vanish. Similarly, any tree diagram containing 4-vertex
and a 3-vertex has to vanish on a monad since its contribution ∼f 3 = 0. The non-
vanishing contribution on a single monad comes from tree diagrams containing two
3-vertices with ∼f 2 ̸= 0 in D2.
9.2.2
Classical gμν as a Quantized Field
Let us analyze the outcome of the previous section in the linearized theory of gravity
on monads from the point of view of Poincaré and gauge invariance. As follows from
the Lagrangian (9.2) of pure QG, not only is there an inﬁnite number of vertices, but
also the simplest 3-vertex has around 90 terms [1]. This is a tremendous complica-
tion. On the other side, placing the pure QG on monads, as in the previous section,
resulted in reducing the vertices into up to 3-vertices. Moreover, there should be
maximally two 3-vertices at a single monad. Being a large simpliﬁcation, it spoils
the gauge invariance of the theory. The point is that when considering isolated Feyn-
man diagrams (or isolated subset of them) their contributions usually are not gauge
invariant. One possibility would be to allow for breaking Lorentz invariance, what
is anyway a returning theme in the context of QG theories. However, we refuse this
possibility and follow the fully ‘covariant’ QG as was also the intention of Feynman
himself. A way to ﬁnding the solution is to refrain from using Feynman diagrams at
all.
Let us recall that on a single monad there can be placed two 3-vertices (if there
are more such 3-vertices this would give the vanishing contribution since ε2+k = 0,
k ≥1). Other vertices are placed on other monads (still maximally two 3-vertices
on a monad), so that the contributions from each monad are taken from E to SET by
projection π (see (9.3) below). This means that the entire contribution from a bigger
Feynman (tree) diagram is decomposed into separated monads contributions. Then
the projection from a monad to SET relies on discarding ε2 factors (or equivalently,
taking ε2 = 1). In other words, every many-3-vertices tree diagram can contribute
in SET as without monads. Having clariﬁed this point we are, however, still in a
trouble since any Feynman diagram containing higher n-vertices vanishes spoiling
the invariance of the theory at the tree-level.
The miracle happens when one turns to the complexiﬁed momenta. There emerge
important extra-properties changing the entire approach:
i. all such complex momenta can be on-shell, i.e. there are no virtual gravitons;
ii. all tree amplitudes building the matrix M(z), z ∈C (see Appendix B) are gen-
erated by 3-vertices diagrams;

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
111
iii. we do not need complicated totality of tree Feynman diagrams, rather there is
the BCFW recursion formula gluing 3-vertices and determining all amplitudes
in M(z) just because of the Poincaré invariance.
One could wonder whether it is possible at all to reformulate a quantum ﬁeld theory
such that everything happens on-shell and all amplitudes (tree level) are rather easily
and efﬁciently calculated recursively. Some facts explaining such possibility are
placed in the Appendix B. The BCFW formula has been derived in the recent years
and the approach actively developed since then (see e.g. [1, 2, 6]).
Let us see how the BCFW algorithm helps solving problems with our formu-
lation of synthetic pure QG. First, the initial data of the algorithm are 3-vertices.
In Sect.9.2 we saw that also in synthetic approach, when placing vertices on mon-
ads, there survive only a 3-vertex which can be glued with another 3-vertex on a
single monad M (x). Any additional vertex is placed on a separate monad M (y),
x ̸= y. The momenta coordinates in SET live on the cotangent spaces T ⋆
x,y M to the
Minkowski spacetime at points x, y which are isomorphic to the tangent spaces.
In SDG the tangent space coordinates live on monads too (see [12]). To represent
complex momenta on monads we need to complexify its structure. It is performed
directly. The complexiﬁcation of coordinates of a monad is just building the complex
monadic structure M ⋆(x) at x, parametrized by D2(4) ⊕i D2(4). In terms of dual
number generator ε it reads
M ⋆(x) = {x} ⊕εR4 ⊕ε2R4 ⊕iεR4 ⊕iε2R4 .
Being equipped with complexiﬁed monads we can write down various Feynman
diagrams in complex momenta on monads. But the BCFW formula (see (9.8) and
(9.9) in Appendix B) shows much more. First, it gives the recipe how to combine
the 3-vertices in complex momenta into arbitrary tree amplitudes. Second, in fact
the bigger diagrams are not Feynman diagrams since we are using entirely on-shell
complex momenta. In our monadic case, taking two such 3-vertices on a monad and
using the SET projection π (see also (9.7) in Appendix A)
π : E →SET
D2 = εR ⊕ε2R ∋(ε · a, ε2 · b) →(a, b) ∈R2
(9.3)
one ﬁnds
BCFW(v(3)
1
−−−−−−v(3)
2 ) = π[BCFW(v(3)
1
−−−−−−v(3)
2 )]|M (x)
where v(3)
1,2 are two 3-vertices (on monads and outside) composed according to the
BCFW algorithm (on monads but also the outside). Repeating the validation of the
BCFWprocedureoneverypairof3-verticesonmonadsandapplyingtheπ projection
we get ﬁnally literally the same result as for BCFW applied outside of the monads
in complexiﬁed momentum space to every collection of 3-vertices. Moreover, as
stated above, the main result of the BCFW schema is that the procedure covers

112
J. Król
all tree amplitudes of the pure QG [5]. That means the requirements of Poincaré
invariance and that all processes to be on-shell, applied to the composed in pairs
3-vertices in the complexiﬁed momenta, leads to the entire tree-level of the theory.
By the same argumentation we can conclude that pure perturbative QG on synthetic
spacetime reproduces precisely the tree-level of the theory on ordinary Minkowski
spacetime without referring to loop diagrams at all. This is basically the result of
applying the synthetic methods to spacetime in the context of BCFW procedure.
Our argumentation, in some sense, has come full circle. We started with classical
GR with gμν where all effects of gravity can be (in principle) calculated from the
Einstein equations. Then we quantized the linearized theory on synthetic spacetime
taking the linearization gμν = ημν + f · hμν. As the result we have obtained the tree
level of the quantum theory. But the tree level reproduces (in the limit of many-legs
diagrams) classical effects of the theory described by gμν we started with. This tree
level of QG is the complete answer the quantization procedure of GR on synthetic
spacetime can give. The pure perturbative covariant QG on synthetic spacetime is
entirely ﬁnite theory. However, the emerging classical level from quantum, improves
fundamentally the status of Einstein equations. gμν can now be considered as fully
quantized ﬁeld and as such it would not conﬂict any longer with quantized matter
ﬁelds in Tμν. However, we have dealt with pure QG where Tμν = 0 and the conﬂict
has not been manifest so far. Thus we should analyze the remaining case of the matter
perturbative QG where Tμν ̸= 0.
9.3
Can Perturbative QG Be Any Fundamental Theory?
EE describe classical gravity. Main objection of this paper is that EE could describe as
well the relation between quantized gravitational ﬁeld and, presumably, the quantized
matter ﬁelds giving contribution to Tμν. However, even in the case of pure QG the
new fundamental role is assigned to gμν. Namely, as we saw in the previous section
gμν is at the same time a quantized ﬁeld which leads to a new role of EE. This is
the effect of synthetic methods applied to spacetime and linearized gravity. Can we
extend the synthetic quantization of GR over theories with Tμν ̸= 0?
In what follows we will see that this problem is not easily solved. Entire argu-
mentation relies heavily on the BCFW rule. The rule, in turn, is derived from the
analytical behavior of the S-matrix M(z) at inﬁnity, namely
lim
z→∞M(z) = 0 .
(9.4)
This vanishing at inﬁnity guarantees that BFCW holds true (see the Appendix B). In
pure QG (9.4) is true and BCFW is still valid. The same property (9.4) holds true also
for N = 8 supergravity with the presence of quantum ﬁelds giving Tμν ̸= 0. That
is why this supergravity theory formulated on synthetic spacetime is again ﬁnite and
gμν quantized. For matter QG without supersymmetry, which is the most interesting

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
113
case to us, we do not have any proof that (9.4) holds true. Actually it may not be
true [1]. We should follow different way directly referring to the tree level of the
theory. First, we should ensure ourselves that as long as this QG is formulated on
synthetic spacetime, only the tree level of such covariant theory survives. However
there appear complications. When one switches to the complex momenta as before
then we are left again with pairs of 3-vertices on a single monad parameterized by
D4
2. There is no necessity that such 3-vertices generate entire tree level of the theory.
The reason is the probable failure of the analogue of the BCFW recursion relations.
One can restrict entire tree level to the recursion procedure and state that precisely
this segment of the tree level is the ‘physical’ content of the theory. There remains,
however, the question of Poincaré invariance of the segment. We are postponing the
details of the analysis to the separate work not deciding here the ﬁnal resolution.
Anyway, the pure perturbative and supersymmetric QG’s are exactly solved by
synthetic methods. These cases, as shown in this paper, teach us that EE are relating
classical as well quantum ﬁelds, including quantized gravity. In this way one ﬁnds
quantum nature of the classical gμν leading to ﬁnite results. The appearance of gμν
in EE does not stay in the opposition to the quantized ﬁelds of matter since gμν is
already quantized.
Theexistenceofsuchﬁnitelyresolvedcasesofcovariantquantizedgravityencour-
ages us to ask some general questions. They are related with the problem stated in the
title of this section, i.e. how (if at all) it can be that a perturbative QG is considered a
fundamental theory. Is this sensible at all? Forgetting for a while the problems with
full matter QG on synthetic spacetime, let us think on the marriage of perturbative
QG and synthetic methods applied to spacetime as giving the ﬁnite, well-deﬁned
results. Where can such approach be applied in physical reality? First, present cos-
mological models of inﬂation are based on the single scalar ﬁeld φ theory of gravity
with the action functional

d4x

c4
16πG R −1
2φ,μφ,νgμν −V (φ)

where R is the Ricci scalar and V (φ) the potential which leads to the FRW geometry
[18]
ds2 = −c2dt2 + a2(t)dx · dx .
The quantization of the theory as the perturbative QG (with scalar matter ﬁeld—the
inﬂaton ﬁeld) allows for calculating the tree, one loop and higher loops effects. The
analysis and results are presented in [18]. It follows that the tree level contributes to
the power spectra i.e. tensor-to-scalar ratio r(k), the scalar spectral index ns(k) and
the tensor spectral index nt(k). These parameters are determined nearly completely
by the tree diagrams of the theory. Currently there are experimental constraints from
PLANCK, WMAP and BICEP collaborations on the parameters which are known
up to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The near future data on CMB irregularities should
allow for testing the tree predictions. These data could become ﬁrst indications on
QG effects ever, even though they would be related with the tree level of the scalar

114
J. Król
GR. The one loop corrections to the spectra are calculable, in principle, in the scalar
theory but their experimental veriﬁcation would require 10 signiﬁcant ﬁgures, which
is eventually possible within next 20 years. Higher loop corrections are out of reach
within predictable future (see e.g. [18]). The conclusion, which agrees also with
synthetic predictions, is that the tree-level of the scalar theory sufﬁces for covering
the nearby QG results.
The tree level of QG reproduces also the classical content of the theory, hence gμν
(in the limit) becomes again valid variable. Recalling this one ﬁnds stronger reasons
indicating that tree canonical QG could be fundamental at any scale. In the previous
sections we have shown that tree diagrams, hence classical gμν, comprises the entire
results of quantization of certain GR theories on synthetic spacetime. Such a result
agrees with the approach to QG known as smooth QG [3] however, the classical
gμν recovered after synthetic quantization undergoes some, rather subtle, changes.
Smooth QG assumes that even on the Planck scales spacetime can be considered a
smooth 4-manifold, hence gμν is the valid variable again. The smoothness structure
is, however, induced by exotic smoothings of R4, i.e. nondiffeomorphic with the
standard R4 and exoticness is essential for the approach. The existence of such exotic
R4’s was established in mathematics in 1980s as the conclusion from breakthrough
works of M. H. Freedman and S. K. Donaldson in differential topology and geometry.
When exotic R4 is used in the cosmological model [4], it leads to the realistic values of
certain cosmological parameters, and can generate quantum algebras of observables
[3]. Thus classical geometry of spacetime (exotic smoothness in dimension 4) can
even precede the quantum regime of gravity (see also [14]).
The QG on synthetic spacetime approach developed in this paper shows that
indeed the spacetime can be seen almost classical, i.e. with monads, even at deep
Planck regime. This modiﬁcation applied to the perturbative QG reproduces the tree
level of the theory. On the other hand applying SDG methods to spacetime at small
distances refers to the modiﬁed logic and set theory of a smooth topos E . The question
thus can be asked: Is this modiﬁed spacetime still any smooth manifold when seeing
from SET perspective? The answer is YES, however, the smoothness structures of
this 4-manifold can not be standard. This is precisely the subtle change witnessed
in gμν mentioned above. In the case of R4 its synthetic deformation gives rise to
exotic R4 when projecting back to SET (e.g. [10, 11]). So we arrived at amazing
coincidence between synthetic perturbative quantization and smooth quantization of
gravity. What is more, this agreement and the entire construction can be successfully
performed exclusively in dimension 4 where there exist exotic Rn’s.
Summarizing, the approach via SDG to the perturbative QG sheds new light on
the problem of quantizing gravity. The relation with smooth QG encourages us to
consider synthetic perturbative QG a fundamental theory. It is fair to say that this
is just the working hypotheses at the moment, nevertheless fascinating ones. Much
theoretical work remains to be done along with confronting the results with the
appearance of more and more reﬁned experimental data.
Acknowledgements The author appreciates much all remarks made by Piotr Sułkowski regarding
this paper since they improved its readability.

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
115
Appendix
A. Monads and Weil Algebras
The SET presentation of monads Dk, k = 1, 2, . . . is usually performed in terms of
spectra of Weil algebras W, which are described as follows. Let W be a local ring
which has R-algebra structure. To be a local ring means that there exists unique
maximal ideal m in W. If W is a ﬁnite dimensional vector space over R and can be
presented as W = R ⊕m then it is a Weil algebra. We will see that m corresponds
to Dk. The best way to understand it is via smooth ring presentation of Weil algebras.
This is the content of the following theorem ([15, Theorem 3.17, p.37]).
Theorem 1 Let W be a Weil algebra. This is equivalent to either of the following
statements
i. W is isomorphic to the R-algebra R[X1, X2, . . . , Xn]/I where I is the ideal of
real polynomials containing all powers of the degree k of X, i.e. for multiindices
α, ∃k ∈N∀α(|α| = k, Xα ∈I).
ii. W is isomorphic to a ﬁnite dimensional real vector space given by a ring
C∞
0 (Rn)/I. Here C∞
0 (Rn) is the ring of germs at 0, i.e. C∞
0 (Rn) = C∞(Rn)/mg.
By an abuse of notation (using internal to E object, Dk) one can write
C∞
0 (R)/(X2) ≃R ⊕εR = R[ε] = R ⊕D1
C∞
0 (R)/(X3) ≃R ⊕εR ⊕ε2R = R ⊕D2.
(9.5)
Following [12] we can ‘carve out’ the subsets of polynomials in R[X] which, in
terms of spectra of Weil algebras, lead to [12, p.43]
D = SpecR[X](C∞
0 (R)/(X2)) = {bε|ε2 = 0, b ∈R},
D2 = SpecR[X](C∞
0 (R)/(X3)) = {bε + cε2|ε3 = 0, b, c ∈R}.
(9.6)
Here SpecA(B) is the operation of carving out a subset of A by a ring B =
C∞(R)/(Xi), i = 2, 3.
The projection π, appearing in (9.3), can be extended over entire ring R as follows
π : E →SET
π : R →C∞(R)/(x3) = R ⊕εR ⊕ε2R .
(9.7)
Note that the natural part of the usual geometric morphism between SET and E sends
R to R. This modiﬁcation of the geometric morphism in the context of gravity will
be analyzed elsewhere.
B. The BCFW Recursion Relations and Tree Amplitudes of Gravity
Let us quote the fragment of [2] which exhibits the philosophy behind the on-shell
3-vertices diagrams with complex momenta as opposite to traditional Feynman dia-
grammatics:

116
J. Król
Individual Feynman diagrams are not gauge invariant and thus don’t have any physical
meaning. By contrast, each on-shell diagram is physically meaningful and corresponds to
some particular on-shell scattering process. Note that although on-shell diagrams almost
always involve loops of internal particles, these internal particles often have momenta ﬁxed
by the constraints (or are otherwise free). On-shell forms are simply the products of on-shell
3-particle amplitudes; as such, they are always well-deﬁned, ﬁnite objects, free from either
infrared or ultraviolet divergences. This makes them ideal for exposing symmetries of a
theory which are often obscured by such divergences.
Let M(p1, . . . , pn, h1, . . . , hn) be the S-matrix of a theory of gravity evaluated at n
incomingmomentaofgravitonswithhelicities hi, i = 1, . . . , n (orothermatterparti-
cles in a matter QG). M(p1, . . . , pn, h1, . . . , hn) is thus the amplitude for the process
with these particles. The result is completely symmetric in all n external momenta.
The BCFW procedure comprises complexiﬁed momenta pi(z) ∈C, i = 1, . . . , n
such that M(pi, hi) becomes a function of z, M(z), and such that all momenta are
on-shell. This last requirement actually demands complex momenta. This goal is
achieved by performing the special deformation (see e.g. [5]). The point of BCFW is
the observation that all information about the analytical structure of M(z) is entirely
coded in the simple poles. This follows from the general property of the analyti-
cal functions that any meromorphic function vanishing at inﬁnity is determined by
the simple poles. Crucial is the vanishing property limz→∞M(z) = 0 from which it
follows
0 =
1
2πi

C
dz′
z′ −z M(z′) = M(z) + {residues}
when the contour C at inﬁnity contains all the poles. Based on this the recursion
relation for the arbitrary tree diagram amplitudes of on-shell momenta follows [1],
and the BCFW relation reads
M(z) =

L,h
ML({p1(zP), h1}, {−P(zP), h}, L)
1
P2(z)MR({p2(zP), h2}, {P(zP), −h}, R) .
(9.8)
Thus the BCFW general relation for arbitrary many n particles can be denoted
schematically at the tree-level, as [6]
An =

r,h
Ah
r+1
1
P2r
A−h
n−r+1
(9.9)
where Ah
r (z) = M(p1(z), . . . , pn(z), h1, . . . , hn) is the amplitude for r gravitons
with helicities h = (h1, . . . , hn). All gravitons are on-shell with complex momenta
and the minimal incoming data for the BCFW procedure are two 3-vertices glued by
the propagator. This fact has been used by us in the text when indicating the similarity
with the structure of gravity on synthetic spacetime. Importantly, the propagator
1
P2r
for the graviton is on-shell as well and that is why we can freely switch between
the gravitons and sum over r. The recursion formula for the amplitudes is not the

9
Aspects of Perturbative Quantum Gravity on Synthetic Spacetimes
117
procedure on Feynman diagrams leading to more and more complicated ones. It is
rather the recursion formula on amplitudes of complex on-shell momenta. The power
of this approach is this simple formula when compared to the extremely complicated
world of Feynman diagrams [1].
References
1. N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, J. Kaplan, What is the simplest quantum ﬁeld theory? JHEP
1009, 016 (2010)
2. N. Arkani-Hamed, J.L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, A.B. Goncharov, A. Postnikov, J. Trnka, Scat-
tering amplitudes and the positive Grassmannian (2012). arXiv:1212.5605
3. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, Smooth quantum gravity: exotic smoothness and quantum gravity, in
At the Frontier of Spacetime, vol. 183, Fundamental Theories of Physics, ed. by T. Asselmeyer-
Maluga (Springer, Switzerland, 2016)
4. T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, J. Król, How to obtain a cosmological constant from small exotic R4.
Phys. Dark Universe. 19, 66–77 (2018), https://authors.elsevier.com/a/1WFBE7t6qpvmr8
5. P. Benincasa, C. Boucher-Veronneau, F. Cachazo, Taming tree amplitudes in general relativity.
JHEP 11, 057 (2007)
6. R. Britto, F. Cachazo, B. Feng, E. Witten, Direct proof of tree-level recursion relation in Yang-
Mills theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 181602 (2005)
7. M.J. Duff, Covariant quantization, in Quantum Gravity. An Oxford Symposium, 2nd edn., ed.
by C.J. Isham, R. Penrose, D.W. Sciama (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1978)
8. R.P. Feynman, F.B. Morinigo, W.G. Wagner, in Feynman Lectures on Gravitation, ed. by B.
Hatﬁeld (Addison Wesley, Reading, 1995)
9. R.P. Feynman, Quantum theory of gravitation. Acta Phys. Pol. 14, 841 (1963)
10. M. Heller, J. Król, How logic interacts with geometry: Inﬁnitesimal curvature of categorical
spaces (2016). arXiv:1605.03099
11. M. Heller, J. Król, Inﬁnitesimal structure of singularities. Universe 3(1), 16 (2017)
12. A. Kock, Synthetic Differential Geometry, 2nd edn. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2006)
13. A. Kock, Synthetic Geometry of Manifolds (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009)
14. J. Król, T. Asselmeyer-Maluga, K. Bielas, P. Klimasara, From quantum to cosmological regime.
The role of forcing and exotic 4-smoothness. Universe. 3(2), 31 (2017)
15. I. Moerdijk, G.E. Reyes, Models for Smooth Inﬁnitesimal Analysis (Springer, New York, 2010)
16. M.D. Scadron, Advanced Quantum Theory, 3rd edn. (Imperial College, World Scientiﬁc, New
Jersey, 2007)
17. G. ’t Hooft, Perturbative quantum gravity, in Proceedings of the International School of Subnu-
clear Physics, Erice 2002, From Quarks and Gluons to Quantum Gravity, ed. by A. Zichichi,
Subnuclear Series, vol. 40 (World Scientiﬁc, 2002), pp. 249–269
18. R.P. Woodard, Perturbative quantum gravity comes of age. Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 23(9), 1430020
(2014)

Chapter 10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the
Concept Analysis of Complex Systems
and Time Series
G. N. Nop, A. B. Romanowska and J. D. H. Smith
Abstract Wille’s formal concept analysis, Hardegree’s treatment of natural kinds,
and Birkhoff’s mathematical theory of polarities provide essentially equivalent tools
for the analysis of a static system functioning at a single level. We now show how a
number of categorical notions allow these tools to be extended to cover the analysis
of complex systems involving multiple hierarchical levels indexed by a semilattice,
including the case where a chain represents a time series governing the evolution of
a single system. A semilattice is a poset category with ﬁnite products or coproducts.
Our analysis then rests on functors from a semilattice to the category of complete
lattice homomorphisms, or from a semilattice to a category of polarities and bonding
relations.
10.1
Introduction
Concept analysis has emerged as a tool for the study of the relationships between
selected items and the properties that they may possess. It identiﬁes those groups of
objects and related properties that embody signiﬁcant features of the system under
consideration. It is a static science that does not take account of the development of a
changing system, or the progressive evolution of complexity. The ﬁxed relationships
that it identiﬁes are exhibited by a concept lattice (Sect.10.2).
The goal of the current work is to present the foundations for an extension of
the ideas of concept analysis to changing environments, evolving complex systems,
and time series analyses of successive stages of a given system. The extension relies
G. N. Nop · J. D. H. Smith
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
e-mail: gnnop@iastate.edu
J. D. H. Smith
e-mail: jdhsmith@iastate.edu
A. B. Romanowska (B)
Warsaw University of Technology, Pl. Politechniki 1, 00-661 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: a.romanowska@mini.pw.edu.pl
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
M. Ku´s and B. Skowron (eds.), Category Theory in Physics, Mathematics,
and Philosophy, Springer Proceedings in Physics 235,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30896-4_10
119

120
G. N. Nop et al.
critically on the use of category theory in a number of ways. On the one side, the
changing relationships between varying sets of items and properties are encoded
within a category of polarities and bonding relations (Sect.10.3). On the other side,
we extend concept lattices to concept quasilattices (Sect.10.5), whose structure is
determined by contravariant functors from poset categories to the category of com-
plete lattices (Sect.10.4).
10.2
Polarities and Complete Lattices
Hardegree’s treatment of natural kinds [4], Wille’s formal concept analysis [2, 14],
MacNeille’s completions [7], andBirkhoff’s theoryof polarities [1, Sect.V.7] provide
essentially equivalent tools for the analysis of a static system functioning at a single
level. We summarize these tools in the present section.
10.2.1
Poset Categories
We will use the following terms:
• A poset category is a small category C, where for each pair x, y of objects of C,
one has |C(x, y) ∪C(y, x)| ∈{0, 1}1;
• A meet semilattice is a poset category, in which each pair x, y of objects has a
product x × y;
• A meet semilattice homomorphism is a functor between meet semilattices that
preserves products of pairs of objects;
• A join semilattice is a poset category, in which each pair x, y of objects has a
coproduct x + y;
• A join semilattice homomorphism is a functor between join semilattices which
preserves coproducts of pairs of objects;
• A lattice is a poset category, where each pair of objects has a product and a
coproduct;
• A lattice homomorphism is a functor between lattices that preserves products and
coproducts of pairs of objects—here Lat denotes the category of lattice homo-
morphisms between lattices;
• A bounded lattice is a lattice with an initial object ⊥and a terminal object ⊤;
• A bounded lattice homomorphism is a lattice homomorphism that preserves the
initial and terminal objects;
• A complete lattice is a poset category which is bicomplete: each set S of objects
has a product 
x∈S x and a coproduct 
x∈S x;
1Recall that each pre-order or thin small category is categorically equivalent to a poset.

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
121
• A complete lattice homomorphism is a lattice homomorphism which preserves
all products and coproducts. Then CLat denotes the category of complete lattice
homomorphisms between complete lattices [6, Sect.I.4.3].
For objects x, y of a poset category P, the nonemptiness of the hom-set P(x, y) will
be denoted by x →y or x ≤y. In the latter notation, appropriate sufﬁces may be
attached, such as
x ≤× y
corresponding to
x = x × y
(10.1)
in a meet semilattice, or
x ≤+ y
corresponding to
x + y = y
(10.2)
in a join semilattice. Note that ≤is a partial order relation on the object set (hence
the term “poset”): reﬂexive, antisymmetric, and transitive.
10.2.2
Contexts
Suppose that  is a set of items, and that  is a set of properties. Let α be a subset
of  × , considered as a relation of attribution from  to . Thus if (x, p) ∈α
(or equivalently x α p), property p is an attribute of item x. The triple (, , α) is
called a polarity [1, Sect.V.7] or NK-structure [4] or context [2, 14]. Equivalently,
the disjoint union  ⊎ may be construed as a poset (category), with nontrivial
order relations x →p for (x, p) ∈α.
We list some classical examples of contexts:
Posets:
For a poset (H, ≤), take (H, H, ≤).
Algebraic geometry:
For a positive integer n, take (Cn, C[X1, . . . , Xn], α), where
α is the annihilation relation with (x1, . . . , xn) α f (X1, . . . , Xn) if and only if
f (x1, . . . , xn) = 0.
Galois theory:
For a ﬁeld extension F →E, suppose that [F, E] is the set of all
intermediate ﬁelds. Let G be the Galois group of the extension, the group of
automorphisms of E that ﬁx F. For K ∈[F, E] and g ∈G, write K α g if g ﬁxes
each element of K. Then ([F, E], G, α) is a polarity.
10.2.3
Galois Connections and Galois Correspondences
For a set X of items, deﬁne
Xr = {p ∈ | ∀x ∈X , x α p}
(10.3)

122
G. N. Nop et al.
as the set of properties common to all items in X. Dually, for a set P of properties,
deﬁne
Ps = {x ∈ | ∀p ∈P , x α p}
(10.4)
as the set of items attributed to all properties in P. The speciﬁcations (10.3) and (10.4)
yield a pair

2, ⊆

r
 
2, ⊇

s

(10.5)
of order-preserving functions, an adjoint pair of functors between poset categories
[13, III Sect.3.3]. The pair (10.5) is known as a Galois connection. It restricts to a
pair

2s, ⊆

r
 
2r, ⊇

s

(10.6)
of mutually inverse order-preserving functions, a Galois correspondence, between
the respective images 2r and 2s of the functions r and s from (10.5). The termi-
nology here relates to the context of Galois theory from Sect.10.2.2.
10.2.4
Concepts
Consider a polarity or context (, , α), with Galois correspondence (10.6). Ele-
ments of 2r and 2s are described as closed. Then a concept of the context is an
ordered pair
(A|B)
(10.7)
in 2s × 2r (written using a vertical line as the separator), with Ar = B and Bs =
A. The closed set A is the extent of the concept (10.7), while the closed set B is the
intent of the concept (10.7).
Example 1 In the algebraic geometry context of Sect.10.2.2, the closed subsets of
Cn are algebraic sets, while the closed subsets of C[X1, . . . , Xn] are radical ideals
[5, Corollary I.1.4].
As a set, the concept lattice L (, , α) is the set of all concepts of the context
(, , α). The conceptualization of an item x ∈ is the concept
xε = ({x}rs|{x}r) ,
(10.8)
while the conceptualization of a property p ∈ is the concept
pη = ({p}s|{p}sr) .
(10.9)

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
123
Under the equivalent order relations
(A1|B1) ≤× (A2|B2)
⇔
A1 ⊆A2
(10.10)
and
(A1|B1) ≤+ (A2|B2)
⇔
B1 ⊇B2
(10.11)
for (A1|B1), (A2|B2) ∈L (, , α), the concept lattice forms a complete lattice.
Indeed, for a subset {(Ai|Bi) | i ∈I} of L (, , α), the product is given by

i∈I
(Ai, Bi) =

i∈I
Ai
			

i∈I
Ai

r
while

i∈I
(Ai, Bi) =

i∈I
Bi

s 			

i∈I
Bi

gives the coproduct [1, V Theorem 19], [2, Satz/Theorem 3], [7]. We will write CtLt
for the category of concept lattices and complete lattice homomorphisms between
them. Note that there is an inclusion functor
A : CtLt →CLat
(10.12)
known as abstraction.
Example 2 In the poset context of Sect.10.2.2, there is an order-preserving embed-
ding
(H, ≤) →L (H, H, ≤); h →(h≥|h≤)
(10.13)
known as the MacNeille completion [7, Sect.11]. The extent h≥= {k ∈H | h ≥
k} and intent h≤= {k ∈H | h ≤k} correspond to the respective slice categories
H/h and h/H. Note that hε = hη = (h≥|h≤) using the conceptualization notation
of (10.8) and (10.9). The MacNeille completion captures the construction of the
ordered set (R, ≤) of real numbers from the ordered set (Q, ≤) of rational numbers.
10.2.5
Two-Element Posets
In order to obtain minimal nontrivial examples of concept lattices for subsequent use,
we will examine the MacNeille completions (10.13) of the two two-element posets.
The intents and extents of the concepts will be presented as concatenations of their
elements.

124
G. N. Nop et al.
Example 3 Consider the two-element lattice 2 = {0 < 1}, which corresponds to the
following poset context:
≤0 1
0 × ×
1
×
.
(10.14)
Its MacNeille completion is the concept lattice (0|01) →(01|1), which is abstractly
isomorphic to 2. Then
(01|1) 

(0|01)


gives a set-theoretical representation of the respective order relations (10.10) and
(10.11).
Example 4 Consider the two-element antichain {a, b}, which corresponds to the
following poset context:
≤a b
a ×
b
×
.
(10.15)
Abstractly, its MacNeille completion is isomorphic to the lattice 2 × 2. Again,
(ab|∅)

zzzzzzzz
 	
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(a|a)


z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
 	
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
(b|b)

	CCCCCCCC

{{{{{{{{
(∅|ab)

	DDDDDDDD


{
{
{
{
{
{
{
{
gives a set-theoretical representation of the respective order relations (10.10) and
(10.11) on the concept lattice.

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
125
10.3
Categories of Concepts
In the preceding section, polarities or contexts were taken in isolation. We now
examine certain relationships between contexts, obtaining various categories whose
object class is the class of polarities or contexts.
10.3.1
The Category of Bonds
Consider a domain context (d, d, αd) and a codomain context (c, c, αc). Then
a bond [2, Sect.5.1] from the domain to the codomain is a relation βdc ⊆d × c
such that:
• For each domain item x, the set
xβdc = {q ∈c | x βdc q}
(10.16)
is an intent in the codomain, and dually
• For each codomain property q, the set
βdcq = {x ∈d | x βdc q}
(10.17)
is an extent in the domain.
The notation of (10.16) and (10.17) is extended to subsets X of d and P of c, so
that
Xβdc = {p ∈c | ∀x ∈X , x βdc p} =

x∈X
xβdc
and
βdcP = {x ∈d | ∀p ∈P , x βdc p} =

p∈P
βdcp .
For any domain context (d, d, αd) and any codomain context (c, c, αc), the
relation d × c forms a bond from (d, d, αd) to (c, c, αc). For any context
(, , α), the polarity α is a bond from (, , α) to (, , α).
Now consider a further bond βdc from (c, c, αc) to a context (b, b, αb).
Then the relation
βdcβcb =

(A|B)∈L (c,c,αc)
βdcB × Aβcb = {(x, n) ∈d × b | (xβdc)s ⊆βcbn}
(10.18)
is a bond from (d, d, αd) to (b, b, αb) [2, Sect.5.1]. The condition (10.18) on
a pair (x, n) from d × b to be in βdcβcb may be summarized by the following
diagram:

126
G. N. Nop et al.
x

M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
βdc

y
βcb

M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
αc
m
m′
n
Here, the item y from c is αc-related to all of the elements m, . . . , m′ that are βdc-
related to x. Thus y represents a typical element of (xβdc)s. The diagram expresses
the deﬁning requirement (10.18) for such an element to lie in βcbn; namely, that it
should be βcb-related to n. This diagrammatic representation of the bond product
may be contrasted with the representations used in [2, Sect.5.1].
The category Bond of bonds has the class of contexts as its object class, and the
class of bonds as its morphism class. The product of morphisms is given by (10.18).
The identity morphism at a context (, , α) is the bond α.
10.3.2
The Category of Bond Pairs
Suppose that (d, d, αd) is a domain context and that (c, c, αc) is a codomain
context. Then a bond pair (βdc, βcd) from (d, d, αd) to (c, c, αc) consists of
a bond βdc from (d, d, αd) to (c, c, αc) and a bond βcd from (c, c, αc) to
(d, d, αd). Thus if (βdc, βcd) is a bond pair from (d, d, αd) to (c, c, αc),
and that (βcb, βbc) is a bond pair from (c, c, αc) to (b, b, αb). Then
(βdc, βcd)(βcb, βbc) := (βdcβcb, βbcβcd)
(10.19)
is a bond pair from (d, d, αd) to (b, b, αb).
The category BdPr of bond pairs comprises the class of contexts as its object
class. The class of bond pairs is its morphism class. The product of morphisms is
given by (10.19). Then the identity morphism at a context (, , α) is the bond pair
(α, α).
10.3.3
The Category of Bondings
Consider a given bond pair (βdc, βcd) from a domain context (d, d, αd) to a
codomain context (c, c, αc). The bond pair is a bonding if the condition
∀(A|B) ∈L (d, d, αd) ,

Aβdcr = βcdB and
βcdB
s = Aβdc
is satisﬁed.

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
127
For a domain context (d, d, αd) and a codomain context (c, c, αc), suppose
that
ϕ : L (d, d, αd) →L (c, c, αc)
is a complete lattice homomorphism. Deﬁne
βdc = {(x, q) ∈d × c | xεϕ ≤qη}
(10.20)
and
βcd = {(y, p) ∈c × d | yε ≤pηϕ}
(10.21)
using the conceptualization notation of (10.8) and (10.9). Then (βdc, βcd) is a bonding
from (c, c, αc) to (d, d, αd) [2, Sect.7.2]. We thus obtain a functor CtLt →
BdPr (where the functoriality follows along the lines of [2, Hilfs./Proposition 113].)
The image of this functor yields a category of bondings Bdg as a subcategory of
BdPr.
Conversely, for a domain context (d, d, αd) and a codomain context
(c, c, αc), suppose that there is a bonding (βdc, βcd) from the domain to the
codomain. Then
L (d, d, αd) →L (c, c, αc): (A|B) →
βcdB
		Aβdc
deﬁnes a complete lattice homomorphism [2, Sect.7.2]. We obtain an isomorphism
L : Bdg →CtLt
(10.22)
between the category Bdg of bondings and the category CtLt of complete lattice
homomorphisms between concept lattices.
10.3.4
A Complete Lattice Homomorphism
The diagonal embedding 
: 2 →2 × 2 of the two-element lattice into its direct
square is a complete lattice homomorphism. Interpreting the domain and codomain
of 
 as the respective concept lattices presented in Sect.10.2.5, we have

: (01|1) →(ab|∅) , (0|10) →(∅|ab)
as the action of the complete lattice homomorphism. The corresponding bonding
(βdc, βcd) is given by
βdc = {(0, a), (0, b)}
recording that the image of 0ε is below aη and bη, according to (10.20), and
βcd = {(a, 1), (b, 1)}

128
G. N. Nop et al.
recording that aε and bε are below the image of 1η, according to (10.21). The bonding
may be displayed as
0 1 a b
0 × × × ×
1
×
a
× ×
b
×
×
(10.23)
in conjunction with the contexts from Examples 3 and 4.
10.4
Quasilattices
A bisemilattice (Q, ×, +) consists of a set Q that forms both a meet semilattice
(Q, ≤×) with products x × y and a join semilattice (Q, ≤+) with coproducts x +
y, for x, y in Q. A bisemilattice homomorphism from a bisemilattice (Q, ×, +)
to a bisemilattice (Q′, ×, +) is a function f : Q →Q′ such that f : (Q, ≤×) →
(Q′, ≤×) is a meet semilattice homomorphism and f : (Q, ≤+) →(Q′, ≤+) is a
join semilattice homomorphism.
A bisemilattice (Q, ×, +) is a quasilattice if
[(x + y) × z] + [y × z] = (x + y) × z
and
[(x × y) + z] × [y + z] = (x × y) + z
for elements x, y, z of Q. Under an additional distributivity assumption, quasilattices
were introduced by Płonka [9]. They were subsequently considered in full generality
by Padmanabhan [8]. Their duality was studied initially in the distributive case [3],
and more recently in the general case [12].
10.4.1
Lattices and Semilattices as Quasilattices
Since a quasilattice consists of two poset categories sharing a common object set,
we may identify two important classes of quasilattices:
• A quasilattice (Q, ×, +) is a lattice if its two poset category structures coincide;
• A quasilattice (Q, ×, +) is a semilattice if its two poset category structures are
mutually dual.
Thus a quasilattice (Q, ×, +) is a lattice if either of the two absorption conditions
x + (x × y) = x
or
x × (x + y) = x

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
129
(expressing the equivalence of ≤× and ≤+) holds for x, y in Q. On the other hand, it
is a semilattice if x × y = x + y (expressing the equivalence of ≤× and ≥+) holds
for x, y in Q.
10.4.2
The Structure of Quasilattices
Consider the categories SLat and QLat of bisemilattice homomorphisms, taken
with respective object classes consisting of semilattices and quasilattices. Then the
nameless inclusion functor SLat →QLat has a left adjoint P : QLat →SLat, the
reﬂection or replica functor. The image Q P of a quasilattice Q is its semilattice
replica. Write π : Q →Q P for the unit of the adjunction, interpreted as an analogue
of a ﬁbre bundle over a base space Q P, with Q as the total space of the bundle.
(This analogy is made more explicit in [12, Sect.5.1.3].) Then for each point h in
H = Q P, the Płonka ﬁbre h R = π−1{h}, as a subquasilattice of Q, is actually a
lattice. If h ≤× k in Q P, there is a uniquely deﬁned lattice homomorphism
(h ≤× k)R : π−1{k} →π−1{h}; x →x + (x × y)
that is independent of the choice of an arbitrary element y of π−1{h}. We call these
lattice homomorphisms the Płonka homomorphisms of the quasilattice (Q, ×, +).
Thus the quasilattice Q serves to specify a contravariant functor R : (H, ≤×) →Lat
from the poset category (H, ≤×), the semilattice replica of Q, to the category Lat
of lattices.
Conversely, suppose that there is a contravariant functor R : (H, ≤×) →Lat from
a meet semilattice (H, ≤×) to the category Lat of lattices. A quasilattice structure
is deﬁned on the disjoint union 
h∈H h R by
x × y = x(h × k ≤× h)R × y(h × k ≤× k)R
and
x + y = x(h × k ≤× h)R + y(h × k ≤× k)R
for h, k ∈H, along with x ∈h R and y ∈k R. These two constructions provide an
equivalence between quasilattices Q and corresponding representation functors
R : Q P →Lat [8, 10], [11, Theorem 4.3.2], [12, Sect.6.1]. In the literature, con-
travariant functors from (H. ≤×) are sometimes taken in the form of covariant func-
tors from (H. ≤+).
10.4.3
The Diagonal Embedding of the Two-Element Lattice
In Sect.10.3.4, we examined the diagonal embedding 
: 2 →2 × 2 of the two-
element lattice 2 = {0 ≤1} into its direct square. The lattice homomorphism may
be displayed as

130
G. N. Nop et al.
1 

 11
01
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
10
BBBBBBBB
0



 00
BBBBBBBB
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
(10.24)
using a convention where the elements of the direct square are written simply as
binary strings of length two. Note that the lattice structures are presented by their
Hasse diagrams, the directed graphs recording the covering relations in the lattices.
In other words, the full order relations on the lattices are the reﬂexive, transitive
closures of the covering relations displayed in the Hasse diagram.
Now consider a two-element meet semilattice
H = {early →late}
(10.25)
which readers are invited to interpret as an encoding of a time interval. Consider
a contravariant functor R : H →Lat. Consider the representation R : H →Lat
with earlyR = 2 × 2, lateR = 2, and (early →late)R = 
. The construc-
tion from Sect.10.4.2 then yields a quasilattice (Q, ×, +) with
1
11

01
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
10
BBBBBBBB
0

00

BBBBBBBB
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
(10.26)
as the Hasse diagram of (Q, ≤×) and
1
 11
01
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
10
BBBBBBBB
0


00
BBBBBBBB
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
(10.27)
as the Hasse diagram of (Q, ≤+). These diagrams illustrate features common to
all quasilattices. For example, two elements lie in the same lattice ﬁbre if and only
if they have the same order relationship in each diagram. On the other hand, an

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
131
order relationship under ≤+ records the action of a lattice homomorphism if the dual
relationship holds under ≤×.
10.5
Concept Analysis of a Complex System
We are now in a position to extend the ideas of concept analysis to complex systems
with a number of distinct levels that are indexed by a semilattice. The semilattice
may be representing a hierarchical arrangement of levels in a complex system. As
an alternative, in the case in which the underlying semilattice is a chain, it may be
interpreted as presenting a series of time points. A quasilattice with a semilattice
replica of this type may be describing the history of a context, with its concomitant
concept lattice, that is evolving over the time series. These quasilattices may be
considered as dynamic versions of concept lattices.
In general, regardless of whether the underlying semilattice is a chain or not, it
turns out to be convenient to use a temporal terminology (“earlier,” “later,” etc.), as in
the protoplasmic example (10.25). In fact, as complex structures evolve, the higher
levels in their hierarchy tend to arise later in the evolution, emerging on the basis of
lower, earlier levels.
10.5.1
Complex Polarities
We ﬁrst extend the ideas of Sect.10.2.2 to complex systems with a hierarchy of
distinct levels, indexed by a semilattice. Deﬁne a complex polarity or quasicontext
to be a contravariant functor P : H →Bdg from a semilattice to the category of
bondings.
Example 5 The polarities and bonding displayed in (10.23) may be interpreted as a
complex polarity P : H →Bdg from the time interval semilattice H of (10.25):
• The image of the object early is the poset context (10.15) from Example 4;
• The image of the object late is the poset context (10.14) from Example 3;
• The image of the morphism early →late is the bonding from Sect.10.3.4.
Note that polarities or contexts in the traditional sense are complex polarities or
quasicontexts for which the indexing semilattice H is a singleton.
10.5.2
Concept Quasilattices
Now we may extend the ideas of Sect.10.2.4 to complex systems with a hierarchy
of distinct levels, indexed by a semilattice. A preliminary mathematical deﬁnition is

132
G. N. Nop et al.
required: A quasilattice is said to be locally complete if its Płonka ﬁbres are actually
complete lattices, and its Płonka homomorphisms are complete lattice homomor-
phisms. Thus under the equivalence presented in Sect.10.4.2, locally complete quasi-
lattices correspond to contravariant representation functors R : (H, ≤×) →CLat
from a meet semilattice (H, ≤×) to the category CLat of complete lattices. In
particular, both complete lattices and arbitrary semilattices form locally complete
quasilattices.
Recall the isomorphism functor L of (10.22) and the abstraction functor A of
(10.12). Now suppose that P : H →Bdg is a complex polarity or quasicontext, as
introduced in Sect.10.5.1. Then the concept quasilattice of P is the locally complete
quasilattice that is given by the representation
H
P  Bdg
L
 CtLt
A
 CLat
(10.28)
of the semilattice H in the category CLat of complete lattices.
Remark 1 If the semilattice H is a singleton {h}, the image of h under the functor P
is a context. Then the image of h under (10.28) is the concept lattice of that context.
This concept lattice is the quasilattice represented by the functor (10.28).
As a disjoint union, the concept quasilattice of P consists of all the concepts
from its individual lattice ﬁbres. For each indexing element h in the semilattice H,
the object hP of Bdg is a context, whose concepts then arise ﬁrst in the concept
lattice H PL . The order relationships between the various concepts of the concept
quasilattice may be derived formally from the quasilattice structure, by means of
(10.1) or (10.2). However, it is more illuminating to combine the set representations
of the individual concept lattices of the contexts hP as h ranges over H. This process
is illustrated and discussed below.
10.5.3
Set Representations: The Layers of History
Consider the complex polarity of Example 5. Abstractly, its concept quasilattice is
given by the representation R : {early →late} →Lat of Sect.10.4.3, which
may be read as a contravariant functor R : {early →late} →CLat, in view
of the fact that 
: 2 →2 × 2 is actually a complete lattice homomorphism. The
respective meet semilattice and join semilattice structures of the abstract quasilattice
are given by the Hasse diagrams (10.26) and (10.27). These Hasse diagrams then
appear within the set representation of the concept quasilattice that is displayed in
Fig.10.1. Here, the separate meet-semilattice and join-semilattice order relationships
between concepts correspond to containments of extents and intents, exactly as in
the classical concept lattice speciﬁcations (10.10) and (10.11).
Note that the containments are opposed within the lattice ﬁbres, as is usual for
concept lattices. On the other hand, the containments actually coincide along the

10
Category Theory as a Foundation for the Concept …
133
Fig. 10.1 The set
representation of a concept
quasilattice as a record of
history
(01/ab|1/Ø)
(ab|Ø)
(a|a)
(b|b)
(Ø|ab)
(0/Ø|01/ab)
late
early
edges in the Hasse diagrams giving the actions of the lattice homomorphism that are
displayed by barred arrows in (10.24). In order to implement these containments,
the extents and intents of the domain concepts are augmented by the respective
extents and intents of their images in the codomain concept lattice. In the ﬁgure,
the augmented domain concepts are separated by a slash, suggesting that the later
concepts appear on top of the corresponding earlier concepts in so-called layers of
history.
In the time-series interpretation of quasicontexts, these layers are understood to
be analogues of geological strata, or the successive layers of an archaeological site.
In the complex system interpretation of quasicontexts, the upper layers represent
advanced or high-level phenomena that have emerged from more primitive, low-
level phenomena.
Looking at Fig.10.1, it may be seen that the early full and empty intents and
extents ab and ∅are preserved over the time period, appearing as lower layers of
history in the late period. On the other hand, the singleton extents and intents a, b are
lost at that later time, corresponding to the fact that they are not part of the image of
the complete lattice homomorphism in the structural representation of the concept
quasilattice.

134
G. N. Nop et al.
10.6
Conclusion
We have extended concept analysis to complex systems with multiple hierarchical
levels, and to time series of evolving contexts. In particular, concept lattices have been
extended to concept quasilattices. Within our theory, set representations of concept
quasilattices provide a model for the accretion of structure that is preserved over
history, and the disappearance of structure that fails to survive.
References
1. G. Birkhoff, Lattice Theory, 3rd edn. (American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1967)
2. B. Ganter, R. Wille, Formale Begriffsanalyse (Springer, Berlin, 1996) Translated by C. Franzke
as Formal Concept Analysis (Springer, Berlin, 1999)
3. G. Gierz, A. Romanowska, Duality for distributive bisemilattices. J. Aust. Math. Soc. 51,
247–275 (1991)
4. G.M. Hardegree, An approach to the logic of natural kinds. Pac. Phil. Q. 63, 122–132 (1982)
5. R. Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry (Springer, Berlin, 1977)
6. P.T. Johnstone, Stone Spaces (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982)
7. H.M. MacNeille, Partially ordered sets. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 42, 416–460 (1937)
8. R. Padmanabhan, Regular identities in lattices. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 158, 179–188 (1971)
9. J. Płonka, On distributive quasilattices. Fundam. Math. 60, 191–200 (1967)
10. J. Płonka, On a method of construction of abstract algebras. Fundam. Math. 61, 183–189 (1967)
11. A.B. Romanowska, J.D.H. Smith, Modes (World Scientiﬁc, River Edge, 2002)
12. A.B. Romanowska, J.D.H. Smith, Duality for quasilattices and Galois connections. Fund. Inf.
156, 331–359 (2017)
13. J.D.H. Smith, A.B. Romanowska, Post-Modern Algebra (Wiley, New York, 1999)
14. R. Wille, Restructuring lattice theory: an approach based on hierarchies of concepts. In Ordered
sets (Banff, AB, 1981), NATO Adv. Study Inst. Ser. C: Math. Phys. Sci. vol. 83 (Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1982) pp. 445–470

