W
Walter Burley
MAREK GENSLER
Department of Philosophy
University of Lo´dz
Lo´dz
Poland
Abstract
Walter Burley (c. 1275–after 1344), known as doctor planus
et perspicuus, was one of the most eminent logicians and
natural philosophers of the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth
century and the chief polemist of William of Ockham.
Of his almost 80 works composed over a period of some
40 years from his studies in Oxford to the ﬁnal days of his
intellectual activity (about 60 of them have survived),
most are devoted to logic and natural philosophy, the
remaining ones, to theology and practical philosophy. In
logic, he was the champion of via antiqua, defending
realist views against the criticism of Ockham. In natural
philosophy, his favorite problem was change. Apart from
local motion, he was interested in the issues related to
substantial, qualitative, and quantitative change, called
generation, alteration, and growth, respectively. Some of
his ideas underwent changes and reﬁnements in discus-
sions with his colleagues in Oxford, Paris, and elsewhere,
others formed a solid core relatively early and were
repeated in consecutive works or were simply taken for
granted.
Biographical Information
Walter Burley was born in a village of Burley (today part of
greater Leeds) in Yorkshire between 1274 and 1276. Noth-
ing is known about his life before 1301, when he had
already been a graduate in Philosophy at Oxford Univer-
sity. As a Master of Arts Burley became a fellow of Merton
College and was a Regent Master in the Faculty of Liberal
Arts until 1306 or 1307. His earliest works (questions to
book III of De anima, probably the only surviving work
from his student times, early versions of commentaries on
Ars vetus, Posterior Analytics, De sophisticis elenchis, logical
treatises, commentary on De generatione et corruptione,
and the early version of commentary on Physics) come
from that period. In 1308, Burley went to Paris to study
theology. While studying theology he continued his inter-
est in logic and philosophy of nature: the ﬁrst version of
De puritate artis logicae, his comprehensive treatise on the
subject, as well some commentaries on logical works of
Aristotle testify to his intellectual maturity as much as
three treatises on accidental change, known as Tractatus
primus, Tractatus secundus, and De formis, and the ques-
tions to Physics. Ironically, his main theological work,
the commentary on the Sentences, is now lost. Still as
a student of theology, before 1319, he disputed de quolibet
in Toulouse: the topic was the ﬁrst and last instant of
change (De primo et ultimo instanti).
In 1324, Burley received the title of Master of Theology
(he had already been a priest since 1321) and remained in
Paris as a professor and fellow of College de Sorbonne for
three more years. In late 1326 he started a diplomatic
career: over a period of almost 20 years he served as an
envoy for the king of England Edward III. He visited the
papal curia in Avignon several times; he also traveled to
Germany and Italy. His diplomatic and ecclesiastical
career was supported by Richard de Bury, later bishop of
Durham and Chancellor of England. At bishop’s court
Burley met a group of learned men, some of whom
(John Maudit, Thomas Bradwardine) he had known
from Oxford. The intellectual atmosphere inspired him
to return to philosophy: he completed the ﬁnal versions of
his commentaries on Physics (started in Paris) and Ars
vetus, revised De puritate artis logicae to respond to
Ockham’s arguments from Summa logicae, and composed
commentaries to Aristotle’s Ethics and Politics as well as
a new treatise De universalibus. His last work was probably
a quodlibetal question in philosophy of nature he
discussed in Bologna in 1341. The date of his death is
unknown: last information about him comes from 1344
but he may have lived until the Black Death reached
England in 1348.
Thought
Burley’s contribution to philosophy is most visible in two
disciplines: logic and natural philosophy. He is not
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

a deliberate innovator. He tries to give a precise and
penetrating (planus et perspicuus, hence his nickname)
explanation of the teaching of Aristotle and other
authorities, which would be in agreement with the com-
mon opinion of scholars (communis opinio doctorum). It
is seldom that he opposes the prevalent views or proposes
a new solution. Still, in both ﬁelds he is able to leave
a
visible
mark
of
his
talent.
In
logic,
his
De
suppositionibus, giving an overview of the theory of sup-
position, helped to revive interest in it not only in William
of Ockham; his De obligationibus, De exclusivis, De
exceptivis, and other treatises similarly set standards for
respective parts of logical theory. His main logical work,
De
puritate
artis
logicae,
was
intended
to
be
a comprehensive study of the whole discipline: Burley
did not complete his project in the original version, now
known as Tractatus brevior, but returned to it later and
revised it in Tractatus longior. The two versions of De
puritate contain a thorough though not uniform presen-
tation of types of logical argumentation; in Tractatus
brevior he divides them into enthymematic consequences,
conditional syllogistic consequences, and hypothetical
unconditional consequences; in Tractatus longior, written
with a clear polemical intention against Ockham, he
reﬁned his original division of consequences into absolute
and as-of-now ones, further dividing the former category
into natural and accidental ones (the criterion being
whether the antecedent includes the consequent), and
introducing three other divisions.
As a realist, he believes that logic is nothing but an
analysis of general structures of reality. Aristotle’s catego-
ries show an order that things bear in themselves (ﬁrst
intentions) and that is only secondarily reﬂected by our
ways of speaking about things (second intentions), there-
fore logic and ontology are inseparable. The opposition to
Ockham’s nominalism is best visible in his views on sup-
position: for Burley, the word ‘‘man’’ in the proposition
‘‘Man is the noblest creature’’ is in the simple supposition
because it signiﬁes something, i.e., a species, for Ockham,
it is not because it signiﬁes a mental intention rather than
a true thing. Burley’s realism does not go as far as Scotus’;
however, he agrees with the Subtle Doctor that both com-
mon nature and individual difference really exist, but he
denies that they differ only formally. Burley tries to avoid
the subtleties of formalitates and claims that the differ-
ences between universals are real. Moreover, common
nature is not contracted by the individual difference, as
was the opinion of Scotus, but remains in an individual in
its totality. This assumption allows Burley to analyze the
divisions of a universal, looking for something general in
various items of minor generality. Though he upholds the
real difference between universals, he denies it – contrary
to Giles of Orleans – between essence and existence.
In natural philosophy, Burley’s interests were truly
focused on the problems of duration and change. He
analyzed it on various levels of abstraction, starting from
particular classes of things and actions observed in the
world. Some of his opinions were modiﬁed in successive
works, of which the most important are the three versions
of his Physics commentary, the commentary on De
generatione et corruptione, and three Parisian treatises on
change. The constant part of Burley’s views on elementary
and organic change can be summarized as follows. Prime
matter, devoid of deﬁnite dimensions, is ﬁrst informed by
primary qualities, which – working in pairs – constitute
the forms of ﬁrst bodies, i.e., the elements. Heat is the ﬁrst
among equals in primary qualities. Its activity causes both
generation and corruption; it is necessary for life but
brings about death too. These various forms of action
are related to various types of heat: celestial, elementary,
and animal. The three types do not differ from one
another in their natures, on the contrary, they share the
same nature, and the observable differences between them
are attributed to intensity in action, which in turn is
dependent on the source of heat. Elements constituted
by heat and the remaining three primary qualities serve
as material for all bodies of sublunary world in such a way
that every body is a mixture of all elements, which are
virtually present in it (an idea borrowed from Thomas
Aquinas), and their qualities concur to produce a mixed
quality, characteristic for a particular body.
The bodies of inanimate beings, such as minerals, are
constituted from elements under the inﬂuence of celestial
heat. In animate beings, the process is more complex,
for it requires concurrence of three parties: the form of
a generated being, say an animal, comes in semen from the
male parent, matter is provided by the female parent, and
solar heat is a necessary condition for creation of a new
life. Semen is a form that exists only during the process of
generation passing the nature to the newly formed being;
in the same vein, an embryo remains a quasi part of
a mother until a vegetative soul is formed in it.
Animate beings need food both for preservation of life
and growth. In the process of nutrition, the form of food is
destroyed in such a way that animal heat digests the
humidity of the food, which brings about the destruction
of its substantial form. The matter is then immediately
informed by the substantial form of the animal. Subse-
quent physiological processes are dependent on the quan-
tity of digested food. If it is sufﬁcient, an animal preserves
its life in its perfection or, if it has not reached its perfec-
tion yet, it grows. If it is insufﬁcient, animal’s heat starts
1374 W
Walter Burley

digesting its own humidity, which causes shrinking of the
body and may bring about death. If it is superﬂuous, an
animal not only preserves its form (regardless of the stage
of its development) but puts on weight: this is a process in
which the excess food is converted into new parts of the
body. It is different from growth in the sense that no new
parts are produced. Both putting up weight and growth
produce a secondary change in the extension of a body,
which occupies larger space as a result of each. Unlike the
former two processes, the change in extension is continu-
ous, for space is inﬁnitely divisible but bodies are com-
posed of minima naturalia, since ﬂesh or bones cannot be
divided inﬁnitely without losing their properties. Apart
from extension (covering a larger space), qualities of
a body may also possess their intension (greater or smaller
degree in which the quality exists).
It is to the problem of intension and remission of
forms that Burley devoted most time and attention in his
physical works, presenting several complementary solu-
tions. He is best known for a ‘‘succession of forms’’ theory,
ﬁrst applied by Godfrey of Fontaines to explain augmen-
tation and diminution. In his early commentaries on the
De generatione et corruptione and Physics, Burley saw
a qualitative change as a process occurring between spe-
ciﬁcally contrary forms within the same genus. He noticed
that the process can be broken down into inﬁnite individ-
ual instantaneous stages, in each of which a quality has
a new form of greater or smaller intensity. In De primo et
ultimo instanti, he presented an explanation of differences
between two modes of understanding qualities undergo-
ing change of intensity: one, seen as a process, and
another, seen as an instant. The fullest and most original
exposition of Burley’s views on the problem of change can
be found in the Tractatus primus. He claims there that also
the termini of qualitative change belong to the same spe-
cies (so, effectively, a qualitative change is between a form
and a lack thereof). This allows him to use effectively the
concept of latitude of forms to explain the process. The
criticism drawn by his original theory made Burley revisit
the issue of qualitative change several more times. In his
Tractatus secundus and, later, in De formis, he gradually
gave up some parts of his solution, and ﬁnally, in his
Bolognese quodlibet, accepted a Scotist view on the
issue, which saw intension or remission as addition or
subtraction of individual degrees of a form, merged into it.
In his theory of local motion, Burley accepts the prev-
alent Aristotelian division into ‘‘permanent beings’’ and
‘‘successive beings,’’ the former being objects, the latter,
motions. Permanent beings have their ﬁrst instants, but
not last ones, successive beings have neither. This distinc-
tion allows Burley and other realists to analyze motion in
separation from objects in motion. For Ockham, who
recognized only substances and qualities as things, motion
was not separable from its object and thus was understood
only as forma ﬂuens, disregarding the other aspect of
motion distinguished by Avicenna, ﬂuxus formae, i.e.,
ﬂux of form, belonging to the category of relation. For
Burley both aspects of motion had to be taken into
account in order to give an adequate description of it.
Practical philosophy attractedBurley’s interest relatively
late and his contributions to that ﬁeld are the smallest
despite the size of his works devoted to it. Although it was
not uncommon for him to follow some authority in his
works in logic and – more often – in natural philosophy (for
instance, Averroes), the commentaries on Nicomachean
Ethics and Politics exhibit extraordinary dependence
on the commentaries by Thomas Aquinas and Peter of
Auvergne respectively. Burley does not add to their opin-
ions much beside references to English cultural context.
Burley’s intellectual activity brought him renown of
his contemporary and later philosophers. A good measure
of this respect is the number of works mistakenly attrib-
uted to him, of which two, Auctoritates Aristotelis and De
vitis et moribus philosophorum, were very popular until the
end of the Middle Ages. Problems with attribution of
some known works and possibility of discovering or iden-
tifying some new ones make the list of his works still open
for change.
See also: ▶Giles of Rome ▶Godfrey of Fontaines ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Logic
▶Natural Philosophy ▶Realism ▶Supposition Theory
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Works by Walter Burley
Many of Burley’s surviving works still remain in manuscript. Editions
listed below include early editions (and their reprints) and modern
ones. Doubtful and spurious works are not included
Commentarius in libros De generatione et corruptione (2007) Kłopotliwa
zmiana czyli Waltera Burleya zmagania ze zmiennos´cia˛ rzeczy, ed.
Gensler M. Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Ło´dzkiego, Ło´dz´, pp 204–388
Commentarius in librum Perihermeneias (1973) Walter Burley’s middle
commentary on Aristotle’s Perihermeneias, ed. Brown S. Francisc
Stud 33:42–134
De consequentiis (1980) Walter Burley’s ‘De consequentiis’, ed. Green-
Pedersen NJ. Francisc Stud 40:102–166
De Deo, natura et arte (1963) Walter Burley’s ‘De Deo, natura et arte’, ed.
Shapiro H. Medievalia et Humanistica 15:88–90
De difﬁnitione (1965) Walter Burley’s text ‘De difﬁnitione’, ed. Shapiro H.
Mediev Stud 27:337–339
De duobus primis principiis (1962) Walter Burley’s ‘De doubus primis
principiis’, ed. Shapiro H. Manuscripta 6:96–98
Walter Burley W
1375
W

De ente (1963) Walter Burley’s ‘De ente’, ed. Shapiro H. Manuscripta
7:105–108
De exclusivis (1984) Walter Burley’s tract ‘De exclusivis’: an edition, ed.
de Rijk LM. Vivarium 23:23–54
De ﬁnito et inﬁnito (1965) Walter Burley’s ‘De ﬁnito et inﬁnito’, ed.
Shapiro H. Manuscripta 9:170–171
De formis (1970) Walter Burley’s treatise ‘De formis’ = Vero¨ffen-
tlichungen der Kommission fu¨r die Herausgabe ungedruckter Texte
aus der mittelalterlichen Geisteswelt, vol 4, ed. Down SFJ. Verlag der
Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mu¨nchen
De motu animalium (1969) Walter Burley’s commentary on Aristotle’s ‘De
motu animalium’, eds. Shapiro H, Scott F. Traditio 25:171–190
De potentia activa et passiva (1966) Walter Burley’s ‘De potentia activa et
passiva’, eds. Shapiro H, Scott F. Modern Schoolman 43:179–182
De potentiis animae (1971) The ‘De potentiis animae’ of Walter Burley,
ed. Kitchel MJ. Mediev Stud 33:85–113
De primo et ultimo instanti (1965) ‘De primo et ultimo instanti’
des Walter Burley, eds. Shapiro H, Shapiro Ch. Arch Gesch Philos
47:157–173
De puritate artis logicae tractatus brevior (1955) Walter Burleigh: De
puritate artis logicae tractatus longior, with a revised edition of the
tractatus
brevior,
ed.
Boehner
Ph.
Franciscan
Institute,
St.
Bonaventure
De puritate artis logicae tractatus longior (1955) Walter Burleigh: De
puritate artis logicae tractatus longior, with a revised edition of the
tractatus
brevior,
ed.
Boehner
Ph.
Franciscan
Institute,
St.
Bonaventure
De qualitatibus (1963) De qualitatibus des Walter Burley, ed. Shapiro H,
Shapiro Ch. Franzisk Stud 45:256–260
De relativis (1962) Walter Burley’s ‘De relativis’, ed. Shapiro H, Kiteley MJ.
Francisc Stud 22:155–171
De sensibus (1966) Walter Burley’s ‘De sensibus’, ed. Shapiro H,
Scott F. Mitteilungen des Grabmann-Institute der Universita¨t
Mu¨nchen 13
De suppositionibus (1972) Walter Burleigh’s treatise ‘De suppositionibus’
and its inﬂuence on William of Ockham, ed. Brown S. Francisc Stud
32:15–64
De toto et parte (1965–1966) Walter Burley’s ‘De toto et parte’, ed. Shapiro
H, Scott F. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Age
32–33:299–303
Expositio in libros octo de physico auditu, Venetiis (1501) (repr. Olms,
Hildesheim, 1972)
Expositio super artem veterem, Venetiis (1497) (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt,
1967)
Expositio vetus super librum Praedicamentorum (2003) Walter Burley’s
‘Expositio vetus super librum Praedicamentorum’, ed. von Perger M.
Francisc Stud 61:55–96
Insolubilia (1970) La Proble´matique des propositions insolubiles au XIIIe
sie´cle et au de´but de XIVe, suivie de I’e´dition des traite´s de W.
Shyreswood, W. Burley and Th. Bradwardine, ed. Roure ML.
Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Aˆ ge 37:262–284
Quaestiones
in
librum
Perihermeneias
(1974)
Walter
Burley’s
‘Quaestiones in librum Perihermeneias’, ed. Brown S. Francisc Stud
34:200–295
Quaestiones super III De anima (1997) Questions on the ‘De anima’ of
Aristotle by Magister Adam Burley and Dominus Walter Burley, ed.
Synan EA. Studien und Texte aus Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters
55:76–156
Tractatus expositorius super libros posteriorum Aristotelis, Oxoniae
(1517) (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1966)
Utrum contradicto sit maxima oppositio (1968) Gualteri Burlei Quaestio:
‘Utrum contradicto sit maxima oppositio’; MS. Vat. Ottob. 318, f.
141va–145vb,
ed.
Palacz
Ryszard.
Mediaevalia
Philosophica
Polonorum 11:128–156; (1996) Burley’s so-called Tractatus Primus,
with an edition of the additional quaestio ‘Utrum contradicto sit
maxima oppositio’, de Rijk LM. Vivarium 34:161–191
Secondary Sources
Jung-Palczewska E (1986) Le proble`me d’Averroisme de Walter Burley
dans son commentaire sur la Physique. Studia Mediewistyczne
24(2):101–109
Kretzmann N (ed) (1982) Inﬁnity and continuity in ancient and medieval
thought. Cornell University Press, Ithaca/London
Kuksewicz Z (1981) The problem of Walter Burley’s Averroism. In:
Maieru A, Paravicini Bagliani A (eds) Studi sul XIV secolo. In
memoria di Annelise Maier. Edizioni di storia e letteratura, Roma,
pp 341–377
Lindberg DC (ed) (1978) Science in the Middle Ages. Chicago University
Press, Chicago/London
Machamer PK, Turnbull RG (eds) (1976) Motion and time, space and
matter. Interrelations in the history of philosophy and science.
Columbus
Maier A (1952) An der Grenze von Scholastik und Naturwissenschaft =
Studien zur Naturphilosophie der Spatschilastik, vol 3, Edizioni di
storia e letteratura, Roma
Martin C (1964) Walter Burley. In: Oxford studies presented to Daniel
Callus = Oxford Historical Society. New Series, vol XVI, Clarendon,
Oxford, pp 194–230
Ottman J, Wood R (1999) Walter Burley: his life and works. Vivarium
37(1):1–23
Pinborg J (1967) Walter Burley on the meaning of propositions. Classica
et Mediaevalia 28:394–404
Roure ML (1970) La Proble´matique des propositions insolubiles au XIIIe
sie`cle et au de´but de XIVe, suivie de l’e´dition des traite´s de W.
Shyreswood, W. Burley and Th. Bradwardine. Archives d’histoire
doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Aˆ ge 37:205–326
Sylla ED (1973) Medieval concepts of the latitude of forms: the Oxford
calculators. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Aˆ ge
39:223–283
Sylla ED (1991) The Oxford calculators and the mathematics of motion
1320–1350. Physics and measurement by latitudes. Harvard Univer-
sity dissertations in history of science, New York/London
Sylla ED (1998) Walter Burley. In: Routledge encyclopedia of philosophy,
Version 1.0. Routledge, London/New York
Sylla ED (2001) Walter Burley’s physics commentaries and the mathe-
matics of alteration. Early Sci Med 6(3):149–170
Sylla ED (2002) Walter Burley’s practice as a commentator on Aristotle’s
physics. Medioevo 27:301–371
Una Juarez A (1978) La ﬁlosoﬁa del siglo XIV. Contexto cultural de Walter
Burley. Biblioteca La Ciudad de Dios Real Monasterio de el Escorial,
Madrid
Weijers O (1998) Le travail intellectuel a` la Faculte´ des arts de Paris: textes
et maıˆtres, III = Studia Artistarum. Etudes sur la Faculte´ des arts dans
les Universite´s me´die´vales, v. 6. Brepols, Paris/La Haye
Weisheipl JA (1969) Repertorium Mertonense. Mediev Stud 31:174–224
Wood R (1984) Walter Burley’s physics commentaries. Francisc Stud
43:275–327
Wood R (1989) Studies on Walter Burley, 1968–1988. Bull Philos Me´die´v
30:233–250
1376 W
Walter Burley

Walter Chatton
SUSAN BROWER-TOLAND
Department of Philosophy
College of Arts and Sciences
Saint Louis University
St. Louis, MO
USA
Abstract
Walter Chatton (c. 1290–1343) was an important four-
teenth-century English philosopher and theologian. He
was a follower of Duns Scotus and a relentless critic of
William of Ockham and Peter Auriol. Because complete
critical editions of Chatton’s writings have only recently
become available, the recovery of his thought is in the
beginning stages. Still, it is already clear that Chatton
made signiﬁcant contributions to number of areas in
medieval philosophy and theology. These include his
development and defense of an ‘‘anti-razor’’ principle in
ontology, his contributions to fourteenth-century debates
about intuitive cognition, his one-level account of con-
sciousness, and his inﬂuential criticisms of Ockham’s the-
ory of concepts and judgment.
Walter Chatton was born (c. 1290) in the village
of Chatton in the northern part of (modern) England.
He entered the Franciscan Order at a young age, most
likely received his philosophical education in the north,
and was then sent to Oxford to study theology. At Oxford,
Chatton encountered the teaching of William of Ockham
(d. 1347) who at the time (c. 1317–1319) was delivering
his lectures on the Sentences of Peter Lombard. This
encounter was to shape much of Chatton’s subsequent
philosophical thinking. Chatton, while highly critical of
his older colleague, was also enormously inﬂuenced by
him. Indeed, Chatton often takes up precisely the issues
Ockham treats, and, likewise, the terminology and concep-
tual apparatus in which he frames them, only to reject
Ockham’s conclusions – typically in favor of Scotus’.
Ockham’s inﬂuence is particularly pronounced in Chatton’s
Sentences commentaries, both the Reportatio, and the
later Lectura (including the separately edited Collatio et
Prologus), but it is also present to a lesser degree in his
(as yet unedited) Quodlibet. Chatton’s training at Oxford
was completed in 1330, when he attained the status of
Franciscan regent master. The rest of his career (c. 1333–
1343) was spent in Avignon, where, among other things,
he served as advisor to Pope Benedict XII. Chatton died at
Avignon in late 1343 or perhaps early 1344.
Scholarship on Chatton’s philosophy is nascent, but
growing. To date, the aspects of his thought that have
received the most scholarly attention include his treat-
ment of issues in ontology, philosophy of mind and cog-
nitive psychology, will and moral philosophy.
Ontology
When it comes to questions of ontology, Chatton’s lean-
ings are Scotistic. Indeed, his treatment of issues in ontol-
ogy often consists in his defending hallmark Scotistic
doctrines against criticism – usually, against objections
raised by Ockham and Peter Auriol (d. 1322). For exam-
ple, Chatton adopts Scotus’ views about universals as well
as his theory of individuation; accordingly, Chatton labors
to defend the Scotistic doctrines of common nature and
haecceitas. (Chatton does not actually use the term
haecceitas, however; instead, following Scotus’ own usage
in the Ordinatio, he uses individualis differentias.) Again,
Chatton follows Scotus – and opposes Ockham – in argu-
ing for the reality of ten (irreducibly) distinct classes of
entity corresponding to each of Aristotle’s ten categories.
In this connection, he gives special attention to defending
the reality of both quantity (as something distinct from
substance and quality) and relation (as something distinct
from absolute entities).
Although the sorts of ontological views Chatton
adopts are not particularly original, his defense of such
views are often subtle and innovative. One particularly
notable example is his development and application of
a certain meta-ontological principle to derive a number
of realist metaphysical commitments. The principle,
which Chatton himself refers to simply as ‘‘my rule’’
(mea regula) or ‘‘my principle’’ (mea propositio), has
come to be known in the literature as ‘‘Chatton’s anti-
razor’’ – a label indicative of his use of it as a foil for
Ockham’s famous razor. Chatton deploys the principle in
a variety of contexts, and its precise formulation varies and
develops across these contexts, but the following can be
taken as representative: ‘‘where an afﬁrmative proposition
is made true by things (res), if fewer things (uniformly
present, without anything else) cannot sufﬁce [for that
proposition’s being true], one must posit more’’ (Collatio
et Prologus, 33). So stated, the principle is hardly contro-
versial; yet the way in which Chatton elaborated and
applied the principle was quite contentious.
A case in point is Chatton’s use of the anti-razor
against Ockham’s reductionism about relations. In Rep. I,
d.30, q.1, a.4, Chatton considers whether it should be
Walter Chatton W
1377
W

allowed that there are relational accidents – that is,
a distinct class of entities corresponding to the (acciden-
tal) category of relation. He argues in the afﬁrmative,
defending in particular the reality and irreducibility of
causal relations. His strategy throughout is straightfor-
ward: he considers six cases of true relational statements
(e.g., ‘‘Socrates generates Plato,’’ ‘‘Heat produces heat,’’
‘‘This hand moves a stick,’’ etc.) and argues that in
each case merely absolute (or non-relational) entities –
regardless of the number or type invoked – ‘‘will not
sufﬁce’’ for the truth of such statements. And, as his
discussion makes explicit, he thinks an entity sufﬁces for
the truth of a given statement just in case its existence
necessitates the statement’s truth. Citing his ‘‘rule,’’
Chatton then concludes that ‘‘it is, therefore, necessary
to posit relational accidents.’’
What is most signiﬁcant about Chatton’s principle is
the way in which it renders explicit a certain methodolog-
ical approach to questions of ontological commitment.
According to this approach, one’s ontological commit-
ments extend to all and only those entities whose existence
is required to explain the truth of a given set of truths.
To be sure, there is nothing particularly novel in Chatton’s
adopting this sort of ‘‘truth-maker’’ approach to matters
of ontology. It is plausible to suppose such an approach
was tacitly assumed by many, if not most, medieval phi-
losophers. But because Chatton’s speciﬁc formulation
of the principle underlying this approach proved contro-
versial, his use of it also had the effect of calling atten-
tion to methodological assumptions guiding metaphysical
speculation.
As we have seen, Chatton’s principle places particular
emphasis on the criterion of sufﬁciency for truth-making,
which in turn suggests that the truth-maker for a given
statement can simply be identiﬁed with that entity
(or those entities) whose existence necessitates its truth.
So understood, however, Chatton’s principle is open to a
number of objections – ones which his contemporaries
were quick to raise. Thus, at Quodlibet I.5, Ockham explic-
itly argues against Chatton’s principle, offering a counter-
example (one involving God’s creation of an angel)
designed to show that an entity’s being sufﬁcient for the
truth of some statement is not necessary for making it true.
Indeed, as he sees it, the truth-maker for a given statement
is ‘‘sometimes sufﬁcient to make the sentence true, but
sometimes not.’’ And, some years later, Adam Wodeham
(d. 1358), Chatton’s slightly junior confrere, uses roughly
the same example to argue that sufﬁciency is not
a sufﬁcient condition on truth-making either. Even if his
principle was not widely adopted as a means for identify-
ing a statement’s truth-makers (and, hence, ontological
commitment), Chatton’s principle seems to have had the
effect of focusing attention on what exactly truth-making
involves.
Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive
Psychology
Chatton treats a wide range of issues in philosophy of
mind and philosophical psychology. As elsewhere, his
views here are almost always Scotistic in inspiration and
developed in direct response to Ockham (and, often,
Auriol as well). For example, Chatton upholds the
Scotistic line on the unity of the rational soul against
Ockham, who argues for a real distinction between sen-
sory and intellective souls. Again, he follows Scotus in
arguing that, pace Ockham, there is a formal distinction
(i.e., formal nonidentity) between both the soul and its
powers as well as among the powers themselves. Finally,
like Scotus and unlike Ockham, Chatton holds that cog-
nition involves the multiplication of species from the
object, through the sense faculties, to the intellect. Indeed,
in response to Ockham’s radical and wholesale elimina-
tion of species (both sensible and intelligible, as well as in
medio), Chatton develops a fairly systematic defense of
species as necessary for both sensory and intellective
cognition.
Chatton’s account of cognition includes an extended
discussion of the nature of intuitive cognition, which we
can think of as approximating our contemporary notion
of perception. One of Chatton’s contributions here is to
focus the debate on questions about the certainty of intu-
itive cognition. Thus, Chatton considers and rejects
Auriol’s theory, which leaves open the possibility that
intuitive cognition could occur naturally in the absence
of its object, on the grounds that such a view utterly
vitiates the ‘‘certitude’’ of knowledge grounded in the
senses. Given this, it is all the more interesting that
Chatton sides with Ockham (and against Scotus) in
allowing the possibility God could cause an intuitive cog-
nition of a nonexistent object, but then resists Ockham’s
further contention that such a case would not result in
deception or error. Chatton insists that it surely would.
His stance on these various issues is interesting insofar as it
indicates, on the one hand, a special concern to safeguard
the epistemic security of sensory intuition, and yet, on the
other, resistance to any notion of its being infallible.
Like many of his contemporaries, Chatton restricts
intuitive cognition to the senses and, thus, resists the
introduction of intuitive cognition at the level of intellect.
In rejecting intellective intuitive cognition, he is essentially
rejecting the idea (and plausibly so) that we possess (at
least in this life) a non-sensory or ‘‘extra-sensory’’ mode of
1378 W
Walter Chatton

perception. In taking this position, however, Chatton
departs from Ockham (and also, perhaps, Scotus), who
argues for intellective intuitive cognition largely on the
grounds that it provides the best explanation for con-
sciousness – that is, for our direct awareness of our own
mental states. Indeed, on Ockham’s view, consciousness is
higher-order (intellective) perception of lower-order
states. As Chatton sees it, the problem with Ockham’s
account, is both (a) that it entails an inﬁnite regress of
higher-order intuitions, and (b) that the higher-order
intellective intuitions it appeals to do not, in fact,
explain the phenomena of consciousness. On Chatton’s
view, by contrast, any conscious experience – my percep-
tion of a rock, say – involves two components: ﬁrst, an
awareness of some object (the rock, in this case); and,
second, a subjective or ﬁrst-personal awareness of the
experience (namely, a perceptual experience) as some-
thing I am undergoing. According to Chatton, therefore,
consciousness is an intrinsic feature of conscious states.
Given this, Chatton insists that self-knowledge can be
explained without the introduction of any higher-order
states, not to say higher-order states of intellectual intui-
tive cognition.
As the foregoing suggests, Chatton made a number of
important contributions to medieval debates about the
nature and mechanisms of cognition. Although scholars
are not yet in a position to assess the precise extent of
Chatton’s inﬂuence on subsequent thinkers in this regard,
it is clear that he exercised a great deal of inﬂuence on
Ockham. Indeed, on a number of issues, Chatton’s objec-
tions were felt by Ockham to be sufﬁciently forceful as to
require substantial modiﬁcations to his views. The best-
documented case of such inﬂuence concerns Ockham’s
developing views of concepts.
In his early writings, Ockham presupposes a kind of
act-object analysis of thought (i.e., intellective cognition).
On this analysis, concepts turn out to be thought-objects
distinct from but dependent on the mental acts directed at
them. Because concepts, on this view, are mind-dependent
objects. Ockham often refers to them as ‘‘ﬁcta’’ (i.e., ‘‘men-
tally-fashioned entities’’). Chatton vigorously attacked
Ockham’s early view on the grounds that such ﬁcta are
(a) ontologically superﬂuous, since mental acts themselves
can function as mental representations, and (b) epistemo-
logically problematic, since they stand in the way of the
mind’s direct cognitive access to reality. On Chatton’s
alternative, ‘‘mental-act’’ analysis of thought, concepts
are not construed as intentional objects of acts of thinking,
but rather are just acts of thought themselves. Ockham
eventually accepts these criticisms and, likewise, Chatton’s
own analysis of concepts. He does not, however, arrive at
Chatton’s view all at once. On the contrary, he initially
remains neutral between the ﬁctum-theory and the men-
tal-act theory. It turns out, however, that Chatton also
plays a crucial role in pushing Ockham from this interme-
diate position to a wholesale rejection of the ﬁctum-theory.
He does so by calling attention to a number of related
difﬁculties in Ockham’s theory of judgment – in particu-
lar, in his account of the objects of knowledge (scientia).
The details are complicated, but the end result is that these
criticisms lead Ockham to recognize systematic advan-
tages of Chatton’s analysis of intellective cognition gener-
ally. In his most mature writings, therefore, Ockham not
only wholeheartedly endorses the mental-act theory of
concepts, but even rejects his own earlier account of
objects of judgment in favor of a view that comes quite
close to Chatton’s own.
Will and Moral Philosophy
In his later writings, Chatton turns increasingly to topics
in moral philosophy. By contrast with his views in ontol-
ogy and cognitive psychology, however, very little is
known about his ethics or his views about freedom and
moral responsibility. It seems clear that Chatton takes the
divine will as the ultimate source of morality and holds
that God’s will is most clearly revealed in the commands
found in Scripture. Accordingly, his discussions of ques-
tions of sin, merit, and moral responsibility often focus on
the de facto order of creation, and on laws, precepts, and
regulations derived from Scripture. Again, it would seem
that he accepts a broadly Scotistic picture of the will and
human freedom and so accepts a libertarian and volunta-
rist conception of the will’s freedom. Beyond such gener-
alizations, however, our understanding of his views on
these topics is limited.
Chatton takes particular interest in questions about
how to reconcile human freedom with divine foreknowl-
edge. He devotes considerable attention to puzzles about
future contingents – in particular, to questions about
whether God’s knowledge and willing of future events is
consistent with their contingency (and, hence, with
human freedom). His own response to these puzzles is as
complex as it is controversial: he offers a novel analysis of
sentences attributing knowledge of future events to God
(thus, he takes claims like ‘‘God knows that a will occur’’ to
be equivalent to the conjunction of the following claims:
‘‘God knows a’’ and ‘‘‘a is occurring’ will be true’’),
he invokes a distinction between the determinately and
indeterminately true and false (claiming, for example, that
no future tense proposition is determinately true), and,
ﬁnally, he defends a controversial analysis of the objects
of God’s knowledge and will (on his view, the objects
Walter Chatton W
1379
W

of knowledge and divine will are not propositions, but
rather are the individual entities (res) represented by
propositions).
Chatton’s commitment to a voluntarist conception of
the will leads him, much as it led Scotus, to reject the
traditional Aristotelian account of unity of the virtues. In
particular, Chatton rejects the view that the possession of
prudence is a sufﬁcient condition for possessing moral vir-
tue. Because moral virtues are habits of willing, and because
the will does not necessarily will in accordance with the
judgments of practical reason, it follows that even where
prudence is generated through the dictates of right reason,
moral virtue may, nevertheless, be lacking. Chatton also
rejects any strong connection between the virtues of tem-
perance, fortitude, and justice. While, he at times, empha-
sizes the cooperation of such virtues in the production of
a single virtuous act, he nevertheless holds that one can
possess (or acquire) one virtue in the absence of the others.
Finally, Chatton maintains that the object of moral
appraisal is not only an agent’s interior character and
intentions in acting, but also the actions themselves. In
taking this position, Chatton opposes Ockham who is an
internalist regarding moral evaluation. On Ockham’s
view, it is only factors internal to agency – namely, acts
of willing – that are morally signiﬁcant. Hence, anything
external to agency, such as exterior acts and their conse-
quences, are indifferent – neither good nor bad. Chatton
offers a number of arguments against Ockham’s view,
some of which are grounded in theological considerations
(e.g., he argues that Ockham cannot account for the moral
signiﬁcance of Christ’s exterior act of dying on the cross),
whereas others are grounded in difﬁculties internal to the
theory itself (e.g., he ﬁnds Ockham’s way of individuating
acts of will implausible).
Conclusion
Chatton is best known today for his criticisms of and
inﬂuence on Ockham’s philosophy. In fact, the relation-
ship between these thinkers is such that scholars have often
had to turn to Chatton’s work to fully understand the
development and shape of Ockham’s views. (The relative
dating of Ockham’s writings, for example, is established by
reference to the three-stage development in his theory of
concepts, a development, which as explained above, is due
to Chatton’s inﬂuence.) For this same reason, the areas of
Chatton’s philosophical thought that have received the
most attention correspond to those aspects of Ockham’s
thought that have most attracted scholarly interest –
namely, issues in metaphysics, cognitive psychology, and,
to a lesser extent, questions about the will and moral
responsibility.
There are, however, a number of other areas to which
Chatton makes signiﬁcant contributions. In natural phi-
losophy, for example, he is among the few medieval pro-
ponents of indivisibilism (i.e., the view that continua are
literally composed of indivisible elements). Again, he
treats at some length the distinction between permanent
and successive entities and offers an important defense,
against Ockham, of the coherence of the notion of
a successive entity (entia successiva). Chatton also seems
to have played a signiﬁcant role in a number of four-
teenth-century
debates
in
philosophical
theology,
including how to reconcile the Christine doctrine of
the Trinity with Aristotelian syllogistic logic and the
nature of sacramental efﬁcacy (the latter of which was
recalled and cited some 200 years later at the Council of
Trent).
It will be some time yet before any systematic presen-
tation or evaluation of Chatton’s philosophical oeuvre can
be undertaken. There is, nevertheless, good reason to
expect that the recent publication of critical editions of
Chatton’s
Sentences
commentaries
(the
Reportatio
appeared in 2002–2005, the Lectura in 2007–2009)
together with increased scholarly interest in the fourteenth
century will signiﬁcantly advance both the recovery of his
thought and our understanding of his place in the broader
development of late medieval philosophy.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Certainty ▶Consciousness
▶Future Contingents ▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cogni-
tion ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Mental Word/Concepts
▶Peter Auriol ▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Voluntarism and
Intellectualism ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Chatton Walter (1989) Reportatio et lectura super Sententias: Collatio ad
librum primum et prologus, ed. Wey JC. Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Chatton Walter (2002–2005) Reportatio super Sententias, ed. Wey JC,
Etzkorn G. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Chatton Walter (2007–) Lectura super Sententias, ed. Wey JC, Etzkorn G.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Brower-Toland S (2006) Facts vs. things: Adam Wodeham and the
later medieval debate about objects of judgment. Rev Metaphys
60:597–642
Brower-Toland S (2007) Ockham on judgment, concepts, and the prob-
lem of intentionality. Can J Philos 37:67–110
Brower-Toland S (forthcoming) Can God know more? A case study in the
later medieval debate about propositions. In: Keele R, Bolyard
C (eds) Essays in later medieval metaphysics. Fordham University
Press, Bronx
1380 W
Walter Chatton

Brower-Toland S (forthcoming) William Ockham and Walter Chatton on
objects and acts of judgment: or, How Chatton changed Ockham’s
mind. In: Klima G (ed) Intentionality, cognition, and mental repre-
sentation in medieval philosophy. Fordham University Press, Bronx
Brown S (1985) Walter Chatton’s Lectura and William of Ockham’s
Quaestiones in libros Physicorum Aristotelis. In: Frank WA, Etzkorn
GJ (eds) Essays honoring Allan B. Wolter. Franciscan Institute, St.
Bonaventure, pp 82–115
Courtenay W (1990) Ockham, Chatton, and the London studium: obser-
vation on recent changes to Ockham’s biography. In: Vossenkuhl W,
Scho¨nberger R (eds) Gegenwart Ockhams. VCH-Verlagsgesellschaft,
Acta Humaniora, Weinheim, pp 327–337
Ga´l G (1967) Gualteri de Chatton et Guillelmi de Ockham controversia de
natura conceptus universalis. Francisc Stud 27:191–212
Hoffmann T (2008) Walter Chatton on the connection of the virtues.
Quaestio: Yearbook of the history of metaphysics 8:57–82
Keele R (2003) The so-called Res theory of Walter Chatton. Francisc Stud
61:37–53
Keele R (2006) Walter Chatton. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy (Fall 2006 edition), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/ fall2006/entries/walter-chatton/
Keele R (2007a) Can God make a Picasso? William Ockham and Walter
Chatton on divine power and real relations. J Hist Philos 45:395–411
Keele R (2007b) Oxford Quodlibeta from Ockham to Holcot. In: Schabel
C (ed) Theological quodlibeta in the Middle Ages, the fourteenth
century. Brill, Leiden-Boston, pp 651–692
Kelley F (1981) Walter Chatton vs. Aureoli and Ockham regarding the
universal concept. Franciscan Stud 41:222–249
Maurer A (1984) Ockham’s razor and Chatton’s anti-razor. Mediaev Stud
46:463–475
O’Callaghan J (1949) Walter Chatton’s doctrine of intuitive and abstrac-
tive knowledge: study and text. PhD dissertation, University of
Toronto
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (2007) The structure of consciousness: a fourteenth-
century debate. In: Heina¨maa S, La¨hteenma¨ki V, Remes P (eds)
Consciousness: from perception to reﬂection in the history of phi-
losophy. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 141–152
Walter of Bruges
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Walter of Bruges (c. 1222–1307) was a pupil of Bonaven-
ture and occupied with promoting Augustine at a time
when Aristotle was getting more and more inﬂuential.
See also: ▶Bonaventure
Bibliography
Longpre´ E´
(1924) Gauthier de Bruges O.F.M. et l’augustianisme
franciscain au XIIIe Sie`cle. In: Miscellanae Ehrle, part 1. Biblioteca
apostolica Vaticana, Rome, pp 190–218
War (Just War, Holy War)
JOHN KELSAY
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL
USA
Abstract
This article surveys medieval discussion of ‘‘just war’’ and
‘‘holy war.’’ While a strong division between these is
a modern development, the terminology does reﬂect dis-
tinctive trajectories of interpretation present in the earliest
of medieval commentators on war. This article begins with
Christian texts and then analyzes analogous writings by
Jews and Muslims. In these texts we see both just war and
holy war trajectories, and begin to understand how it came
to be that late medieval and early modern authors like
Alberico Gentili or Francisco de Vitoria could make strong
distinctions between the two conceptions, to the end that
difference in religion, considered in and of itself, ought
never constitute a just cause of war.
Early Developments
When Augustine wrote The City of God, he built on several
centuries of discussion regarding the status of war and of
military service among Christians. For example, Tertullian
(d. 220) wrote that Christ had ‘‘unbelted’’ every soldier,
and that Christians participating in the Roman army
would in all likelihood ﬁnd it impossible to retain their
faith. In a slightly different vein, Origen of Alexandria
(d. 254) responded to charges of Christian irresponsibility,
arguing that believers who refused induction into the
military nevertheless provided valuable service by praying
that God send the heavenly hosts to ﬁght against those
invisible, yet powerful forces assisting the emperor’s
enemies. More generally, authors like Lactantius (d. 320)
decried the wastefulness and tragedy of war.
At the same time, the Roman army included Chris-
tians, at least from the late second century forward. And
once the status of Christianity began to change in the early
part of the fourth century, even an author like Lactantius
changed his tune, saying that some wars, at least, might be
legitimate from a Christian point of view. By the time of
War (Just War, Holy War) W
1381
W

Ambrose, bishop of Milan (d. 397), a Christian leader
could see his authority as complementary to that of the
state. Even the partly legendary refusal of communion to
the Emperior Theodosius following the massacre of 7,000
in Thessalonica –punishment decreed by the emperor for
the murder of a Roman commander in that city – should
be seen in this regard. Ambrose understood his role as
bishop to include the giving of moral advice, and even the
imposition of moral discipline, just as he saw the duty of
the emperor and other ofﬁcials as a matter of carrying out
the guidance provided by the church.
As Ambrose’s De ofﬁciis indicates, Christian discourse
on war in this period could be cast as a transformation
of the Roman bellum iustum. Indeed, the very title
of Ambrose’s work suggests this, as it reﬂects his use of
Cicero’s similarly named treatise. In Cicero’s account, the
Roman way of war suggests that military force is governed
by norms of justice. For example, war must be declared by
publicly authorized ofﬁcials; it cannot be a matter of
private or personal revenge. Then, too, resort to war
should take place only when disputes cannot be resolved
through discussion. The justiﬁcation for going to war
involves securing the peace of Roman society. When ﬁght-
ing, soldiers should conduct themselves with honor. When
war is over, the victors should be magnanimous to the
vanquished, since the point is to persuade the enemy not
to repeat its offense, and to deter others from similarly
threatening the peace of the Roman state. Ambrose took
these notions of public, honorable, and thus just war, and
connected them with Christian notions of neighbor-love
and obedience to God. With respect to the former, the
bishop’s argument was that the command to love one’s
neighbor as oneself might in certain contexts be fulﬁlled
by protecting the weak from aggressors. Indeed, Ambrose
took the example of Moses in Exodus 2:11–15 as an indi-
cation that anyone who is able to prevent an injury, but
fails to do so, might be judged as complicit in injustice.
Defense of a neighbor is distinguished from defense of
oneself, however. The latter might be judged as an expres-
sion of inordinate self-love and a denial of faith in the
providence of God. But the former is required, as a matter
of obedience to God’s command. In that connection, too,
Ambrose found a way of tying Christian notions of war to
the ﬁghting described in Joshua and other books of the
Old Testament. For Ambrose, war commanded by God is
a distinct species of just war. In some particulars (e.g., the
total destruction of the enemy described in Joshua), such
war differs from the more ordinary ﬁghting by which
military action relates to purposes of state. Nevertheless,
in its moral species, war commanded by God should be
seen as a type of bellum iustum; in fact, it is the prototype
of such ﬁghting, since God, the author of justice, can never
command believers to do an unjust act.
Augustine built on these insights of Ambrose, which
explains his response to Faustus, or more generally to the
challenge presented by those who saw in the Old Testa-
ment a contradiction to the New Testament. As Augustine
had it, the ﬁghting of the people of Israel was an expression
of obedience rather than of brutality. In commanding
such wars, God assigned punishments that were just. The
real evil of war, after all, is not that some people are killed,
since all mortals must die. Rather, the desire to inﬂict
harm or to dominate others exempliﬁes aspects of war,
as more generally of human behavior, that should be
condemned.
For Augustine, war is related to the condition of fallen
and therefore sinful humanity. In one sense, war results
from sin. Hence, aggressive ﬁghting is an expression of
evils like those already mentioned. In another sense, how-
ever, war provides a remedy for sin. In ﬁghting just wars,
a wise person does what is necessary, even if in some sense
the conditions that impose and legitimate his or her
actions are regrettable. It is important, of course, that in
waging war the wise person resist sinful dispositions.
Thus, just wars are characterized by limits. Authorized
by public authorities, such wars are not an occasion for
private vengeance. Fought for legitimate public purposes,
they are not to be waged for purposes of aggrandizement.
Soldiers must punish aggressors, and in turn must take
care to distinguish the innocent from the guilty. And,
while a number of tactics involving (ostensible) deception
(ambush, for example) are legitimate, one must never
violate a promise to one’s enemy, or engage in massacre.
As with Ambrose, Augustine’s writing suggests that
bellum iustum is a category that includes wars of several
types. Most signiﬁcantly, the category includes wars under-
taken by God’s command, as well as at the command of
legitimate (i.e., public) authority. With respect to the latter,
the limits and norms connected with honor and neighbor-
love apply. With respect to the former, the command of
God may direct ﬁghting in ways that seem to violate such
limits. The qualiﬁcation is important, however. Fighting
commanded by God may, as in the book of Joshua, appear
to violate the limits of justice. Nevertheless, it does not or
cannot do so, since by deﬁnition God is just, and God’s
commands are correspondingly expressive or even consti-
tutive of justice. Faced with this proviso, some interpreters
have
wondered
whether
Augustine
considered
such
a command an actual possibility, or whether his comments
on this matter are rather dictated by theological interests.
That is certainly an interesting, if eminently controversial
question. As further developments would show, however,
1382 W
War (Just War, Holy War)

the notion that bellum iustum might include wars autho-
rized by God, or derivatively, by religious authorities,
came to be an important feature of Christian reasoning
about military force.
The ‘‘Classic’’ Formulation
Many scholars describe Augustine as the ‘‘father’’ of Chris-
tian just war thinking. Given his great legacy in this, as in
other areas of political thought, there is some reason for
such a characterization. Nevertheless, as noted above,
Augustine’s notions of war build on several centuries of
development. In particular, Ambrose’s combination of
biblical and Roman ideas of bellum iustum provides
a context in which Augustine’s ideas make sense.
Also, Augustine never provides a succinct, systematic
statement of just war criteria. Instead, his judgments are
sprinkled throughout his works, especially The City
of God. A far more systematic statement is found in
the Summa theologiae of Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274).
At IIaIIae, q. 40, Thomas asks whether it is always a sin
to wage war. In response, he writes that there are three
things required for a war to be just. First, the war must be
commanded by a prince who possesses the authority to
make war. Second, the war must be fought for a just cause;
showing his debt to Augustine, Thomas indicates that this
usually implies a war fought to avenge injuries, for exam-
ple, when a state deserves to be punished for failing to
restore things unjustly taken or to right wrongs done by its
people. The third requirement is right intention, and again
Thomas quotes Augustine with respect to those evil dis-
positions, which may be described as the ‘‘real’’ evils
associated with war.
As noted, Thomas built on Augustine. He references
a number of other sources, however, and thus points to
the continuing development of Christian just war
thinking.
By Thomas’ time, the efforts of ecclesiastical and polit-
ical leaders to limit war by such conventions as the Peace
of God and the Truce of God (tenth and eleventh centu-
ries) were well-entrenched. In particular, the former for-
bade direct and intentional attacks on speciﬁc targets.
These included churches, as well as certain classes of
people whose age, gender, or vocation would normally
identify them as nonparticipants in ﬁghting. The latter
tried to prohibit ﬁghting on speciﬁc days, at least among
Christians. The inﬂuence of both efforts are evident in
Thomas, as he addresses questions regarding the partici-
pation of clergy in ﬁghting (he says it is not normally
allowed, because it does not ﬁt with their vocation) and
of the possibility that ﬁghting may be prohibited in certain
times and places.
Most notably, though, Thomas’ statement of just war
criteria presupposes developments in canon law. The
inﬂuence of Gratian’s Decretum (mid-twelfth century), as
well as of the various commentators on that work and on
the Decretals, is particularly evident in the ﬁrst of Thomas’
concerns. From the late ninth century, the collapse of the
Carolingian Empire provided a context in which various
authorities competed for power, and in which the inci-
dence of ﬁghting among Christians became a cause of
concern. As the canon lawyers (and Thomas) had it, only
a prince possessed competence de guerre; and a prince, in
their vocabulary, meant a ruler whose control of
a particular territory indicated that he had no superior.
Such a ruler could be recognized by the Pope, who as the
vicar of Christ was responsible for the moral and spiritual
welfare of Christians. When Urban II appealed to Chris-
tians in 1095 to join in a Crusade against the Seljuk Turks,
he did so particularly with reference to those princes
whose sphere of power qualiﬁed them as authorities, in
Thomas’ sense.
Right authority thus constituted the most important
area in which Thomas’ statement indicates the inﬂuence
of canon law. As with the canonists, however, the sum-
mary of Thomas leaves a certain ambiguity. If those who
possess authority with respect to war do so in part
because of ecclesiastical recognition, where does author-
ity actually rest? Is it with those secular authorities
described as princes? Or with the Pope, who recognizes
and, in the instance of the Crusades, summons the
princes to organize their armies for a particular ﬁght?
In dealing with the topic of war, Thomas seems to say that
the princes possess authority for war and that ecclesias-
tical authorities only direct and exhort them in the exer-
cise of that authority. And yet, the authority of the church
does involve an evaluation of the legitimacy of secular
rulers. Particularly with respect to ﬁghting against the
Turks, or to Christendom’s internal ﬁght against heretics,
the Pope’s authority seems paramount. As succeeding
generations would have it, the ‘‘just war’’ allowed for
a distinction between two sorts of causes, and the role
of secular and ecclesiastical authorities differed as one
considered this distinction. Thus, secular authorities
might authorize ﬁghting for the common good, con-
strued in terms of recovery of territory or goods taken
through aggression. By contrast, ﬁghting for a religious
cause – here, Thomas’ reference to Augustine’s notion
that the ‘‘injury’’ justifying war might involve punish-
ment for wrongs done could be extended to include
idolatry and other matters of religion – should be autho-
rized by the Pope, and Christian rulers did their duty by
responding to his call.
War (Just War, Holy War) W
1383
W

Interestingly, Thomas’ own position on the war
against the Turks shows considerable nuance. He is not
convinced that ﬁghting Muslims in order to punish their
religious errors is justiﬁed, and seems to prefer to refer
such ﬁghting to notions of a right of passage. All people,
including Christians making pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
have a right to travel peacefully. If Muslim authorities
restrict that right, there may be a just cause of war against
them. Such a cause might even justify taking back the
lands
conquered
by
Muslims,
a
rationale
further
supported by the notion that territory taken by aggression
may be recovered through military force. Even here,
though, Thomas’ argument shows nuance, since he won-
ders whether retaking territory after a long occupation
may not upset established patterns of living, and thus do
more harm than good.
Where Thomas does suggest that religion presents
a just cause of war is in matters of heresy and blasphemy.
It is not right to ﬁght against unbelievers, for example
Jews, in order to compel their faith. But it is right to
ﬁght against those who claim to be Christians, but dissent
from the teaching of the church. The latter case involves
the breaking of a contract with God; it is the church’s right
and duty to punish such wrongdoing, and to provide an
example to others who might be tempted to part ways
with the church.
In all these matters, Thomas and others involved in the
just war discussion addressed issues which vexed morally
sensitive souls throughout the Middle Ages. Augustine’s
writings on the Donatist controversy provided an early
example of the tensions built into the connection of just
war with wars fought on behalf of religion. Given instances
in which the latter could be connected with dispropor-
tionate force, or even with massacre, the notion of ﬁghting
for religious causes was gradually separated from the more
clearly political causes for which secular rulers possessed
authority. At the close of our period, Francisco de Vitoria
could evaluate the claim of the Spanish emperor with
respect to ﬁghting against the indigenous peoples of the
New World in such a way as to suggest that difference of
religion, in and of itself, could never provide a just cause of
war. Nor could the emperor authorize ﬁghting based on
a claim that dominion over the natives’ lands had been
granted him by the Pope. The Pope’s authority with
respect to the New World extended only to the matter of
sending missionaries who would preach the Gospel.
Should the natives refuse passage to these envoys, and
particularly if they should kill or otherwise harm them,
then a limited use of military force might be justiﬁed. But
just wars have to do with limited, political causes, and
secular
authorities
show
their
good
intention
by
understanding that limited causes require limits on
means – in other words, the conduct of war provides an
important measure of the justice of the various sides.
Judaism and Islam
Development of a Christian idea of bellum iustum, includ-
ing distinctions between just war and holy war, was
a matter of utmost import for the history of Europe and
of the Americas. In the process, Christian writers made use
of many non-Christian sources. The legacy of Rome,
Greek philosophical and historical writing, and the
knightly or chivalric code all provided material, which
Christians connected with a reading of the Bible.
As well, the existence of Judaism and Islam played
a part in Christian just war discourse, though not so
much in the way of providing source material or prece-
dents. The persistence and, in the case of Islam, the power
of non-Christian religious communities pressed just war
thinkers to answer signiﬁcant questions. Should war be
used to spread the Christian faith? Under what conditions
could an alternative religious community become an
enemy? For what purposes could a war between Christians
and Jews or Muslims be fought?
From the standpoint of Christian just war thinking,
Jews were identiﬁed as a persistent, though for the most
part nonthreatening religious minority. The task of Chris-
tians was to govern those Jewish communities living under
Christian rule. Thomas Aquinas illustrates well the ambi-
guity of this position. Christians should think, he wrote, of
the persistence of Jews and their erroneous practices as the
result of God’s providence. Their position should be reg-
ulated in ways designed to reinforce the costs of error, and
correlatively of the impending triumph of Christ. Jews
might be invited to receive the Gospel. But they ought
not to be coerced, at least if that involves the use of
military force. The payment of special taxes, the imposi-
tion of restrictions on freedom of movement and associ-
ation, and the like were acceptable to Thomas. War within
Christendom should be reserved for heretics and apos-
tates, however.
That said, it is of interest to historians that Jewish
tradition developed its own ‘‘just war tradition’’ in the
period of our interest. Following the failure of wars of
liberation against Rome in 70 and again in 130–135 CE,
rabbinic authorities interpreted the Hebrew Bible in a way
that radically delimited the right of Jews to resort to
military force for political and/or religious purposes. For
reasons connected to purposes of communal discipline,
God had decreed that the people of Israel be governed by
others, and anyone who raised the sword by organizing
a revolt should be judged as controverting the purposes of
1384 W
War (Just War, Holy War)

God. The Talmudic tract called Sotah articulated this
judgment, even as it noted that biblical tradition indicated
God’s authorization for two types of wars. The one,
milhemet mitzvah or ‘‘obligatory’’ war involved ﬁghting
commanded by God, as in the book of Joshua or more
generally, against the mythic enemy identiﬁed as Amalek.
In terms of means, the obligatory war is total war,
according to the rules recorded in Deuteronomy 20. The
other, milhemet rashut or ‘‘permitted’’ war, identiﬁed with
the wars of King David and other exemplary rulers, sug-
gests a war for political purposes, for example the expan-
sion of Israel’s territory and/or the enhancement of its
security. In its means, this type of war is more limited,
again as indicated by the provisions for war against cities
‘‘far away’’ in Deuteronomy 20. The Talmud, in the por-
tions called Mishna and Gemara (usually dated c. 200 and
500 CE, respectively) recorded rabbinic commentary
suggesting that the ruler of a Jewish state should gain the
approval of the Sanhedrin or council of 70 prior to initi-
ating a ‘‘permitted’’ war.
In Mishneh Torah, the great medieval scholar Moses
Maimonides (d. 1204) systematized these and other rab-
binic judgments. In discussing the laws pertaining to kings
and wars, Maimonides restates the distinction between
obligatory and permitted wars, and notes that these are
valid for any King of Israel. Maimonides, born in Spain at
a time when Christians were making progress toward
retaking the peninsula from Muslims, migrated to Egypt
and thus produced most of his work in a context domi-
nated by Islam. It is not clear whether and how Maimon-
ides thought these judgments might be implemented,
though it is of interest that his comments, along with the
views presented by Nachmanides (d. 1270), provide mate-
rial for Jewish debate over the military and political pol-
icies of present-day Israel.
By contrast with authorities like Maimonides, Muslim
scholars dealt with questions of war in connection with
rule over vast expanses of territory. Following the rapid
conquest of much of the Middle East and North Africa,
members of the religious class (al-‘ulama¯’) articulated
a set of judgments indicating that diplomatic and military
activity designed to spread the blessings of Islamic gov-
ernment should be viewed as consistent with the program
of the Prophet Muhammad (d. 632). According to this
view, Muhammad’s early career in Mecca, the city of his
birth, involved a divine restriction, in that he had only
received the order to preach. Around the time of the
migration to Medina (622 CE), the Prophet and his fol-
lowers received ﬁrst the permission to ﬁght (cf. Qurʾa¯n 22:
39–41), and then in successive revelations the command
obligating them to do so. Before his death, Muhammad
declared that Arabia was now under the control of Islam,
and according to tradition, sent letters to the ruler of the
Byzantine, Sasanian, and ‘Abba¯sid Empires inviting them
to accept Islam, to pay tribute to the Islamic state, or to
make themselves ready to ﬁght. As many Muslims under-
stood it, such actions of the Prophet constituted
a standing order for the faithful to struggle by means of
the sword, as well as by teaching and preaching, so as to
bring the world into a pattern consistent with God’s will or
to ‘‘make God’s cause succeed’’ (Qurʾa¯n 8: 39).
Muslim thinking about war thus tied ﬁghting to the
example of the Prophet, and similarly restricted its means
according to reports of orders Muhammad gave to his
army. These include restrictions on targeting (women,
children, the very old, members of religious classes, and
others are classiﬁed as noncombatants and thus are not to
be the direct target of attacks), as well as exhortations to
keep pledges and in general to ﬁght in ways worthy of the
title muja¯hid (one who struggles, particularly by ﬁghting
in approved wars).
By the mid-ninth and tenth centuries, texts presenting
the judgments of well-known scholars like Malik ibn ‘Atta
(d. 795), al-Shaybani (d. 804), and al-Shaﬁ‘i (d. 820)
provided material studied by members of the learned
class. These included a set of ‘‘judgments pertaining to
armed struggle’’ or ah:ka¯m al-jiha¯d, which were regarded
as establishing precedents that could be extended so as to
provide guidance for contemporary questions. The gen-
eral character of such judgments provides a remarkable
parallel with Christian just war thinking. Thus, Muslim
authorities indicate that legitimate war requires authori-
zation by a competent authority, must be fought for an
approved cause, and must be conducted with right inten-
tion. The ﬁrst requirement is usually taken to mean the
head of state or his designee, albeit in consultation with
recognized religious scholars. The second has to do with
the establishment or extension of Islamic authority, or in
some circumstances with its maintenance or defense. The
third requires that Muslim military policy and the conduct
of Muslim armies follow the orders of the Prophet. As
Muslim just war thinking developed, these came to be
associated not only with avoidance of direct or intentional
harm to noncombatants, but also with a discussion about
certain weapons and tactics. The use of hurling machines
in siege warfare might be approved, for example; but the
use of ﬁre was more problematic.
One of the more interesting developments in Muslim
discussion related to the problem of rebellion. In general,
the idea of Muslims ﬁghting Muslims was seen as prob-
lematic; as well, there are many sayings attributed to
Muhammad designed to discourage Muslims from revolt,
War (Just War, Holy War) W
1385
W

even in the context of unjust rule. Nevertheless, the subset
of just war judgments indicated by the term ah:ka¯m al-
bug˙a¯t or ‘‘judgments pertaining to rebels’’ indicates that
political authorities faced with a revolt orchestrated by
a group with a clearly Islamic intention must tread lightly.
Their goal should be reconciliation, in the manner
suggested by Qurʾa¯n 49:10.
Three further items deserve mention: ﬁrst, the texts in
which authorities speak about the justiﬁcation and con-
duct of war make a rigorous distinction between ﬁghting
intended to extend or defend Islamic territory, and the use
of force with respect to faith. Here, as in the Christian case,
forced conversions violate the rule of faith, though here-
tics, apostates, and religious minorities (ahl al-dhimma or
‘‘protected’’ people) who are recalcitrant may be fought.
Second, a minority view, represented by the various Shı¯ʿite
groups, argued that most of the ﬁghting by which Islam
expanded had been illegitimate, since these wars did not
take place under the leadership of a divinely appointed
imam or religious-political authority. Third, during the
period of the Crusades, the notion of ﬁghting as an ‘‘indi-
vidual duty’’ came to the fore. This notion, which received
further development in the writings of Ibn Taymiyya (d.
1328) in connection with the advance of the Mongols,
suggested that when the Muslims of a particular region
(e.g., Syro-Palestine during the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies) proved unable to defend themselves, the rulers of
neighboring Muslim territories should send armies to
help. It is this judgment which, by an interesting twist,
would come to be developed in the nineteenth and subse-
quent centuries in connection with a variety of Muslim
resistance movements.
Concluding Remarks
The medieval development of religious thinking about
war thus presents important background for contempo-
rary discussions of justice and war. By the end of the
period, Christian authors made a strong distinction
between just war, construed as war fought for approved
political and moral purposes, and holy war, understood to
be war fought because of difference in religion. Just war
came to be approved, while holy war stood within the class
of prohibited acts. Jews and Muslims, by contrast, did not
make this distinction. While Muslims thought of war for
the sake of conversion as wrong, the idea that the phrases
‘‘legitimate state’’ and ‘‘Islamic state’’ are two ways of
saying the same thing persisted. Thus, wars fought for
the establishment or defense of Islamic territory remained
within the category ‘‘just war,’’ and one might speak of an
enemy in terms of religious identity, particularly in the
case of Christian encroachment upon lands controlled by
Islam. And Jews, who would not organize armies until the
mid-late twentieth century, maintained a way of speaking
about wars commanded by God and wars authorized by
state authority that suggested a religious base for distinc-
tions between just and unjust wars.
More generally, advocates of all traditions spoke about
war as a rule-governed activity. Even in cases where
authors noted the approval of ﬁghting involving some-
thing approaching total destruction, their argument
focused on the command of God. And, in more ordinary
settings, restrictions on the conduct of war are consistent:
one must avoid direct targeting of noncombatants, and
one must avoid the use of means that cause dispropor-
tionate damage to enemy property and life.
Finally, one should note a series of developments in
the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries that would presage
a more modern and alternative way of speaking about
war, in terms of reasons of state. By the time of Grotius
(d. 1645), Hobbes (d. 1679), and Locke (d. 1704), new
forms of politics, and with these, new understandings of
political authority, were shaping just war discourse. The
old tradition needed to be recast. And so, it seems, is ever
the case.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Canon Law ▶Church Fathers
▶Cicero in Political Philosophy ▶Civil (Roman) Law
▶Francisco de Vitoria ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Political
Philosophy, Arabic ▶Political Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Political Philosophy, Jewish ▶Political Philosophy
▶Reason of State ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought
Bibliography
Most of the texts by medieval authors are available in the many anthol-
ogies dealing with Christianity and war.
Reichberg GM, Syse H, Begby E (eds) (2006) The ethics of war: classic
and comtemporary readings. Blackwell, Malden, Oxford. This is an
excellent, recent addition to this literature. As well, the Cambridge
University Press Series, Texts in the history of political thought
includes useful anthologies of selections by Augustine, Thomas
Aquinas, Francisco de Vitoria, and others.
Solomon S (2006) The ethics of war in Judaism. In: Brekke T (ed) The
ethics of war in Asian civilizations. Routledge, London/New York, pp
39–80, identiﬁes relevant literature and provides an excellent over-
view of developments within Judaism
In the same volume, cf. John Kelsay, Islamic tradition and the justice of
war. pp 81–110. Also for Islam, see Peters R (1906) Jihad in classical
and modern Islam: a reader. Markus Wiener, Princeton
For more general discussions, see the following:
Abou El Fadl K (2001) Rebellion and violence in Islamic law. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Johnson JT (1981) Just war tradition and the restraint of war. Princeton
University Press, Princeton
Johnson JT (1997) The holy war idea in western and Islamic traditions.
Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park
1386 W
War (Just War, Holy War)

Kelsay J (2007) Arguing the just war in Islam. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Russell FH (1997) The just war in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Tuck R (2001) The rights of war and peace. Oxford University Press,
New York, Oxford
Weakness of Will
▶Will, Weakness of
Will
THOMAS PINK
Department of Philosophy
King’s College London
London
UK
Abstract
The notion of the will or voluntas was central both to
medieval psychology and ethics. As the will was com-
monly conceived, it was through the choices of their will
that an individual exercised freedom in the performance
of action, and in well or ill-directed love determined their
ethical relation to God and neighbor; and it was through
the persistence of their will along with their intellect that
an individual survived bodily death to live out in eternity
the consequences of choices of the will made by them in
this life.
Medieval theories of the will developed out of both the
Christian and pagan thought of late antiquity. The fore-
most inﬂuence on medieval Latin philosophy was St.
Augustine, but his own thought was already marked by
the inﬂuence of pagan philosophy, especially that of Sto-
icism. Stoic thought had developed far more clearly than
Aristotelianism (which in the Hellenistic period Stoicism
came in turn to inﬂuence) a general theory of the actions
of rational beings as involving the exercise of a capacity for
internal action of choice or decision – conceived by Stoics
as sunkatathesis or practical assent – which preceded and
explained the external actions decided upon. And this
conception of the exercise of an inner agency of the will
as a general constituent of human action was a constant
feature of the action theory of medieval and early modern
scholasticism. Indeed, it was fundamental to its moral
thought.
Theories of the will of the high and latter middle ages
were strongly marked by the rediscovery of Aristotle, and
in particular by the discussion of mind and action to be
found in the Nicomachean Ethics. But Aristotle’s texts were
assimilated into the existing Stoic–Augustinian concep-
tion of the will. Prohairesis or rational choice or decision
was for Aristotle himself a motivating element in only
some intentional human action, being absent from the
motivation of akratic action; and the status of prohairesis
as an action itself was not emphasized. By contrast, the
term generally used to translate prohairesis in Latin
thought, electio, denoted a decision or choice that was
viewed on most theories, including those of Aquinas or
Scotus in the high middle ages down to Sua´rez in the
sixteenth century, as the primary form taken by all inten-
tional human action.
Medieval theories of the will are often divided between
intellectualists and voluntarists: intellectualists such as
Aquinas emphasizing a dependence of the operation of
the will on that of the intellect, and voluntarists such as
Henry of Ghent, Scotus, or Ockham emphasizing the will’s
independence of the intellect. These debates were real, but
were generally carried out within a more fundamental
consensus about the nature of will and its fundamental
role in action.
For all these thinkers, the will was our capacity for
choice and decision, providing motivation for actions
chosen or decided upon. It was responsive to the deliber-
ation and judgment of our intellect or understanding
about how we should act, and in the extent of this respon-
siveness it was distinguished from the nonrational corpo-
really based motivations or passions of the sensitive
appetite (appetitus sensitivus) that were common to us
and the animals. Deliberate human actions were generally
seen as occurring ﬁrst and foremost as decisions or choices
of the will, all else that we did intentionally being willed
effects of these decisions and choices of the will. It was
through the will that all such actions were performed and
freedom or control over those actions was exercised.
Hence, the will was generally conceived as a rational
appetite (appetitus rationalis) or rational motivating
power, closely linked with the intellect. Both faculties
were supposed to exist together in beings capable of rea-
son, and so were to be found in humans and angels and, in
a quite different way beﬁtting his inﬁnite nature, in God;
but were not to be found in nonrational animals. Unlike
other corporeally based psychological capacities, such as
the senses and imagination, the will, like the intellect, was
generally held to be an immaterial faculty, operating
Will W
1387
W

independently of any bodily organ and surviving bodily
death. This immateriality was connected with its status,
shared with the intellect, as a rational or intellectual fac-
ulty, involving a grasp of concepts in their generality. For
such a grasp was widely thought to exceed the capacities of
any bodily organ.
Why was the will generally seen by medieval thinkers
as a primary locus of human action? Such a conception of
action became much more controversial in the seven-
teenth century, where the opposition to medieval psychol-
ogy mounted by Thomas Hobbes included an attack on
the existence of a freedom or agency of the will. For
Hobbes, the will was neither a distinctively rational fac-
ulty, being simply a general corporeally based capacity for
motivation that is common to us and the animals; nor was
it a locus of action, being entirely passive, our actions
occurring only as the subsequent willed effects of its exer-
cise. It is no coincidence that such an attack on the agency
of the will should have been accompanied by an attack on
its status as a distinctively rational or reason-involving
faculty. For central to medieval theories of the will was
a generally accepted theory of deliberate or fully inten-
tional human action as a mode of exercising rationality at
the point of the will.
This conception of action was practical reason-based:
to perform a deliberate or intentional action was to exer-
cise a capacity to respond to and apply an intellectually
presented practical reason. The intellect was directed at
truth and seen as our capacity to reason and thereby arrive
at belief or knowledge; in exercising the intellect to delib-
erate practically, about how to act, we arrived at conclu-
sions about how we should act. Actions in their primary
form were seen as occurring as the exercise of a capacity to
respond to such deliberations not simply at the level of
belief or knowledge, but at the level of motivation,
through a faculty directed at goodness or some other
practical value (such as, for Scotists, justice) as presented
by the intellect. So in concluding by the intellect that,
say, it is good that we should give alms, we could also
respond to the goodness of that option by exercising
the will to decide and become motivated to give alms.
And that response was, by its very nature, a deliberate or
intentional action.
This conception of action was common ground
between intellectualists and voluntarists about the will.
Thus, Aquinas understood the will in intellectualist
terms, as dependent on the intellect in its function: acts
of will stood as matter to the form provided by judgments
of the practical intellect, the act of electio being informed
by a judgment that the act chosen should be performed.
Thus, actions of the will were described by Aquinas as
cognitively informed inclinations. But we ﬁnd the same
conception of action in a more voluntarist thinker such as
Scotus. Though for Scotus actions of the will were
undetermined by practical judgments of the intellect,
their status as actions was still understood by him in the
same practical reason-based terms. He gave a widely
discussed deﬁnition of intentional action or praxis as the
act of a faculty that has at least the function, which in cases
of irrationality may not be fulﬁlled, of responding to and
being guided by judgments of the intellect – a faculty that
he identiﬁed as the will.
Actions were generally viewed as taking two forms:
actus eliciti or interni, elicited or internal actions of the
will itself, in which we perform actions of electio or deci-
sion and choice; and then through the effect of these actus
eliciti, further actus imperati or externi, commanded exter-
nal actions involving faculties or capacities outside the
will, in which we acted as decided on or chosen. The
conception of action as a mode of responding to reason
in the intellect applied directly only to the will itself. For as
we have noted, the dignity and nature of reason was
generally seen as precluding the material embodiment of
faculties directly responsive to reason. Hence, the status of
commanded actions chosen or decided upon through the
will, actions that occurred outside the will itself and which,
in the case of actions such as hand raisings and the like,
were located in corporeal motive capacities, was explained
indirectly, in terms of their being willed effects of actions
of the will. The status of the will as the primary locus of
action was then a direct consequence of its being the only
capacity to which the dominant practical reason-based
conception of action could directly apply.
This conception of action as a mode of exercising
rationality through the will could not apply to nonrational
animals, who were supposed to lack wills and merely
possessed passions of the sensitive appetite. But notice
that the inﬂuence of the practical reason-based conception
shaped even the theory of animal action. For although
nothing exactly like human action might take place
in animals, still something quite like it did take place
in what Aquinas termed ‘‘imperfectly voluntary’’ form.
And the principal case of imperfectly voluntary animal
action, as thinkers such as Aquinas and Sua´rez agreed, was
to be found, not in bodily motions, but in the prior
passions that motivated these motions. The closest ana-
logue of human actions in animals were not cases of
animal bodily motion, but rather animal passions. For in
responding appetitively to particular goods presented
through the imagination, animals were approximating as
closely as they could to the responses to an intellectually
presented good made by human wills.
1388 W
Will

The debate between intellectualists and voluntarists
did not involve any fundamental difference about the
nature of agency. It did however reﬂect important differ-
ences about the nature of freedom and about how freedom
is based in the will. In Thomism, the freedom of the will
was explained in terms of the nature of its object as
presented by the intellect. Freedom as a power to do or
not to do was explained in terms of the will, a faculty
oriented toward the agent’s good as happiness, being
presented by the intellect with a range of imperfect, ﬁnite
goods as options. So while freedom was a characteristic of
the will, Aquinas taught that its root was to be found in
reason. And the will’s status as an intellectual or rational
faculty at all was derivative, owing to its acts being
informed by those of the intellect. The state of beatitudo
or happiness, which was the destiny of the saved in heaven,
was primarily a state of the intellect as involved in the
beatiﬁc vision or contemplation of God.
Whereas for Scotus, the will’s freedom depended on
a duality in its proper object – as consisting both in the
good of the agent and in justice. But the nature of freedom
was not exhausted by the nature of will’s intellectually
presented object. Freedom was understood by Scotus to
consist in a power of the will to determine itself; and the
presence of this power was only revealed to us in our
experience of our own choices. Moreover, the will deter-
mined its actions as an efﬁcient cause of them, judgments
of the intellect serving only as secondary, partial, or
nondetermining efﬁcient causes. Indeed, appealing to the
characterization of rational power by Aristotle in Meta-
physics Book IX as involving a potential to opposites, in
Scotus’ view, thanks to the possibility of freedom, it was
the will rather than the intellect that was the truly rational
power. And it was the will rather than the intellect that was
the primary source of the happiness of heaven, as the
faculty by which we direct ourselves to God in love of him.
Besides its central role in action, the will was also fun-
damental to the medieval Christian understanding of love.
The central demand of the New Law presented by Christ
was that people love God and love their neighbor as bearing
the image of God. And, following Augustine, it was gener-
ally held that the love required by the law actually existed in
the will. Not only was the will taken to be a locus of action, it
was also taken to be a seat of affect and emotion.
In exercising the will, we favor or incline ourselves
toward something. But we might favor or incline ourselves
toward a person rather than an action. For the object of
the will might be, not an action, but a substance. In which
case, the will’s exercise toward its object could amount to
love of a person. And so it was taken to be by Augustine,
who took the orientation of our will to determine the
direction of our love, and by later authors. In fact,
corresponding to nonrational emotions felt in the sensi-
tive appetite, passions properly so called, there were gen-
erally supposed to be corresponding rational emotions of
the rational appetite or will.
In so far too as the will was a locus of agency, the
identiﬁcation of the will as the seat of love allowed the
accommodation of a generally held view of law. What law
required of us and made obligatory, it was generally
thought, is action or refraining from action. That is, law
served to govern agency as something over which we
possess dominium or control provided by our freedom.
But if what the law required of us is ﬁrst and foremost
properly directed love, then it was important that love take
the form of a kind of free action. And if love of something
was an orientation of the will toward it, and to direct one’s
will toward something was to perform a free action, then
this demand could be met. The law could both govern
action and directly require of us that we love. The emotion
of love was therefore widely broken down into an action,
what the law could and did directly require of us that we
perform, and a habitus or disposition – a character of the
soul that was not itself an action, and not directly obliga-
tory under law, but by which we came to perform the
obligatory action more readily and easily.
Included among habitus were the virtues and vices.
And there was much dispute about the location of the
moral virtues. Justice was generally agreed to be a virtue or
disposition of the will; but what of courage and temperance?
Aquinas held these to be virtues of the sensitive appetite,
defective passions being the main obstacle to the perfor-
mance of courageous and temperate actions. But Scotus and
his followers put all the moral virtues in the will. For a moral
virtue, properly speaking, must be a disposition of that
faculty by which, morally, we act well or badly; and the
will, precisely because possessing a freedom of alternatives
or opposites, was the more in need of virtues to dispose it
toward morally good action and away from evil.
In fact, it was generally held that by virtue of its
imposing obligations on external actions, the natural law
directly addressed the will and imposed obligations too on
our decisions: that, as Aquinas made clear (in Aquinas
1948:1.2, q100 a9), under natural law we were bound to
will obligatory external actions, and bound not to will
prohibited ones, so that the existence of an obligation to
give alms implied a corresponding obligation to decide
and intend to give alms. Behind this lay a conception of
obligation, not simply as a kind of command – though
obligations might be imposed through commands – but as
a mode of justiﬁcatory support or, to use a term from
Sua´rez, a vis directiva or justiﬁcatory force.
Will W
1389
W

The force of a justiﬁcation is the kind of justiﬁcatory
support provided for what it justiﬁes – the support we
refer to when we say that an argument has ‘‘great force.’’
And in the practical sphere, the force of any justiﬁcation
must apply not only to the external actions justiﬁed or
supported, but also to the will itself. If a justiﬁcation for an
action such as giving alms is to move someone to act, it
must equally justify and support not only giving alms but
their ﬁrst deciding to give alms. Otherwise, the agent
would remain quite unmoved by the justiﬁcation for
alms giving since they would lack any justiﬁcation for
deciding to act as it directed them. But practical justiﬁca-
tions must be able to move us to act. They must justify the
decisions and motivations that are involved in our
responding to them. The assumption that obligations
applying to external actions also apply to decisions of the
will
themselves
is,
then,
a
direct
consequence
of
a conception of obligation as a mode of justiﬁcatory
support or force. And again, in so far as obligation was
also conceived as directive of action, so this conception of
obligation required that the will be a locus of agency.
Hence, scholastic moral theory was committed to the
will’s being a locus of action in two ways: by its conception
of what the moral law required as being, ﬁrst and fore-
most, a will-based emotion of love; and then by its con-
ception of obligation as a vis directiva or mode of
justiﬁcatory support.
See also: ▶Emotion ▶Henry of Ghent ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶Virtue and Vice ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1948) Summa theologiae. Marietti, Turin
Aristotle (1968) L’Ethique a Nicomaque, ed. Gauthier R-A, Jolif J-Y.
Peeters, Louvain
Aristotle (1972) Ethica Nicomachea, translatio Roberti Grosseteste
Lincolniensis, ed. Gauthier R-A. Editions Peeters, Leiden/Brussels
Augustine (1970) De libero arbitrio, Corpus Christianorum Series Latina,
vol 29. Brepols, Turnhout
Bonaventure (1882–1902) Opera omnia. Quaracchi, Rome
Henry
of
Ghent
(1518)
Quodlibeta
magistra
Henrici
Goethals
a Gandavo doctoris solemnis, ed. Badius J. Paris (repr. Louvain,
1961)
Henry of Ghent (1979) Opera omnia, ed. Macken R et al. Leuven Uni-
versity Press, Leuven
Scotus John Duns (1639) Opera omnia, ed. Wadding L. Lyon
Scotus John Duns (1950) Opera omnia, ed. Balic C et al. Vatican, Rome
Scotus John Duns (1997) Opera philosophica, ed. Etzkorn G et al. The
Franciscan Institute, St Bonaventure
Sua´rez Francisco (1856–1870) Opera omnia, ed. Berton C. Vives, Paris
William of Ockham (1967–1989) Opera philosophica et theologica, ed.
Boehner Ph et al. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Inwood B (1985) Ethics and human action in early stoicism. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Kahn C (1988) Discovering the will. In: Dillon J, Long A (eds) The
question of ‘‘eclecticism’’. University of California Press, Berkeley,
pp 234–259
Kent B (1995) Virtues of the will. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington
Korolec J (1982) Free will and free choice. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 629–641
Lottin O (1942–1960) Psychologie et Morale aux XIIe et XIIIe siecles, 6
vols. Gembloux, Louvain
Macken R (1975) La volonte humaine, faculte plus elevee que l’intelli-
gence selon Henri de Gand. Recherches de theologie ancienne et
medievale 42:5–51
Macken R (1977) Heinrich von Gent im Gespraech mit seinen
Zeitgenossen
ueber
die
menschliche
Freiheit.
Franzisk
Stud
42:125–182
Maurer A (1999) The philosophy of William of Ockham in the light of its
principles. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
McInerny R (1992) Aquinas on human action. Catholic University of
America Press, Washington
Pink T (2004) Sua´rez, Hobbes and the scholastic tradition in action
theory. In: Pink T, Stone M (eds) The will and human action: from
antiquity to the present day. Routledge, London, pp 127–153
Pink T (2005) Action, will and law in late scholasticism. In: Kraye J,
Saarinen R (eds) Moral philosophy on the threshold of modernity.
Springer, Dordrecht, pp 31–50
Rorty A (ed) (1980) Essays on Aristotle’s ethics. California University
Press, Berekeley
Saarinen R (1994) Weakness of the will in medieval thought: from Augus-
tine to Buridan. Brill, Leiden
Stone M (2004) Moral psychology before 1277: the will, liberum
arbitrium, and moral rectitude in Bonaventure. In: Pink T, Stone
M (eds) The will and human action: from antiquity to the present
day. Routledge, London, pp 99–126
Westberg D (1994) Right practical reason: Aristotle, action and prudence
in Aquinas. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Wolter A (1986) Duns Scotus on the will and morality. Catholic Univer-
sity of America Press, Washington
Will, Weakness of
TOBIAS HOFFMANN
School of Philosophy
The Catholic University of America
Washington, DC
USA
Abstract
Weakness of will, taken broadly, characterizes actions
performed against one’s better judgment or against one’s
resolve. The Aristotelian concept of unqualiﬁed akrasia
1390 W
Will, Weakness of

(incontinence) denotes the special case of weakness of will
due to passions. Prior to the reception of Aristotle’s teach-
ing on akrasia, the medievals saw weakness of will pre-
dominantly as a volitional rather than a cognitive
deﬁciency. The early phase of the reception of Aristotle’s
teaching on akrasia (from Albert the Great to Henry of
Ghent) focused on the voluntary character of inconti-
nence by investigating the will’s control of the passions
and of the momentary corruption of the incontinents’
moral convictions. With notable exceptions, in the later
period, interest in Aristotle’s account of akrasia waned,
and the focus shifted more exclusively toward the interac-
tion of intellect and will. Aristotle considered incontinent
action to be contrary to the individual’s choice, whereas
Christian thinkers agreed that incontinent action is freely
chosen. Christian thinkers disagreed, however, on whether
it is possible to act contrary to one’s better judgment while
one is still fully aware of this judgment (synchronic or
clear-eyed weakness of will) or only when this conviction
is momentarily obscured or not properly applied to the
speciﬁc situation (diachronic weakness of will).
Historical and Systematic Development of
the Concept
Medieval thinkers rarely employed the term ‘‘weakness
of will’’ (inﬁrmitas voluntatis or its cognates). Yet the
phenomenon of intentionally acting against one’s better
judgment or against one’s resolve, which in contemporary
philosophy is called ‘‘weakness of will’’, was the object of
lively discussion. Historically, the mid-thirteenth century
is a watershed for treatments of weakness of will, for only
in
1246/1247
was
Aristotle’s
discussion
of
akrasia
translated into Latin. The term akrasia was translated as
incontinentia (incontinence). Prior to the reception of
Aristotle, weakness of will was mainly discussed under
two headings: acting against one’s conscience and sinning
from weakness.
Earlier medieval thinkers tended to explain weakness
of will as a volitional rather than a cognitive deﬁciency. For
Anselm of Canterbury, the weak-willed abandon their
initial desire for the upright action: in other words, they
did not persistently will (pervelle) what they initially
intended. Yet such weakness of will is not due to intellec-
tual failure or impulsive passions, but rather due to
a defective and voluntary act of the will. Peter Abelard
distinguishes two kinds of weakness of will: on the one
hand, the free consent to follow sensory desires rather than
the rational will, so that one does not will what one judges
best; on the other hand, the abandonment of one’s initial
will, so that one does not do what one had intended to do.
Bernard of Clairvaux envisages a cognitive dimension in
what he explicitly calls ‘‘weakness of will’’ (inﬁrmitas
voluntatis). The weak-willed are self-deceived about their
order of preferences. While they think they want to avoid
sinning, they actually prefer sinning to enduring that
which an upright decision would entail. Yet even Bernard
explains the failure of the weak-willed in terms of
a volitional rather than a cognitive defect (for Anselm,
Abelard, and Bernard, see the chapters by Bernd Goebel,
Jo¨rn Mu¨ller, and Christian Trottmann in Hoffmann et al
2006; see also Mu¨ller 2009:381–495).
Albert the Great is the ﬁrst Latin author to comment
on Aristotle’s treatment of akrasia. Aristotle, sharing the
Socratic presupposition that one cannot do evil in full
awareness that the action is evil, was more concerned
with explaining how akrasia is possible than with its vol-
untary character. He argues that because of vehement
passions, the incontinent fail to apply their general, habit-
ual moral knowledge to the particular situation they are in
(Nicomachean Ethics 7.3). Albert and later Christian
authors, by contrast, are more concerned with showing
that the incontinent freely choose to act incontinently and
are fully responsible for their action. According to Aris-
totle, choice is the result of practical deliberation. Thus,
failure to act according to one’s better knowledge means
acting against one’s choice. Hence the incontinent do not
act from choice. In the Augustinian tradition, of which
Albert is an heir, choice may or may not conform with
practical reason. Albert explains the phenomenon of
akrasia in Aristotelian terms: the incontinent act contrary
to their choice, because due to the onslaught of passions,
they are momentarily unaware that their particular action
conﬂicts with their general moral beliefs. Yet Albert
explains the incontinents’ cognitive failure in Augustinian
terms: by their own free will, they allowed themselves to be
unaware that their action is not choiceworthy (Saarinen
1994:100–118).
Thomas Aquinas, who was inﬂuenced by Albert, and
Henry of Ghent, who wrote in the two decades after
Aquinas’ death, provide the most elaborate contributions
to the medieval debate on weakness of will. They represent
two opposite tendencies in discussing weakness of will,
owing to their fundamentally different views on the will’s
relation to the intellect. For Aquinas, the will’s desires and
choices are strictly proportional to the practical judgments
of what is worth desiring or choosing. Accordingly, he
does not admit ‘‘clear-eyed’’ or ‘‘synchronic weakness of
will’’: that is, like Aristotle, he denies that at the moment of
weak-willed action, the person actually acknowledged the
better judgment that he or she generally holds. According
to Aquinas, even malice – that is, deliberate evildoing –
involves ignorance at some level. This conscious pursuit of
Will, Weakness of W
1391
W

evil implies ‘‘ignorance of choice’’ (ignorantia electionis),
which is an ignorance of the fact that whatever good one
might expect from the act, this evil act is not to be done
(read: it is opposed to true happiness) (Summa theologiae
1a2ae q. 78 a. 1 ad 1 and a. 4 ad 1). Malice characterizes the
intemperate, who wrongly consider self-indulgence to be
choiceworthy. In contrast, the incontinent correctly
believe that self-indulgence should not be pursued. They
act incontinently, however, because their vehement pas-
sions distract them from dwelling on their moral convic-
tions, drawing their attention toward considerations that
speak in favor of the desired act. When tempted, someone
who normally admits that adultery is to be avoided is
temporarily dominated by the thought that immediate
pleasure is worth pursuing. Thus, incontinence is like
momentary intemperance. When the passions calm
down, the incontinent tend to regret the act, whereas the
intemperate, whose disposition is stable, see nothing bad
in their action. Aquinas maintains the parallelism of intel-
lect and will in incontinence; in his view, incontinence
involves not the refusal of the will to follow a correct
practical judgment, but rather a momentarily mistaken
practical judgment on the part of the intellect, which pre-
sents the action as choiceworthy. Nevertheless, the will is
also at fault, because it failed to counteract the effect of the
passions by directing the attention of reason away from
temptation. Like Albert, Thomas blames the incontinent
for their momentary lack of acknowledgment that their
action is sinful. It is only because of this voluntary cogni-
tive failure that they can act contrary to their better judg-
ment (for concise accounts, see Kent 1989; Bradley 2008;
as well as Mu¨ller 2005, 2009:512–547).
Henry
of
Ghent
reverses
Aquinas’
explanation.
Rather than holding that incontinent action presupposes
ignorance or unawareness of what is best to do here and
now, Henry argues that ignorance follows upon inconti-
nent action. For Henry, the possibility of synchronic weak-
ness of will; is inherent to the will, whether or not passions
are involved. But normally, passionate desires have a part
in weakness of will; that is, typically, weakness of will takes
the form of incontinence. Yet for Henry, the passions or
the cognitive deﬁciency they might cause do not by them-
selves entail the corruption of the will. The passions that
assail the incontinent cause the will to delight in them, and
if the will freely consents to the object of delight, it pursues
the incontinent action and causes reason erroneously to
judge it as good. Over time, repeated evil choices destroy
practical knowledge entirely: someone who initially
thought that theft is bad comes to think that it is good.
Thus, an evil will corrupts reason, rather than vice versa
(Hoffmann 2008; Mu¨ller 2009:569–617).
While Duns Scotus repeatedly defends the possibility
of acting contrary to one’s practical judgment, he shows
little interest in the Aristotelian notion of incontinence as
passionate weakness of will, as in fact he is generally not
very interested in the role of the passions in human
agency. He agrees with Henry that the will can depart
from reason. But he rejects Henry’s view that an evil will
can corrupt the judgment of practical reason, for the
activity of practical reason is ultimately rooted in self-
evident practical principles. Rather than corrupting rea-
son, the will can either turn it away from a correct practical
consideration, or it can command it to ﬁnd the means to
an evil end (see the chapter by Timothy Noone in
Hoffmann et al 2006; Mu¨ller 2009:636–672). William of
Ockham follows Duns Scotus on this point.
These theories leave us in a dilemma. If one considers
the will to be capable of willing contrary to practical
reason, as the voluntarists do, it is hard to see why
someone would will to act contrary to what he or she
has subjectively judged to be best (e.g., pursuing pleasure
if abstinence is judged best, or avoiding pleasure if self-
indulgence is judged best). On the other hand, if one
asserts that the will must act in conformity with practical
reason, as the intellectualists do, it seems that moral
failure has to be traced to cognitive failure, and it appears
implausible to fault a person for such failure. In order to
avoid both alternatives, John Buridan denies that the
will’s desire or choice can be contrary to an unambiguous
judgment of reason, but he grants that when the judg-
ment is uncertain, the will can abstain from willing,
postponing its decision until the ambiguity is resolved.
For Buridan, weakness of will presupposes weak practical
judgments, allowing the will to be divided between fol-
lowing what is pleasurable and avoiding what is immoral
(Saarinen 1994:166–187).
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Bernard of Clairvaux
▶Emotions ▶Henry of Ghent ▶John Buridan ▶Parisian
Condemnation of 1277 ▶Peter Abelard ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Virtue and Vice ▶Voluntarism and Intellectu-
alism ▶Will ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1968/1972) Super Ethica commentum et quaestiones,
ed. Ku¨bel W. Opera omnia, vol 14. Mu¨nster
Aquinas Thomas (1892) Prima secundae Summae theologiae, a quaestione
LXXI ad quaestionem CXIV, cura et studio Fratrum Praedicatorum.
Opera omnia, iussu Leonis XIII P.M. edita, vol 7. Rome
Buridan John (1513) Super decem libros Ethicorum. Paris (repr. Minerva,
Frankfurt, 1968)
1392 W
Will, Weakness of

Duns Scotus John (2007) Ordinatio III dist. 26–40, ed. Hechich B et al.
Opera omnia, vol 10. Rome
Henry of Ghent (1979) Quodlibet I, ed. Macken R. Opera omnia, vol 14.
Leuven/Leiden
William of Ockham (1984) Principium bibliae sive quaestio de
connexione virtutum, ed. Wey JC. Opera theologica, vol 8.
St. Bonaventure, NY
Secondary Sources
Bradley Denis JM (2008) Thomas Aquinas on weakness of the will. In:
Hoffmann T (ed) Weakness of will from Plato to the present. The
Catholic University of America Press, Washington, DC
Eardley P (2006) The problem of moral weakness, the propositio
magistralis, and the condemnation of 1277. Mediaev Stud 68:161–203
Hoffmann T (2008) Henry of Ghent’s voluntarist account of weakness of
will. In: Hoffmann T (ed) Weakness of will from Plato to the present.
The Catholic University of America Press, Washington, DC
Hoffmann T, Mu¨ller J, Perkams M (eds) (2006) The problem of weakness
of will in medieval philosophy. Peeters, Leuven/Paris/Dudley
Kent B (1989) Transitory vice: Thomas Aquinas on incontinence. J Hist
Philos 27:199–223
Kent B (1995) Virtues of the will: the transformation of ethics in the late
thirteenth century. The Catholic University of America Press, Wash-
ington, DC
Mu¨ller J (2005) Willensschwa¨che als Problem der mittelalterlichen
Philosophie: U¨ berlegungen zu Thomas von Aquin. Rech The´ol
Philos Me´die´v 72:1–28
Mu¨ller J (2009) Willensschwa¨che in Antike und Mittelalter: Eine
Problemgeschichte von Sokrates bis Johannes Duns Scotus. Leuven
University Press, Leuven
Saarinen R (1994) Weakness of the will in medieval thought: from
Augustine to Buridan. Brill, Leiden
Saarinen R (2002) Weakness of will: the plurality of medieval
explanations. In: Lagerlund H, Yrjo¨nsuuri M (eds) Emotions and
choice from Boethius to Descartes. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 85–97
William Arnaud
JULIE BRUMBERG-CHAUMONT
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
CNRS
Paris
France
Abstract
William Arnaud was a Master in the Arts Faculty of the
University of Toulouse in the South of France at the end of
the thirteenth century. He wrote a course on logic that was
published under the name of Giles of Rome and a very
interesting commentary of Peter of Spain’s Tractatus. His
views are deeply inﬂuenced by Thomas Aquinas’ semantic
and ontological positions and very often opposed to those
of Peter of Spain.
Life and Work
William Arnaud is principally known in medieval philos-
ophy for two reasons: he wrote a very interesting com-
mentary on Peter of Spain’s Tractatus and a course on
logica vetus ascribed to Giles of Rome under whose name
they have been published. According to L. M. De Rijk,
William Arnaud was a Master in Toulouse who taught in
the 1240s or in the 1250s. This view has been challenged
by R. A. Gauthier (Gauthier 1989a:52∗, 69∗sq) because
William quotes Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on the
Peri hermeneias (as ‘‘expositor’’), as well as other works
from Thomas and Giles of Rome when commenting on
Aristotle’s logic. His activity is therefore to be situated in
the late thirteenth century. This date has now been gener-
ally adopted by scholars (except Lahey 2005). William’s
commentary on the Liber de six principiis has been attrib-
uted to ‘‘Master Vital’’ (i.e., Vital du Four) and so edited
separately (Gondras 1975). He also wrote a commentary
on the Analytics (Prior and Posterior). Not much of his life
is known except for these pieces of information on his
logical production as a Master in the Arts Faculty of the
University of Toulouse, since he is no longer identiﬁed
with the Archdeacon of Lanta, who died in 1255, with
William of Saint Amour or with the inquisitor beaten to
death in 1242. A list of his works, manuscripts, and edi-
tions are to be found in Weijers (1998).
The Course on Aristotle’s Logic
William’s course on the Logica vetus (Isagoge, Categories,
Peri hermenieas, Liber VI Principiis) has been edited under
the name of Giles of Rome. It is known in two manuscripts
from Avignon (BM 1078 and BM 1089); there is a
third manuscript (Vatican, Bibl Apost. Barberini, lat. 433)
that is perhaps a copy of the ancient edition, and a fourth
manuscript concerning the commentary on the Liber De
six principiis (Berlin Staatsbibl. Preussischer Kulturbesitz,
Fol.624, ff 51ra–62ra). The set of commentaries on
Logica vetus is headed by a prologue called ‘‘principium’’
(Tabarroni
1988:374)
or
‘‘divisio
logice’’
(Gauthier
1989a:70∗). This division is inﬂuenced by John of Dacia’s
division of sciences (Tabarroni 1988:372). The attribution
of the whole course to William can be based upon an
ascription in one manuscript (Avignon 1089), but the
most serious arguments are derived from the doctrinal
content of the work, which is very close to the Lectura
Tractatuum on Peter of Spain’s Tractatus, which is unques-
tionably by Arnaud. Quotations from Thomas Aquinas
can be read in all parts of his work (Gauthier 1989a:71∗
for the Peri hermeneias’ commentary, as an example).
A. J. Gondras has given an edition of William Arnaud’s
commentary of the Librum de six principiis though he does
William Arnaud W
1393
W

not attribute this work to him, but discuss in detail the
attribution to Vital du Four. He sees the commentary as
the work of a young Master because he does not quote
the Fathers nor the theologians and also because he is far
from being an expert in the Arts (Gondras 1975:187).
The last point seems rather inaccurate considering the
vast amount of quotations from Aristotle’s works on
natural philosophy contained in the commentary, and
the ﬁrst one can probably be explained by the nature of
the text commented upon and by the fact that the
course belongs to the Arts Faculty, and not to theology.
Gondras’ edition is based on two manuscripts from
Avignon (BM 1078 and BM 1089), that is, from those
manuscripts containing the whole course of William
Arnaud on Logica vetus. Another version of the commen-
tary on the Liber is mentioned in an other manuscript
(Toulouse Arch. Dep. 4, F2, see Gauthier 1989a:71∗,
note 2).
One can gain an idea of William’s unpublished com-
mentary on the Categories thanks to the study of
R. Andrews (Andrews 2001:299–300) who listed his ques-
tions and published one on quantity, together with some
similar questions written by other thirteenth-century
masters (Andrews 2001:305–307). William follows Albert
the Great’s solution with regard to the deﬁnition of quan-
tity (Andrews 2001:284).
William’s commentary on the Peri hermeneias has been
thoroughly examined by A. Tabarroni, elaborating on the
discoveries of R. A. Gauthier (who mentions two other
fragmentary manuscripts, Gauthier 1989a:71∗). William
is very faithful to Thomas Aquinas, whom he calls the
‘‘Expositor’’ not only in the sections where Aquinas’
Expositio is extant, but also in the ﬁnal part of the treatise
on which Thomas did not comment. This shows that
William had access to an anonymous Continuatio other-
wise partially transmitted in two manuscripts. His own
exegesis is so dependent on his source that A. Tabarroni
considers it a very good testimony for the reconstitution of
that work (Tabarroni 1988:373–374). This anonymous
Continuatio, strongly inﬂuenced by Herveus Natalis’ com-
mentary on the Peri hermenias was thought to be authen-
tic by William. A partial edition of the Continuatio is given
by A. Tabarroni, followed by the parallel text of William
(Tabarroni 1988:420–427).
William’s commentary on the Analytics is found in one
manuscript (Barcelona, Arch de la Corona de Aragon
Ripoll 109). It has been studied by R. A. Gauthier in his
introduction to Thomas Aquinas’ Expositio: it is based
upon Thomas but also upon Giles of Rome’s commentary
on the same treatise, so that it should be dated after 1290
(Gauthier 1989b:65∗–66∗). A partial edition of his
commentary on the Prior Analytics has been made by
Grabmann (1928).
The Commentary on Peter of Spain’s
Tractatus
The text is known in ﬁve manuscripts and has been
partially edited by de Rijk (1969). The author is quite
critical towards the text on which he is commenting and
develops original positions in his theory of supposition
(see Brumberg-Chaumont 2010). It has been thought
that William’s teaching in logic should be understood
within the new general framework introduced by the
modists in logic. Envisaged in this way, his commentary
could be seen as a very interesting testimony of the
encounter between the new paradigm and the revival of
the interest in the theory of the properties of terms
observed elsewhere at the end of the thirteenth century
(see Pinbord and Ebbesen 1984). Nonetheless, the imme-
diate inspiration of the text is to be found in Thomas
Aquinas’
logical
and
ontological
works
on
a philosophical point of view. William introduces into
the analysis of the theory of signiﬁcation and supposition
Avicenna’s theory of essence as interpreted by the
Dominican on a semantic point of view (especially in
the De ente et essentia and in his commentary on the Peri
hermeneias). Conversely, R. A. Gauthier has shown how
Thomas Aquinas was dealing with the same referential
problems as the terminist treatises did when analyzing
the signiﬁcation and the scope of universal nouns as
subject and as predicate, but that Thomas used different
tools, though he knew the terminist tradition (Gauthier
1989a:55∗–56∗). Similar examples are used, studied in
detail by R. A. Gauthier who mentions the defense Wil-
liam gives of the Thomistic interpretation against Peter of
Spain (Gauthier 1989a:54∗–56∗). One can say that Wil-
liam translates Thomas Aquinas’ approach into the lan-
guage of terminism, as can be seen in the analysis of the
supposition of the predicate, a very interesting case from
the philosophical point of view. According to Peter of
Spain, the predicate ‘‘man’’ is in simple supposition, the
supposition the term can also have in a subject position in
propositions such as ‘‘man is a species.’’ But this is impos-
sible in a Thomistic approach inspired by the Avicennian
paradigm, because the property of being a universal pred-
icable as a species cannot be possessed by the essence itself,
but by the essence as it is thought, the intention, whereas it
is the essence itself that is predicated of the thing in which
it has its being, so that ‘‘man’’ in the two propositions
(‘‘Socrates is a man,’’ ‘‘man is a species’’) cannot have the
same supposition. For William, simple supposition is the
supposition for the intention in the soul and cannot be the
1394 W
William Arnaud

supposition of the predicate because propositions such as
‘‘all men are animals’’ would always be false (Lectura
tractatuum, p. 147). The predicate is in personal supposi-
tion and the proposition is about things, not concepts.
The proposition can all the same remain true even if there
is no man left, because William favors the signiﬁcation of
the thing as thought, so that nouns do not lose their
signiﬁcation if the things named are destroyed, and
because he sees natural supposition as the supposition
for the form as preserved in particulars whether they
exist or not (Lectura tractatuum, p. 146).
See also: ▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought ▶Peter of
Spain ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arnaldus Guilelmus (1969) Lectura tractatuum, e´d. De Rijk LM. On the
genuine text of Peter of Spain’s Summulae logicales. Vivarium
VII:120–162
Ps-Giles of Rome (1507) Expositio dominii Egidii in Artem veterem.
Venetiis (repr Frankfurt, 1968). Venitiis 1582, Minerva, Bergomi 1592
Secondary Sources
Andrews R (2001) Question commentaries on the Categories in the
thirteenth century. Medioevo 26:265–326
Brumberg-Chaumont J (2010) The place of discrete terms in the theory of
the properties of terms. In: Bos EP (ed) Rise and development of
supposition theory. Acts of the 17th European symposium on medi-
eval logic and semantics, Leiden, 2008. Turnhout, p 24
Gauthier RA (1989a) Introduction. In: d’Aquin T, Opera omnia I∗, 2,
Expositio libri peri Hermeneias. Commission Le´onine, Rome/Paris/
Vrin
Gauthier RA (1989b) Introduction. In: d’Aquin T, Opera omnia I∗, 2,
Expositio libri posteriorum. Commission Le´onine, Rome/Paris/Vrin
Gondras GA (1975) Un commentaire avignonnais sur le Liber de sex
principriis attribue´ a` ‘maıˆtre Vital’. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale
et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 42:183–317
Grabmann M (1928) Mittelalterliche lateinische Aristoteleu¨bersetzungen
und Aristeleskommentare in Handschriften spanischer Bibliotheken.
Bayer Ak. D. Wissenschaften, Mu¨chen, pp 55–62
Lahey SE (2005) William Arnaud. A companion to philosophy in the
Middle Ages. In: Gracia JJE, Nonne TB (eds) Blackwell companions
to philosophy 24, Blackwell publ., Malden (Mass.). Partially available
on http://www.blackwellreference.com
Pinbord J, Ebbesen S (1984) Thirteenth century notes on William of
Sherwood’s Treatise on Properties of Terms, an edition of Anonymi
Dubitationes
et
Notabilia
circa
Guilelmi
de
Shyreswode
Introductionum Logicalium Tractatum V from Ms Worcester Cath.
Q. 13. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 47:104–141
Tabarroni A (1988) Le pseudio Egidio (Guglielmo Arnaldi) e un’inedita
continuazione del commento di tommaso al ‘Peryermeneias’.
Medievo 14:371–427
Weijers O (1998) Le travail intellectuel a` la Faculte´ des arts de Paris: textes
et maıˆtres (ca. 1200–1500): Re´pertoire des noms commenc¸ant par G.
Brepols, Turnhout
William Crathorn
STEPHEN E. LAHEY
Department of Classics and Religious Studies
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE
USA
Abstract
William Crathorn (ﬂ.1330s), Oxford Dominican whose
unique epistemology fueled controversies during Oxford’s
‘‘Golden Age’’ of theology. Crathorn’s thought emerged
from the epistemically oriented Ockhamist approach, but
it incorporated an older account, in which the perceived
object projects ‘‘species’’ which are received in the act of
perception and interpreted by the understanding as the
basis for formulating ideas about the perceived object.
Crathorn argued that the ideas we formulate about the
species projected by the object take on the physical char-
acteristics of the object, so that perception of a black cat
results in the formulation of an idea that is black,
possessing felinity, and so forth. Crathorn’s position was
the object of great scorn from his contemporaries, notably
Robert Holcot. This led to increased attention of the
relation of perceived appearances to the substance behind
the perception, and Crathorn recognized that his position
entailed a difﬁculty in a certain distinction between the
Aristotelian categories of substance and quality.
Biography
Very little is known of the Dominican William Crathorn,
save that he entered the O.P. around 1315, and active in
Oxford in the early 1330s. Crathorn was a contemporary
of Robert Holcot, O.P., and appears to have been engaged
in heated debate with Holcot for a time. There is no record
of his presence at Oxford after this period, although his
unique positions continued to attract comment in the
1360s. Crathorn’s commentary on the ﬁrst book of Lom-
bard’s Sentences is the sole source of our knowledge of his
thought, although a manuscript in Vienna contains
quodlibetal questions that may also be his.
Oxford theology in the early fourteenth century was
very heavily
inﬂuenced
by
Ockham’s
philosophical
emphasis on the relation of logic and philosophy of lan-
guage on epistemological questions, demoting ontology
from the pride of place it had enjoyed in thirteenth-
century thought. It by no means follows that all Oxford
thinkers were thereby Ockhamists; the so-called ‘‘Mod-
ern’’ approach lent itself to great variation within
William Crathorn W
1395
W

philosophical speculation, of which William Crathorn
proves a very good example. (It should be understood
that the term moderni was understood to mean thinkers
roughly contemporary to whoever was using it. Before the
condemnation of Wyclifﬁsm in the late fourteenth cen-
tury, when the term was used to mean positions opposed
to Wyclif’s realism, the term was not used to refer to one
speciﬁc philosophical position. Everyone from Thomas
and Scotus onward could count as ‘‘modern.’’) Crathorn’s
Sentence commentary is characterized by the epistemo-
logically oriented approach of the Moderni, but his philo-
sophical conclusions were sufﬁciently divergent from the
mainstream as to lead Robert Holcot to comment that one
should only read Crathorn for amusement. In an age when
it was common to make few personal references to pro-
ponents of opposing philosophical viewpoints, this kind
of comment is remarkable. It is very likely that Crathorn’s
thought was very widely discussed in Oxford from the
1330s through the 1370s, as is evidenced by Wyclif’s hos-
tile references to positions associated with him.
The hallmark of Crathorn’s philosophy was a develop-
ment of the then common notion that human knowledge
is reliant on the species of objects perceived, a position
developed initially by Roger Bacon, whose model of per-
ception was inspired by medieval optics. When we per-
ceive a given object, what we perceive is a result of the
emitted appearances, or species, of the object. This is
analogous to the refraction of an object through a lens;
given the medium of light, when a lens is held up to
a object, an image of that object is produced on the
other side of the lens. This image, the species of the object,
is what we perceive with our senses. It has a lesser form of
being than the substance that produces it, but it has
sufﬁcient being as to convey likeness of that substance.
Crathorn adopted this optically oriented epistemological
model, but added a signiﬁcant limitation: he eliminated
the mental act normally associated with receiving the
perceived species in the mind from his account. That is,
he believed there to be no grounds for distinguishing
between the cognitive power and the acts it might pro-
duce. Aquinas’ model of cognition, in which there are four
elements at play (soul, powers, acts, and species) typiﬁed
thirteenth-century epistemology. Ockham had eliminated
the distinction between soul and powers, identifying the
two, and had done away with species, emphasizing the
cognitive power’s direct perception of the object. Crathorn
agreed with Ockham in identifying the soul and its pow-
ers, retained species in the formula, and arguing against
the distinction between a power and the acts that arise
from it. This left the Soul, or mind, and the species. The
mind receives the species, which reﬂect the qualities of the
object perceived, which results in the mind acquiring the
qualities of the object perceived. Hence, when I perceive
a black cat, the species of the cat contain the qualities of
felinity, blackness, quadrupedality, and so forth; when the
species enters my mind, my mind becomes a substantial
foundation for felinity, blackness, quadrupedality, and so
forth. In effect, my idea of the black cat is, to a very real
extent, black cat-like in all the qualities associated with the
being of the cat. It is this aspect of Crathorn’s thought that
led Holcot to his derisory comment; considered charita-
bly, it is unique to scholastic epistemology.
The ﬁrst question to arise from such a remarkable
position is whether the species we perceive is veridical.
That is, how can we be certain that the species of the black
cat that is identical to our idea of the black cat we perceive
is the same as the qualities as they exist in the black cat
itself? Obviously, the species is not identical to the quali-
ties that produce the appearance, so the question stands:
what is the grounds for certainty that the species fully
embody the qualities of the substance in question?
Ockham’s position adroitly avoids this question by elim-
inating the intermediary species in favor of our direct
perception of the object itself, but Crathorn’s departure
from Ockham leads him to a position familiar to anyone
familiar
with Descartes. The species of skepticism
Crathorn faces is different, then, from that arising from
Ockham’s conviction that God can cause us to perceive
objects
that
do
not
exist.
Ockham’s
arises
from
a consideration of God’s absolute power, while Crathorn’s
arises
naturally
from
his
epistemology.
Crathorn’s
response is similar to Ockham’s, depending on the unlike-
lihood of God’s leading people into error, but it plays
a much greater role in Crathorn’s thought than it does in
Ockham’s. Elsewhere, Crathorn argues against skepticism
by relying on Augusine’s si fallor, sum, a then widely
known counter to traditional skepticism.
While his epistemology represents a remarkable depar-
ture from the Moderni norm, Crathorn’s ontology is slightly
more
commensurate
with
Ockhamist
conceptualism.
Ockhamists generally had reduced the ten Aristotelian cat-
egories to just two, substance and quality; the latter serving
as ontological basis for the remaining eight. Crathorn’s
position, arising from his epistemology, prevents him from
distinguishing with certainty between species of substance
and species of quality, leading him to suggest that the
categories are primarily conventional. There are objects,
and the species we perceive suggest Ockham’s division
between substance and qualities, but we lack the certain
evidence we would need to construct a complex ontological
account of things in the world. Crathorn was among the
Oxford indivisibilists, or atomists, who argued for the
1396 W
William Crathorn

existence of fundamentally indivisible constituents of
a continuum. Opinions varied regarding the nature
and number of these atomic units; some argued for
a potentially inﬁnite number of indivisibles in a ﬁnite con-
tinuum, while others stipulated that a ﬁnite continuum
must be composed of a ﬁnite number of atomic units.
Crathorn was among the latter, and he seems to have advo-
cated a somewhat richer atomism than others, holding these
indivisible elements to be discrete, kind-deﬁned beings.
Given Crathorn’s skepticism regarding the categories,
and the uncertainty about the similarity relation holding
between the species we perceive and the objects behind the
species, one might well ask what Crathorn believed there
to be that we perceive. Crathorn argued that when we
perceive a black cat, there is more involved than simply
the perceiving subject and the perceived object; when we
make a judgment like ‘‘the cat is black’’ we are referring to
a complex that serves as the basis for our proposition.
Crathorn’s position is different from Wodeham’s com-
plex signiﬁcable in that he does not seem to have worked
out the philosophical arguments need to account for
what might correspond to statements about nonexistent
object, or assertions like ‘‘man is not an ass.’’ Crathorn’s
account of propositions is further complicated by his
rejection of the mental language that many of his con-
temporaries believed to be the primary mode of for-
mulating mental propositions prior to their semantic
articulation in a conventional language. Because there is
no distinction between the mental power and the mental
act, there is no space in Crathorn’s philosophy of mind for
the distinction between the cognition of the species and
the translation of the cognition into a conventional lan-
guage. Further, the linguistic apparatus by which complex
propositions are formulated, including verbs, substance-
terms, syncategoremata, and so forth are not contained
within the cognition. Hence, when we translate the cogni-
tion into the semantic expression of the proposition, we
use the conventional language that has been developed by
the linguistic community in which we have been raised.
See also: ▶Atomism ▶Epistemology ▶John Wyclif
▶Robert Holcot ▶Skepticism ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1988) Crathorn Quaestionen zum ersten Sentenzenbuch: Einfu¨hrung
und Text, ed. Hoffman F. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
und Theologie des Mittlealters NF 29. Achendorff, Mu¨nster
(2003) I. Sent., q., trans. Pasnau R. In: The Cambridge translations of
medieval philosophical texts, vol III: mind and knowledge, ed.
Pasnau R. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 245–301
Secondary Sources
Gelber H (1984) I cannot tell a lie: Hugh Lawton’s critique of Ockham on
mental language. Francsc Stud 44:141–179
Gelber H (2004) It could have been otherwise: contingency and necessity
in Dominiacn theology, 1300–1350. E.J. Brill, Leiden
Hoffman F (1971) Der Satz als Zeichen der Theologischen Aussage bei
Holcot, Crathorn, und Gregor von Rimini. Der Begriff der
Repraesantatio im Mittelalter Miscellanea Medievalia 8:296–313
Hoffman F (1995) Der Wandel in der Scholastischen Argumentation vom
13 Zum 14 Jahrhundert aufgezeigt an zwei Bespielen: Robert Holcot
und William Crathorn. Die Bibliotheca Amploniana, Miscellanea
Medievalia 23:301–322
Kirjavainen H (2000) Transcendental elements in the semantics of
Crathorn. In: Holmstro¨m-Hintakka G (ed) Medieval philosophy
and modern times. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Krauss J (1933) Die Stellung des Oxforder Dominikanerlehrers Crathorn
zu Thomas von Aquin. Zeitschrift fu¨r Katholische Theologie
57:66–68
Lahey S (2008) John Wyclif. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Panaccio C (1996) Le langage mental en discussion: 1320–1335. Les
E´tudes Philosophiques 3:323–339
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later Middle Ages. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Perler D (1997) Crathorn on mental language. In: Marmo C (ed) Vestigia,
imagines, verba, semiotics and logic in medieval theological texts.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 337–354
Robert A. William Crathorn. In: Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/crathorn/
Schepers H (1970) Holkot contra dicta Crathorn: I. Quellenkritik und
Biographische
Auswertung
der
Bakkalareatsschriften
zweier
Oxforder Dominikaner des XIV Jahrunderts. Philosophisches
Jahrbuch 77:320–354
Schepers H (1972) Holkot contra dicta Crathorn: II. Das signiﬁcatum per
propositionem. Aufbau und Kritik einer Nominalistischen Theorie
u¨ber den Gegenstand des Wissens. Philosophisches Jahrbuch
79:106–136
Tachau K (1987) Wodeham, Crathorn, and Holcot: the development of
the complexe signiﬁcabile. In: de Rijk LM, Braakhuis H (eds) Logos
and pragma. Ingenium, Nijmegen, pp 161–187
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Studien und
Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters. E.J. Brill, Leiden
Wood R (1989) Crathorn versus Ockham. Fransc Stud 49:347–353
William Heytesbury
JOHN L. LONGEWAY
Department of Philosophy
University of Wisconsin
Kenosha, WI
USA
Abstract
William Heytesbury (before 1313–1372/1373) was a fellow
of Oxford’s Merton College from 1330. Developing the
William Heytesbury W
1397
W

work of Richard Kilvington and Thomas Bradwardine, he
applied supposition theory to the logical exposition of
‘‘sophisms,’’ attending in particular to scope problems
and compounded and divided sense. His chief work
is the Rules for Solving Sophismata (Regulae solvendi
sophismata). He is particularly noted for applying his
methods to puzzles about motion and the continuum,
and is best known for the mean speed theorem concerning
the distance covered over a period of time under uniform
acceleration. His work had some inﬂuence on the devel-
opment of early modern science, though he cannot be said
to have been doing empirical science, his work being much
closer to mathematical analysis.
William was born before 1313, probably in Wiltshire,
Salisbury Diocese. He served as the ﬁrst bursar in his
college in 1338–1339. He had become a Doctor of
Theology by 1348, and was chancellor of the university
in 1371–1372. He died in the winter of 1372/1373.
Heytesbury was one of the second generation of the
Mertonian school, building on Richard Kilvington’s
Sophisms (Sophismata) (before 1325), and Thomas
Bradwardine’s Insoluble Sentences (Insolubilia) and Trea-
tise on Proportions (Tractatus de proportionibus) (1328).
Heytesbury’s work deals chieﬂy with ‘‘sophisms,’’ state-
ments occurring within formal disputations, the truth of
which was at issue given speciﬁed assumptions. The
respondent must agree to or deny the sophism, and then
answer his opponent’s questions, granting whatever
follows deductively from his admissions, without falling
into contradiction. All of William’s works would have
been written during his regency in the Arts at Merton,
approximately 1331–1339. Most inﬂuential is the Rules for
Solving Sophismata (Regulae solvendi sophismata). A work
supplementing the Rules, On the Proofs of Conclusions
from the Treatise of Rules for Resolving Syllogisms
(De
probationibus
conclusionum
tractatus
regularum
solvendi sophismata), which may not be by William
himself, appears with it in early printed editions and
manuscripts. William also wrote a number of more ele-
mentary pieces, focusing chieﬂy on logical and semantical
issues rather than paradoxes involving the continuum.
These include a collection of 32 Sophismata, and
a second collection of 39 sophisms purportedly proving
that the respondent is a donkey (tu est asinus), entitled
Sophismata Asinina. He produced a number of short
works at the more elementary level as well, including On
the Compound and Divided Senses (De sensus composito et
diviso), and Concerning the Truth and Falsehood of Pre-
mises (De veritate et falsitate propositionis). All of these
appear in the 1494 edition of Locatellus. Works found
only in manuscript include a treatise on consequences,
another on obligations, one on future contingents, and
a beginner’s book of deﬁnitions and divisions in natural
philosophy. For these, see Weisheipl (1969).
The Rules contains six chapters. The ﬁrst deals with
insoluble sentences, self-referential paradoxes such as
‘‘what I am now uttering is false.’’ The second deals with
intensional
contexts.
For
instance,
it
presents
the
sophisma ‘‘you know the king is seated,’’ given that the
king is seated, and you know that sentence A, in fact
asserting this, is true, but do not know what A says. The
third chapter deals with problems connected with relative
pronouns, and the fourth with paradoxes involving the
terms ‘‘begins’’ and ‘‘ceases.’’ Here Heytesbury notes that if
something begins to have a property at a given moment,
then it might either have the property for the ﬁrst time at
that moment or lack the property for the last time at that
moment, and tries to set forth rules as to which ‘‘exposi-
tion’’ to adopt in any particular case. In the ﬁfth chapter of
the Regulae, on maxima and minima, Heytesbury
considers the limits of capacities. He assumes that every
active capacity is measured by the resistance (the passive
capacity) it can overcome. Thus an active capacity to lift
weights will be measured by the weight (a resistance) that
it enables one to lift. It is natural to assign as one’s weight-
lifting capacity the greatest weight one can lift, the limit of
one’s capacity. But in some cases, there will be no greatest
passive capacity by which the active capacity can be mea-
sured. Still, as long as the active capacity has some limit
there will then be a least passive capacity that the active
capacity cannot overcome. Thus any given active capacity
will divide the range of passive capacities on which it is
measured into two sets, every element of one of which is
greater than every element of the other, and the limit of
the capacity will be that unique capacity which is at the
boundary between the two sets, either the greatest in the
ﬁrst set, or the least in the second. The situation is parallel
to that with beginning and ceasing, where it turned out
that two different expositions were needed for ‘‘A begins to
be F,’’ one assuming a ﬁrst instant at which A is F, the other
a last instant at which A is not. Heytesbury lays down
some rules as to which of these options to choose in any
particular case. He also tries to determine when the limit
of a capacity in fact exists, and his work here is strongly
reminiscent of Dedekind’s deﬁnition of real numbers
in terms of rationals. The sixth chapter deals with change
and motion.
Heytesbury’s central interest is the logic of continua
and inﬁnite divisibility, a pursuit nowadays identiﬁed
as part of mathematics. His puzzles are logical, and
Heytesbury works, like other logicians who treated
1398 W
William Heytesbury

sophisms, ‘‘according to imagination,’’ allowing any con-
sistent set of propositions whatever to be assumed for the
presentation of a sophism, regardless of metaphysical or
physical possibility. He treated qualities such as heat and
whiteness as measurable on a continuous range, and
accustomed thinkers to the notion that any quality varying
in ‘‘intension’’ could be conceived quantitatively. Ancient
physics envisioned quantitative treatments only of spatial
dimensions, time, and motion, and so Heytesbury’s work
helped lay the logical groundwork for sixteenth and
seventeenth-century breakthroughs in such areas as the
physics of heat and temperature. In the sixth chapter of
his Rules, Heytesbury developed the mathematics of uni-
form acceleration, proving that uniformly accelerated
bodies will, in a given period of time, cover the same
distance they would have covered traveling at a uniform
velocity one half the sum of initial and ﬁnal velocities.
Domingo de Soto noted the theorem’s application to free
fall in 1555, and Galileo beneﬁted from the medieval
discussion of uniform acceleration to which William con-
tributed, though he probably was not directly acquainted
with his work.
See also: ▶Domingo de Soto ▶Insolubles ▶John
Dumbleton ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Oxford Calculators
▶Quantiﬁcation
▶Richard
Kilvington
▶Richard
Swineshead
▶Sophisms
▶Supposition
Theory
▶Syncategoremata ▶Terms, Properties of ▶Thomas
Bradwardine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Heytesbury William. Sophismata, Latin text transcribed by Pironet
Fabienne, en route to a critical edition, at her website
Heytesbury William (1494) Hentisberi de sensu composito et diviso,
Regulae solvendi sophismata, etc. Bonetus Locatellus, Venice.
Includes commentaries by Gaetano of Thienne, and the Sophismata
at 77ra–70vb. See Wilson (1960) for further information
Heytesbury William (1959) On the three categories. Selections translated
by Moody EA in: Claggett M, The science of mechanics in the Middle
Ages. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, pp 235–237, 270–277
(repr. in Grant Edward (1974) A source book in medieval science.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp 237–243)
Heytesbury William (1979) William of Heytesbury on ‘‘Insoluble’’
sentences, translated with notes by Spade P. Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Heytesbury William (1984) On maxima and minima: chapter 5 of ‘‘Rules
for solving sophismata,’’ with an anonymous fourteenth-century
discussion, translated with introduction and study by Longeway J.
D Reidel, Dordrecht
Heytesbury William (1994) Sophismata asinina. Une introduction aux
disputes logiques du Moyen Age, pre´sentation, e´dition, critique et
analyse par Pironet Fabienne. J Vrin, Paris
Heytesbury William of (1983) On knowing and being uncertain, trans-
lated by Boh I. Available in mimeograph from The Translation
Clearing House, Oklahoma State University
Heytesbury William of (1988) The compounded and divided senses, and
The verbs ‘know’ and ‘doubt,’ translated by Kretzmann Nand Stump E.
In: The Cambridge translations of medieval philosophical texts, vol
1: logic and philosophy of language. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 413–479
Secondary Sources
Longeway J (2007) William Heytesbury. In: The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. //plato.stanford.edu/entries/heytesbury/
Spade PV (1989) The manuscripts of William Heytestbury’s Regulae
solvendi sophismata. Conclusions, notes and descriptions. Medioevo
15:272–313
Sylla ED (1971) Medieval quantiﬁcations of qualities: the ‘‘Merton
School.’’ Arch Hist Exact Sci 8:9–39
Sylla ED (1973) Medieval concepts of the latitude of forms: the ‘‘Oxford
Calculators.’’ Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen
aˆge 40:223–283. Discusses the metaphysical consequences found in
the assumption that a form such as heat can take on different
intensities
Sylla ED (1982) The Oxford Calculators. The Cambridge history of later
medieval philosophy, ed. Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 545–563. A general review,
discussing in particular the nature of a sophisma and teaching
context, i.e., the disputations in which they occurred
Sylla ED (1997) Transmission of the new physics of the fourteenth century
from England to the continent. La nouvelle physique du XIVe sie`cle,
Biblioteca de Nuncius Studi e Testi, vol 24, ed. Caroti S, Souffrin P.
Olschki, Florence, pp 65–109
Weisheipl JA (1968) Ockham and some Mertonians. Mediev Stud
30:151–175. For William’s life, and his place in his School
Weisheipl JA (1969) Repertorium Mertonense. Mediev Stud 31:174–224.
Lists William’s works and manuscripts, with those of the other
members of his School
Wilson C (1960) William Heytesbury: medieval logic and the rise of
mathematical physics. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
A detailed analysis
William of Alnwick
JEFFREY C. WITT
Department of Philosophy
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
William of Alnwick was a Franciscan theologian who
became Bishop of Giovinazzo at the end of his life. He is
known primarily for his close association with John Duns
Scotus as a secretary and a collaborator. Alnwick’s own
William of Alnwick W
1399
W

work shows a reliance on Scotus as a starting point, but
shows independence in the conclusions he draws. He is
notable for his positions on the univocity of being, the
epistemic status of theology, as well as being conversant
with many of the main voices of the early fourteenth
century. His work as a whole provides helpful clariﬁca-
tions into the mind of Scotus, and raises inﬂuential objec-
tions that helped shape the ongoing conversation of the
fourteenth century.
William of Alnwick (1275–1333) was a Franciscan theo-
logian who at the end of his life was consecrated as the
Bishop of Giovinazzo. His name is derived from his birth-
place of Alnwick in Northumberland, England, and it is
believed that he was born sometime around 1275. As
a Franciscan friar, he must have spent time studying the-
ology at a Franciscan Studium – most likely at the nearby
Studium in Newcastle. What he did next is less clear, but
we know that at least by 1303, he was licensed as a Doctor
of Theology at the University of Paris (he is listed as one of
the masters who sided with Phillip IV against Pope Bon-
iface VIII). There is little doubt that by this time, Alnwick
was in close dialogue with the famous thinker with whom
he would always be associated in posterity – John Duns
Scotus. When exactly Alnwick later left Paris is unknown,
but we do know for sure that he eventually found his way
back to England to teach at Oxford. He is listed as the
forty-second regent master at Oxford, which situates him
chronologically around 1316 during the Oxford chancel-
lery of Henry Harclay.
Alnwick’s relationship and interaction with Scotus
consisted initially in the form of assistance that he could
provide to the latter. Alnwick was a collaborator in the
completion of Scotus’ Ordinatio and functioned as secre-
tary for one of Scotus’ Collationes. He likewise went on to
compile what are called the Additiones Magnae or long
additions, which were compiled by Alnwick from Scotus’
lectures in both Oxford and Paris. These additions soon
became attached to Scotus’ Ordinatio as an appendix and
then
eventually
became
inserted
directly
into
the
Ordinatio to ﬁll in what were perceived of as holes in
books one and two. Alnwick was, no doubt, incredibly
indebted to the inﬂuence of Scotus in his life, and he is
certainly remembered primarily for his relationship to
Scotus. But Scotist studies are equally indebted to Alnwick
because, through his close association with Scotus, he has
been able to offer key points of clariﬁcation at otherwise
frustratingly ambiguous places in Scotus’ corpus.
Moreover, it is not entirely fair to reduce Alnwick
to a mere personal assistant of the great John Duns Scotus.
To focus on this relationship exclusively is to overlook
the fact that Alnwick was a signiﬁcant thinker in his own
right, often distancing himself from Scotus’ views at crit-
ical points. As various scholars have often echoed, while
Alnwick’s work in philosophy and theology most often
began from the foundation laid by his early work
under the tutelage of Scotus, this foundation was only
the starting place for his own independent thinking.
He cannot, therefore, be reduced to a blind student imi-
tating a former teacher.
Besides his cooperative work with Scotus, Alnwick has
left us with his own commentary on the Sentences, of
which select questions have been edited in journals. We
also have a selection of questions from his commentary on
Aristotle’s De anima, a lengthy list of questions in his
Determinationes, an independent sermon on the beatiﬁc
vision, and ﬁnally his Quodlibet questions and his
Quaestiones de esse intelligibili, which were edited and
published in full in 1937.
Perhaps one of the most visible examples of Alnwick’s
reliance on the thought of Scotus as a starting place and his
simultaneous independence with regard to the conclu-
sions reached is found in Alnwick’s discussion of the
univocity of being.
There are two halves to Scotus’ doctrine of the
univocity of being. The ﬁrst is that a common concept of
being is shared between God and creatures and therefore
being is a univocal predicate, having a ratio or meaning
that means the same thing in all of its applications. The
second is that this univocal concept of being cannot be
predicated essentially (in quid) of everything to which it is
univocally said. That is, for Scotus it appeared to follow
logically from the premise that being is said univocally,
that other irreducible concepts like ultimate differences
and the transcendentals cannot include the concept of
being essentially. If they contained being and yet were
not merely the same thing as being, but distinct from
being, then they would not be irreducibly simple, for
they would contain being and something that differenti-
ates them.
Alnwick argues vigorously on behalf of the ﬁrst half of
Scotus’ position. He, like Scotus, agrees that there is one
single univocal ratio for being, and he defends this posi-
tion against the criticisms of Robert Cowton and Richard
of Conington. But Alnwick, equally as vigorously, argues
against the second half of Scotus’ position. Alnwick does
not think it follows that being can be excluded from
certain intelligible concepts. He insists that being must
be predicable of all intelligible things with no exceptions.
So he argues for the essential predication of being to
extend to the transcendental attributes of being and
ultimate differences. At one point, Alnwick poses the
1400 W
William of Alnwick

question: if the transcendental attributes of being and its
ultimate differences do not essentially contain being, then
how can they be anything at all? (Alnwick in Noone 1993
ll. 359–363, 398–404). While the Scotist position is able to
offer its own answers to such a question (and did so),
Alnwick at least presented an objection that later thinkers
found interesting and at the very least were obliged to
refute. Peter Aureoli and Walter Chatton are two subse-
quent thinkers who took up and addressed directly this
question posed by Alnwick.
Alnwick’s status as ‘‘independent Scotist’’ is also seen in
his questions on intelligible being. Faced with the question
of the ontological status of an object as known, William is
perplexed by what he perceives as Scotus’ answer. While
Scotus was willing to say that such an object attains
a relative status of being (esse cognitum), William ﬁnds
this merely confusing. His own answer is to say that the
being of the object known is nothing other than the being
or existence of the knowing intellect. An accompanying
consequence of this position pertains to the status of divine
ideas. Since no separate existence is granted to what is in the
mind, William denies any existence, created or produced, of
the divine ideas distinct from the existence of God.
Besides his views on univocity and the status of intel-
ligible being, Alnwick opposes Scotus’ belief that the
immortality of the soul is truly demonstrable. He asserts
instead that it is something that can only be held by faith.
Also, contra Scotus, he maintains that God is the subject of
metaphysics and not being. Since, according to Aristotle,
no science proves the existence of its subject, Alnwick
concurs with Averroes that God’s existence cannot be
proven by metaphysics, but only through the science of
physics and motion. Scotus sides with the position of
Avicenna, holding that being is the subject of metaphysics,
and therefore God’s existence can be proven through the
science of metaphysics. Finally, Alnwick is noted for bring-
ing his own clariﬁcation and speciﬁcation to the well-
known and often ambiguous Scotistic doctrine of the
formal distinction. In his Determinatio 14, he argues for
a gradation within the context of real distinctions. In
conversation with Henry of Ghent and the later work of
Scotus, he posits three kinds of real distinctions:
simpliciter, secundum quid, and formaliter. Thus, the for-
mal distinction is freed from any confusion with a mere
distinction of reason existing only in the mind. Likewise, it
is ensured the status of having a reality in the nature of
things themselves, though it remains the weakest of all
three real distinctions.
Within the realm of natural philosophy, Alnwick has
been associated with a debate over an early and peculiar
form of atomism known as ‘‘indivisibilism.’’ This position,
as it was ﬁrst advanced by Henry Harclay, took aim spe-
ciﬁcally at Aristotle’s assertion that a line could not be
composed of indivisibles, and more broadly the position
opposed Aristotle’s suggestion that time, space, and even
motion could not be constructed out of indivisible units.
Alnwick is documented as developing a response – in
terms of terminist logic or logica moderna (Murdoch
1982) – in opposition to Harclay and later proponents
such as Walter Chatton and Gerard of Odo.
Finally, Alnwick’s role in the developing conversation
about the compatibility of faith and science is worth
mentioning. Setting the stage for the discussion is Thomas
Aquinas’ position that faith and scientiﬁc knowledge
regarding the same thing are incompatible. No one can
scientiﬁcally know something to be true and still have faith
in it. The objection had been raised against Aquinas that if
faith and scientiﬁc knowledge are incompatible, then the-
ology itself could not be a science. Wanting to preserve the
scientiﬁc status of theology – once again in distinction
from his teacher Scotus who argued that theology strictly
speaking is not a science – Alnwick took issue with the
problematic premise. Alnwick claimed, contra Aquinas,
that faith and scientiﬁc knowledge were not incompatible.
Rather, he insisted that someone could continue to have
faith regarding a particular truth even while having scien-
tiﬁc evidence of its validity. The major hurdle in his
reasoning was to show, through ﬁne distinctions, how
evidence and nonevidence can be had simultaneously
without contradiction. With a certain innovation and
originality of his own, Alnwick departs from the position
of his teacher and attempts to ﬁnd a unique way to
preserve the scientiﬁc status of theology.
Toward the end of Alnwick’s life, he found himself
caught up in an ecclesiological controversy that prompted
his departure from England. In 1322, Alnwick joined
a contingent of Franciscan theologians who drew up the
decree, De paupertate Christi, written in opposition to
Pope John’s XXII’s position on apostolic poverty. The
Pope insisted that Christ and the Apostles had indeed
owned property and this contingent of Franciscans insisted
that Christ and the Apostles had not, thus legitimizing their
call for poverty within the Franciscan order against the
dissenting voices of rival Franciscans. Alnwick, while he
may not have been involved in the drafting of the decree
itself, nevertheless gave a public defense of it found in the
last question of his Determinationes. Alnwick must have
left Oxford by this time, for his Determinationes are said to
have been held at Bologna in 1322–1323. In this ﬁnal
question, William argued that Christ and the Apostles had
owned nothing privately or even in common, and this
direct opposition to the Papal decree caught the Pope’s
William of Alnwick W
1401
W

attention. John XXII ordered that action be taken against
Alnwick, who subsequently ﬂed to Naples. In Naples, he fell
favorably under the hospitality of King Robert of Sicily,
who, in 1330, made Alnwick the legitimate Bishop of
Giovinazzo. He died three years later in Avignon.
See also: ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Henry Harclay ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶Peter Auriol ▶Walter Chatton
Bibliography
Primary Sources
William of Alnwick (1937) Questiones disputatae de esse intelligibili et de
quolibet, ed. Ledoux A. Collegium S. Bonaventure, Quaracchi
Secondary Sources
D’Souza J (1973) William of Alnwick and the problem of faith and reason.
Salesianum 35:425–488
Dumont SD (1987) The univocity of the concept of being in the four-
teenth century: John Duns Scotus and William of Alnwick. Mediaev
Stud 49:1–75
Gilson E (1955) History of Christian philosophy in the Middle Ages.
Random House, New York
Murdoch JE (1982) Inﬁnity and continuity. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 564–591
Noone TB (1993) Alnwick on the origin, nature, and function of the
formal distinction. Francisc Stud 53:231–261
Thijssen JMMH (1990) The response to Thomas Aquinas in the early 14th
century. Eternity and inﬁnity in the works of Henry Harclay, Thomas
of Wilton, and William of Alnwick. In: Wissink JBM (ed) The
eternity of the world in the thought of Thomas Aquinas and his
contemporaries. Brill, Leiden, pp 82–100
Williams T (2003) Introduction. In: Williams T (ed) The Cambridge
companion to John Duns Scotus. Cambridge University Press, New
York, pp 1–14
Wolter AB (1994) Alnwick on Scotus and divine concurrence. In: Carrol
WJ, Furlong JJ (eds) Greek and medieval studies in honor of Leo
Sweeney. S. J. Peter Lang, New York, pp 255–283
William of Auvergne
ROLAND J. TESKE S. J.
Department of Philosophy
Marquette University
Milwaukee, WI
USA
Abstract
William of Auvergne was one of the ﬁrst thinkers in the
Latin West to offer a positive reception to the Greek and
Aristotelian thought pouring into Europe through the
new translations. He was deeply inﬂuenced, especially by
Avicenna with regard to his understanding of God, the
proofs for his existence, the structure of the created world,
and the nature of the human soul. He said that Aristotle,
by whom he most often meant Avicenna, should be upheld
wherever he was correct, but rejected wherever he was in
conﬂict with the faith (De anima 2, 12). Accordingly, he
rejected and refuted Avicenna on many points opposed to
the Christian faith.
Biographical Information
William of Auvergne, also known as William of Paris, was
born c. 1180–1190 in Aurillac in the former Province of
Auvergne, southwest of the present Clermond-Ferrand.
Little is known of his early life, but after studying at Paris,
he became a canon of the cathedral and was a master in
theology at the University of Paris by 1223 (Marrone 1983).
When Barthomaeus, bishop of Paris, died in 1227, William
was displeased over the man chosen by the canons to
replace him. Accordingly, William went to Rome where he
persuaded Gregory IX to ordain him bishop and place him
over the see of Paris in 1228; here he remained bishop until
his death in 1249 (Valois 1880). Although he was strongly
reprimanded by Gregory for failing to settle the strike at
the University during the years 1229 to 1231, William soon
returned to the good graces of the pope for whom he
carried out several diplomatic missions. During the strike
of the masters and students at the university, he appointed
the ﬁrst members of the mendicant religious orders to
chairs in theology at the university, the Franciscan Alex-
ander of Hales and the Dominican, Roland of Cremona,
thus giving entree to members of these orders from which
would come some of the greats of medieval philosophy
and theology (Switalski 1976). William strongly opposed
a plurality of beneﬁces and condemned various theologi-
cal errors in 1241 or 1244, thus setting a pattern for more
signiﬁcant condemnations in the future by bishops of
Paris (Bianchi 2005). He also issued strong condemna-
tions of the Talmud in 1248. William was on good terms
with the royal family, ﬁrst with the regent, Blanche of
Castille, and then with Louis IX, the future saint. William
strongly discouraged Louis against undertaking a crusade,
which he vowed to do upon recovering from a fever, but to
no avail. By the time Louis returned to Paris, William was
dead and was buried at Saint Victor’s.
Philosophy
William was one of the ﬁrst in the Latin West to give
a favorable reception to the Greek and Arabic philosophy
that was rapidly becoming available through the recent
translations and presenting to Christian Europe a new and
1402 W
William of Auvergne

scientiﬁc view of the world that was often at odds with the
Christian faith. Though the teaching of Aristotle was
repeatedly condemned by ecclesiastical authorities during
the early thirteenth century, William, the bishop of Paris,
clearly read and appreciated the thought of the Greek
and Islamic philosophers, especially of Avicenna. He, of
course, could not and did not completely accept such
philosophy, but upheld it where he could and rejected it
where the Christian faith required.
His Teaching on God in the Mode of Wisdom
(Magisterium divinale et sapientiale), which has generally
been viewed as one huge summa-like work in the author’s
intention, but also more recently simply as a way of
philosophizing (Corti 1968), was begun in the years
before his episcopacy and was continued until his death.
The magisterium is usually said to consist of seven works:
On the Trinity, or First Principle (De trinitate, sive primo
principio), On the Universe of Creatures (De universo
creaturarum), On the Soul (De anima), Why God Became
Man (Cur Deus homo), On the Faith and the Laws (De ﬁde
et legibus), On the Sacraments (De sacramentis), On the
Virtues and Morals (De virtutibus et moribus). Thus the
whole magisterium has the full sweep of the emergence
from God of the world, the creation of human beings, as
well as their return to God through the redemption, sacra-
ments, virtues, and ﬁnal reward in heaven. In that respect
the magisterium has the same plan of emergence from and
return to God as works of the later thirteenth century, such
as the Summa theologiae of Thomas Aquinas. Viewing the
magisterium as a way of doing philosophy rather that as
one huge work has the advantage of allowing one to
include other works of William, such as Divine Rhetoric
(Rhetorica divina) and On Grace (De gratia) under that
rubric, for which there seem to be good reasons.
William’s works were treated simply as individual works
in the Opera omnia and were recognized as forming the
huge magisterium only early in the twentieth century
(Kramp 1920, 1921). His extant works, manuscripts, and
translations have been recently listed (Ottmann 2005), and
advances have been made in their relative and absolute
dating (Corti 1968). The magisterium contains a more
philosophical primum magisterium, which aims at demon-
strative proofs, within the more theological whole magiste-
rium, which aims at the glory of God through the perfection
of human souls and their attainment of eternal life, although
the two parts of the magisterium are not sharply distin-
guished either in terms of the time of their composition or
of their intended order within the magisterium.
The present article is limited to four of William’s works
that contain his main philosophical teachings on God, the
created world, the human soul, and ethics. On the Trinity,
or First Principle, the ﬁrst work in the magisterium in terms
of temporal composition and intended order, contains
a philosophical approach to God as the ﬁrst principle of
creatures as he is known through reason and as the triune
God of the Christian faith. The inﬂuence of Avicenna on
William’s thought is clearly seen in his distinction between
essence and existence in creatures and in his argument
from beings possible in themselves, although actually
existing, to God as a being necessary through himself.
William, however, rejects and argues against both the
Aristotelian and Avicennian arguments for the eternity
of the world and argues for the freedom of God in creating
the world. William’s metaphysics combines an Avicennian
account of the structure of the world with Avencebrol’s
emphasis on the divine will as the explanation of why
there is a created world at all (Caster 1996). The
Trinitarian part of the work may have been intended
more as a demonstrative proof of the Trinity than as
a faith-based understanding of the Christian mystery. It,
for example, appeals to an Avicennian principle to show
that God could generate only one Son (Teske 2006).
The second work in the magisterium in terms of the
intended order, but not of its time of composition, The
Universe of Creatures is divided into a ﬁrst principal part
on the universe in general and more speciﬁcally on the
world of bodily creatures and a second principal part on
the spiritual universe, that is, of the separate substances or
intelligences, including the good and bad angels. In the
ﬁrst principal part, William takes up some questions on
the universe in general. For instance, he argues that there is
only one world, rejects the dualism of good and evil found
in the Carthar or Manichaean view of the world, where he
adapts arguments from Avicenna rather than borrows
from Augustine (Teske 2006).
William argues against Avicenna’s doctrine that from
the ﬁrst intelligence or God only one second intelligence
can proceed, and so on with the third, fourth, and others.
Although he agrees with the truth of the Avicennian prin-
ciple that from one as one only something one can pro-
ceed, he insists that from God or the ﬁrst intelligence other
things proceed not from the unity of God, but from his
will. Against Avicenna William appeals to Avencebrol,
a Jewish philosopher, but one whom he takes to be Chris-
tian, who held that God created through his word.
William argues against the eternity of the world and
develops a concept of divine eternity as all at once,
distinguishing it from the sort of eternity that the Aristote-
lians claimed for the world (Teske 2006). He also employed
the sort of arguments ultimately derived from the
Greek philosopher, John Philoponus, but perhaps more
proximately from kalam arguments of various Islamic
William of Auvergne W
1403
W

thinkers, for the ﬁniteness of past time (Teske 2006). In
this respect he anticipated the position of Bonaventure as
opposed to that which Aquinas was going to defend.
The three sections of the second part discuss the
intelligences, which William understood in terms of
Avicennian metaphysics as pure spirits or incorporeal sub-
stances, thus clearly departing from the Augustinian view
that the angels were composed of matter and form, albeit
spiritual matter. William, however, insisted that, unlike
the nine Avicennian intelligences that cascaded forth suc-
cessively after the ﬁrst, there are many more than nine
intelligences or angels in the heavenly court since, as
William argues, nine courtiers are far too few even for
a respectable royal court on earth. He also holds that they
do not necessarily proceed from the ﬁrst and that they are
certainly endowed with wills and are not merely intellects.
For otherwise they could have no goodness or virtues.
With such important qualiﬁcations the separate intelli-
gences are according to William pure spirits ontologically
on a par with the angels and demons, to which the remain-
der of the second part is devoted, although further discus-
sion of them will be omitted here.
In
psychology
William
is
greatly
indebted
to
Avicenna’s De anima. He endorses the latter’s conception
of a human being as a spiritual soul, but he expresses his
amazement that philosophers have classiﬁed the study of
the soul as a natural science as opposed to a divine science
(De anima, Prologue). He critically examines Aristotle’s
deﬁnition of soul as the ﬁrst act of a body potentially having
life, which he fails to understand, and borrows Avicenna’s
‘‘ﬂoating man’’ argument, quoting it twice, to prove that
a human being or soul is not a body (Teske 2005). William
divides the powers of the soul into cognitive and moving
powers. The cognitive powers include the ﬁve external
senses, various internal senses, such as the memory, imagi-
native and estimative powers, and the intellect, while the
moving or appetitive powers are divided into a higher mov-
ing power, namely, the will, and the lower moving powers,
namely, the concupiscible and irascible appetites. William’s
arguments for the soul’s immortality in On the Soul closely
parallel those found in On the Immortality of the Soul (De
immortalitate animae), which had once been attributed to
Gundissalinus, but is now accepted as William’ work. Hence,
the bishop has been cleared of the charge of plagiarism.
William strongly argues against the role of Avicenna’s
agent intelligence in the acquisition of knowledge. For he
saw the agent intelligence, the tenth intelligence, as simply
pouring knowledge into souls and, hence, making the
acquisition of knowledge an entirely passive reception
that does away with all study and effort at learning. He
also rejected the Platonic archetypal world of Forms or
Ideas, which he knew only through Cicero’s translation of
part of the Timaeus, because he was convinced that such
a really real world led to a reduction of the sensible world
to something less than real, though like the real world. He
also greatly reduced the role of divine illumination, which
Augustine had given as a source for our knowledge, to
only a few ideas found in both God and creatures, such
as being, one, true, and good (Marrone 1983). Despite a
common view to the contrary, William did not have God
play the role of the agent intellect (Teske 2006).
Up until the ﬁfth of the seven parts, William treats the
essential properties of the soul, such as its incorporeality,
indivisibility, and immortality. But then William takes up
the fallen nature of the soul, which he argues is a penal
condition, of which he claims that Aristotle had no knowl-
edge, although he says that he should have been able to
infer it from our present state. Our present state of misery
is clearly, William claims, one of punishment that must
stem from the ﬁrst parents’ sin. As one of the ﬁrst Chris-
tian thinkers to come into contact with the Aristotelian
concept of nature, William was faced with the challenge of
trying to reconcile the Augustinian and the Aristotelian
concepts of nature. He attempted to combine a philosoph-
ical conception of the nature of the soul derived from
Avicenna, which remains unchanged in its essentials,
with an Augustinian concept of nature, which changed
over time. He speaks of the original state of our nature, its
present fallen state, which may be somewhat healed by
grace, and its future state in glory. According to William
our present state of misery is due to our bodies rather than
out souls since he claims that God could not and does not
create damaged souls; rather, souls suffered damage
through their union with bodies. The original condition
of our ﬁrst parents, however, contained many elements
that later theologians labeled as preternatural or supernat-
ural (Teske 2006). Clearly William is struggling to inte-
grate an unchanging Aristotelian concept of nature
with an Augustinian nature that has changed and will
change.
In ethics, William’s knowledge of the Nicomachean
Ethics was limited to the books two and three contained
in the versio vetissima (Ju¨ssen 1995). In his On the Virtues,
William criticizes Aristotle’s deﬁnition of virtue from the
Nicomachean Ethics and ﬁnds fault with other ideas of his,
such as that a virtue stands in the mean between two
extremes and that a person can have one virtue without
the others. He clearly prefers Augustine’s account of the
cardinal virtues from De moribus as four forms of love.
He distinguishes three sorts of virtue: natural virtues such
as Adam’s soul and, it seems, our soul had when created;
consuetudinal or moral virtues, such as those of which
1404 W
William of Auvergne

Aristotle spoke; and gratuitous virtues, such as Christian
faith, hope, and charity, which are infused by God. William
compares the consuetudinal virtues to crutches or wooden
legs insofar as they repair to some extent the damage done
to our natural powers or virtues, but do not completely
restore them to their original condition.
William expresses amazement at the fact that Aristotle,
by whom he usually means Avicenna, said so much about
intellect and little or nothing about will. He argues that the
will is most free in its act of willing and refers to it as the
king and emperor over the other powers of the soul (Teske
1994). The intellect acts merely as a counselor to the will,
and the senses serve as messengers that seek out and bring
back information to their king.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Avicebron
▶Being
▶Boethius
▶Bonaventure
▶Dominicus
Gundissalinus ▶Epistemology ▶Essence and Existence
▶Ethics ▶Form and Matter ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶John Philoponus ▶Metaphysics ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Trinity ▶Virtue and Vice ▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
William of Auvergne (1496) De universo. Georg Stuchs, Nuremberg
William of Auvergne (1674) Opera omnia, 2 vols, ed. Hotot Franc¸ois with
supplementum, ed. Le Feron B. Orle´ans-Paris; (repr. Minerva, Frank-
furt am Main, 1963). English translations of selections from the De
universo, of the De anima, and of the De immortalitate animae by
Teske Roland, are available in Mediaeval Philosophical Texts in Trans-
lation 30, 35, 37, 43. Milwaukee, 1992, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2007. Selec-
tions from De virtutibus are forthcoming in the same series
William of Auvergne (1897) De immortalitate animae, ed. Bu¨low Georg.
In Des Domininicus Gundissalinus Schrift von der Unsterblichkeit
der Seele nebst einem Anhange, enthaltend die Abhandlung des
Wilhem von Paris (Auvergne) ‘‘De immortalitate animae.’’ In
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters II 3.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
William of Auvergne (1946) Tractatus Magistri Guilielmi Alvernenesis de
bono et malo, ed. O’Donnell J. Reginald. Mediaev Stud 8:245–299
William of Auvergne (1954) Tractatus secundus Guillielmi Alvernensis de
bono et malo, ed. O’Donnell J. Reginald. Mediaev Stud 16:219–271
William of Auvergne (1966) Il ‘‘Tractatus de Gratia’’ di Gugliemo
d’Auvergne, ed. Corti Gugliemo. Lateran University, Rome
William of Auvergne (1976) De trinitate, ed. Switalski Bruno. Pontiﬁcal
Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto; an English translation by
Teske Roland et al is available in Mediaeval Philosophical Texts in
Translation 28. Milwaukee, 1989
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Marrone S (1983) William of Auvergne and Robert Grosseteste. New ideas
of truth in the early thirteenth century. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Valois N (1880) Guillaume d’Auvergne, E´ve`que de Paris (1228–1249): Sa
vie et ses ouvrages. Picard, Paris
Collections
Morenzoni F et al (ed) (2005) Autour de Guillaume d’Auvergne. Brepols,
Turnhout
Teske R (2006) Studies in the philosophy of William of Auvergne. Mar-
quette University Press, Milwaukee (contains a collection of previ-
ously published articles)
Journal Articles
Bianchi (2005) List of manuscripts and editions. In Autour de Guillaume
d’Auvergne ({1249), pp 155–171
Caster K (1996) William of Auvergne’s adaptation of Ibn Gabirol’s doc-
trine of the divine will. Mod Schoolman 74:31–42
Corti G (1968) Le sette parte del Magisterium diuinale et sapientiale di
Guglielmo di Auvergne. In Studi e richerche di scienze religiose in
onore dei santi apostoli Petro et Paulo nel XIX centenario del loro
martirio. Lateran University, Rome, pp 289–307
Ju¨ssen G (1995) Die Tugend und der gute Wille: Wilhelm von Auvergnes
Auseinanderstezung mit der aristotelischen Ethik. Philosophisches
Jahrbuch 102:20–32
Kramp J (1920, 1921) Des Wilhelm von Auvergne Magisterium Divinale.’
Gregorianum 1:538–613; 2:42–103, 174–195
Ottman J (2005) List of manuscripts and editions. In Autour de
Guillaume d’Auvergne ({1249), pp 275–399
Teske R (1994) The will as king over the powers of the soul: uses and
sources of an image in thirteenth century philosophy. Vivarium
32:62–71
Teske R (2005) William of Auvergne’s spiritualist concept of the human
being. Autour de Guillaume d’Auvergne, pp 35–53
William of Auxerre
BOYD TAYLOR COOLMAN
Theology Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
William of Auxerre, (d. 1231), was a secular master,
scholastic theologian from the University of Paris, author of
the Summa aurea, an early, inﬂuential ‘‘summa’’ of Chris-
tian theology/doctrine, and a Summa de ofﬁciis ecclesiasticis
(Summa of Ecclesiastical Ofﬁces), a commentary on the
mass, was appointed by Pope Gregory IX in 1231 to head
a committee charged with examining for errors the ‘‘books
of Aristotle,’’ later became archdeacon of Beauvais.
William of Auxerre
Author of the ﬁrst scholastic summa of theology and early
magister at the University of Paris, William of Auxerre
(d. 1231) is a seminal ﬁgure in thirteenth-century
William of Auxerre W
1405
W

scholasticism. From the uncertain theological and philo-
sophical climate of the preceding century, William’s
thought and writing emerge with impressive originality.
Both traditional and innovative, his Summa aurea incor-
porates into many traditional theological topics the
methods and teachings of the full scope of Aristotelian
philosophy rapidly gaining currency in the early Univer-
sity of Paris. In particular, William breaks new ground in
medieval intellectual culture by attempting to give
a genuine and considerable role to reason and philosoph-
ical argument within the discipline of theology, thus
establishing theology as a legitimate science (scientia),
while also retaining its revealed and supernatural charac-
ter. On various other fronts, William is a pioneering ﬁgure
in the development of medieval scholasticism.
Though often overshadowed by such later scholastic
luminaries as Aquinas and Scotus, William of Auxerre was
a highly regarded university theologian throughout the
later Middle Ages, as the nearly 120 surviving manuscripts
of his entire Summa aurea (‘‘Golden Summa’’) – not to
mention abridgements – manifestly attest. (William also
wrote Summa de ofﬁciis ecclesiasticis (Summa of Ecclesias-
tical Ofﬁces), a commentary on the mass.) Later Parisian
scholars remembered William for his facility in disputation
and his profundity in preaching. Surprisingly little, however,
is known with certainty of his life, except that he occupied
a prominent place among the theological masters of the
nascent University of Paris in the ﬁrst three decades of the
thirteenth century, and was involved in various high-level
negotiations between the university and church authorities.
Most notable of these was his appointment by Pope Gregory
IX in 1231 to head a committee charged with examining for
errors the ‘‘books of Aristotle’’ (Natural Philosophy and
Metaphysics) that had already been prohibited at Paris in
1210. William’s death in the same year brought this task to
naught. A letter of Pope Gregory IX indicates that William
was also an archdeacon of Beauvais.
Though it roughly follows the structure of Peter
Lombard’s Sentences, William’s Summa aurea (so-called
by, and reﬂecting the esteem of, later generations) is
arguably the ﬁrst high-scholastic ‘‘summa,’’ whose inde-
pendent structure and dialectical style reﬂect, respectively,
his distinctive theological vision (developed over decades
of university teaching and disputation) and the increasing
inﬂuence of Aristotelian philosophy on university theol-
ogy. The work is divided into four books (I – God’s
existence and nature; II – creation, free will, and sin; III –
Christ, salvation, and the virtues; IV – sacraments and
eschatology). One of the most intriguing features of the
Summa aurea is its subtle and implicit engagement with
contemporary authors and discussions in the course of
explicit treatment of traditional questions and topics. The
result for modern readers is the tantalizing sense of being
able to hear only one voice in a lively, multilateral debate
over the most important issues of the day.
William is one of the ﬁrst medieval thinkers to grapple
with the fuller presentation of Aristotle’s philosophy,
rapidly emerging at that time. Though he is acquainted
with Aristotle’s Physics and Metaphysics and with a partial
translation of the Ethics, William is especially inﬂuenced
by the so-called logica nova (especially the Posterior
Analytics), whose conception of genuine scientia inspires
and informs his attempt to establish theology as a genuine
scientiﬁc discipline (see below). At the same time, William
is also in the vanguard of medieval thinkers, whose appro-
priation of Aristotelian philosophy is mediated and
accompanied by the Stagarite’s later Arabic commenta-
tors, such as Avicenna and Averroes, whom William
clearly knows, though only infrequently quotes by name.
Subsequent scholastic generations will assimilate these
Arabic interpretations more fully and systematically, but
William inaugurates this monumental trend.
William made important contributions, both innova-
tive and inﬂuential, on several theological fronts, regarding
both scholastic method and content. Perhaps his most far-
reaching achievement is in methodology, where he provides
a point of departure for subsequent thinkers (e.g., Alexan-
der of Hales, Albert the Great, Bonaventure) in his attempt
to provide a crucial and clearly conceived role for reason in
the theological enterprise, and thereby to establish its gen-
uinely scientiﬁc character. For William, theology begins
with the supernatural gift of formed faith, which cannot
be arrived at by prior reasoning. But once established in
faith, reason can play a vital role, not merely in refuting
heresies and providing a reasonable defense against objec-
tions from nonbelievers, but in extending and deepening
the knowledge (scientia), and understanding (intellectus)
of what is believed. William’s analogy here is the above-
mentioned Aristotelian conception of genuine scientia,
which begins with ﬁrst principles that are themselves not
proven, but axiomatically self-evident (principia per se
nota), which are the basis for further knowledge derived
logically therefrom. So, for William, the creedal articles of
faith (articula ﬁdei), given through revelation and
embraced with supernatural certitude, are not rationally
provable, but once accepted by faith become the basis for
further theological knowledge derived logically from
them. Rational argument is never the basis of faith, but
nonetheless plays a crucial, necessary role in the pursuit of
theological truth. Later scholastics will appropriate and
develop William’s pioneering approach in this regard.
William also made important contributions to the
1406 W
William of Auxerre

theological method in relation to the form of theological
discourse, especially its written form. William’s Summa
reﬂects his pioneering skills at systematic organization,
and clear and concise formulation of the abundant and
diffuse theological material accumulated by the end of the
twelfth century. This is particularly evident in his treatise
on the Incarnation, whose topical ordering, clarity of
presentation, and precision of analysis marked a new
point of departure for later scholastic Christology.
Regarding content, William is something of a Janus-
ﬁgure in relation to the development of medieval thought.
On most topics, he is rather traditional, much indebted to
the Augustinian tradition, mediated by intervening
ﬁgures, such as Boethius, Anselm, and the Victorines.
So, for example, William’s arguments for God’s existence
include Anselm’s so-called ontological argument, though
William identiﬁes that being ‘‘than which nothing greater
can be conceived’’ not simply as ‘‘God,’’ but as the highest
good (summum bonum), thus reﬂecting his proclivity for
a metaphysics of goodness, which seems to have inspired
contemporary thinkers, such as Philip the Chancellor’s
Summo de Bono. In general, William’s treatment of such
divine attributes as the good, being, and unity inﬂuenced
later thirteenth-century discussions of the so-called tran-
scendentals. On issues of epistemology, moreover, William
is an illuminationist in the Augustinian tradition, yet even
here he reformulates this teaching in the Aristotelian
terms of assimilation of the knower to the known.
Yet, in other respects, William initiates new trends. He
was one of the ﬁrst medieval thinkers, for example, to
deploy the distinction between God’s absolute and
ordained powers, which would be so central to later scho-
lastic debates regarding the divine nature. William also
writes the ﬁrst treatise devoted in its own right to the topic
of free will (liberum arbitrium). Similarly, William’s treat-
ment of the virtues in Book III of the Summa aurea sets
important developments in train. This massive, systematic
analysis of the virtues, constituting nearly the whole of
Book III, brings medieval moral theory to a new level of
philosophical and theological sophistication and also pre-
views similar attention to virtue among later scholastics.
William originated the theological distinction between the
perfect happiness proper to God and the imperfect hap-
piness appropriate to created beings, a distinction which
Aquinas will later employ in his Summa theologica. Again,
reﬂecting his employment of Aristotelian thought within
theology, William appears to be one of the ﬁrst to use the
distinction between form and matter in his analysis of the
sacraments. Finally, William’s teaching on the spiritual
senses of the soul draws on the philosophical tradition of
the internal senses of the soul.
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Divine
Power ▶Epistemology ▶Ethics ▶Form and Matter
▶Happiness ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Inter-
nal Senses ▶Logic ▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle
Ages ▶Philip the Chancellor ▶Proofs of the Existence of
God ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
William of Auxerre (1980–1987) Summa aurea, ed. Ribaillier J.
Spicilegium Bonaventurianum, vols 16–20. Magristri Guillelmi
Altissiodorensis, Summa aurea, Liber quartus. Paris-Grottaferrata
Secondary Sources
Coolman BT (2004) Knowing God by experience: the spiritual senses in
the theology of William of Auxerre. Catholic University of America
Press, Washington
Lambert M and Sole`re J-L (2002) Guillaume d’Auxerre, ~ 1150–1231.
Dictionnaire du Moyen Aˆ ge, ed. Gauvard C, de Libera A, Zink M.
Quadrige/PUF, Quercy
MacDonald S (1992) Goodness as a transcendental: the early thirteenth-
century recovery of an Aristotelian idea. Topoi 11:173–86
Pouillon H (1939) Le Premier traite´ des proprie´te´s transcendentals,
La ‘Summa do bono’ du Chancellier Phillipe. Revue ne´oscolastique
de philosophie 42:40–77
Principe W (1963) William of Auxerre’s theology of the hypostatic union.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Ribaillier J (1937) Guillaume d’Auxerre. Dictionnaire de Spiritualite´,
vol 6. Beauchesne, Paris
Sole`re J-L (2000) La logique d’un texte medieval: Guillaume d’Auxerre
et la question du possible. Revue Philosophique de Louvain
98(2):250–293
Trottman C (1999) The´ologique et noe´tique au XIIII sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Wieland
G
(1981)
Ethica-Scientia
Practica:
die
Anfa¨nge
de
philosophischen Ethik im 13. Jahrhundert. Aschendorf, Mu¨nster
William of Champeaux
MARGARET CAMERON
Department of Philosophy
University of Victoria
Victoria, BC
Canada
Abstract
William of Champeaux (d. 1122) is best known as the
leading master of dialectic (which included logic, grammar,
and rhetoric) at Notre Dame when his more famous
William of Champeaux W
1407
W

student, Peter Abelard, came there to study. William alleg-
edly stopped teaching at that centre around 1108, shortly
after his realist defenses on the controversial topic of the
status of universals were attacked by Abelard, and he took
up as a canon regular at the monastery at Saint Victor
(Abelard 1967); there is no historical evidence to support
the oft-repeated claim that William founded that famous
monastery and school, his name is not found among the
writings of the Victorines, and upon his death he was
buried elsewhere, at Clairvaux (Mews 2001). William’s
educational background in dialectic is unknown, but he
studied under and taught with Anselm of Laon, and their
theological work is preserved in the Liber pancrisis (Lottin
1959), the ﬁrst known work to publish together the writ-
ings of both modern, practicing theologians and patristic
sources. After his retirement from teaching, William even-
tually became Bishop of Chaˆlons-sur-Marne, and belonged
to circles of ecclesiastical inﬂuence (Mews, forthcoming).
Although none of his writings has been thought to survive,
recently a number of anonymous commentaries and tracts
on dialectic datable to the early years of the twelfth century
have been either attributed to William or said to contain
his teachings (Iwakuma 1993, 1999, 2003, 2008). None of
these claims has been deﬁnitely proven, and scholars rec-
ognize that more work is yet to be done to sort out the
authorship of these materials and their relationships to
one another and to known masters. Complicating this
project is that explicit references to a master’s view are
normally given by abbreviating a name to a sole initial,
and given ﬂuid spelling and orthography it is difﬁcult to
judge whether every ‘‘W,’’ ‘‘G,’’ or ‘‘V’’ should apply to the
same person (i.e., William), especially when the variety of
initials can be found in one and the same text (e.g.,
Abelard’s Dialectica, which also contains references to
‘‘My teacher (magister noster)’’.
William’s realist theories of universals are the best
known part of his philosophy. The defeat of these two
positions led, according to Abelard, to William’s lectures
on dialectic ‘‘falling to pieces’’ (Abelard 1967); John of
Salisbury, writing years later, reports that William ‘‘is
convicted of error by his own writings’’ (John of Salisbury
1991). William’s ﬁrst theory is known as ‘‘Material Essence
Realism’’: each existing thing possesses a material essence,
which William identiﬁes as the species of the individual, or
genus of the species. What makes one individual different
from another individual that shares the same material
essence (i.e., is of the same species) is the addition of
particular, accidental forms. Abelard launched a series of
arguments against William’s theory, after which William
took up anew with what is called ‘‘Indifference Realism’’:
individuals (x, y) of the same species (A) are indifferently
the same insofar as they do not differ in being (A) (Abelard
1919; Spade 1994; King 2004). This second position, too,
was crushed by Abelard, and no further theories on this
question by William are known. Abelard’s attacks on Wil-
liam took place during William’s lectures on rhetoric. It is
possible that William’s rhetorical teachings have been
identiﬁed (Fredborg 1976).
The details of William’s theory of signiﬁcation are
unknown, although it is certain that he distinguished
between literal and ﬁgurative locutions, appealing to the
latter to resolve problems such as the signiﬁcation of
expressions containing apparently contradictory terms
(e.g., ‘‘dead man,’’ where ‘‘man’’ means ‘‘rational, mortal
animal’’). In his theological writings, William advocated
the view that terms used to refer to God are to be taken in
a sense that is transferred from their usual meaning,
namely what they were imposed (on things in the created
world) to signify. Abelard, followed by other twelfth cen-
tury ﬁgures, developed William’s improper or ﬁgurative
signiﬁcation into a doctrine of translatio in order to deter-
mine the signiﬁcation of expressions that are affected by
their context (Rosier-Catach 1999).
William likely borrowed the notion of improper sig-
niﬁcation from the discipline of grammar. References to
a Master G and W in a set of notes on a widely copied
commentary on Priscian’s Institutiones grammaticae have
suggested William’s important role in the development of
grammatical theorizing at this time (Rosier-Catach, forth-
coming). William believed that grammar and dialectic
present two different theories about the sense of proposi-
tions and predicative questions, based on the answers that
each discipline’s authorities give to the question of the
proper relation between the subject, predicate, and copula.
‘‘Snow is white,’’ according to the grammarian, means that
snow is a white thing, and the terms ‘‘snow’’ and ‘‘white’’
thereby co-refer; according to the dialectician, it means
that whiteness inheres in snow. Mocked by one scholar for
thinking that meaning is determined according to disci-
plinary boundaries (where the author wonders whether
there is not also an ethical and a physical sense), the view is
criticized at length by Abelard who urged that proposi-
tions and predicational questions have a single sense.
Several of William’s opinions are given in anonymous
discussions of Boethius treatment of topical reasoning,
and a number of these are criticized by Abelard elsewhere
(Green-Pedersen, 1974; Martin 2004). William seems to
have held that the force of a topical argument is the
thing referred to or understood itself, such that in the
1408 W
William of Champeaux

consequence ‘‘if Socrates is man, Socrates is animal,’’ man
provides the force. The locus differentia is the relation
(habitudo), for example, speciality, generality, equality,
and so on, that holds between the things referred to.
Each maximal proposition generates a multitude of mean-
ings, for example, ‘‘Whatever is predicated of the species is
predicated of the genus’’ contains as its meanings ‘‘if it is
man it is animal,’’ and ‘‘if it is pearl, it is stone’’ (Green-
Pedersen 1974). This view is variously criticized by the
anonymous commentator reporting it and by Abelard.
William also added additional loci to Boethius’ list, includ-
ing the loci from the predicate and the subject, and
from the antecedent, consequent, or either of these
through contraposition. An anonymous logic primer, the
Introductiones secundum Wilgelmum (Iwakuma 1993)
includes some but not all of these additional loci. Possibly
associated with William’s teachings or his followers, this
primer exempliﬁes several features of topical theory of
which Abelard was deeply critical, such as the failure to
distinguish between the rules for syllogistic and topical
reasoning (Abelard 1969; Martin 2004).
William of Champeaux is an important ﬁgure whose
dialectical views provoked much response during the
volatile period of the early twelfth century. Snippets of
William’s other views can be found throughout the
anonymous commentaries from this period (Iwakuma
1999). We will be in a better position to understand
his theories once more of the anonymous commentaries
and tracts from this period are critically edited and
studied.
See also: ▶Peter Abelard ▶Realism ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1919) Glossae super Porphyrium, Logica ingredientibus,
ed. Geyer B. Aschendorff, Munster, pp 1–109
Abelard Peter (1967) Historia calamitatum, ed. Monfrin J. Vrin, Paris
Abelard Peter (1969) Super topica glossae. Abelardo: Scritti di logica, 2nd
edn, ed. Dal Pra M. La Nuova Italia, Florence
Fredborg Karin Margareta (1976) The commentaries on Cicero’s De
inventione and Rhetorica ad herennium by William of Champeaux.
Cahiers de l’Institut du moyen aˆge grec et latin 17:1–39
Iwakuma Yukio (1993) The Introductiones dialecticae secundum
Wilgelmum and secundum G. Paganellum. Cahiers d’Institut
Moyen Age Grec et Latin 63:45–114
Iwakuma Yukio (2008) Pseudo-Rabanus Super Porphyrium (P3).
Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen-aˆge 75:43–196
John of Salisbury (1991) Metalogicon, ed. Hall JB. Brepols, Turnhout
Spade Paul Vincent (1994) Five texts on the medieval problem of univer-
sals: Porphyry, Boethius, Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham. Hackett,
Indianapolis
William of Champeaux (1959) Sententiae. Psychologie et Morale au XIIe
et XIIIe sie`cles, ed. Lottin O. Duculot, Gembloux, pp 190–227
Secondary Sources
Cameron M (2004) ‘What’s in a name? Students of William of
Champeaux on the vox signiﬁcativa. Bochumer Philosophisches
Jahrbuch 9:93–114
De Libera A (1996) La Querelle des universaux, de Platon a` la ﬁn du
Moyen Age. Seuil, Paris
De Rijk LM (1967) Logica modernorum II. Van Gorcum, Assen
Green-Pedersen NJ (1974) William of Champeaux on Boethius’ topics
according to Orleans Bibl. Mun 266. Cahiers de l’Institut du moyen
aˆge grec et latin 13:13–30 (includes excerpts of opinions attributed to
William of Champeaux)
Iwakuma Y (1999) Pierre Abe´lard et Guillaume de Champeaux dans les
premie`res anne´es du XIIe sie`cle: une e´tude pre´liminaire. In: Biard
J (ed) Langage, Sciences, Philosophie au XIIe Sie`cle. Vrin, Paris, pp
93–124
Iwakuma Y (2003) William of Champeaux and the Introductiones. In:
Braakhuis HAG, Kneepkens CH (eds) Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias in
the Latin Middle Ages: essays on the commentary tradition.
Ingenium, Groningen-Haren, pp 1–30
King P (2004) Metaphysics. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Marenbon J (2000) Aristotelian logic, Platonism and the context of early
medieval philosophy in the West. Ashgate, Aldershot
Martin C (2004) Logic. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Mews C. (2001) Abelard and His Legacy. Ashgate, Variorum, Aldershot
Mews CJ (forthcoming) Logica in the service of philosophy: William of
Champeaux and his inﬂuence on the study of language and theology
in the twelfth century. In: Rosier-Catach I (ed) Les Glosulae super
Priscianum, Guillaume de Champeaux, Abe´lard: arts du langage et
the´ologie aux conﬁns des XIe-XIIe, les conditions enjeux d’une
mutation
Rosier-Catach I (1999) La notion de translatio, le principe de
compositionalite´ et l’analyse de la pre´dication accidentelle chez Abe´-
lard. In: Biard J (ed) Langage, Sciences, Philosophie au XIIe Sie`cle.
Vrin, Paris, pp 125–164
Rosier-Catach I (2007) Priscian on divine ideas and mental conceptions:
the
discussions
in
the Glosulae
in
Priscianum, The
Notae
Dunelmenses, William of Champeaux and Abelard. Vivarium
45:219–237
Rosier-Catach I (forthcoming) (ed) Les Glosulae super Priscianum, Guil-
laume de Champeaux, Abe´lard: arts du langage et the´ologie aux
conﬁns des XIe–XIIe, les conditions enjeux d’une mutation
William of Conches
▶Platonism
William of Luna
▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
William of Luna W
1409
W

William of Ockham
STEPHEN F. BROWN
Institute of Medieval Philosophy and Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
William of Ockham, most famous for ‘‘Ockham’s Razor,’’
was an English Franciscan theological and philosophical
author whose academic work was mostly done in England.
He never became a Master of Theology, but he did teach at
Oxford from 1317–1319, commenting there on the
‘‘Sentences of Peter Lombard.’’ He earned in the Middle
Ages the title ‘‘Venerable Inceptor,’’ so it is presumed that
he began the early ceremony (the inceptio) that formally
initiated entry into the rank of Master. However, he was
stopped en route. ‘‘Ockham’s Razor’’ is essentially the
principle of parsimony. This principle, established long
before Ockham, gained its name from him because of his
more frequent appeal to this device in all the areas of his
theology and philosophy.
William of Ockham, an English Franciscan theologian and
philosopher, was born around 1287 in Ockham, a hamlet
in Surrey that is southwest of London. He joined the
Franciscans as a teenager and began his studies at their
convent in London. Although this house of studies was
a provincial studium, not a general or international
studium, it had a faculty that traditionally had trained in
theology at the University of Paris. There William received
his preparatory studies in the seven liberal arts and phi-
losophy and did his ﬁrst studies in Bible and the Sentences
of Peter Lombard. He pursued his advanced studies in
theology at Oxford and commented as a baccalarius
sententiarum (Bachelor of the Sentences) on Peter Lom-
bard’s work from 1317–1319. His honoriﬁc title ‘‘Venera-
ble Inceptor’’ suggests that he had taken the ﬁrst step
toward becoming a Master of Theology at Oxford. How-
ever, he never went beyond the inceptio ceremony or
formal university initiation rite. Quite likely he was
prevented from becoming a Master of Theology by some
of the masters who challenged his teachings or by John
Lutterell, the chancellor of the university who later
accused Ockham of heresy. At this point he returned to
teach in London at the Franciscan studium.
Although the details of Ockham’s coming to Avignon
are not all clear, we know that Pope John XXII summoned
Ockham to Avignon and appointed a commission to
examine the erroneous and heretical charges that masters
of theology had brought against him. No formal condem-
nation was ever issued by the pope; Ockham simply was
forbidden to leave Avignon. At this point, however, the
direction of Ockham’s life was about to change. The chief
superior of the Franciscans, Michael of Cesena, who had
been feuding with Pope John XXII over the nature of
Franciscan poverty, was summoned to Avignon. He
ordered Ockham to study previous papal documents
regarding the Franciscan rule to see if John XXII’s stance
violated them. Ockham concluded that the pope in fact
had contradicted earlier papal constitutions, held false
views concerning the nature of Apostolic poverty, had
thus fallen into heresy, and thereby surrendered his right
to the throne of Peter. When Pope John XXII called
a chapter of the Franciscans to elect a new superior to
lead the Order, Michael of Cesena, Ockham, and two other
Franciscans ﬂed Avignon on May 26, 1328. They were
automatically excommunicated.
Ockham and the other three Franciscans arrived in
Pisa in September, 1328 and there joined up with
a strong enemy of Pope John XXII, Ludwig of Bavaria.
Ludwig, whose election as the Holy Roman Emperor was
not recognized by the pope, invited them into his service.
When the emperor returned to Munich in 1330, they went
with him and Ockham stayed there until his death.
Ockham’s ﬁrst writings in this period were produced
with an eye to Pope John XXII (d, 1334), and then to his
successors, Benedict XII and Clement VI. Gradually, how-
ever, they took on a broader scope. He always claimed to
be a faithful Christian and stood willing to submit to the
legitimate authorities of the Franciscan Order and the
church. He died on April 10, 1347 in Munich and was
buried in the Franciscan church there, without ever ﬁnd-
ing the legitimate authorities that could rescind his
excommunication.
Works
The writings of Ockham are many and were produced in
different places. Most of his philosophical and theological
works date from his teaching in London and Oxford. His
Quodlibets were begun in England but completed in Avi-
gnon. His political writings all were produced during his
late years in Munich. The philosophical writings were
works mainly focused on logic and natural philoso-
phy or physics. Some of his logical works were tradi-
tional commentaries connected with Aristotle’s treatises:
(1) Exposition on Porphyry’s ‘‘Isagoge’’; (2) Exposition on
the Book of Categories; (3) Exposition on the Two Books of
the Perihermeneias; (4) Exposition on the Two Books of the
1410 W
William of Ockham

Sophistical Refutations. The other logical works are inde-
pendent of the texts of Aristotle’s Organon. The most
impressive is (1) the Summa logicae, a very lengthy uniﬁed
treatise on the whole of logic. The previous general logic
works of Peter of Spain, William of Sherwood, Roger
Bacon, and Lambert of Auxerre are in reality collections
of logical treatises on different subjects. In contrast, the
Summa logicae is an integrated whole. Two other works on
logic attributed to William are (2) The Compendium of
Logic and (3) An Elementary Logic. The Compendium is
not a summary text of the Summa logicae but a short
rendition of the basic positions of Ockham’s logic. The
Elementarium is a beginner’s logic text that is in agreement
with Ockham’s authentic work. It is a work that leaves out
any theological applications, so in this way it differs
noticeably from the Summa logicae. The last two works
have had their authenticity challenged, but they contain
nothing that contradicts Ockham’s teachings. The author
of the Elementarium refers to his own Logica and it is hard
to ﬁnd someone other than Ockham who holds the posi-
tions that the Elementarium and the Summa logicae hold
in common.
The attention that Ockham gave to philosophical mat-
ters centered on natural philosophy. All such works were
based on the doctrine of Aristotle’s Physics. He has four
works in this area of study: (1) Exposition on the Books of
the Physics; (2) Questions on the Books of the Physics;
(3) A Summula of the Books of the Physics; and (4) Brief
Summa of the Physics. Ockham’s Exposition is a long,
detailed study of the text of Aristotle’s Physics, the largest
of his philosophical works. The Questions follows the
alternative form of a commentary: it just poses the ques-
tions that arise from the text and presents them in a form
that suggests they are William’s questions rather than
Aristotle’s. The Summula is an incomplete work covering
only the materials of the ﬁrst few books of Aristotle’s
Physics. It provides the essence of Ockham’s positions in
the form of an exposition. Remarks made in the prologue
have led a recent specialist in Ockham’s Avignon period
(Franciscan Studies 46 [1986]: 70–71) to suggest that it was
written there. The Brief Summa is a sketch of each of the
books of Aristotle’s Physics that one might consider
a digest of the Expositio; however, it provides a summary
of the whole of Book VIII which stops after chapter 2 in
Ockham’s own Expositio.
William’s theological writings are likewise numer-
ous:
(1)
Scriptum
in
primum
librum
sententiarum
(Written Commentary on Book One of the Sentences);
(2) Reportationes in libros II–IV sententiarum (Student
Accounts of His Lectures on Books II–IV of the Sentences;
(3) Seven Quodlibets; (4) Treatise on the Sacrament of
the Altar; (5) Treatise on the Body of Christ (also called
The Treatise on Quantity); (6) Treatise on Predestination
and on God’s Foreknowledge and Future Contingents;
(7) Quaestiones variae (A Collection of Various Questions).
The Scriptum or Written Commentary is the text of
Ockham himself. Though it is a single work, William
made changes to his text which are indicated as
additions or clariﬁcations in the recent Latin edition of
his works. The Reportationes for Books II, III, and IVof the
Sentences are the reports or accounts of very able students.
Some of the Seven Quodlibets certainly are based on dis-
putes carried on in England but other elements and the
ﬁnal redaction of this work indicate that it was formally
completed in Avignon. The next two works, on the Eucha-
rist, are A Treatise on Quantity, since a great deal of the
discussion in these works centers on issues of quantity
related to the Eucharist, and On the Body of Christ. It is
possible that these works also might have ties to Avignon.
At one time both treatises together were called On the
Sacrament of the Altar. The Treatise on Predestination and
Foreknowledge covers much the same material as is found
in discussions of God’s knowledge and power in the late
distinctions of Ockham’s Scriptum on Book I of the
Sentences. The Various Questions were disputed questions
that were edited as parts of the Reportationes in II–IV
Sententiarum back in 1495. For the most part they are
found in manuscripts of the Reportationes, but they really
do not belong there. In the recent edition of Ockham’s
Opera theologica they are published separately along with
an independent question On the Connection of the Virtues
which is not found among the manuscripts that have the
Reportationes.
Ockham’s political and polemical writings, dating
from his years in Munich, are also many: (1) The Work of
Ninety Days; (2) A Letter to the Friars Minor; (3) A Dia-
logue; (4) On the Teachings of Pope John XXII; (5)Compen-
dium of the Errors of Pope John XXII; (6) Letter Against John
XXII; (7) Letter Against Benedict XII; (8) Allegations
Concerning Imperial Power; (9) Eight Questions on the
Power of the Pope; (10) Treatise on the Power of Emperors
and Pontiffs; (11) Consultation on a Marriage Case;
(12) A Brief Declaration on Tyrannical Power.
Philosophy and Theology
By the time of William of Ockham, the university view of
the nature of theology had long been debated. Key ﬁgures,
such as Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, Godfrey of
Fontaines, John Duns Scotus, and Peter Auriol, had
pushed the discussion concerning the nature of theology
to the point that the term ‘‘theology’’ came to mean either
the study of the Scriptures, or deductive theology or
William of Ockham W
1411
W

declarative theology. The last two technical expressions
pointed to different ways of studying the contents of the
Christian scriptures. Each approach used philosophy in
different ways. Deductive theology received its name from
its primary role: a deductive theologian assumed as true
certain basic teachings of the Scriptures, such as the truths
summarized in the creed of the church. Reason or philos-
ophy could not prove such truths; they were accepted by
faith. However, once the theologians accepted them as
true, they could assume them as premises and search to
see if they could ﬁnd other premises that might allow them
to draw further conclusions. When they found a suitable
necessary premise, then they could draw a conclusion that
would also be necessary. When they found a strong con-
tingent premise, their drawn conclusion would be contin-
gent, but a strong theological conclusion. In short, the ﬁrst
option would produce theological certainty; the second
option would develop theological opinions. Deductive
theologians aimed to have their theological opinions to
be as strong as possible, so they tended in lieu of certainty
to pursue premises that were most probable. The deduc-
tive approach thus demanded the strongest arguments
and modeled its procedures on the Posterior Analytics,
Aristotle’s book on demonstration. Pursuing this method,
theologians realized that if they started with premises that
were accepted on faith, they differed from Aristotle who
started with self-evident or evident premises. Still, their
method itself was similar and they could claim that they
were at least doing ‘‘a science of the faith.’’ They could go
further and see what kind of arguments would bring them
even closer to science as Aristotle saw it. They could try to
ﬁnd arguments that would demonstrate things about God
and his attributes, so that even in an Aristotelian sense
they would have demonstrated or necessary naturally
known conclusions about God or the works of God. This
made the logic of demonstration and the study of meta-
physics and physics very important to the deductive
theologian.
The declarative theologian approached things differ-
ently. He too started with the main truths of Christian
faith. However, he did not deduce further conclusions. He
tried to bring understanding to the articles of the Creed.
Following St. Augustine and St. Anselm, the declarative
theologian concentrated mostly on truths the church
accepted on faith and then asked if he could ﬁnd
supporting or conﬁrming arguments for the believed
truths. He knew that many of the things Christians
believed could not be demonstrated; still he knew that if
God were not contradictory, then what he revealed in the
Scriptures could not contradict his gift of reason when it
was used properly. The declarative theologian still
proceeded according to logic, but he did not take the
model of demonstration in the Posterior Analytics as his
primary guide. Like Augustine and Anselm, he aimed at
bringing understanding to the truths accepted on faith. He
asked: what causes misunderstanding? He realized that
there were many things that could confuse believers.
Sloppy deﬁnitions cause misunderstanding. Weak analo-
gies cause misunderstanding. Lack of supporting reasons
leads to hesitation regarding things that are believed.
Opponents, attackers, and heretics also cause confusion.
The declarative theologian knew then that his task was to
ﬁnd clearer deﬁnitions that help understanding. He
needed to discover better analogies and supporting argu-
ments gained mainly from a knowledge of the natural
world that might bring some recovery from doubt and
confusion. Finally, he needed to show the weaknesses in
positions that opposed or distorted what he knows by
faith must be true. These are the main tasks of the declar-
ative theologian as a theologian. Like the deductive theo-
logian, he might also examine what about God and
creation might be demonstrated, but he would call it
metaphysics rather than theology. He might want to dis-
cover what new necessary truths of faith he might deduce;
but realizing how limited is the knowledge of necessary
evident truth that might help in this endeavor, he tended
to concentrate on whatever probable or conﬁrming argu-
ments would help him best to refute heretics and critics.
William of Ockham, like many of his predecessors men-
tioned above, was both a deductive and a declarative theo-
logian. To achieve the goals of both approaches to
theology, he had to pursue logic in all its areas and dimen-
sions, metaphysics as a science that searches for what is
necessary and certain, and physics as a scientiﬁc portrait
of creation.
Logic
The Summa logicae (Opera philosophica I) is Ockham’s text
dealing with the whole of logic. Its principal positive aim is
to produce scientiﬁc thinking. It sets the necessary direc-
tions for doing so, but at the same time, most explicitly in
its treatment of fallacies (Summa logicae, 749ss.), it indi-
cates that the Scriptures, the writings of the fathers and
even the writings of the philosophers often speak rhetor-
ically rather than logically. St. Augustine at the very begin-
ning of his De trinitate cautions his readers about speech
that says that God remembers or forgets, even though the
Scriptures (Psalm 13, 1) say: ‘‘How long, O Lord? Will you
forget me forever?’’ St. Anselm, in chapter 16 of his
Monologion, following the lead of St. Augustine in the
opening chapter of VII De trinitate, corrects the language
coming from the church fathers that says ‘‘God has
1412 W
William of Ockham

wisdom’’ or ‘‘God has justice’’ instead of ‘‘God is wisdom’’
and ‘‘God is justice.’’ Ockham tells us that Aristotle himself
in his natural philosophy stressed that it is necessary to
clarify the meanings of statements such as ‘‘motion and
time differ’’ and ‘‘a statue is composed of iron and its
shape’’ before agreeing or disagreeing. Ockham’s message
is that even philosophers and theologians at times speak
according to a common parlance. It has to be noted,
however, that there is a common parlance which is that
of the broad community and there is also a common
parlance (usus loquendi) among philosophers and patristic
and medieval theologians when they speak or write.
According to Ockham, his readers at times realized that
this was the case; often, however, they did not. Logic, when
dealing with philosophers and theologians of the past, had
to teach readers how to decode or reconstruct statements
to render them accurate. First, they had to put the state-
ments into their proper form, and then they had to judge
the proper form in terms of their truth.
Ockham’s Theory of Supposition
Ockham inherited signiﬁcant contributions from Walter
Burley’s Treatise on Suppositions. However, the criticism
of Ockham’s Summa logicae by Burley in his De puritate
artis logicae shows their dramatic differences. For both,
supposition is the characteristic of a term as it functions in
a proposition, whereby it refers to a thing (Personal Suppo-
sition), to a concept in the mind (Simple Supposition), or to
itself as a spoken or written term (Material Supposition).
The supposition of a term tells us for what it stands or
supposits. In the proposition ‘‘A man is running,’’ ‘‘man’’
stands for any man who is presently running. In the prop-
osition ‘‘Man is monosyllabic,’’ ‘‘man’’ supposits for the
word ‘‘man.’’ In the proposition ‘‘Man is an animal,’’
‘‘man,’’ according to Walter Burley, supposits or stands for
the universal essence of man. For Ockham, in the same
proposition ‘‘man’’ stands for concrete individual men. For
William, there is no universal essence or reality in men, as
Burley contends. Men are, for Ockham, essentially alike, and
they are essentially alike prior to any action of our minds;
yet, there is no essential ‘‘likeness’’ in them. Ockham’s theory
of supposition in this case presupposes his theory of uni-
versals. He denies the exaggerated realism he found in
Burley’s early writings. It is the same exaggerated realism
that Walter also defends in his later De puritate where he
admits that universal essences are in individuals. Ockham’s
theory of supposition extends to all areas of scientiﬁc study.
Ockham’s Portrait of the Categories
There are for Ockham, as was just said, no universal sub-
stances. There are only individual substances. Such
individual substances, then, are realities, whereas universal
substances are concepts. For Ockham, some qualities are
also realities. However, some are not. If the grass you see is
green, it is because green is an inhering quality of the grass.
If two white men are white, each has whiteness as a quality
in them. They are thereby also alike or similar to one
another insofar as each is really white. Yet, even though
they are really alike according to the accident of whiteness
that each has, this does not mean that there is a quality of
‘‘likeness’’ in them. Twins also are alike, really and essen-
tially alike, because both are human beings; but they do
not have ‘‘twinness’’ in them as an inhering real quality
expressing that they were born of the same mother within
a short period of one another. Men also are really tall and
really short, but when we speak of the tall one being taller
than the short one, the relation between them does not
demand that we admit a quality of tallness in a man whom
we might describe in common parlance as ‘‘really tall.’’
When, then, we deal with the Aristotelian categories and
want to speak scientiﬁcally or precisely, we have to ask for
what realities do our terms expressing substances, quali-
ties, quantities, relations, and the other categories
supposit.
They
do
not
all
supposit
for
directly
corresponding realities.
The Realities of Natural Philosophy
As a general point, Ockham notes that when we use
nouns we are tempted to think that there are realities
that directly correspond to them. Due to common par-
lance, we might believe that there is a reality called
‘‘weather,’’ ‘‘a cold spell,’’ or ‘‘a day.’’ Ockham noted that
according to the common parlance of natural philoso-
phers, ‘‘motion’’ and ‘‘sudden change’’ are spoken of as if
they were actual realities in themselves. We might be led
to think that when we have nouns for them we must reify
all things spoken of in natural philosophy. This is not
how Aristotle proceeds. If we follow him, we have to
search for what exactly nouns or noun-expressions like
‘‘motion’’ or ‘‘sudden change’’ supposit when we, in our
common way of speaking in natural philosophy, say that
motion and sudden change exist. According to Ockham,
Aristotle’s portraits of motion or of sudden change are
such
that
one
could
best
represent
the
realities
corresponding to them by substituting the following
descriptions for them. ‘‘Motion’’ is a mobile thing that
now coexists at a part of a place where it did not coexist
before. ‘‘Sudden change’’ is that which signiﬁes that some
form is acquired all at once. Many expressions of natural
philosophy thus must be decoded, if we are to under-
stand them precisely and not create ﬁctional realities
representing them.
William of Ockham W
1413
W

Ockham’s Razor
Ockham is most famous for using the principle of parsi-
mony in his writings: denying universal realities, reducing
the
realities
often
associated
with
the
categories,
employing his razor wherever relevant. In its original
presentation the razor or principle of parsimony was
a principle enunciated by Aristotle in Books I and VII of
his Physics (188a 17–18 and 259a 8–15): ‘‘Plurality must
not be admitted without necessity.’’ William appealed to it
in the very ﬁrst question of his Prologue to Book I of the
Sentences in his discussion of the distinction between
intuitive and abstractive cognition (Opera theologica I,
74–75). We can see from the discussions above concerning
supposition, the categories and natural philosophy that he
was ridding the world of extra realities he considered
unnecessary. One of his chief targets was John Duns
Scotus and the metaphysical principle of haeceitas
(thisness) that Scotus employed to explain the distinctness
of individuals within a species. In the Summa logicae
(Opera philosophica I, 772) William tells us that the prop-
osition ‘‘The ‘thisness’ of Socrates is something’’ can be
understood in two ways: it can mean that the ‘‘thisness’’,
which is a thing distinct from other ‘‘thisnesses’’, is some-
thing or it can mean that Socrates who is this man or this
creature or this being is something. Ockham thinks it is so
evident which is correct, that he does not explicitly tell you
which choice is his. If it was evident to him which was the
correct choice, it was not evident to Walter Chatton.
Walter, a great defender of Duns Scotus, was teaching at
London with Ockham, in the years before Ockham was
called to Avignon. Chatton’s challenge to Ockham was his
‘‘rule’’ or ‘‘anti-razor’’ which he formulated in this way:
‘‘If three things are not enough to verify an afﬁrmative
proposition about things, a fourth must be added, and so
on.’’ In brief, he was arguing that one must not posit
less than are necessary. In response, in Quodlibet VII,
q. l (Opera theologica IX, 704, 17–19) Ockham casts his
razor in corresponding new terms: ‘‘When a proposition is
veriﬁed of things, if three or two things sufﬁce for its truth,
it is not necessary to posit a fourth,’’ etc.
Metaphysics and Theology as a Science
The deductive theologian, as explained above, had reason to
pursue philosophy in the strongest possible way: he aimed
at gaining certainty. Even if his subject matter could deliver
only probable conclusions, he aimed at the highest type of
probability. His greatest helper, then, was metaphysics. If he
wanted to deduce further certain truths from a faith pre-
mise that was certain, such as an article of the Creed, then
he needed either another certain faith premise or
a metaphysical premise. If he wanted to demonstrate by
reason some truth about God and his attributes, then he
was actually doing metaphysics. Ockham, in his role as
a deductive theologian, also was a metaphysician. This is
evident in his defense of the univocal concept of being as
providing the necessary common ground for arguments
concerning the existence of God and the divine attributes.
Ockham denies any univocal reality between God and
creatures, but he admits a univocal concept that is
a common concept, not a proper one which would include
the differences of ‘‘inﬁnite’’ and ‘‘ﬁnite’’ that distinguish
God from creatures. Often he is accused of nominalism,
but certainly he is not a nominalist in the sense of Hobbes’
non-spiritual nominalism. Ockham denies that there are
universal essences or realities, but he does admit that there
are universal concepts in the mind, so he might justly be
labeled a conceptualist. He is, nonetheless, not an idealistic
conceptualist like Kant, where universality comes from the
mind and the way it organizes. Ockham’s concepts have
their source in the objects. Men are essentially alike, even
though they do not have, according to Ockham, a further
common human likeness in them beyond their actually
being men. He might more accurately be called a realistic
conceptualist.
The Absolute and Ordained Power of God
Among the attributes of God that Ockham discusses is
divine omnipotence or the power of God. There is
a traditional distinction regarding God’s power that Ock-
ham inherits: God’s absolute power and God’s ordained
power. He discusses this distinction at length in Book I of
the Sentences, and particularly in the context of talking
about grace. In the Summa logicae (Opera philosophica I,
777), he gives a brief helpful way of understanding God’s
so-called ‘‘two powers.’’ ‘‘This proposition ‘God by his
absolute power can accept [for eternal life] someone who
does not have grace but not by his ordained power’ is
ambiguous. One meaning is that God by one power,
which is absolute and not ordained, can accept someone
without grace, and through one other power, which is
ordained and not absolute, cannot accept him, as if there
were two powers in God and that through one of them he
could do this and not through another. This way of under-
standing it is false. In another way, the original proposi-
tion is taken improperly as though it were substituted for
this statement: ‘God can accept someone who does not
have [created] grace informing his soul, because doing so
does not entail a contradiction, and yet God ordained that
this would never take place’.’’ Here we see Ockham using
his razor, we watch him decoding the original statement,
and we thereby come to understand that there are not two
competing powers in God.
1414 W
William of Ockham

Ockham’s Moral Theory
Within the context of natural morality, Ockham joins the
many medievals who, following Aristotle, thought of
ethics as being a practical science where man pursues the
fulﬁllment of his nature that brings happiness. Motiva-
tion, however, also plays a major part in his moral philos-
ophy. In his question On the Connection of the Virtues,
William stresses that no one acts virtuously if he does not
act with knowledge and freedom. The basic virtuous act is
one where ‘‘the intellect dictates that a particular just work
should be done at such a place and time for the sake of the
intrinsic worth of the deed or for the sake of peace or some
such thing, and the will elicits an act of willing such deeds
in conformity with the dictates of the intellect’’ (Opera
theologica VIII, 335). William judges that one would
deserve more respect if beyond this basic expectation one
were to do this act when it costs a price, e.g., death in
honor for one’s country, which right reason would tell us
we should be willing to pay. An even higher level of respect
is due when one acts for no other motive than that right
reason demands it. Taking into account theological
motives, there can be even higher motives, e.g., doing
something for the love of God. Motives are important
for Ockham’s doctrine of morality, but they are not the
only determinants of morality. Ockham’s theological con-
siderations will also deal with further dimensions of the
moral life – going beyond what human nature demands.
This leads him into discussions of obedience in regard to
the divine laws revealed in the Bible and theological dis-
cussions of merit, which consider the conditions necessary
for moral actions to be also meritorious actions, i.e.,
worthy of eternal beatitude.
Political Writings
William’s political interests were primarily stimulated by
Michael of Cesena, who, as head of the Franciscan order,
was feuding in Avignon with Pope John XXII over the
Franciscan view of poverty. Michael and his Franciscan
followers believed that their vocation was to imitate their
vision of the poverty of Christ and the apostles. They
appealed to the bull Exiit qui seminat promulgated by
Nicholas III in 1279. This bull set up the arrangement
that the papacy held ownership of the goods that were
not owned but simply used by the friars. In various bulls in
the 1320s, John XXII rejected this arrangement and also
declared it heretical to deny that Christ and the apostles
had rights of ownership in regard to the things they used.
Asked by Michael to examine the documents and to judge
the legitimacy of John XXII’s claims, William wrote the
Letter to the Friars Minor in 1334, where he concluded that
many
of
John’s
pronouncements
were
‘‘heretical,
erroneous, silly, ridiculous, fantastic, insane and defama-
tory’’ (Letter. . . , 3). In The Work of Ninety Days, written at
the same time, William criticized in detail John’s errors
which he listed in the previous letter, and also challenged
John’s claim that Christ, both as divine and human, was
universal king and lord of all things. In this work, Ockham
provided the basic deﬁnitions and distinctions that he
would unfurl later, in the Dialogus, as a full-blown treatise
that would discuss the government of the church and lay
political authority. His treatment of both types of govern-
ment is extensive and shows that William in his theory
concerning governments goes far beyond the immediacy
of the political struggles between Pope John XXII and
Ludwig of Bavaria. He basically defends the position that
ecclesiastical and political societies should, except in pru-
dently deﬁned instances, operate independently of one
another.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Augustine ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Logic ▶Natural Phi-
losophy
▶Supposition
Theory
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Universals ▶Walter Burley ▶Walter Chatton
Bibliography
Primary Sources
de Ockham Guillelmi (1956) Epistola ad fratres minores,Tractatus contra
Ioannem, et Tractatus contra Benedictum, ed. Ofﬂer HS. Opera
politica III. Manchester University Press, Manchester
de Ockham Guillelmi (1963) Opus nonaginta dierum, cc. 7–124, ed.
Bennett RF, Sikes JG, Ofﬂer HS. Opera politica II. Manchester Uni-
versity Press, Manchester
de Ockham Guillelmi (1967–1987) Opera philosophica et theologica, 19
vols, ed. Ga´l G. Editiones Instituti Franciscani Universitatis S.
Bonaventurae, St. Bonaventure
de Ockham Guillelmi (1940) Octo quaestiones de potestate papae, An
princeps pro suo succursu, scilicet guerrae, possit recipere bona
ecclesiarum, etiam invite papa; Consultatio de causa matrimoniali et
Opus nonaginta dierum, cc. 1–6, ed. Sikes JG, Ofﬂer HS, Snape RH,
Bennett RF. Opera politica I. Manchester University Press, Manchester
English Translations
Ockham William (1973) William of Ockham’s commentary on Porphyry,
trans. Kluge EHW. Francisc Stud 33:171–25; 34:306–32
Ockham William (1974) Ockham’s theory of terms: part I of the ‘‘Summa
logicae’’, trans. Loux MJ. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Ockham William (1980) Ockham’s theory of propositions: part II of the
‘‘Summa logicae’’, trans. Freddoso A, Schuurman H. University of
Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Ockham William (1983) Predestination, God’s foreknowledge, and future
contingents, 2nd edn., trans. Adams MM, Kretzmann N. Hackett,
Indianapolis/Cambridge
Ockham William (1989) Ockham on Aristotle’s physics, A translation of
Ockham’ s Brevis Summa libri physicorum, trans. Davies J. Francis-
can Institute, St. Bonaventure
Ockham William (1991) Quodlibetal questions, trans. Freddoso A, Kelley
F. Yale University Press, New Haven
William of Ockham W
1415
W

Ockham William (1992) In: McGrade AS (ed) Short discourse on tyrannical
government, trans. Kilcullen J. Cambridge University Press, New York
Ockham William (1995) In: McGrade AS, Kilcullen J (eds) ‘‘A letter to the
Friars Minor’’ and other writings, Cambridge texts in the history of
political thought, trans. Kilcullen J. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1987) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame
Beckman JP (1992) Ockham-bibliographie, 1900–1990. Felix Meiner,
Hamburg
Boehner P (1992) In: Buytaert EM (ed), Collected articles on Ockham,
2nd edn. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Brampton CK (1960) Traditions relating to the death of William of
Ockham. Arch Francisc Hist 53:442–449
Brown SF (1972) Walter Burleigh’s treatise De suppositionibus and its
inﬂuence on William of Ockham. Francisc Stud 32:15–64
Brown SF (1981) A modern prologue to Ockham’s natural philosophy. In:
Zimmermann A (ed) Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalter, Mis-
cellanea Mediaevalia 13.1. de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 107–129
Courtenay WJ (1984). Force of words and ﬁgures of speech: the crisis over
‘Virtus sermonis’ in the fourteenth century. Francisc Stud 44:107–128
Etzkorn GJ, Ga´l G, Green R, Kelley F, Wood R (eds) (1984/1985/
1986) William of Ockham (1285–1347). Commemorative Issues
I–III. Francisc Stud 44 (1984), 45 (1985), and 46 (1986)
Freppert L (1988) The basis of morality according to William of Ockham.
Franciscan Herald Press, Chicago
Ga´l G (1981) William of Ockham died ‘impenitent’ in April 1347.
Francisc Stud 41:90–95
Goddu A (1984) The physics of William of Ockham. Brill, Leiden
Maurer A (1984) Ockham’s razor and Chatton’s anti-razor. Mediaev Stud
46:463–475
Maurer A (1999) The philosophy of William of Ockham in the light of its
principles. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
McGrade AS (1974) The political thought of William of Ockham. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Menges MC (1952) The concept of univocity regarding the predication of
God and creature according to William of Ockham. The Franciscan
Institute, St. Bonaventure
Vignaux P (1930) Nominalisme. Dictionnaire de the´ologie catholique,
11.1. Letouzey et Ane´, Paris, pp 717–784
William of Sherwood
JOHN L. LONGEWAY
Department of Philosophy
University of Wisconsin
Kenosha, WI
USA
Abstract
William of Sherwood was an English logician of the thir-
teenth century, whose Introduction to Logic, covering the
standard logical syllabus of the day, presented a version of
supposition theory that, unlike that of Peter of Spain,
made no ontological commitments unfriendly to nomi-
nalism. He also wrote discussions of syncategorematic
words, insolubles, and obligations, which develop their
teaching from the consideration of sophisms. His work
quickly sank into obscurity after his death, but it marks the
point at which the new elements of medieval logical
thought coalesced into a coherent and stable whole made
independent of metaphysical considerations.
William of Sherwood, born between 1200 and 1205 in
Nottinghamshire, taught as a Master of Theology at
Oxford from 1252, and died between 1266 and 1271.
Only his logical works have survived. Praised by Roger
Bacon as a ﬁner logician than Albert the Great, no doubt
in part because he agreed with Bacon’s own theory of
supposition, William quickly sank into obscurity after
his death. His work marks the point at which the new
elements of medieval logical thought coalesced into
a coherent and stable whole, a whole made independent
of metaphysical considerations.
William’s Introduction to Logic contains six chapters
covering the standard logic syllabus of the day. The ﬁrst
corresponds to Aristotle’s On Interpretation, concerning
the structure of statements, logical opposition, immediate
inferences, and modal terms. The second deals with the
ﬁve predicables, genus, species, differentia, property, and
accident, the topic of Porphyry’s Isagoge. The third, on
syllogism, answers to Aristotle’s Prior Analytics. The
fourth, on ‘‘dialectical’’ reasoning, draws on Boethius’
On Different Topics (De differentiis topicis). It deals with
the application of principles speciﬁc to no particular sci-
ence, involving such terms as ‘‘part’’ and ‘‘cause.’’ The
sixth, on fallacy, is developed from Aristotle’s Sophistical
Refutations.
The ﬁfth chapter discusses the ‘‘properties of terms,’’
signiﬁcation, supposition, copulation, and appellation.
This represents an entirely medieval development. In
William’s version, the signiﬁcation of a term, the presen-
tation of its signiﬁed form to the understanding, is inde-
pendent of its occurrence in any particular sentence. The
meaning of the subject or predicate within the context
of a categorical statement is its supposition there. A term
‘‘supposits a form’’ in a given context if its supposition
depends on that form. But to know a term’s supposition
we must also know what it supposits for, roughly, what it
refers to. It is what is true of what its terms supposit for
that makes a sentence true. For instance, if we were to say
‘‘an animal is walking,’’ the form of animal would be
signiﬁed by the term ‘‘animal,’’ and supposit it, but the
1416 W
William of Sherwood

term would supposit for individual animals, since it would
only be in virtue of an individual animal’s walking that ‘‘an
animal is walking’’ is true.
The term ‘‘animal’’ does not supposit the form it sig-
niﬁes in ‘‘animal is trisyllabic,’’ but rather itself. One need
not know what the term signiﬁes to assess the truth of the
sentence. This is material supposition. If a term supposits
the form it signiﬁes, it may supposit for what it signiﬁes as
well, as in ‘‘animal is a genus,’’ ‘‘humanity is the noblest of
creatures,’’ or ‘‘pepper is sold here and at Rome.’’ This is
formal, simple supposition. If it supposits what it signiﬁes
for something falling under what it signiﬁes, this is formal,
personal supposition, as in ‘‘an animal is walking.’’ Personal
supposition may be confused, when a term supposits for
more than one thing, as in ‘‘every animal perceives,’’ or
determinate, when it supposits for one (undetermined)
thing alone, as in ‘‘an animal is running.’’ Confused per-
sonal supposition is mobile if one can apply the predicate
truly to each item supposited for, as in ‘‘every animal
perceives,’’ or immobile (or merely confused) if one cannot,
as in ‘‘every donkey is an animal,’’ from which we cannot
conclude that ‘‘every donkey is this animal.’’
Copulation corresponds to supposition, but belongs
to terms such as ‘‘white,’’ which signify accidents. William
argues such terms mean only ‘‘of this sort,’’ ‘‘of every sort,’’
or ‘‘of some sort,’’ and signify only in conjunction with
a substantive term. One cannot say that ‘‘of every sort
perceives,’’ but only ‘‘animals of every sort perceive.’’ If
one wants to say something about perceiving, say ‘‘per-
ceiving is an accident,’’ then ‘‘perceiving’’ has supposition,
not copulation.
This allows reference to real universals, but William
himself assumes that a particular must enter into every
actual state of affairs, so a sentence can only be made true
by what is true of particulars. His discussion of genus
suggests we read ‘‘animal is a genus’’ as ‘‘animal is predi-
cable of several particulars differing in species in respect of
their essence.’’ His theory of supposition differs from Peter
of Spain’s realist theory in that it can be used within either
a nominalist or realist context.
Appellation occurs when a term is taken to supposit
only for things that actually exist at the present time.
The theory of supposition did much of the work done
in modern logic by quantiﬁcation theory. It is built around
Aristotle’s account of the syllogism, but no artiﬁcial logical
language was envisioned within which the syntax precisely
mirrored the semantics. Logic was done in ordinary Latin,
and in the quest to make Latin itself an ideal logical
language logicians introduced artiﬁcial semantic rules to
cover the necessary distinctions and allow exceptionless
rules of validity within a Latin syntax. William, at the
beginning of this development, is often satisﬁed simply
to note an ambiguity and give an account of it in terms of
the properties of terms.
In his Treatise on Syncategorematic Words, William
considers words other than the subject and predicate terms
that alter the supposition of ‘‘categorematic’’ terms. Such
‘‘syncategorematic’’ terms may have no signiﬁcation of their
own, and include ‘‘whole,’’ ‘‘all,’’ ‘‘but,’’ ‘‘only,’’ and others of
this sort, as well as such terms as ‘‘begins’’ and ‘‘ceases.’’
In his discussion William often introduces ‘‘soph-
isms,’’ problem statements occurring in the course of
a disputation. A set of background conditions is proposed,
which must be granted as long as it is consistent, and then
the sophism is proposed. The student must respond to it,
and all further statements proposed by his opponent, by
afﬁrming it if it follows from what he has granted, denying
it if it is inconsistent with what he has granted, and
assigning it its truth value, or declaring it uncertain if
that is unknown, if it is logically independent. The ques-
tioner aims to drive the respondent into contradiction, the
respondent to avoid this. Sherwood’s smaller treatises,
Obligations, On the Assumption of Contraries, and Insolu-
bles, concern such sophisms.
‘‘Insolubles’’ are self-referential paradoxes, such as ‘‘I am
now uttering a falsehood.’’ This sentence cannot be true, for
if it is, it is false, but it cannot be false either, since then it
must be true. William rejects the suggestion that the one
who utters such a sentence ‘‘says nothing,’’ for the statement
is grammatical, and its meaning is clear enough so that we
can argue from it. One might hold that the statement has to
refer to some statement other than itself, because a term
cannot supposit for a whole of which it is a part, so that the
term ‘‘falsehood’’ in the statement must refer to some other
sentence than the sentence it is in. But this rule rejects
perfectly harmless sentences, such as ‘‘every name signiﬁes
some substance,’’ in which the term ‘‘name’’ surely must be
taken to supposit for itself. William himself agrees that the
term ‘‘falsehood’’ in the problem sentence cannot refer to
the sentence it is in, but for another reason. He invokes the
principle of charity, holding that the sentence should be read
so that at least it could be true. The sentence is false because
one is not uttering some other falsehood while uttering it.
The treatise on obligations (i.e., the obligations of the
respondent in a logical disputation) deals with a variety of
sophisms, among them paradoxes that depend on the
inﬂuence of the pragmatic context on the meanings of or
logical relations between the statements granted. For
instance, it is assumed that you have never granted that
God exists, but instead hold this to be uncertain. The
questioner now asks you if God exists. The proposition
is logically unrelated to what has been granted already, so
William of Sherwood W
1417
W

one must assign it its known truth value. Ordinarily no
contradiction is created from following this rule, but here,
if you grant that God exists, you are then asked if it is the
case that you have never granted that God exists.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Boethius’ De topicis
differentiis, Commentaries on ▶Insolubles ▶Obligations
Logic ▶Peter of Spain ▶Quantiﬁcation ▶Roger Bacon
▶Sophisms ▶Supposition Theory ▶Syncategoremata
▶Terms, Properties of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
William of Sherwood (1963) The logical treatises De obligationibus:
an introduction with critical texts of William of Sherwood (?)
and Walter Burley, ed. Green R. Ph.D. Dissertation, Louvain
University
William of Sherwood (1966) William of Sherwood’s introduction to logic,
trans. Kretzmann N. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
William of Sherwood (1968) William of Sherwood’s treatise on syncate-
gorematic words, trans. Kretzmann N. University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis
William of Sherwood (1970) Insolubilia. In: La problematique des prop-
ositions insolubles au XIIIe sie`cle et au debut du XIVe, suivie de
l’e´dition des traite´s de W. Shyreswood, W. Burleigh et Th.
Bradwardine, ed. Roure ML. AHDLMA 37:248–261
William of Sherwood (1976) Some thirteenth century tracts on the game of
obligation. III. The tract De petitionibus contrariorum, usually attrib-
uted to William of Sherwood, ed. de Rijk LM. Vivarium 14:26–49
Secondary Sources
Braakhuis HAG (1977) The views of William of Sherwood on some
semantical topics and their relation to those of Roger Bacon. Vivar-
ium 15:111–142
Stump E (1980) William of Sherwood’s treatise on obligations.
Historiographia Linguistica 7:249–261. (repr. Dialectic and its place
in the development of medieval logic. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, London, 1989), pp 177–193
William of Ware
JEFFREY C. WITT
Department of Philosophy
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
William of Ware was a Franciscan theologian who
ﬂourished in the 1290s and into the ﬁrst years of the
fourteenth century. He is remembered primarily as
a teacher of John Duns Scotus, and many of his positions
on the nature of theology, the subject of metaphysics,
ontology, and the will share striking resemblances to the
more precise and more complete views ultimately found
in Scotus. Moreover, William is also often engaged with
the work of Henry of Ghent making him a ﬁgure of great
importance as a mediating bridge in the well-known intel-
lectual rivalry between Henry and Scotus.
From the town Ware in Hertfordshire near London, Wil-
liam of Ware (ﬂ. 1290–1305) is thought to have ﬂourished
primarily in the 1290s. At a young age, he joined the
Franciscan order and it is believed, but remains difﬁcult
to conﬁrm, that he ﬁrst read the Sentences in the Francis-
can Studium in Oxford. He may also have lectured on the
Sentences there, but he is, however, not listed as a magister
at Oxford and therefore probably never began to teach
there as a master of theology. Shortly thereafter, he is
thought – but again it is hard to conﬁrm – to have gone
to Paris to teach. Throughout the fourteenth century,
William is remembered as the teacher of Scotus, and the
inscription on his tomb reads ‘‘Magister Gulielmus Varro
Praeceptor Scoti.’’ Despite the inscription, it is not yet
clear where and when Scotus, as student, would have
encountered William. William is referred to under several
titles in scholastic literature, but he is most commonly
called the Doctor Fundatus.
William’s commentary on the Sentences is not
a commentary in the strictest sense, treating every distinc-
tion thoroughly, but is instead a series of major questions
occasioned by the text of Lombard. No complete edition
currently exists, but several small selections of the text
have been edited in various journals.
The work of William is of interest not only because of
its inherent value and intense rigor, but also because he is
situated within a pivotal moment of late-scholastic
thought. He is frequently engaged with the work of his
contemporary Henry of Ghent, and when he departs from
the views of Henry he shows his value as an innovator,
often putting forth positions new to the scholastic tradi-
tion. Moreover, William clearly exerts an inﬂuence over
the thinking of John Duns Scotus, the extent of which
is not yet fully known. In light of the amount of atten-
tion Scotus gives to the work of Henry of Ghent,
the importance of William’s mediating role cannot be
underestimated. His work is also of preeminent value
because of the time and attention he gives to surveying
the thought of his immediate predecessors and contem-
poraries. He dialogues regularly with thinkers as impor-
tant as Thomas Aquinas, Godfrey of Fontaines, Giles of
1418 W
William of Ware

Rome, and Richard of Mediavilla. He therefore is integral
in the preservation, interpretation, and transmission of
the scholastic thinking into the fourteenth century and
beyond.
William’s status as an innovator at a critical juncture
is particularly evident in his position taken on the status
of theology as a science. After surveying several opinions,
William makes a distinction regarding theology that later
wins the acceptance of Scotus. There can be theology
proper (thelogia in se) and theology from a human van-
tage point (theologia quoad nos). William maintains that
theologia in se, from the perspective of God, angels, and
the blessed, is indeed a science. However, contrary to the
opinion of Aquinas and Henry of Ghent, theologia quoad
nos is not a science. William asserts that a science must
proceed from principles that are known perfectly in
themselves. And while theologia quoad nos does proceed
from ﬁrst principles, they are not known evidently, but are
only believed. Thus, for the pilgrim, theology is not
a science. William, however, is quick to point out that
this is in no way due to some fault in the object of such
a science. Rather, he explains that God is like the sun; in
itself the sun is the most visible thing, but it cannot be
looked at with human eyes. God in himself is the most
knowable and most evident thing, but to the human eye he
remains obscure and unclear on account of his own bril-
liant clarity.
Such a position further necessitates a strong distinc-
tion between the science of metaphysics and theology.
William takes the position that while God is not excluded
from the science of metaphysics, he is not the exclusive
concern of metaphysics. Rather God is only considered in
metaphysics inasmuch as he can be known from the nat-
ural light of reason. And under this light, God can only be
considered as a being among other beings. Theology, on
the other hand, considers God as its proper subject, but
can do so only through the supernatural light of faith.
William’s exclusion of a strict deﬁnition of theology from
the realm of natural reason presents real doubts about
what can be known about God without the supernatural
light of faith and anticipates restrictions about what meta-
physics can ultimately tell us about God.
Despite his cautiousness, William continues to uphold
many of the standard metaphysical positions, but at the
same time he continues to add nuance and raise questions.
For example, William asserts, with tradition, that though
the proposition that God exists is not self-evident, it can
still be demonstrated by natural reason. However, he
claims that the argument from motion is the weakest
argument because reason has not shown that God is the
only thing that can be self-moved. He notes that nothing
prevents the angels from being self-movers, and, owing to
his position on the primacy of the will, William suggests
that the will could also be self-moved. Consequently, the
argument from motion does not show that there can only
be one unmoved mover, but opens up the possibility of
several unmoved movers.
Concerning the attributes of God, William presents
a position that is at once open to the possibilities of reason,
but cautious about its reach. He afﬁrms that we can indeed
know something of the ‘‘what’’ of God from his effects.
However, he makes a threefold distinction between know-
ing God through his essence, through his proper concept,
and through the concept of another. It is only in this third
and removed sense that we can know about God. Every
simple perfection found in creatures is able to tell us
something about God, not about his perfection simply,
but of the modes of his perfection. Here William antici-
pates Scotus’ insistence on our ability to know something
about God from the univocal perfections common to both
creatures and God.
William demonstrates at once both his willingness to
put forward new opinions and his cautiousness with
regard to natural reason perhaps nowhere more clearly
than in the question regarding the oneness of God. In
contrast to the established scholastic tradition of afﬁrming
that reason can indeed prove that God is one, William is
one of the ﬁrst scholastics to claim that natural reason is
not in fact able to demonstrate such a claim. This position
is subsequently adopted by many later scholastics, includ-
ing William of Ockham, Adam Wodeham, Robert Holcot
and Peter of Ailly. Even Scotus, who on this point does not
accept his conclusion, alludes to and refutes William’s
position in his own treatment of the question (Opus
Oxoniense I, dist. II, q. iii).
His contribution to ontology is also evident in the
manner in which he distinguishes the divine attributes.
Here, his importance for Scotus is unmistakable. William
denies any real distinction between the attributes of God,
but he also denies that any distinction between attributes
is merely generated by an intellectual act, whether of
humans, angels, or God. This is a different kind of dis-
tinction, one that has its foundation in the object itself, but
is not, strictly speaking, ‘‘real.’’ This peculiar type of dis-
tinction, while not explicitly named by William, is an
evident precursor of the formal distinction made famous
by Scotus.
William likewise holds, contra Aquinas, that there is
no real distinction between being and essence, but nor is it
merely a distinction of reason. The distinction of being
and essence is similar to that of the distinction between
being, truth, and goodness in creatures. It is found rather
William of Ware W
1419
W

than produced, despite the fact that there are no ‘‘really’’
distinct composite parts.
The notion of an objective, but non-real distinction, is
also important for William as he rejects the idea that
matter is the principle of individuation. In contrast, he
asserts that just as an essence has its own existence – that is
not ‘‘really’’ distinguishable – so an individual essence has
its own individuality through itself. Such ideas on indi-
viduality clearly foreshadow Scotus’ full theory of the
ultimate formal distinction (the so-called haecceity) as
the principle of individuation.
Finally, it would be remiss to ignore altogether Wil-
liam’s position on the will. He asserts the primacy of the
will over the intellect, since, as he claims, the object of the
will is nobler than the object of the intellect. William holds
a position of high respect for the will, stating that the
greatest nobility of the human being is in the freedom of
the will. Consequently, he claims that nothing determines
the will, neither the intellect, nor its object, nor even God.
Here again we can see William’s formative inﬂuence upon
the ultimate position of Scotus, who holds a strikingly
similar view.
See
also:
▶Henry of
Ghent
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶Metaphysics
Bibliography
Primary Sources
William of Ware (1909) Comment. in I Sent. d. 2, q. 1 et q. 8. In:
Daniels A, Quellenbeitra¨ge und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte
der Gottesbeweise im Dreizehnten Jahrhundert. BGPhThMa 8.1–2.
Munster, pp 89–109
William of Ware (1913) Quaestio de scientia humana. In: Daniels A,
Wilhelm von Ware u¨ber das menschliche Erkennen. BGPhThMA
I Supplementband. Munster, pp 309–318
William of Ware (1930a) Quaestio de Gratia creata et increata. In:
Ledoux A, De gratia creata et increata juxta quaestionem ineditam
Guillelmi de Ware. Antonianum 5:148–156
William of Ware (1930b) Comment. in I Sent. d. 26, q. 2–3; d. 27, q. 1 and
3; d. 28, q. 1–3. In: Schmaus M, Der Liber Propugnatorius des
Thomas Anglicus und die Lehrunterschiede zwischen Thomas von
Aquin und Duns Skotus. BGPhThMA 29.1. Munster, pp 234–285
William of Ware (1934) Comment. In I Sent. Prooem, q. 4: utrum ista
scientia (theologia) per se et proprie debet dici speculativa vel
practica. In: Amoros PL, La teologia como ciencia practica en la
escuela franciscana en los tiempos que preceden a Escoto. Arch
Histo Doctr Litt M A 9:291–303
William of Ware (1966) Queastio disputata de attributis divinis. In:
Lenaigre BM, Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et The´ologiques.
50:225–227
William of Ware (1975) Quaestio de unitate Dei, In: Muscat P, Guillelmi
de Ware quaestio inedita de unitate dei. Antonianum 2:335–350
Secondary Sources
Daniels A (1917) Zu den Beziehungen zwischen Wilhelm von Ware und
Johannes Duns Scotus. Franzisk Stud 4:221–238
Ga`l G (1954) Gulielmi de Ware, O.F.M. Doctrina Philosophica Per
Summa Capita Proposita. Francisc Stud 14:155–180, 265–292
Hodl L (1990) Literar- und problemgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zum
Sentenzen Kommentar des Wilhelm von Ware O.F.M (nach 1305).
Recherches de Theologie Ancienne et Medievale 57:97–141
Klug PH (1915) Zur Biographie der Minderbru¨der Johannes Duns Skotus
und Wilhelm von Ware. Franzisk Stud 2:377–385
Lechner J (1949) Die mehrfachen Fassungen des Sentenzenkommentars
des W. v. W. O.P.M. Franzisk Stud 31:14–31
Longpre E (1922) Maitres Franciscains de Paris: Guillaume de Ware. La
France Franciscaine 5:71–82
Spettmann H (1927, 1928) Die philosophiegeschichtliche Stellung des W.
v. W. Philosophisches Jahrbuch 40:401–413; 41:42–52
Wodeham, Adam
▶Adam Wodeham
Wyclif, John
▶John Wyclif
Wylton, Thomas
▶Thomas Wylton
1420 W
Wodeham, Adam

