Trace
793
T
Trace
Roderich Tumulka
Trace of an operator: The sum of the diagonal elements of the operator’s matrix
representation. The “trace” is a number that can be associated with an operator T
on  Hilbert space, and is usually denoted tr(T ), tr T , Tr(T ), or Tr T . It can be a
complex number, or +∞, or can be undeﬁned (because it is of the type ∞−∞).
The set of operators whose trace is a ﬁnite complex number is called the trace class.
Deﬁnition (1) The trace of an n × n matrix A = (aij)i,j⩽n is deﬁned as the sum of
the entries on the main diagonal:
tr(A) =
n

i=1
aii.
(1)
(In the sum convention of general relativity, this is written a i
i .) For an n×m matrix
with unequal number of rows and columns there is no concept of trace.
(2) For a (linear) operator T on a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space, tr(T ) is deﬁned
as the trace of its matrix representation relative to an arbitrary basis. It can be shown
that the value of tr(T ) does not depend on the choice of the basis.
(3) For an inﬁnite matrix A = (aij)i,j∈N, the trace is deﬁned as the series (inﬁnite
sum)
tr(A) =
∞

i=1
aii,
(2)
provided it converges.
(4) For an operator T on a (separable) Hilbert space H , one would like to deﬁne
its trace as the trace of its matrix representation relative to an arbitrary orthonormal
basis {φ1, φ2, . . .}, that is
tr(T ) =
∞

n=1
⟨φn|T φn⟩.
(3)
However, the series may not converge, or may converge for one  orthonormal basis
and not for another. That is why one splits the deﬁnition in two steps [1]. If T is a
positive operator (i.e., ⟨ψ|T ψ⟩⩾0 for every ψ ∈H ) then its trace is deﬁned by
(3), which is either a nonnegative real number or +∞; it can be shown that this
value does not depend on the choice of the orthonormal basis. This deﬁnition is
extended to non-positive operators as follows. An operator T belongs to the trace
class if the positive operator |T | =
√
T ∗T has ﬁnite trace (where T ∗denotes the
adjoint operator of T ); for such T we can deﬁne the trace by (3), as it can be shown
that the series converges (to a ﬁnite complex number) and its value is independent
of the orthonormal basis. Every trace class operator is bounded.

794
Trace
Properties (1) The trace is linear:
tr(S + T ) = tr(S) + tr(T ),
tr(λT ) = λ tr(T )
(4)
for all operators S, T from the trace class and all λ ∈C. (S + T and λT belong to
the trace class, too.)
(2) The trace is invariant under cyclic permutation of factors:
tr(AB · · · YZ) = tr(ZAB · · · Y).
(5)
(We assume here that at least one of the factors A, B, . . . , Z belongs to the trace
class and the others are bounded; in that case, also AB · · · YZ belongs to the trace
class.) In particular tr(AB) = tr(BA) and tr(ABC) = tr(CAB), which is, however,
not always the same as tr(CBA).
(3) If an operator T can be diagonalized, i.e., if there exists an orthonormal basis
of eigenvectors, then tr(T ) is the sum of the eigenvalues, counted with multiplicity
(= degree of degeneracy).
(4) The trace of the adjoint operator T ∗is the complex-conjugate of the trace of
T : tr(T ∗) = tr(T )∗.
(5) The trace of a self-adjoint operator T (in the trace class) is real: tr(T ) ∈
R. A self-adjoint operator lies in the trace class if and only if it is bounded, its
spectrum is discrete, all nonzero eigenvalues have ﬁnite multiplicity, and the sum of
the eigenvalues (with multiplicity) is ﬁnite (i.e., converges absolutely).
(6) The trace of a positive operator T ⩾0 is nonnegative: tr(T ) ⩾0.
Trace Formula in Quantum Theory When an observable, given by the self-adjoint
operator T , is measured on a system with density matrix ρ then the probability that
the outcome Z lies in the set  ⊆R is
P(Z ∈) = tr(ρ P)
(6)
with P the spectral projection of T corresponding to the spectrum in .
Literature
1. Reed, M., Simon, B.: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics. Vol. I: Functional Analysis
(Academic Press, New York and London 1972)

