Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological
and Mechanical Considerations
Kaitlynn P. Olczak and Kevin J. Otto
Contents
1
Coatings for Micro-Neural Implants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
1.1
Rationale for Adding a Device Coating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
1.2
Device Coating Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
2
Improving Biological Integration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
2.1
Reducing Protein Adsorption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
2.2
Reducing Oxidative Stress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
2.3
Mitigating Glial Cell Activation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
2.4
Promoting Neural Proximity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
3
Improving Mechanical Properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
3.1
Reducing Mechanical Mismatch Between Electrode
and Surrounding Tissue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
3.2
Coatings to Facilitate Implantation of Compliant Electrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
4
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167
Abstract
This chapter provides an overview of how coatings can be used to improve the
performance of neural interfacing devices by improving biological integration
and mechanical properties. The rationale for adding device coatings and the
general attributes that are important to consider for all coatings are introduced.
The chapter is then organized by the coating goal: (1) improve biological
integration or (2) improve mechanical properties. For each type of coating the
K. P. Olczak · K. J. Otto ()
J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
e-mail: kpolczak@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_132
141

142
K.P Olczak et al.
rationale behind how it can improve device performance is presented and is
followed by examples of their use in the literature to highlight their advantages
and disadvantages.
Keywords
Neural implants · Brain-machine interfaces · Surface modiﬁcation · Foreign
body response · Inﬂammation · Biointegration
Abbreviations
α-MSH
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
BBB
Blood-brain barrier
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
BDNF
brain-derived neurotrophic factor
CMC
Carboxymethylcellulose
CCC
Charge carrying capacity
CPs
Conductive polymers
CV
Cyclic voltammetry
DPI
Days post implantation
Dex
Dexamethasone
DS
Dextran sulfate
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EtO
Ethylene oxide
FBR
Foreign body response
Hya
Hyaluronic acid
IL-1Ra
Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
IrOx
Iridium oxide
LBL
Layer-by-layer
MMPs
Matrix metalloproteinases
Min
Minocycline
MnTBAP
Mn(III)tetrakis(4-benzoic acid)porphyrin
NCAD
N-cadherin
NGF
Nerve growth factor
NCAM
Neural cell adhesion molecule
NT3
Neurotrophin-3
PEG-DA
PEG-diacrylate
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
PEDOT
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PAA
Poly(acrylic acid)
PEO
Poly(ethylene oxide)
PVA
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PDL
Poly-D-lysine
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PEG-DMA
Polyethylene glycol dimethacrylate
PEI
Polyethylenimine
PPy
Polypyrrole
PSS
Polystyrene-sulfonate
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SNR
Signal-to-noise ratio
SOD
Superoxide dismutase

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
143
α-MSH
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
TGF-β1
Transforming growth factor-β1
VTMs
Voltage transient measurements
WPI
Weeks post implantation
1
Coatings for Micro-Neural Implants
1.1
Rationale for Adding a Device Coating
For successful clinical translation of neural interfacing devices, they must function
reliably over chronic time periods [1, 2]. Reduced device functionality is commonly
observed at chronic time points after device implantation and has been attributed
to abiotic and biotic mechanisms [3–5]. Abiotic failure modes are associated with
instability of the engineered device and include corrosion [6, 7], fractured traces
[8], and insulation delamination [4, 9, 10]. Biotic failure modes are associated with
the tissue response to the device, also known as the foreign body response (FBR),
which is a multiphase inﬂammatory response that is initiated during implantation
and sustained by the presence of the implanted device [11–15].
Device coatings have been used to modify the physical and chemical properties
of neural interfacing devices to address both abiotic and biotic failure modes.
Oftentimes, coatings affect the device-tissue interface in multiple ways; however,
the primary purpose can be categorized as improving biological, mechanical, or
electrical properties.
1.2
Device Coating Considerations
Before a coating is added to a neural interfacing device, several factors must
be considered including coating size, material properties, and sterilization. The
following sections will discuss the important aspects of each of these considerations.
1.2.1
Coating Size
The beneﬁts of adding a coating must be weighed against the potential negative
effects that can be caused by increasing the device volume. The volume added
by the addition of a coating is a function of coating’s surface area (X-Y plane)
and thickness (Z plane). Larger devices cause more trauma during insertion and
increase tissue strain once implanted due to the larger volume the tissue needs to
accommodate. Coating designs should aim to minimize thickness while maintaining
the functional beneﬁts of the coating. If the minimal coating size needed still
signiﬁcantly increases the overall implant size, a cost beneﬁt analysis should be
completed to weigh the potential beneﬁts of the coating against the harm caused by
the increased device size.

144
K.P Olczak et al.
Fig. 1 Schematic illustrating possible deposition locations for coatingson neural interfacing
devices. (a) Coating covering both the substrate and electrode sites. (b) Coating covering only
the substrate while leaving the electrode sites uncoated. (c) Coating covering only the electrode
sites
Surface Area
The surface area of the coating depends on where the coating is applied (e.g., the
device substrate, electrode sites, or the entire device) (Fig. 1). Coatings that cover the
entire device (both the substrate and electrode sites) have the greatest surface area,
while coatings that only cover the electrode sites have the smallest. To illustrate
the difference in coating surface areas, consider a commonly used Michigan-style
electrode having 16 electrode sites with each site having an area of 703 μm2 (Fig. 1).
The total surface area of a 3-mm-long shank is 0.576 mm2 considering the back
and front of the device and assuming negligible surface area from the thickness.
Thus, a coating that covers both the substrate and electrode sites will have a surface
area of 0.576 mm2. A coating that only covers the substrate will have a surface
area of 0.5648 mm2, which is not substantially lower than the entire device. A
coating that is only applied to the electrode sites will have a total surface area of
0.0112 mm2, which is less than 2% of the total device surface area. Whether the
coating is deposited on the substrate, electrode sites, or both depends on the intended
purpose of the coating.
Coatings deposited on both the device substrate and electrode sites utilize the
entire device-tissue interface but can negatively impact the electrical performance
of the device. Several simple techniques can be used to apply coatings to the entire
device surface including dip coating, spray coating, and spin coating. Coating the
entire device surface maximizes the interaction between the coating and tissue,
which can be beneﬁcial for coatings intended to improve biological integration
of the device. Since coatings that cover the entire device introduce an additional

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
145
barrier between the electrode and surrounding tissue, it is critical to consider how
the coating will affect the device electrical properties. The coating material needs to
be permeable to ion movement, but not so conductive that adjacent electrode sites
are short-circuited.
Coatings deposited only on the device substrate utilize a large portion of the
device-tissue interface but can be difﬁcult to fabricate. Substrate-only coatings
increase the interaction between the coating and surrounding tissue, which is
beneﬁcial for coatings intended to improve biological integration. Since the coating
does not cover the electrode sites, coating materials that would inhibit charge
transfer can be used without impairing the electrical performance of the device. The
limitation in only coating the substrate lies in the difﬁculty of accurately masking
the electrode sites during the coating process. As devices increase in complexity,
the ability to selectively coat the substrate becomes increasingly difﬁcult, requiring
specialized equipment.
Coatings deposited only on the electrode sites can improve device electrical
performance and biological integration but utilize the smallest portion of the device-
tissue interface. Electrode-site-only coatings can modify the electrode surface
to improve charge transfer between the electrode and tissue. While improving
device electrical performance is often the primary purpose of electrode-site-only
coatings, they can also be used to improve biological integration. Several studies
have incorporated biologically active molecules (e.g., therapeutics, peptides, etc.)
into conductive polymers (CPs) to improve biological integration. While some
studies have had success using electrode-site-only coatings to improve biological
integration, the small portion of the device surface represented by the electrode sites
limits the interaction between the coating and surrounding tissue.
Thickness
Devices with small cross-sectional areas induce less trauma upon insertion and can
reduce the FBR compared to larger sized devices [16, 17]. Larger devices also
increase the intracerebral pressure caused by the presence of the device. A critical
consideration for a device coating is how it will impact the device volume. While
some coatings cause a negligible increase in device volume, other coatings, such as
hydrogels, can double the volumetric footprint of the device.
The change in coating size after implantation is also an important consideration,
as most coatings will change in size over the course of implantation, either
from swelling, degradation, or both. Coating materials that absorb water, such as
hydrogels, swell after implantation. Coatings that swell have the potential to cause
secondary damage from the increased tissue strain caused by the increasing device
volume and can restrict blood ﬂow reducing perfusion around the device [18].
Many studies estimate coating swelling using in vitro measurements; however, it
is important to ensure the in vitro conditions are representative of the in vivo
environment. The importance of this was illustrated in a study by Lu et al. that
compared the swelling of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)
hydrogels submerged in different solutions [19]. When water was used as the

146
K.P Olczak et al.
Fig. 2 Timeline illustrating the ideal coating duration based on the coatings’ intended function.
This chapter covers coatings to improve the biological integration and mechanical properties of
neural devices. Coatings to improve electrical properties are covered in chapter “Coatings for
Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations”
solution, PVA/PAA hydrogels swelled 200–300%, which was signiﬁcantly lower
than the 200–900% swelling observed when the hydrogels were submerged in
artiﬁcial spinal ﬂuid.
Coating degradation rate is also an important consideration, where the ideal rate
is dictated by the purpose of the coating (Fig. 2). If coating degradation occurs
too quickly, it can reduce its effectiveness; for example, if a coating intended to
affect the chronic FBR (∼> 21 days) degrades during the acute response (∼3–
7 days), it is unlikely to be effective. Slow coating degradation can also have
negative consequences, as was observed by Kozai et al. when evaluating the in
vivo performance of coatings to facilitate the insertion of compliant devices [20].
Previous in vitro studies indicated the coatings would dissolve within 20 minutes
of implantation; however, they observed evidence of the material in the tissue days
after implantation. This highlights the importance of verifying in vitro size dynamics
in vivo.
1.2.2
Material Properties
The material properties of an implanted device dictate how it will interact with the
surrounding tissue and directly affect the FBR [21–23]. The difference in tissue
response between stab wounds and implanted devices suggests the chronic presence
of the device is responsible for the characteristic glial sheath of the FBR [24]. Thus,
the material properties of any coating need to be carefully considered regardless if
it is primarily intended to improve biological integration. The following section
discusses several considerations including [1] hydrophobicity, [2] stiffness, [3]
adhesion strength, [4] conductivity, [5] stability, and [6] sterilization.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
147
Hydrophobicity
Coating hydrophobicity is an important consideration since hydrophobicity of
the device surface drives protein adsorption, which perpetuates the FBR. Several
studies have utilized hydrophilic coatings to reduce protein adsorption [25–28]. The
difference in protein adsorption between hydrophobic and hydrophilic materials
can be explained by the energy required for protein adsorption. Hydrophobic
regions in proteins can form hydrophobic interactions with the material. Protein
replacement of water molecules at a hydrophobic surface increases entropy and
is thus energetically favorable, which drives further adsorption [29]. Conversely,
the energy barrier for proteins to displace water molecules on hydrophilic surfaces
limits protein adsorption.
Stiffness
The ideal coating stiffness depends on the intended application. Coatings meant to
reduce mechanical mismatch between a device and the surrounding tissue should
closely match the modulus of the native tissue (e.g., ∼3–10 kPa for the brain [30]).
In contrast, coatings meant to aid the insertion of a device need to be stiff enough
to sufﬁciently increase the device buckling force to enable insertion. The critical
force required to penetrate the cortex has been evaluated by several studies and is
generally in the range of ∼320–1235 μN, depending on device size, tip geometry,
and speed of implantation [30, 31]. Coating modulus is commonly measured via
compression testing [32, 33], and can also be measured using AFM [34]. Substrate
inﬂuence on modulus measurements should be accounted for when assessing thin
coatings (<100 nm) or coatings with a substantial difference in modulus than the
substrate [35].
Adhesion Strength
The adhesion strength between the coating and device must be greater than the
shear forces that are applied during implantation to avoid coating delamination.
Experimentally measured shear forces during implantation have been reported
between 214 and 720 μN/mm [30]. However, the exact shear forces applied to the
coating will depend on the parameters used for implantation. If the implantation
shear forces are greater than the adhesion strength between the coating and device,
the coating can delaminate during the implantation.
Coating adherence is commonly evaluated in vitro by inserting coated devices
into 0.6–1% agarose gel brain phantoms [36–39]. Coating adherence after insertion
is commonly assessed via a simple visual inspection of the coated device; however,
visual inspection is not always possible with very thin or transparent coatings. Pierce
et al. addressed this issue by incorporating ﬂuorescein salts into a sol-gel coating
and comparing coating integrity before and after insertion using ﬂuorescence
microscopy [40].
Electrical Properties
Perhaps the most important consideration is how a coating will affect device
function, which is determined by the material’s electrical properties. The appro-

148
K.P Olczak et al.
priate electrical properties of a coating material depend on where the coating
is deposited (Fig. 1). The electrical properties of substrate-only coatings are the
least critical since they are not applied onto the electrode sites; however, the
coatings should not be too conductive to avoid short-circuiting adjacent electrode
sites. The electrical properties of electrode-site-only coatings, which are specif-
ically chosen to improve charge transfer between the electrode and surrounding
tissue, are discussed in chapter “Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical
Considerations“.
For materials that are unable to support electron transfer, their electrical prop-
erties are determined by the movement of ions. The movement of ions through
a coating is dependent on the coating material as well as the environment. For
example, hydrogels do not typically hinder charge transfer between an electrode
and environment due to their high water content that enables high ion mobility.
The coating thickness also signiﬁcantly affects its impact on charge transfer
regardless of ion mobility within the ﬁlm. For coatings with high ion mobility,
increasing the coating thickness can cause charge transfer to become diffusion
limited. On the other hand, coatings with low ion mobility can be thought of as
a parallel plate capacitor, and thus increasing the coating thickness will decrease
the capacitance value. Environmental factors that can affect ion mobility within a
coating, and should be considered during coating evaluations, include temperature,
ion concentration, and pH.
Several measurements are commonly used to evaluate the effect of coatings
on device electrical properties including electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS), cyclic voltammetry (CV), and voltage transient measurements (VTMs). EIS
is a quick and nondestructive technique that measures the impedance of the system
across a wide range of frequencies. The ability to assess charge transport across
multiple frequencies is important for coatings on neural electrodes since the critical
frequency range depends on the application (i.e., recording or stimulating) (Fig. 3).
Lower frequencies relevant for neural recordings include 10–300 Hz for local
ﬁeld potentials (LFPs), and 700–15,000 Hz for single-unit recordings. The relevant
frequencies for stimulation applications depend on the stimulation parameters and
type of electrode. Readers are referred to Orazem et al. [41] for detailed information
on extracting electrode information such as double-layer capacitance and charge-
transfer resistance from EIS data. Since EIS is a nondestructive measurement, it
can monitor changes in ion transport over time as the coating swells or degrades.
CV can be used to determine if any electrochemical reactions are occurring at the
electrode and is commonly used to calculate the charge carrying capacity (CCC)
of electrodes. VTMs measure the polarization of the electrode when a current-
controlled stimulation pulse is applied and can be used to evaluate how the coating
will affect the stimulation performance of a device. Comprehensive reviews on
electrochemical evaluation testing methods and interpretation of stimulating and
recording electrodes are available [42, 43].

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
149
Fig. 3 Frequencies relevant for neural interfacing devices used for recording and stimulation
applications
Stability
The length of time a coating should remain stable depends on its intended function
(Fig. 2). To ensure the coating will not begin to lose functionality too quickly, or
remain after it is needed, in vitro characterization should be done over the duration
the coating will be used. Initial in vitro studies typically evaluate coating stability in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). However, discrepancies between coating stability
in vitro and in vivo highlight the need for more rigorous testing conditions that
more accurately represent in vivo conditions after device implantation [44]. A few
parameters that can affect coating stability that are not commonly addressed during
in vitro testing include pH ﬂuctuations and ROS.
The effect of pH on the performance of device coatings should be considered due
to the dynamic pH of the tissue following device implantation. Transient, biphasic
shifts in pH occur following implantation [45], and decreased pH has been observed
following stimulation [46]. Coating stability under nonideal conditions is especially
important when the coating is used to control drug delivery. Decreased pH values
can affect the release rate, potentially lead to rapid drug release, and cause tissue
concentrations above the therapeutic limit.

150
K.P Olczak et al.
ROS produced by activated microglia/macrophages can signiﬁcantly impact
device integrity [7, 47], and their effect on device coatings should be considered.
Accelerated aging tests conducted in solutions containing ROS have been a useful
tool in evaluating device failure modes in a short amount of time [9, 48, 49]. This
type of testing could provide useful information regarding a coating’s stability in
vivo, though the high temperatures and high ROS concentrations may overestimate
failure.
1.2.3
Sterilization
The method of sterilization of a coated device is an important consideration because
the extreme conditions used for many sterilization methods can negatively affect
coatings. The ability to sterilize coated devices is critical since residual endotoxins
can signiﬁcantly exacerbate the FBR [50]. Commonly used sterilization methods
include autoclaving, dry heat, ethylene oxide (EtO), and ultraviolet radiation. Many
materials used for coatings have melting points below temperatures used in dry
heat (∼160 ◦C) and autoclave sterilization (∼120 ◦C), making them unacceptable
sterilization methods. Room-temperature EtO does not use elevated temperatures,
making it compatible for coatings that are temperature sensitive; however, EtO can
react with several functional groups (e.g., amide, carboxyl, and carbonate functional
groups) which could signiﬁcantly affect coating properties [51]. Coated devices
should be evaluated before and after sterilization to assess the impact of sterilization
on the coating properties discussed in the sections above.
2
Improving Biological Integration
Upon device insertion, a cascade of inﬂammation occurs resulting in the device
encapsulated in a ﬁbrotic sheath and loss of neurons surrounding the device. The
tissue damage that occurs during the device implantation compromises the blood-
brain barrier (BBB) and allows serum proteins into the brain [52, 53]. Within
24 hours after implantation, the device is surrounded by activated microglia, which
form a loose cellular sheath around the device [54–56]. Over the next few weeks,
activated astrocytes form a tight sheath around the device, which becomes more
compact by 6 weeks post implantation (WPI) [12, 56–58]. This compact glial
sheath reduces the device’s ability to communicate with surrounding neurons
because it acts as a barrier to ion diffusion [59–61] and increases the distance
between the electrode and surrounding neurons [12]. In addition to being physically
displaced by the glial sheath, the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines involved in the FBR
are postulated to contribute to neuronal loss around the implanted device. This
increase in electrode-neuron distance has signiﬁcant functional implications for both
recording and stimulating applications.
Modifying the tissue response offers the opportunity to improve device proximity
to surrounding neurons. The dynamic nature of the FBR and complex interactions

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
151
between cells involved creates multiple therapeutic targets for coatings. The follow-
ing sections discuss several ways in which coatings are used to improve biological
integration of neural interfacing devices including [1] reducing protein adsorption,
[2] reducing oxidative stress, [3] mitigating glial cell activation, and [4] promoting
neural proximity.
2.1
Reducing Protein Adsorption
Hydrophilic coatings
have been used to reduce protein adsorption onto neural
interfacing devices in order to mitigate the FBR. Silicon, the traditional substrate for
MEAs, is hydrophobic which promotes nonspeciﬁc protein adsorption. Serum pro-
teins, such as albumin, released from the compromised BBB after device insertion
have been shown to activate microglia and astrocytes [62, 63]. Adsorption of serum
proteins onto the device surface has been postulated to perpetuate glial inﬂammation
[64]. Hydrophilic coatings can reduce protein adsorption by preventing hydrophobic
interactions between proteins and the device surface, which is a major driving
force of protein adsorption [29, 65–67]. Consequently, several studies have explored
reducing the FBR by applying hydrophilic coatings to reduce protein adsorption on
the device.
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is widely recognized for its anti-biofouling properties
and has been used in a variety of biomedical applications to reduce protein adsorp-
tion. Reduced protein adsorption on PEG is attributed in part to its high hydrophilic-
ity [68]. PEG coatings reduced protein adsorption on microwires [69] and reduced
glial activation in vitro [25], but had no signiﬁcant effects on glial activation or
neuron density around implanted devices 4 WPI [26]. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
microgel particles cross-linked with polyethylene glycol diacrylate) (PEG-DA),
where the PEG decorates the surface at physiological conditions, signiﬁcantly
reduced microglia activation around implanted device 24 WPI; however, the PEG-
DA microgel-coated devices had signiﬁcantly lower neuron density compared to
uncoated devices. The observation that devices coated with only PEG had signiﬁ-
cantly greater IgG than PEG-maleimide-coated devices, which provided triggered
therapeutic release (see Sect. 3.3.3 – Active Therapeutic Release), suggests reducing
protein adsorption alone isn’t sufﬁcient for reducing the FBR [70]. It is also possible
that PEG coatings dissolve before BBB integrity is restored, since compromises in
BBB integrity have been shown to last 4 WPI [71]. Finally, it is possible that serum
proteins adsorbed onto the uncoated device if the coating was gone before the BBB
regained integrity.
A number of other coating materials have been explored to reduce protein
adsorption on neural interfacing devices. Zhao et al. found that chitosan/collagen
coatings reduced adsorption of both albumin and immunoglobulin G on silicon
substrates [72]. Li et al. used PVA/PAA and PU/PAA hydrogel coatings to reduce
protein adsorption on polydimethylsiloxane substrates [73]. In a follow-up study,
Lu et al. found that PVA/PAA hydrogels signiﬁcantly reduced astrocyte activation

152
K.P Olczak et al.
compared to uncoated polydimethylsiloxane devices in vivo after 6 WPI [74].
Several studies have used Hya-based coatings to reduce protein adsorption [75–77].
For example, Yue et al. found Hya-coated PDMS substrates signiﬁcantly reduced
adsorption of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and ﬁbronectin compared to uncoated
PDMS [76].
2.2
Reducing Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress has been observed at the device-tissue interface [78–81], and has
been implicated in both biotic and abiotic failure modes [3, 4, 82]. Ferritin, a
sign of oxidative stress in microglia [83], has been observed around implanted
devices between 2 and 16 WPI. ROS can directly trigger neural degeneration [80].
Finally, oxidative stress damages device insulation and has been suggested to cause
device failure in vivo [7]. Considering the multiple failure modes thought to involve
oxidative stress, reducing ROS around the device creates an opportunity to address
both biotic and abiotic failure modes. Coatings can reduce ROS by locally delivering
antioxidants or creating an antioxidative surface on the device.
The Capadona lab has carried out multiple studies to test the hypothesis that
preventing ROS accumulation at the device-tissue interface can directly improve
BBB stability and improve neural health. To overcome poor bioavailability and rapid
clearance of local and systemically delivered antioxidants [81, 84], Potter-Baker
et al. developed a superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic device coating capable of
providing sustained antioxidative effects [85]. The SOD mimetic Mn(III)tetrakis(4-
benzoic acid)porphyrin (MnTBAP) is a metalloporphyrin, a class of catalytic SOD
mimetics that have a manganese core which alternates between Mn (III) and Mn
(II) as it undergoes reduction and oxidation reactions [86]. MnTBAP was used
due to its ability to selectively inhibit accumulation of ROS and not nitric oxide,
which has been shown to play an important role in cellular communication and
maintaining glial cell homeostasis in the brain. Immobilizing MnTBAP onto the
substrate surface provided sustained antioxidative activity and a hybrid coating,
which combined immobilization with nonspeciﬁc adsorption, provided sustained
activity and a burst release of free MnTBAP. Durability testing showed the
coatings maintained antioxidative activity over 2 days of exposure to physiological
conditions. Hybrid coatings reduced intracellular and extracellular ROS suggesting
immobilized MnTBAP can interact with microglia directly adjacent to the device,
whereas the free MnTBAP
can exert its effect on activated microglia in the
surrounding tissue.
2.3
Mitigating Glial Cell Activation
Device implantation activates microglia and astrocytes, which progressively encap-
sulate the device in a ﬁbrotic sheath [71]. Within 24 hours after implantation, the
device is surrounded by activated microglia, which form a loose cellular sheath
around the device [54–56]. Pro-inﬂammatory cytokines released from activated

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
153
microglia activate nearby astrocytes [87] and can cause neuronal death [11, 64,
88, 89]. Activated astrocytes are increased around the device by 1 WPI [56], and
continue to increase forming a loosely organized provisional sheath around the
device by 3 WPI [56, 57]. The sheath becomes more compacted in the following
weeks [12] and is postulated to reduce electrode function by electrically and
physically isolating the electrode from the surrounding neurons [59].
Coatings can mitigate glial cell activation by making the device surface anti-
inﬂammatory or locally releasing anti-inﬂammatory molecules. Immobilization of
anti-inﬂammatory molecules on the device surface via covalent bonding can be
used to create an anti-inﬂammatory surface. Coatings used to locally deliver anti-
inﬂammatory molecules can use either active or passive release strategies. For the
purposes of this chapter, passive release refers to coatings that release drugs over
time in contrast to active release coatings where the drug release is triggered by an
external stimulus. The following sections will discuss coatings used to mitigate glial
cell activation using [1] immobilization of anti-inﬂammatory molecules, [2] passive
release of anti-inﬂammatory molecules, and [3] active release of anti-inﬂammatory
molecules.
2.3.1
Immobilization
Anti-inﬂammatory therapeutics immobilized on the device surface interact directly
with tissue adjacent to the implant. Molecules that have been immobilized to
device surfaces to reduce inﬂammation include transforming growth factor-β1
(TGF-β1) [90], α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) [91], interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) [92], hyaluronic acid (Hya) [93], dextran [93], and
dexamethasone (Dex) [93].
The molecules mentioned above have found various degrees of success in
mitigating the FBR. TGF-β is a potent anti-inﬂammatory cytokine that promotes
microglia polarization to an M2 phenotype [94] and can reset activated astrocytes to
a nonreactive state [87]. Immobilized TGF-β reduced astrocyte proliferation by 57%
in vitro compared to laminin-coated surfaces [90]. The neuroimmunomodulatory
peptide α-MSH is known to reduce microglia production of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines. Immobilized α-MSH signiﬁcantly reduced microglia activation around
devices 1 and 4 WPI, and signiﬁcantly reduced astrocyte activation after 4 WPI [91].
Since the peptide was tethered to the surface of the implant, not directly in contact
with astrocytes, the reduced astrocyte activation can likely be attributed to the
reduced microglia activation. Further analysis of the spatial distribution of TNF-α
around devices 1 WPI supported this hypothesis showing reduced TNF-α expression
around α-MSH-coated devices. IL-1Ra serves as an anti-inﬂammatory mediator in
inﬂammation processes involving IL-1 [95]. IL-1Ra-coated devices signiﬁcantly
reduced astrocyte activation compared to laminin-coated devices 4 WPI [92]. The
effect of IL-1Ra on other cell types was not assessed; however, later studies assessed
the effect of IL-1Ra release on microglia, astrocytes, and neurons (see Sect. 3.3.3 –
Active Therapeutic Release). Grand et al. evaluated the effect of immobilizing Hya,
dextran, and Dex onto silicon devices on the FBR [93]. Hya is a major component
of the brain ECM [96] and was used to “camouﬂage” the implanted device; dextran

154
K.P Olczak et al.
is an antithrombotic agent and was used to reduce bleeding after implantation; and
Dex is a glucocorticoid agonist and known anti-inﬂammatory drug. At 1 WPI neural
density was decreased within 100 μM of all devices compared to control tissue
far from the implant. Hya-coated devices had the lowest neural survival, and only
Dex-coated devices had signiﬁcantly higher neural survival than uncoated silicon
devices [93]. Although device size after coating was not assessed, Hya is a large
molecule that can have a molecular mass of 10 [6]–107 Da and extend lengths of
2–25 μm [97], which is much larger than Dex ∼392 Da, and dextran ∼70,000 Da.
The large differences in molecular mass likely translated to large differences in
coating thickness, which could explain the poor performance of Hya-coated devices.
2.3.2
Passive Therapeutic Release
Passive release coatings release their loaded therapeutic over time as the device
is implanted, without a trigger from an external stimulus. Passive release coatings
comprise a variety of different coating materials and therapeutics.
A device coating can be used as a carrier to release micro- or nanoparticles
that carry the therapeutic. An example of this is Dex-loaded poly(lactide-co-
glycolic acid) nanoparticles encapsulated in alginate hydrogel [98]. In this study,
Kim et al. showed that nanoparticles not encapsulated by alginate reached 100%
release by 9 hours, which is very short compared to the duration of inﬂammation
at the device-tissue interface. Encapsulation of the nanoparticles in the alginate
hydrogel signiﬁcantly extended the release time, resulting in only 40% release after
100 hours. This duration more closely matches the time course of the FBR. EIS
of electrodes coated with the nanoparticle-loaded hydrogel revealed the coating
did not signiﬁcantly affect impedance, likely due to the high permeability of ions
through the alginate hydrogel. Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) coatings have also been
used to deliver drug-loaded nanoparticles [36]. In this study, the PEO dissolved
within minutes of insertion, releasing poly(propylene sulﬁde) nanoparticles which
then released drugs at a slower rate. Initial in vitro EIS studies showed the coating
temporarily increased impedance, but only until the PEO dissolved. A phase shift
of 3◦was observed after the coating dissolved, which XPS revealed was due to
residual PEO on the electrode. Release duration for Dex-loaded nanoparticles was
9 days. Preliminary in vivo impedance from Dex-nanoparticle PEO coatings had
lower average impedance despite high inter-electrode variability [99].
Nitrocellulose
is a cellulose derivative that has been used in a variety of
applications. The Bellamkonda group has used nitrocellulose coatings to deliver
α-MSH [100] and Dex [101, 102]. Dispersing α-MSH throughout the nitrocellulose
coating provided a sustained release over 21 days [100]. Impedance measurements
before and after the coating was applied revealed that the 1 kHz impedance
magnitude was decreased after coating despite nitrocellulose having a dielectric
constant of 6.2–7.5. The decreased impedance was attributed to the highly porous
nature of the nitrocellulose coating observed by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). Dex-loaded nitrocellulose coatings also reduced the 1 kHz impedance of
coated electrodes, and coated devices were able to record single-unit activity in
acute neural recordings [101]. Dex-loaded nitrocellulose coatings reduced microglia

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
155
and astrocyte activation around implanted devices 1 WPI, but only astrocyte activa-
tion remained signiﬁcantly decreased 4 WPI. Dex-loaded nitrocellulose coatings
signiﬁcantly reduced neural loss around implanted devices 1 WPI, having an
average neural loss region of 17 μm compared to 37 μm for uncoated devices
[102]. Although neural loss increased between 1 and 4 WPI for both coated and
uncoated devices, the region of neural loss for Dex-nitrocellulose-coated devices
remained signiﬁcantly lower than uncoated devices. Despite the increase between
1 and 4 weeks, the region of neural loss at 4 weeks was 45 μm, which is still
less than the approximate 50 μm electrode-neuron distance limit to record single
units [103].
Matrigel, a mixture of over 1850 proteins commonly used in cell culture [104],
is another coating material that has been used to release Dex [105, 106]. Lee et al.
compared two methods to improve adhesion of the Matrigel coating to the high-
energy parylene: sonication during dip coating and adding a poly-D-lysine (PDL)
priming layer to make the surface hydrophilic [105]. SEM images of parylene
devices coated using the two methods revealed that the sonication method produced
non-uniform coating coverage in contrast to the uniform coating on the PDL-
primed devices. The PDL-primed devices were able to load a total of 563 ng Dex;
however, the Dex released from the Matrigel was rapid, reaching complete release
by 35 minutes. Evaluation of the 1 kHz impedance of Matrigel-coated devices 1
WPI found no signiﬁcant differences between Matrigel and Dex-loaded Matrigel,
which is likely due to the short release duration. Comparison of Matrigel-coated
devices to non-coated devices showed Matrigel coatings did not signiﬁcantly affect
impedance or neural recording quality, measured by SNR, at 2 106 or 4 WPI [107].
Interestingly, SNR signiﬁcantly improved for Matrigel-coated probes compared to
uncoated probes 14 WPI [106].
Layer-by-layer (LBL) coatings
have been used to achieve sustained release
of drugs that are difﬁcult to release for long duration using traditional coating
methods, such as minocycline (MIN). LBL coatings are multilayer coatings created
by sequentially adsorbing monolayers of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes via
electrostatic interactions [108, 109]. MIN, a second-generation tetracycline, has
been shown to have anti-inﬂammatory and neuroprotective properties [110], and
following oral administration Rennaker et al. observed improved SNR and tissue
response of implanted devices [111]. To overcome the high doses required to reach
therapeutic levels in the brain from systemic administration of MIN [112], Zhang
et al. developed a LBL coating to achieve local sustained release [113, 114]. Gelatin
type A served as the polycation and dextran sulfate (DS) containing Mg2+ or Ca2+
served as the polyanion, which enabled the incorporation of MIN, since both DS
and MIN can chelate divalent ions. Adjusting the number of trilayers allowed the
thickness and MIN release to be tuned; thickness increased at 62.5 nm/trilayer, and
increasing from 12 to 20 trilayers increased the total MIN loading and increased the
duration of release from 36 to 46 days [113]. Additional studies using the same
coating paradigm found electrode impedance was initially increased after a 20-
trilayer coating was applied, but began to return to pre-coated values after soaking
in PBS [115, 116].

156
K.P Olczak et al.
2.3.3
Active Therapeutic Release
Active release coatings on neural interfacing devices have utilized physical and
biological stimuli to trigger therapeutic release. For example, CP coatings can utilize
electrical stimulation as a physical stimulus to trigger the release of therapeutics
incorporated into the CP coating. Additionally, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
have been used as a biological stimulus to trigger the release of therapeutics since
they are known to be upregulated during inﬂammation.
Anionic drugs can be incorporated into CP coatings as dopants during poly-
merization and then actively released via application of an electrical stimulus.
Dex, which has a negative charge from its phosphate group, has been used
with polypyrrole (PPy) [117–120] and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)
[121–123]. For example, Wadhwa et al. doped PPy ﬁlms with Dex and obtained
release that was linear with the number of CV scans [117]. The released Dex
reduced reactive astrocytes in vitro to the same degree as Dex directly added to the
media, showing the released Dex retained its anti-inﬂammatory properties. More
recently, Boehler et al. evaluated the effects of active Dex released from PEDOT-
coated electrodes implanted over 12 weeks [123]. PEDOT was polymerized on
iridium oxide (IrOx) electrodes using Dex or polystyrene-sulfonate (PSS) as a
counter ion. The Dex release was triggered by applying a CV scan between −0.3
and 0.45 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). They found no signiﬁcant differences in impedance
magnitude or phase angle between PEDOT/Dex and PEDOT/PSS at any time
point. Histological analysis showed the average neuron to electrode distance was
lowest for PEDOT/Dex coatings but was not signiﬁcantly lower than controls,
which included non-stimulated PEDOT/Dex and PEDOT/PSS. Interestingly, the
bare IrOx electrodes had the lowest microglia and astrocyte activation surrounding
the device after 12 weeks. Boehler et al. hypothesized that residual EDOT attached
to the polyimide during polymerization leached out in vivo and induced greater
inﬂammation for PEDOT-coated devices.
Active therapeutic release has been demonstrated by designing coatings that
sense the presence of MMPs to trigger drug release. MMPs are proteolytic enzymes,
and one enzyme in particular, MMP-9, which is normally present at low levels,
is signiﬁcantly upregulated during inﬂammation [96, 124]. MMP-9, which has
been shown to increase BBB permeability [125], is increased around implanted
devices as early as 3 days post implantation (DPI), and remains upregulated
until 16 WPI [126]. Devices coated with a PEG-maleimide hydrogel with IL-1Ra
incorporated using protease-degradable cross-links allowed MMP triggered IL-
1Ra release [70]. Although IL-1Ra-releasing coatings did not signiﬁcantly reduce
microglia or astrocyte action, they did decrease BBB damage compared to PEG-
coated control devices. The IL-1Ra-releasing coatings also improved neuronal
survival within 100 μm of the device, in contrast to the reduced neuronal survival
observed for uncoated and PEG-coated controls. Although the histological analysis
showed promising results, the functional implications remain unclear since there
were no electrophysiological measurements.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
157
2.4
Promoting Neural Proximity
While neural proximity is important for both recording and stimulation, the speciﬁc
requirements for the exact distance and connectivity of the neurons differ. Proximity
of a neuron is the only requirement to record a high-quality SNR. A neuron within
∼50 μm can provide a high SNR even if it is relatively disconnected from a network
and not providing useful information. Theoretically, converse criteria exist for
stimulation. For stimulation, it matters less exactly how far away the closest neuron
is, but more how connected the affected neurons are to the rest of the neural network.
Although the electrode-neuronal distance is not as critical for stimulation as it is for
recording, improving neuronal proximity can improve stimulation efﬁciency and
selectivity. Thus, enhancing neuronal proximity is a goal of implanted electrodes
for both applications.
Coatings can be used to promote neuron proximity to the electrode and create
a more stable connection between the electrode and neurons. Neuronal proximity
can be improved by coating the device with surface molecules to improve cell
attachment or using a coating that releases soluble molecules to encourage neural
growth toward the electrode. Coatings that promote cell attachment can do so by
receptor-mediated binding or non-receptor-mediated binding. In contrast to surface-
bound molecules that are restricted to interacting with cells adjacent to the electrode,
coatings that release soluble growth factors can interact with cells in a larger area
around the device.
2.4.1
Surface Molecules
Surface molecules coated onto the device can promote neural attachment through
receptor-mediated or non-receptor-mediated mechanisms. Coatings, such as polyly-
sine, that create a positively charged surface can promote neural adhesion through
electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged cell membrane. Coatings
that mediate neural attachment through receptor-mediated mechanisms employ a
molecule that can interact with a receptor on neuronal cell membrane. Molecules
that have been used for receptor-mediated binding include laminin, L1, and other
neural adhesion molecules.
Polylysine is a synthetic polymer composed of L-lysine or D-lysine monomer
units and is the most commonly used coating for non-receptor-mediated binding.
Polylysine was shown to support the attachment of hippocampal neurons in
vitro, and attachment of cerebral neurons was signiﬁcantly greater than L1- and
ﬁbronectin-coated surfaces [127]. However, when seeded with cerebral neurons,
astrocytes, and meningeal cells, polylysine supported equal growth of all cells [127].
This nonspeciﬁc support of cellular growth highlights one of the main limitations of
non-receptor-mediated attachment; since a neuron-speciﬁc receptor is not targeted,
there is the possibility of promoting glial attachment.

158
K.P Olczak et al.
Laminins
are a major component of the extracellular matrix and have been
widely used to promote neural adhesion onto neural interfacing devices. Laminin
is composed of three peptide chains with multiple functional domains recognized
by integrin molecules on the cell membrane. He et al. compared LBL coatings
using laminin or gelatin as the polyanion and polyethylenimine (PEI) or chitosan
as the polycation [128]. Laminin coatings signiﬁcantly improved neurite outgrowth
in vitro compared to gelatin-containing coatings. Later studies evaluated the
laminin/PEI coatings in vivo over 4 weeks; microglia/macrophage activation was
signiﬁcantly increased around coated devices 1 DPI suggesting laminin triggered
a greater initial response compared to uncoated devices. However, after 1 WPI
there were no signiﬁcant differences in microglia/macrophage activation, and by
4 WPI, activation was signiﬁcantly decreased around coated devices. The laminin
coatings did not affect neurons around the device which was attributed to the limited
interactions of immobilized laminin to the cells directly adjacent to the device [129].
Although whole laminin can provide multiple binding motifs for improving cell
adhesion, substrate surface properties affect laminin conformation which can limit
cellular recognition of the epitopes [130].
Peptide fragments of laminin epitopes are an intriguing approach because they
are smaller than whole laminin but still provide biological functionality. Laminin-
derived peptide sequences have been immobilized onto device surfaces as well as
incorporated into CPs through entrapment or as dopants. Peptide sequences immo-
bilized on dextran substrates found IKVAV, a laminin peptide fragment, selectively
promoted neuronal attachment, whereas RGD, the minimal cell adhesion peptide of
ﬁbronectin, promoted glial cell and ﬁbroblast adhesion preferentially over neurons
[131]. Peptide fragments can be incorporated into CPs by serving as a dopant or co-
dopant during polymerization. Cui et al. demonstrated the preferential attachment
of neural cells to PPy coatings containing the laminin fragment CDPGYIGSR
[132]. Soak tests showed the CDPGYIGSR peptide remained entrapped in the
PPy coating for 7 weeks [57]. In a follow-up study, PPy/CDPGYIGSR-coated
electrodes implanted in guinea pigs over 1–3 weeks increased neuroﬁlament around
the device 1 WPI but did not affect the FBR [57]. Later studies compared PPy
coatings doped with CDPGYIGSR or RNIAEIIKDI peptide fragments. While both
peptide fragments are laminin binding domains, RNIAEIIKDI has been shown to
speciﬁcally promote neurite outgrowth, whereas CDPGYIGSR has been shown to
play a role in both neural and astrocyte binding. Both peptides enhanced neuronal
attachment and neurite outgrowth compared to PPy/PSS, though the effect was
signiﬁcantly greater for coatings with RNIAEIIKDI [133].
L1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein involved in neuronal survival and growth
that has been extensively studied to promote neuronal adhesion in vitro and in
vivo. L1-coated substrates have been shown to promote neuronal adhesion in vitro
in several studies [134–138]. Immobilized and adsorbed L1 substrates selectively
promoted neuron attachment in vitro while inhibiting astrocyte, meningeal cell,
and ﬁbroblast attachment [127]. Following the promising in vitro results, the Cui
lab has extensively characterized the impact of L1 coatings in vivo. In contrast to
the decreased number of neurons normally observed around implanted devices, L1-

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
159
coated probes showed no signiﬁcant difference in the number of neurons compared
to background staining between 1 and 8 weeks post implantation [139]. Further-
more, L1-coated devices were found to have increased levels of neuroﬁlament
compared to background, suggesting increased axonal growth near the L1-coated
device. The improved neuronal response was proposed to be due to axons of
nearby neuron interaction with the immobilized L1 promoting neural adhesion and
neurite growth. In vivo imaging showed L1-coated probes had signiﬁcantly reduced
microglia coverage at all time points from 8 minutes after implantation until the
end of the 6-hour study. Since the total number of microglia processes directed
toward the devices was the same for coated and uncoated devices, the L1 coating
is postulated to affect the microglia end feet and processes immediately adjacent to
the implant [140].
Other adhesion molecules that have been used to promote neural adhesion
include neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) [141], N-cadherin (NCAD) [142].
Similarly to L1, NCAM is another transmembrane cell surface receptor that is
involved in neurite outgrowth [143] and has been used to promote neural adhesion
to devices [141, 144]. Polyimide microwire functionalized with a NCAM-derived
peptide reduced microglia and astrocyte activation in vitro [145]. Stability testing
revealed 68% of the coating remained after 4 days in physiological conditions.
Comparison of the adhesion strength of neurons on L1-, NCAM-, or NCAD-coated
surfaces found NCAD-coated surfaces had the strongest neuron adhesion and were
more stable than NCAM coatings [138].
The method used to attach receptor-mediated-binding molecules can signiﬁ-
cantly affect their function. Cherry et al. demonstrated the effect of L1 orientation
by comparing neural behavior between L1 adsorbed onto polylysine, expected to
result in random orientation, and L1 attached to protein A, which was expected to
orient L1 [135]. Protein-A-mediated L1 orientation signiﬁcantly increased neurite
extension in vivo compared to randomly oriented L1 on polylysine. A separate
study also found adsorbed L1 had signiﬁcantly less neural attachment compared
to covalently bonded L1 [127]. Adsorbed YIGSR supported cell attachment, but
cell spreading was only observed for covalently bonded YIGSR [146], indicating
orientation is also important for peptide fragments.
2.4.2
Neurotrophin Release
Many studies have focused on releasing neurotrophins to promote neuronal proxim-
ity due to their potential to reach a larger number of cells than surface-immobilized
molecules. Neurotrophins are a family of growth factors that mediate neural
development, function, plasticity, and survival [147, 148]. Systemic delivery of
neurotrophins is challenging due to their short half-lives [149]. Kennedy et al.
demonstrated the potential of local delivery of neurotrophins to improve device
function in his seminal work seeding a piece of sciatic nerve into a glass cone
electrode. These electrodes implanted in the cortex of rats showed neurite ingrowth
and improved recording quality compared to cones with no nerve [150]. Despite
the improved function, the technical difﬁculties involved in this local delivery
approach have limited its widespread use. To overcome this technical challenge,

160
K.P Olczak et al.
various coating strategies have been employed to locally deliver neurotrophins
including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF),
and neurotrophin-3 (NT3).
Local release of BDNF has been achieved using hydrogels and CPs; however,
the release duration has been limited. Lee et al. evaluated BDNF release from
Matrigel-coated parylene devices and found that the BDNF reached complete
release (∼4.5 ng BDNF) within 24 hours [106]. After the coatings were sterilized
with EtO, the release proﬁle remained unchanged, but the cumulative amount of
BDNF released decreased by 36%. Jun et al. used PAA and polyethylene glycol-
diacrylate (PEG-DA) hydrogels to release BDNF in vitro [151]. Their initial release
measurements using BSA as a model for BDNF indicated the release duration was
3 days; however, BDNF (14 kDa) is almost ﬁve times smaller than BSA (66.5 kDa)
and would likely have a more rapid release. Evans et al. incorporated BDNF into
PPy ﬁlms and evaluated the effect of electrical stimulation on release [152]. A burst
release during the ﬁrst day was observed for both stimulated and non-stimulated
groups; this burst release has been observed by other studies as well and is attributed
to loosely bound BDNF desorbing [153]. Over 7 days the stimulated coatings
released a 12.1 ± 1.4 ng/cm2 with an average release rate of 2.15 ng/cm2 per
day, which was signiﬁcantly greater than cumulative release of the unstimulated
group which was 13.2 ± 1.4 ng/cm2 with an average release rate of 0.53 ng/cm2
per day [152].
NGF is the most common neurotrophin released from coatings and has been
used with hydrogels and CPs. Increased neurite outgrowth on laminin coatings
combined with dissolved NGF compared to immobilized NGF [154] suggests that
release of soluble NGF might have greater beneﬁts than immobilized NGF. NGF
released from Matrigel-coated parylene sheath electrodes found that the release
persisted over 4 days in vitro, which was longer than the 1-day release observed for
BDNF. However, NGF loss (46%) during sterilization was greater than the amount
of BDNF lost (36%) [106]. The large loss of neurotrophin combined with the short
duration drug release makes this coating strategy not ideal for targeting neuronal
loss over chronic time periods. To achieve longer release rates, NGF was loaded in
PEG/poly(e-caprolactone) hydrogels. The NGF-loaded hydrogels remained stable
in agarose gel for over 1 month and over 9 months in PBS. Neurite growth at
days 7 and 14 conﬁrmed that the released NGF was bioactive and releasing at
physiologically relevant concentrations over 2 weeks [155]. Active release of NGF
has been achieved by incorporating it into CP coatings [156, 157]. For example,
George et al. incorporated NGF into PPy ﬁlms using biotin-streptavidin coupling
[157]. PPy ﬁlms were polymerized using biotin as a dopant, and then the biotin-
doped coatings were soaked in streptavidin. Since streptavidin has four biotin
binding sites, it can bind to the biotin in PPy and biotinylated molecules, which in
this study was biotinylated NGF. NGF released from stimulated PPy ﬁlms produced
slightly lower neurite outgrowth compared to unmodiﬁed NGF and biotinylated
NGF but was still signiﬁcantly greater than no NGF.
NT3 has been released from PPy coatings on its own [153] and in combination
with other neurotrophins [107, 153]. NT3 is known to promote growth and differ-

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
161
entiation of neurons and has been shown to be neuroprotective [158]. NT3 released
from PPy doped with para-toluene sulfonic acid and NT3 was measured for short
and long polymerization times under electrically stimulated and nonelectrically
stimulated release [159]. Coating thickness and NGF loading increased with the
duration of polymerization time at a current density of 2 mA/cm2. A burst release
was observed for thin (10 μm) and thick (26 μm) coatings in the ﬁrst 24 hours
and was followed by a slower release for the following 6 days for both electrically
stimulated and nonelectrically stimulated coatings. The large burst of NT3 observed
from unstimulated coatings following CV at the end of the experiment suggests the
unstimulated coatings could have released for a longer duration than the study mea-
sured. The bioactivity of NT3 released from PPy was conﬁrmed by the signiﬁcantly
increased neurite number and length of spiral ganglion neurons [160]. PPy coatings
loaded with NT3 and BDNF signiﬁcantly improved neurite outgrowth compared
to coatings containing only one neurotrophin. This improvement, despite lower
cumulative neurotrophin release observed for BDNF-/NT3-loaded PPy compared
to NT3-loaded PPy, suggests that the neurotrophins act synergistically [153].
3
Improving Mechanical Properties
The mechanical mismatch between commonly used device materials and the
surrounding tissue creates signiﬁcant strain which is thought to propagate the FBR
and contribute to device failure [161]. Traditional penetrating microelectrodes made
of silicon have Young’s moduli of 150–170 GPa, which is 6–7 orders of magnitude
greater than the surrounding tissue (3–100 kPa). This difference in mechanical
properties creates strain on the surrounding tissue and signiﬁcantly contributes
to neuroinﬂammation [162]. Modeling data has shown strain can be signiﬁcantly
reduced by decreasing device stiffness [163, 164] and there is increasing evidence
from in vivo studies that compliant devices can improve histological and elec-
trophysiological outcomes [162, 165–169]. New device fabrication is focused on
developing increasingly ﬂexible devices by decreasing the size and using compliant
materials; however, as these devices become smaller and softer, they become
increasingly challenging to implant into the brain.
Coatings can be used to improve the mechanical properties of devices by 1)
reducing the mechanical mismatch between the device and tissue or 2) facilitating
insertion of compliant devices. Reducing the mechanical mismatch between the
device and surrounding tissue is hypothesized to reduce stress at the device-tissue
interface and mitigate tissue damage caused by movement of the brain relative to
the device (micromotion).
3.1
Reducing Mechanical Mismatch Between Electrode
and Surrounding Tissue
Stiff devices have been coated with soft materials to reduce the mechanical
mismatch between the device and surrounding tissue [19, 170, 171]. Modeling data

162
K.P Olczak et al.
have shown hydrogel coatings can reduce tissue strain with hydrogels that more
closely match brain tissue causing the least strain [172]. The coating thickness
required to fully absorb the distance displaced during micromotion (dmicromotion)
can be calculated using the following equation [170]:
Coating thickness = dmicromotion
εMax
where εMax is the maximum strain the material can undergo within the elastic
deformation regime. It is important to calculate the coating thickness necessary to
absorb displacement from micromotion that occurs in vivo (∼30 μm [173]) and
consider the effect a coating of that thickness would have on the overall device size
and electrical properties. In this section we will focus on several speciﬁc examples of
hydrogels that have been used to reduce the modulus of silicon devices, speciﬁcally
PVA, polyethylene glycol dimethacrylate (PEG-DMA), and gelatin.
PVA is a water-soluble polymer that has been used in a variety of biomedical
applications. Nguyen et al. compared the FBR between PVA and PVA-coated silicon
implants [174]. PVA coatings reduced the elastic modulus of silicon devices from
∼200 GPa to ∼49–78 GPa, which is still signiﬁcantly stiffer than tissue (<100 kPa).
Despite model predictions that the PVA coating would not signiﬁcantly affect
strain [174], in vivo measurements showed the PVA coating signiﬁcantly reduced
micromotion-induced stress by 37–40% compared to uncoated silicon probes [175].
Furthermore, there were no signiﬁcant differences in the strain produced by PVA-
coated silicon and PVA implants. PVA has also been used with PAA to make
PVA/PAA hydrogel coating on optrodes [19]. In this study, Lu et al. used PVA/PAA
hydrogels to improve the mechanical stability of PEDOT coatings on the optrode
microwires. Initial stability testing found after 100 CV cycles and soaking in
artiﬁcial cerebral spinal ﬂuid for 1-week PVA/PAA coatings reduced CCC loss
to 8% compared to 15% for uncoated electrodes. Furthermore, PVA-/PAA-coated
electrodes signiﬁcantly reduced the impedance magnitude at 1 kHz relative to
unmodiﬁed devices over the duration of the study (28 days).
PEG-DMA is a PEG-based hydrogel that has a low elastic modulus (2–11 kPa)
and forms a stable structure that is non-degrading [176, 177]. Spencer et al. used
PEG-DMA hydrogel coatings to reduce mechanical mismatch between implanted
devices and surrounding neural tissue [170]. PEG-DMA hydrogels reduced the in
vitro strain ﬁelds induced by axial and perpendicular displacements of 30 μm that
simulated micromotion (Fig. 4). Thicker PEG-DMA coatings (400 μm) produced
the greatest reduction in axial (side-to-side) strain, while thinner PEG-DMA coat-
ings (200 μm) produced the greatest reduction in perpendicular (in-and-out) strain.
Comparison of the PEG-DMA coatings on the FBR showed the coatings initially
decreased astrocyte activation after 1 WPI. After 8 WPI PEG-DMA hydrogel
coatings had increased microglia and astrocyte activation and reduced BBB integrity
and neuronal density. This highlights the trade-offs that must be considered when
using a coating to decrease mechanical mismatch between the device and tissue.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
163
Fig. 4 PEG-DMA hydrogels reduce local strain ﬁelds from micromotion in the axial and
perpendicular directions. (a) Local strain ﬁelds produced by 30 μm displacement perpendicular
to the device for uncoated, 200 μm PEG-DMA-coated, and 400 μm PEG-DMA-coated devices.
(b) Local strain ﬁeld potentials produced by 30 μm displacement in the axial direction for
uncoated, 200 μm PEG-DMA-coated, and 400 μm PEG-DMA-coated devices. (Figures adapted
with permission from [170])
Even if neural density around the coated probes was not affected, the PEG-DMA
hydrogels were 200 μm and 400 μm thick, which is greater than the single-unit
recording limit of ∼50 μm [103].
3.2
Coatings to Facilitate Implantation of Compliant Electrodes
Coatings can be used to facilitate implantation of compliant and/or small devices
that are prone to buckling during insertion [178, 179]. Coatings can increase the

164
K.P Olczak et al.
effective stiffness to increase the buckling force
of compliant devices enabling
them to penetrate the brain. Often, the coating temporarily increases the device
stiffness by increasing device size or Young’s modulus. Following implantation, the
coating dissolves at a rate determined by the coating material properties, leaving
just the compliant device. Stability is an important aspect of coatings used to
facilitate device implantation; they need to remain stable long enough to facilitate
implantation but should dissolve after implantation. The following sections will
discuss the importance of coating stability and coating materials commonly used
to facilitate device implantation.
Coating stability is an important parameter for facilitating device insertion; the
coating needs to remain stable long enough to allow insertion, but not so long
that it exacerbates the FBR. Benzocyclobutene electrodes coated with glucose
and poloxamer, a thermoresponsive polymer, were unable to penetrate brain tissue
because the coatings immediately dissolved upon contact with ﬂuid [180]. Other
rapidly dissolving materials such as PEG, dextran [181], and tyrosine-derived poly-
carbonate copolymer [182, 183] have successfully facilitated implantation while
dissolving quickly after implantation. Rapid dissolution of the coating removes
any impedance added by the presence of the coating, which is beneﬁcial if the
device needs to be used for recording or stimulation soon after implantation. For
applications that may require the device to be adjusted after implantation, the ability
to tune the coating degradation rate can be advantageous.
Although coatings to facilitate implantation are designed to dissolve away
upon implantation, the overall size of the coating is still a critical consideration
since it can hinder coating dissolution. Larger coatings increase the tissue trauma
during implantation and can cause lasting impacts depending on the degradation
rate. The size of tyrosine-derived polycarbonate copolymer coatings was shown
to have signiﬁcant effects on FBR, despite in vitro tests showing the polymer
completely dissolved within 5 hours [183]. Large (200 μm) coatings signiﬁcantly
increased astrocyte activation 3 WPI compared to small (100 μm) coatings on the
same-size device [182]. The effect of coating size was also observed by Kozai
et al. when they compared histological response of large (37,500 μm2) and small
(12,500 μm2) carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) coatings [20]. The coatings were
expected to dissolve in 20 minutes based on previous in vitro testing that observed
almost complete dissolution 8 minutes after insertion into agar brain phantoms
[184]; however, later in vivo studies observed evidence of the coating remaining in
the tissue days after implantation. The implant opening for the small CMC shuttle
had an average diameter of only 3.6 ± 3.6 μm 12 weeks after implantation, and
most of the openings were completely closed. In contrast, most of the large CMC
shuttle implantation sites never closed and had an average diameter of 120 ± 37 μm
at 12 weeks. This highlights the importance of verifying the assumed degradation
rate of the shuttle in vivo to conﬁrm that the presence of the shuttle does not
confound later analysis. If a shuttle exceeds a critical size, it can have lasting impact
potentially due to the initial trauma, or the inability of the material to be cleared
from the tissue.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
165
Gelatin is a protein derived from collagen that has been used to facilitate
implantation of a variety of devices. The mechanical properties of gelatin are highly
dependent on the source and processing conditions of the raw material, and can
be further modiﬁed by the addition of plasticizers [185]. Witteveen et al. coated
freestanding gallium phosphide nanowires with gelatin and found the wires became
bent, broken, or agglomerated due to internal forces as the gelatin dried [38]. They
then added glycerol as a plasticizer to reduce internal forces and found the number
of nanowires broken or bent decreased as the glycerol percent increased, with
only 8.5% of the nanowires becoming bent or broken using 100/60 gelatin/glycerol
(w/w). PEG has also been used as a plasticizer to improve the mechanical properties
of gelatin coatings [186]. Agorelius et al. embed ﬂexible gold electrode arrays
in a gelatin matrix made of 27.5% gelatin, 6.9% PEG, and 1.4% glycerol using
a molding process which allowed the gelatin mixture to be formed into a sharp
tip [186]. To ensure the coating remained stable until the device was completely
implanted, an additional coating of Kollicoat, a PVA-PEG graft copolymer, was
applied. Compression tests of the gelatin matrix-coated probes had an average
maximum deformation force of 0.373 ± 0.18 N, which was sufﬁcient for the probe
to penetrate the brain. They visually monitored the gelatin matrix after implantation
and observed complete dissolution within 3.5 hours. The electrode conformation
was conﬁrmed after 3 WPI by imaging cleared brain sections that contained the
implanted device.
PEG has been used to facilitate the implantation of a variety of devices. Lee et al.
used PEG coatings to facilitate the implantation of off-stoichiometry thiol-enes-
epoxy (OSTE+) polymer probes with Young’s moduli of 300 MPa (OSTE+Hard)
and 6 MPa (OSTE+Soft) [169]. Both OSTE+ probes were unable to penetrate agar
gel, and parylene probes were found to only penetrate the agar 80% of the time.
Dip coating the probes in 4 kDa PEG produced an average coating thickness of
46.05 ± 14.58 μm, which provided sufﬁcient stiffness for the probes to be inserted
into mouse pia mater. The devices were inserted at high speeds in part to avoid
PEG dissolution as it came in contact with cerebral spinal ﬂuid. Suzuki et al. also
used PEG coatings to facilitate the implantation of parylene C electrodes [187]. In
this study they found that the PEG coating initially increased the electrode’s 1 kHz
impedance and then returned to pre-coated values after soaking in PBS for 20 s.
Several studies have used silk to facilitate device insertion [39, 188–190]. Tien
et al. used silk coatings to facilitate the implantation of polyimide-based devices
[189]. The silk coating was applied using a molding process where only one side
of the device which allowed the electrode sites to remain uncoated (Fig. 5a).
This coating process allowed multiple layers of the silk coating to be applied
which increased the buckling force of the device from 0.042 ± 0.003 mN for
uncoated devices to 11.9 ± 2.7 mN for 3 layers, and 104.9 ± 12.8 mN for
6 layers. They evaluated the functional implications of the increased buckling
force by comparing the insertion of coated and uncoated devices into an agar
brain phantom. Uncoated devices were unable to penetrate an agar brain phantom
(Fig. 5b). The initial stiffness provided by the silk coatings enabled both the three-

166
K.P Olczak et al.
Fig. 5 Silk coatings that facilitate the implantation of compliant polyimide-based devices. (a)
Picture of the silk-coated device, illustrating the coatings present on only one side of the device,
leaving the electrode sites uncoated (inset). (b) Uncoated devices were unable to penetrate the agar
brain phantom. (c) Devices coated with three layers were able to penetrate the agar brain phantom
but bent during the insertion. (d) Devices coated with six layers were able to penetrate the agar
brain phantom and remained straight during the insertion. (Figures adapted with permission from
[189])
and six-layer coatings to penetrate the agar brain phantom; however, the faster
hydration rate of the three-layer coating resulted in the device bending within the
agar during insertion (Fig. 5c), in contrast to the six-layer coating which remained
straight (Fig. 5d). Lecomte et al. compared PEG and silk coatings to facilitate
insertion of parylene probes [39]. Parylene probes were unable to penetrate agar
gel and had an average compression force of 1.32 mN. Both the PEG and silk
coatings facilitated gel penetration having penetration forces of 8 mN and 23 mN,
respectively. Furthermore, PEG-coated probes were able to penetrate agar gels an
average of 1.3 times before buckling, whereas silk-coated probes penetrated the
gel an average of 12.3 times before buckling. While PEG coatings are sufﬁcient
for applications that don’t require high spatial precision, if the procedure requires
precise implantation, precision silk coatings are better suited.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
167
4
Conclusion
Device coatings have been used to improve the performance of neural interfacing
devices by improving their [1] biological integration, [2] mechanical properties, or
[3] electrical properties. This chapter has discussed the rationale behind improving
biological integration and mechanical properties. The complexities of the device-
tissue interface that contribute to the failure of neural interfacing devices will likely
require a multimodal approach combining the unique advantages of each coating
type used.
References
1. Moynahan, M., French, J., Hoffmann, M., Ye, M., Welle, C.G., Ryan, T., Wachrathit, K.,
Contreras-Vidal, J.L., Denison, T., Judy, J.W., Pena, C., Pancrazio, J.J., Knaack, G., Civillico,
E.F., Getzoff, N., Tyler, D.J., Hochberg, L.R., Skodacek, K., Peckham, P.H., et al.: Brain-
computer Interface devices for patients with paralysis and amputation: a meeting report. J.
Neural Eng. 13(2), 023001 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/13/2/023001.
2. Judy,
J.W.:
Neural
interfaces
for
upper-limb
prosthesis
control:
opportunities
to
improve long-term reliability. IEEE Pulse. 3(2), 57–60 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/
MPUL.2011.2181026
3. Prasad, A., Xue, Q.-S., Sankar, V., Nishida, T., Shaw, G., Streit, W.J., Sanchez, J.C.:
Comprehensive characterization and failure modes of tungsten microwire arrays in chronic
neural implants. J. Neural Eng. 9(5), 056015 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/9/5/
056015.
4. Prasad, A., Xue, Q.-S., Dieme, R., Sankar, V., Mayrand, R.C., Nishida, T., Streit, W.J.,
Sanchez, J.C.: Abiotic-biotic characterization of Pt/Ir microelectrode arrays in chronic
implants. Front. Neuroeng. 7(February), 2 (2014). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2014.
00002
5. Prasad, A., Sanchez, J.C.: Quantifying long-term microelectrode Array functionality using
chronic in vivo impedance testing. J. Neural Eng. 9(2), 026028 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/9/2/026028.
6. Sanchez, J.C., Alba, N., Nishida, T., Batich, C., Carney, P.R.: Structural modiﬁcations
in chronic microwire electrodes for cortical Neuroprosthetics: a case study. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14(2), 217–221 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2006.
875581
7. Patrick, E., Orazem, M.E., Sanchez, J.C., Nishida, T.: Corrosion of tungsten microelectrodes
used in neural recording applications. J. Neurosci. Methods. 198(2), 158–171 (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.03.012.
8. Kozai, T.D.Y., Catt, K., Li, X., Gugel, Z.V., Olafsson, V.T., Vazquez, A.L., Cui,
X.T.: Mechanical failure modes of chronically implanted planar silicon-based neural
probes for laminar recording. Biomaterials. 37, 25–39 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2014.10.040
9. Takmakov, P., Ruda, K., Phillips, K.S., Isayeva, I.S., Krauthamer, V., Welle, C.G., Scott
Phillips, K., Isayeva, I.S., Krauthamer, V., Welle, C.G., Phillips, K.S., Isayeva, I.S.,
Krauthamer, V., Welle, C.G.: Rapid evaluation of the durability of cortical neural implants
using accelerated aging with reactive oxygen species. J. Neural Eng. 12(2), 1–16 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/12/2/026003.

168
K.P Olczak et al.
10. Schmitt, G., Schultze, J.-W., Faßbender, F., Buß, G., Lüth, H., Schöning, M.: Passivation
and corrosion of microelectrode arrays. Electrochim. Acta. 44(21–22), 3865–3883 (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013-4686(99)00094-8
11. Edell, D.J.J., Toi, V.V.V., McNeil, V.M.M., Clark, L.D.D.: Factors inﬂuencing the biocompat-
ibility of insertable silicon microshafts in cerebral cortex. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 39(6),
635–643 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1109/10.141202.
12. Turner, J.N., Shain, W., Szarowski, D.H., Andersen, M.D., Martins, S., Isaacson, M.,
Craighead, H.: Cerebral astrocyte response to micromachined silicon implants. Exp. Neurol.
156(1), 33–49 (1999). https://doi.org/10.1006/exnr.1998.6983
13. Delisle Burns, B., Stean, J.P.B., Webb, A.C.: Recording for several days from single cortical
neurons in completely unrestrained cats. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 36(C), 314–
318 (1974). https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4694(74)90175-8
14. Schmidt, E.M., Bak, M.J., McIntosh, J.S.: Long-term chronic recording from cortical neurons.
Exp. Neurol. 52(3), 496–506 (1976). https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886(76)90220-X
15. Stensaas, S.S., Stensaas, L.J.: Histopathological evaluation of materials implanted in the cere-
bral cortex. Acta Neuropathol. 41(2), 145–155 (1978). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00689766
16. Seymour, J.P., Kipke, D.R.: Neural probe design for reduced tissue encapsulation in CNS.
Biomaterials. 28(25), 3594–3607 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.03.024
17. Thelin, J., Jörntell, H., Psouni, E., Garwicz, M., Schouenborg, J., Danielsen, N., Linsmeier,
C.E.: Implant size and ﬁxation mode strongly inﬂuence tissue reactions in the CNS. PLoS
One. 6(1), e16267 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016267.
18. Kozai, T.D.Y., Jaquins-Gerstl, A.S., Vazquez, A.L., Michael, A.C., Cui, X.T.: Brain tissue
responses to neural implants impact signal sensitivity and intervention strategies. ACS Chem.
Neurosci. 6(1), 48–67 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1021/cn500256e
19. Lu, Y., Li, Y., Pan, J., Wei, P., Liu, N., Wu, B., Cheng, J., Lu, C., Wang, L.: Poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(Styrenesulfonate)-poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(acrylic acid) inter-
penetrating polymer networks for improving optrode-neural tissue interface in optogenetics.
Biomaterials. 33(2), 378–394 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.09.083
20. Kozai, T.D.Y., Gugel, Z., Li, X., Gilgunn, P.J., Khilwani, R., Ozdoganlar, O.B., Fedder, G.K.,
Weber, D.J., Cui, X.T.: Chronic tissue response to carboxymethyl cellulose based dissolvable
insertion needle for ultra-small neural probes. Biomaterials. 35(34), 9255–9268 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.07.039
21. Vishwakarma, A., Bhise, N.S., Evangelista, M.B., Rouwkema, J., Dokmeci, M.R., Ghaem-
maghami, A.M., Vrana, N.E., Khademhosseini, A.: Engineering immunomodulatory bioma-
terials to tune the inﬂammatory response. Trends Biotechnol. 34(6), 470–482 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.03.009
22. Anderson, J.M.: Biological responses to materials. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 31(1), 81–110
(2001). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.31.1.81
23. Anderson, J.M., Rodriguez, A., Chang, D.T.: Foreign body reaction to biomaterials. Semin.
Immunol. 20(2), 86–100 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2007.11.004
24. Potter, K.A., Buck, A.C., Self, W.K., Capadona, J.: Stab injury and device implantation
within the brain results in inversely multiphasic neuroinﬂammatory and neurodegenera-
tive responses. J. Neural Eng. 9(4), 046020 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/9/4/
046020.
25. Sommakia, S., Rickus, J.L., Otto, K.J.: Glial cells, but not neurons, exhibit a control-
lable response to a localized inﬂammatory microenvironment in vitro. Front. Neuroeng.
7(November), 1–10 (2014). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2014.00041
26. Lee, H.C., Gaire, J., Currlin, S.W., McDermott, M.D., Park, K., Otto, K.J.: Foreign body
response to intracortical microelectrodes is not altered with dip-coating of polyethylene glycol
(PEG). Front. Neurosci. 11(SEP), 1–11 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00513.
27. Kozai, T.D.Y., Catt, K., Du, Z., Kyounghwan, N., Srivannavit, O., Haque, R., Seymour,
J.P., Wise, K., Yoon, E., Cui, X.T.: Chronic in vivo evaluation of PEDOT/CNT for stable
neural recordings. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 9294(c), 1–1 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TBME.2015.2445713

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
169
28. Gutowski, S.M., Templeman, K.L., South, A.B., Gaulding, J.C., Shoemaker, J.T., LaPlaca,
M.C., Bellamkonda, R.V., Lyon, L.A., Garc, J., García, A.J.: Host response to microgel
coatings on neural electrodes implanted in the brain. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 102(5),
1486–1499 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.34799
29. Haynes, C.A., Norde, W.: Globular proteins at solid/liquid interfaces. Colloids Surfaces B
Biointerfaces. 2(6), 517–566 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1016/0927-7765(94)80066-9
30. Sharp, A.A., Ortega, A.M., Restrepo, D., Curran-Everett, D., Gall, K.: In vivo penetration
mechanics and mechanical properties of mouse brain tissue at micrometer scales. I.E.E.E.
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56(1), 45–53 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2008.2003261
31. Jensen, W., Yoshida, K., Hofmann, U.G.: In-vivo implant mechanics of ﬂexible, silicon-based
ACREO microelectrode arrays in rat cerebral cortex. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53(5),
934–940 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2006.872824
32. Ahearne, M., Yang, Y., Liu, K.: Mechanical characterization of hydrogels for tis-
sue engineering applications. Tissue Eng. 4(June), 1–16 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijsolstr.2018.05.016.
33. Goding, J., Vallejo-Giraldo, C., Syed, O., Green, R.A.: Considerations for applications
of hydrogels in bioelectronics. J. Mater. Chem. B. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TB
02763C
34. Domke, J., Radmacher, M.: Measuring the elastic properties of thin polymer ﬁlms with the
atomic force microscope. Langmuir. 14(12), 3320–3325. https://doi.org/Doi (1998). https://
doi.org/10.1021/La9713006
35. Chudoba, T., Griepentrog, M., Dück, A., Schneider, D., Richter, F.: Young’s Modulus
measurements on ultra-thin coatings. J. Mater. Res. 19(1), 301–314 (2004). https://doi.org/
10.1557/jmr.2004.19.1.301.
36. Mercanzini, A., Reddy, S., Boers, M., Velluto, D., Bertsch, A., Hubbell, J., Renaud,
P.: The effect of biodegradable drug release coatings on the electrical characteristics of
neural electrodes. In: TRANSDUCERS 2007–2007 International Solid-State Sensors, Actu-
ators and Microsystems Conference, pp. 1377–1380. IEEE (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/
SENSOR.2007.4300399
37. Rao, S.S., Han, N., Winter, J.O.: Polylysine-modiﬁed PEG-based hydrogels to enhance the
neuro–electrode interface. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 22(4–6), 611–625 (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1163/092050610X488241.
38. Witteveen, J.A., Suyatin, D.B., Gällentoft, L., Schouenborg, J., Danielsen, N., Prinz, C.N.:
Gelatin/glycerol coating to preserve mechanically compliant nanowire electrodes from
damage during brain implantation. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct.
28(6), C6K13 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1116/1.3498764
39. Lecomte, A., Castagnola, V., Descamps, E., Dahan, L., Blatché, M.C., Dinis, T.M., Leclerc,
E., Egles, C., Bergaud, C.: Silk and PEG as means to stiffen a parylene probe for insertion
in the brain: toward a double time-scale tool for local drug delivery. J. Micromech Microeng.
25(12), 125003 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/25/12/125003
40. Pierce, A.L., Sommakia, S., Rickus, J.L., Otto, K.J.: Thin-ﬁlm silica sol–gel coatings
for neural microelectrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods. 180(1), 106–110 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2009.02.008.
41. Orazem, M.E., Bernard, T., Cells, E.: Electrochemistry. In: Electrochemical Impedance
Spectroscopy, p. 2008. John Wiley & Sons, New York
42. Cogan, S.F.: Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10(April),
275–309 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.10.061807.160518.
43. Hung, A., Goldberg, I.B., Judy, J.W.: Stimulation electrode materials and electrochemical
testing methods. In: Zhou, D., Greenbaum, E. (eds.) Implantable Neural Prostheses 2:
Techniques and Engineering Approaches, pp. 191–216. Springer New York, New York
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-98120-8_7.
44. Schmidt, E.M., Mcintosh, J.S., Bak, M.J.: Long-term implants of parylene-C coated
microelectrodes. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 26(1), 96–101 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02441836

170
K.P Olczak et al.
45. Johnson, M.D., Kao, O.E., Kipke, D.R.: Spatiotemporal PH dynamics following insertion of
neural microelectrode arrays. J. Neurosci. Methods. 160(2), 276–287 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.09.023.
46. Ballestrasse, C.L., Ruggeri, R.T., Beck, T.R.: Calculations of the PH changes produced in
body tissue by a spherical stimulation electrode. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 13(5), 405–424 (1985).
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02407769
47. Sankar, V., Patrick, E., Dieme, R., Sanchez, J.C., Prasad, A., Nishida, T.: Electrode impedance
analysis of chronic tungsten microwire neural implants: understanding abiotic vs. Biotic con-
tributions. Front. Neuroeng. 7(May), 13 (2014). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2014.00013
48. Street, M.G., Welle, C.G., Takmakov, P.A.: Automated reactive accelerated aging for rapid
in vitro evaluation of neural implants performance. bio Rxiv, 204099 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1101/204099
49. Caldwell, R., Sharma, R., Takmakov, P., Street, M.G., Solzbacher, F., Tathireddy, P., Rieth,
L.: Neural electrode resilience against dielectric damage may be improved by use of highly
doped silicon as a conductive material. J. Neurosci. Methods. 293, 210–225 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2017.10.002.
50. Ravikumar, M., Hageman, D.J., Tomaszewski, W.H., Chandra, G.M., Skousen, J.L.,
Capadona, J.: The effect of residual endotoxin contamination on the neuroinﬂammatory
response to sterilized intracortical microelectrodes. J. Mater. Chem. B Mater. Biol. Med.
2(17), 2517–2529 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/C3TB21453B.
51. Phillip, E., Murthy, N.S., Bolikal, D., Narayanan, P., Kohn, J., Lavelle, L., Bodnar, S.,
Pricer, K.: Ethylene oxide’s role as a reactive agent during sterilization: effects of polymer
composition and device architecture. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B Appl. Biomater. 101B(4),
532–540 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.b.32853
52. Kozai, T.D.Y., Marzullo, T.C., Hooi, F., Langhals, N.B., Majewska, A.K., Brown, E.B., Kipke,
D.R.: Reduction of neurovascular damage resulting from microelectrode insertion into the
cerebral cortex using in vivo two-photon mapping. J. Neural Eng. 7(4), 46011 (2010). https:/
/doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/7/4/046011.
53. Bjornsson, C.S., Oh, S.J., Al-Kofahi, Y.A., Lim, Y.J., Smith, K.L., Turner, J.N., De, S.,
Roysam, B., Shain, W., Kim, S.J.: Effects of insertion conditions on tissue strain and vascular
damage during neuroprosthetic device insertion. J. Neural Eng. 3(3), 196–207 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/3/3/002
54. Kozai, T.D.Y., Vazquez, A.L., Weaver, C.L., Kim, S.-G., Cui, X.T.: In vivo two-photon
microscopy reveals immediate microglial reaction to implantation of microelectrode through
extension of processes. J. Neural Eng. 9(6), 066001 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-
2560/9/6/066001.
55. Kozai, T.D.Y., Jaquins-Gerstl, A.S., Vazquez, A.L., Michael, A.C., Cui, X.T.: Dexamethasone
retrodialysis attenuates microglial response to implanted probes in vivo. Biomaterials. 87,
157–169 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.02.013.
56. Szarowski, D.H., Andersen, M.D., Retterer, S., Spence, A.J., Isaacson, M., Craighead, H.,
Turner, J.N., Shain, W.: Brain responses to micro-machined silicon devices. Brain Res. 983(1–
2), 23–35 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-8993(03)03023-3
57. Cui, X.T., Wiler, J., Dzaman, M., Altschuler, R.A., Martin, D.C.: In vivo studies of
polypyrrole/peptide coated neural probes. Biomaterials. 24(5), 777–787 (2003). https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0142-9612(02)00415-5.
58. Schultz, R.L., Willey, T.J.: The ultrastructure of the sheath around chronically implanted
electrodes in brain. J. Neurocytol. 5(6), 621–642 (1976). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01181577
59. Roitbak, T., Sykova, E.: Diffusion barriers evoked in the rat cortex by reactive Astrogliosis.
Glia. 28(1), 40–48 (1999). https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-1136(199910)28:1<40::AID-
GLIA5>3.0.CO;2-6
60. Kim, Y.T., Bridge, M.J., Tresco, P.A.: The inﬂuence of the foreign body response evoked by
ﬁbroblast transplantation on soluble factor diffusion in surrounding brain tissue. J. Control.
Release. 118(3), 340–347 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2007.01.002.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
171
61. Grill, W.M., Mortimer, J.T.: Electrical properties of implant encapsulation tissue. Ann.
Biomed. Eng. 22(1), 23–33 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02368219.
62. Ranaivo, H.R., Hodge, J.N., Choi, N., Wainwright, M.S.: Albumin induces upregulation of
matrix metalloproteinase-9 in astrocytes via MAPK and reactive oxygen species-dependent
pathways. J. Neuroinﬂammation. 9(1), 1 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-2094-9-68.
63. Ranaivo, H.R., Wainwright, M.S.: Albumin activates astrocytes and microglia through
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Brain Res. 1313(51), 222–231 (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.11.063.
64. Leung, B.K., Biran, R., Underwood, C.J., Tresco, P.A.: Characterization of microglial
attachment and cytokine release on biomaterials of differing surface chemistry. Biomaterials.
29(23), 3289–3297 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.03.045
65. Rabe, M., Verdes, D., Seeger, S.: Understanding protein adsorption phenomena at solid
surfaces. Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 162(1–2), 87–106 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cis.2010.12.007
66. Andrade, J.D., Hlady, V.: Protein adsorption and materials biocompatibility: a tutorial review
and suggested hypotheses. In: Advances in Polymer Science, pp. 1–63 (1986). https://doi.org/
10.1007/3-540-16422-7_6.
67. Roach, P., Eglin, D., Rohde, K., Perry, C.C.: Modern biomaterials: a review - bulk properties
and implications of surface modiﬁcations. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 18(7), 1263–1277
(2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10856-006-0064-3
68. Alcantar, N.A., Aydil, E.S., Israelachvili, J.N.: Polyethylene glycol-coated biocompatible
surfaces. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 51(3), 343–351 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-
4636(20000905)51:3<343::AID-JBM7>3.0.CO;2-D
69. Sommakia, S., Rickus, J.L., Otto, K.J.: Effects of adsorbed proteins, an antifouling agent and
long-duration DC voltage pulses on the impedance of silicon-based neural microelectrodes.
In: 2009 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, pp. 7139–7142. IEEE (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5332456
70. Gutowski, S.M., Shoemaker, J.T., Templeman, K.L., Wei, Y., Latour, R.A., Bellamkonda,
R.V., LaPlaca, M.C., García, A.J.: Protease-degradable PEG-Maleimide coating with on-
demand release of IL-1Ra to improve tissue response to neural electrodes. Biomaterials. 44,
55–70 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.12.009.
71. Skousen, J.L., Tresco, P.A.: The biocompatibility of Intracortical microelectrode recording
arrays for brain machine interfacing. In: Neuroprosthetics: Theory and Practice, vol. 8, 2nd
edn, pp. 259–299 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1142/9789813207158_0011
72. Zhao, Y., Lü, X., Wang, Z., Huang, Y., Jiang, Z., Li, X.: Study of the adhesion improvement
in hippocampal cells on collagen/chitosan- modiﬁed silicon surfaces. Biomed. Mater. 4(6),
065004 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-6041/4/6/065004.
73. Li, M., Zhou, H., Li, T., Li, C., Xia, Z., Duan, Y.: Polyurethane/poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel
coating improves the cytocompatibility of neural electrodes. Neural Regen. Res. 10(12), 2048
(2015). https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.172325
74. Lu, Y., Wang, D., Li, T., Zhao, X., Cao, Y., Yang, H., Duan, Y.Y.: Poly(vinyl alco-
hol)/poly(acrylic acid) hydrogel coatings for improving electrode–neural tissue Interface.
Biomaterials. 30(25), 4143–4151 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.04.030
75. Sunwoo, S.H., Kim, T.I., Lee, J.Y., Jang, Y., Cho, S.-W.W., Kim, S., Jang, L.K., Jang, Y.,
Jang, L.K., Sunwoo, S.H., Kim, T.I., Cho, S.-W.W., Lee, J.Y.: Electrochemical deposition of
dopamine-hyaluronic acid conjugates for anti-biofouling bioelectrodes. J. Mater. Chem. B.
5(23), 4507–4513 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/c7tb00028f.
76. Yue, Z., Liu, X., Molino, P.J., Wallace, G.G.: Bio-functionalisation of Polydimethylsilox-
ane with hyaluronic acid and hyaluronic acid – collagen conjugate for neural interfac-
ing. Biomaterials. 32(21), 4714–4724 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.
03.032
77. Yu, K., Hou, J., Jin, Z., Wu, K., Xu, S., Yang, N., Shen, Y., Tang, T., Guo, S.A.: Cochlear
implant loaded with dexamethasone and coated with hyaluronic acid to inhibit ﬁbroblast

172
K.P Olczak et al.
adhesion and proliferation. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 46(May), 173–181 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2018.05.004.
78. Ereifej, E.S., Rial, G.M., Hermann, J.K., Smith, C.S., Meade, S.M., Rayyan, J.M., Chen, K.,
Feng, H., Capadona, J.: Implantation of neural probes in the brain elicits oxidative stress.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 6(February) (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2018.00009.
79. Bennett, C., Mohammed, F., Álvarez-Ciara, A., Nguyen, M.A., Dietrich, W.D., Rajguru, S.M.,
Streit, W.J., Prasad, A.: Neuroinﬂammation, oxidative stress, and blood-brain barrier (BBB)
disruption in acute utah electrode array implants and the effect of deferoxamine as an iron
chelator on acute foreign body response. Biomaterials. 2019(188), 144–159 (October 2018).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.09.040
80. McConnell, G.C., Rees, H.D., Levey, A.I., Gutekunst, C.-A., Gross, R.E., Bellamkonda, R.V.:
Implanted neural electrodes cause chronic, local inﬂammation that is correlated with local
neurodegeneration. J. Neural Eng. 6(5), 056003 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/6/
5/056003.
81. Potter-baker, K.A., Foster, E.J., Potter, K.A., Jorﬁ, M., Householder, K.T., Weder, C.,
Capadona, J.: Curcumin-releasing mechanically adaptive intracortical implants improve the
proximal neuronal density and blood-brain barrier stability. Acta Biomater. 10(5), 2209–2222
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2014.01.018.
82. Potter-Baker, K.A., Capadona, J.: Reducing the “stress”: antioxidative therapeutic and
material approaches may prevent intracortical microelectrode failure. ACS Macro Lett. 4(3),
275–279 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1021/mz500743a
83. Mehlhase, J., Gieche, J., Widmer, R., Grune, T.: Ferritin levels in microglia depend upon
activation: modulation by reactive oxygen species. Biochim. Biophys. Acta – Mol Cell Res.
1763(8), 854–859 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.04.012.
84. Potter, K.A., Buck, A.C., Self, W.K., Callanan, M.E., Sunil, S., Capadona, J.: The effect
of resveratrol on neurodegeneration and blood brain barrier stability surrounding intra-
cortical microelectrodes. Biomaterials. 34(29), 7001–7015 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2013.05.035
85. Potter-Baker, K.A., Nguyen, J.K., Kovach, K.M., Gitomer, M.M., Srail, T.W., Stewart, W.G.,
Skousen, J.L., Capadona, J.: Development of superoxide dismutase mimetic surfaces to
reduce accumulation of reactive oxygen species for neural interfacing applications. J. Mater.
Chem. B Mater. Biol. Med. 2(16), 2248–2258 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TB00125G.
86. Patel, M., Day, B.J.: Metalloporphyrin class of therapeutic catalytic antioxidants. Trends
Pharmacol. Sci. 20(9), 359–364 (1999). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-6147(99)01336-X
87. Liddelow, S.A., Guttenplan, K.A., Clarke, L.E., Bennett, F.C., Bohlen, C.J., Schirmer, L.,
Bennett, M.L., Münch, A.E., Chung, W.-S., Peterson, T.C., Wilton, D.K., Frouin, A., Napier,
B.A., Panicker, N., Kumar, M., Buckwalter, M.S., Rowitch, D.H., Dawson, V.L., Dawson,
T.M., et al.: Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. Nature.
541(7638), 481–487 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21029.
88. Biran, R., Martin, D.C., Tresco, P.A.: Neuronal cell loss accompanies the brain tissue response
to chronically implanted silicon microelectrode arrays. Exp. Neurol. 195(1), 115–126 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2005.04.020
89. Gibbons, H.M., Dragunow, M.: Microglia induce neural cell death via a proximity-dependent
mechanism involving nitric oxide. Brain Res. 1084(1), 1–15 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.brainres.2006.02.032
90. Klaver, C.L., Caplan, M.R.: Bioactive surface for neural electrodes: decreasing astrocyte
proliferation via transforming growth factor-B1. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 81A(4),
1011–1016 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.31153
91. He, W., McConnell, G.C., Schneider, T.M., Bellamkonda, R.V.: A novel anti-inﬂammatory
surface for neural electrodes. Adv. Mater. 19(21), 3529–3533 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.200700943
92. Taub, A.H., Hogri, R., Magal, A., Mintz, M., Shacham-diamand, Y.: Bioactive anti-
inﬂammatory coating for chronic neural electrodes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 100 A(7),
1854–1858 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.34152

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
173
93. Grand, L., Wittner, L., Herwik, S., Göthelid, E., Ruther, P., Oscarsson, S., Neves, H.,
Dombovári, B., Csercsa, R., Karmos, G., Ulbert, I.: Short and long term biocompatibility of
NeuroProbes silicon probes. J. Neurosci. Methods. 189(2), 216–229 (2010). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.04.009.
94. Cherry, J.D., Olschowka, J.A., O’Banion, M.: Neuroinﬂammation and M2 microglia: the
good, the bad, and the inﬂamed. J. Neuroinﬂammation. 11(1), 98 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1186/1742-2094-11-98
95. Arend, W.P.: The balance between IL-1 and IL-1Ra in disease. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.
13(4–5), 323–340 (2002)
96. Rauch, U.: Extracellular matrix components associated with remodeling processes in brain.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 61(16), 2031–2045 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-004-4043-x.
97. Zimmermann, D.R., Dours-Zimmermann, M.T.: Extracellular matrix of the central nervous
system: from neglect to challenge. Histochem. Cell Biol. 130(4), 635–653 (2008). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00418-008-0485-9
98. Kim, D.-H., Martin, D.C.: Sustained release of dexamethasone from hydrophilic matrices
using PLGA nanoparticles for neural drug delivery. Biomaterials. 27(15), 3031–3037 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.12.021
99. Mercanzini, A., Reddy, S.T., Velluto, D., Colin, P., Maillard, A., Bensadoun, J.-C., Hubbell,
J.A., Renaud, P.: Controlled release nanoparticle-embedded coatings reduce the tissue
reaction to neuroprostheses. J. Control. Release. 145(3), 196–202 (2010). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.04.025.
100. Zhong, Y., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Controlled release of anti-inﬂammatory agent α-MSH
from neural implants. J. Control. Release. 106(3), 309–318 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2005.05.012.
101. Zhong, Y., McConnell, G.C., Ross, J.D., DeWeerth, S.P., Bellamkonda, R.V.A.: Novel
dexamethasone-releasing, anti-inﬂammatory coating for neural implants. In: Conference
Proceedings. 2nd International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering, 2005, vol.
2005, pp. 522–525. IEEE (2005). https://doi.org/10.1109/CNE.2005.1419674.
102. Zhong, Y., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Dexamethasone-coated neural probes elicit attenuated inﬂam-
matory response and neuronal loss compared to uncoated neural probes. Brain Res. 1148(1),
15–27 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2007.02.024.
103. Henze, D.A., Borhegyi, Z., Csicsvari, J., Mamiya, A., Harris, K.D., Buzsáki, G.: Intracellular
features predicted by extracellular recordings in the Hippocampus in vivo. J. Neurophysiol.
84(1), 390–400 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.84.1.390.
104. Hughes, C.S., Postovit, L.M., Lajoie, G.A.: Matrigel: a complex protein mixture required for
optimal growth of cell culture. Proteomics. 10(9), 1886–1890 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/
pmic.200900758
105. Lee, C., Yu, L., Kuo, J.T.W., Kim, B., Hoang, T., Meng, E.: Drug eluting coating for
3D Parylene sheath electrode. In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on
Neural Engineering (NER), pp. 839–842. IEEE (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/NER.2013.
6696065
106. Lee, C.D., Hara, S.a., Yu, L., Kuo, J.T.W., Kim, B.J., Hoang, T., Pikov, V., Meng, E.: Matrigel
coatings for Parylene sheath neural probes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B Appl. Biomater.
104(2), 357–368 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.b.33390.
107. Kim, B.J., Kuo, J.T.W., Hara, S.A., Lee, C.D., Yu, L., Gutierrez, C.A., Hoang, T.Q., Pikov,
V., Meng, E.: 3D Parylene sheath neural probe for chronic recordings. J. Neural Eng. 10(4)
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/10/4/045002.
108. Decher, G., Hong, J.D., Schmitt, J.: Buildup of ultrathin multilayer ﬁlms by a Self-assembly
process: III. Consecutively alternating adsorption of anionic and cationic polyelectrolytes on
charged surfaces. Thin Solid Films. 210–211, 831–835 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-
6090(92)90417-A
109. Decher, G., Eckle, M., Schmitt, J., Struth, B.: Layer-by-layer assembled multicomposite
ﬁlms. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 3(1), 32–39 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-
0294(98)80039-3

174
K.P Olczak et al.
110. Kraus, R.L., Pasieczny, R., Lariosa-Willingham, K., Turner, M.S., Jiang, A., Trauger, J.W.:
Antioxidant properties of minocycline: Neuroprotection in an oxidative stress assay and direct
radical-scavenging activity. J. Neurochem. 94(3), 819–827 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1471-4159.2005.03219.x
111. Rennaker, R.L., Miller, J., Tang, H., Wilson, D.A.: Minocycline increases quality and
longevity of chronic neural recordings. J. Neural Eng. 4(2), L1–L5 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/4/2/L01
112. Colovic, M., Caccia, S.: Liquid chromatographic determination of minocycline in brain-to-
plasma distribution studies in the rat. J. Chromatogr. A. 791(1–2), 337–343 (2003)
113. Zhang, Z., Nong, J., Zhong, Y.A.: Anti-inﬂammatory and neuroprotective layer-by-layer
coatings for neural implants. J. Neural Eng. 12(4), 046015 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1741-2560/12/4/046015.
114. Zhang, Z., Nix, C.A., Ercan, U.K., Gerstenhaber, J.A., Joshi, S.G., Zhong, Y.: Calcium
binding-mediated sustained release of minocycline from hydrophilic multilayer coatings
targeting infection and inﬂammation. PLoS One. 9(1), 1–8 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0084360.
115. McDermott, M.D., Olczak, K.P., Otto, K.J.: Electrical analysis of minocycline eluting
layer-by-layer thin-ﬁlms from functional micro-electrode arrays. In: 2017 8th International
IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), pp. 243–246. IEEE (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1109/NER.2017.8008336
116. Olczak, K.P., McDermott, M.D., Otto, K.J.: Electrochemical evaluation of layer-by-layer drug
delivery coating for neural interfaces. ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2(12), 5597–5607 (2019). https:/
/doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.9b00688
117. Wadhwa, R., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: Electrochemically controlled release of dexametha-
sone from conducting polymer polypyrrole coated electrode. J. Control. Release. 110(3),
531–541 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.10.027.
118. Leprince, L., Dogimont, A., Magnin, D., Demoustier-Champagne, S.: Dexamethasone elec-
trically controlled release from Polypyrrole-coated nanostructured electrodes. J. Mater. Sci.
Mater. Med. 21(3), 925–930 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10856-010-4008-6
119. Luo, X., Cui, X.T.: Sponge-like nanostructured conducting polymers for electrically con-
trolled drug release. Electrochem. Commun. 11(10), 1–8 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.elecom.2009.08.027.Sponge-like.
120. Thompson, B.C., Moulton, S.E., Richardson, R.T., Wallace, G.G.: Effect of the dopant anion
in Polypyrrole on nerve growth and release of a Neurotrophic protein. Biomaterials. 32(15),
3822–3831 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.053
121. Abidian, M.R., Kim, D.-H., Martin, D.C.: Conducting-polymer nanotubes for controlled drug
release. Adv. Mater. 18(4), 405–409 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200501726
122. Kleber, C., Lienkamp, K., Rühe, J., Asplund, M.: Electrochemically controlled drug release
from a conducting polymer hydrogel (PDMAAp/PEDOT) for local therapy and bioelectron-
ics. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 1801488, 1801488 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201801488
123. Boehler, C., Kleber, C., Martini, N., Xie, Y., Dryg, I., Stieglitz, T., Hofmann, U.G.,
Asplund, M.: Actively controlled release of dexamethasone from neural microelectrodes
in a chronic in vivo study. Biomaterials. 129, 176–187 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2017.03.019
124. Rosenberg, G.A.: Matrix metalloproteinases in neuroinﬂammation. Glia. 39(3), 279–291
(2002). https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.10108
125. Tian, W., Kyriakides, T.R.: Matrix metalloproteinase-9 deﬁciency leads to prolonged
foreign body response in the brain associated with increased IL-1β levels and leakage
of the blood-brain barrier. Matrix Biol. 28(3), 148–159 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.matbio.2009.02.002.
126. Saxena, T., Karumbaiah, L., Gaupp, E.A., Patkar, R., Patil, K., Betancur, M., Stanley,
G.B., Bellamkonda, R.V.: The impact of chronic blood-brain barrier breach on intracor-
tical electrode function. Biomaterials. 34(20), 4703–4713 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2013.03.007

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
175
127. Webb, K., Budko, E., Neuberger, T.J., Chen, S., Schachner, M., Tresco, P.A.: Substrate-
bound human recombinant L1 selectively promotes neuronal attachment and outgrowth in
the presence of astrocytes and ﬁbroblasts. Biomaterials. 22(10), 1017–1028 (2001). https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0142-9612(00)00353-7.
128. He, W., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Nanoscale neuro-integrative coatings for neural implants.
Biomaterials. 26(16), 2983–2990 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2004.08.021
129. He, W., McConnell, G.C., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Nanoscale laminin coating modulates cortical
scarring response around implanted silicon microelectrode arrays. J. Neural Eng. 3(4), 316–
326 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/3/4/009
130. Rodríguez Hernández, J.C., Sánchez, M.S., Soria, J.M., Gómez Ribelles, J.L., Pradas,
M.M.: Substrate chemistry-dependent conformations of single laminin molecules on polymer
surfaces are revealed by the phase signal of atomic force microscopy. Biophys. J. 93(1), 202–
207 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.106.102491.
131. Massia, S.P., Holecko, M.M., Ehteshami, G.R.: In vitro assessment of bioactive coatings for
neural implant applications. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 68(1), 177–186 (2004). https://
doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.20009
132. Cui, X.T., Lee, V.A., Raphael, Y., Wiler, J.A., Hetke, J.F., Anderson, D.J., Martin, D.C.:
Surface modiﬁcation of neural recording electrodes with conducting polymer/biomolecule
blends. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 56(2), 261–272 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-
4636(200108)56:2<261::AID-JBM1094>3.0.CO;2-I
133. Stauffer, W.R., Cui, X.T.: Polypyrrole doped with 2 peptide sequences from Laminin.
Biomaterials. 27(11), 2405–2413 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.10.024
134. Greve, F., Frerker, S., Bittermann, A.G., Burkhardt, C., Hierlemann, A., Hall, H.: Molecular
design and characterization of the neuron-microelectrode Array Interface. Biomaterials.
28(35), 5246–5258 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.08.010
135. Cherry, J.F., Carlson, A.L., Benarba, F.L., Sommerfeld, S.D., Verma, D., Loers, G., Kohn, J.,
Schachner, M., Moghe, P.V.O.: Multimeric biointerfaces of the L1 cell adhesion molecule:
an approach to enhance neuronal and neural stem cell functions on 2-D and 3-D polymer
substrates. Biointerphases. 7(1–4), 1–16 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13758-012-0022-1.
136. Azemi, E., Stauffer, W.R., Gostock, M.S., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: Surface immobilization
of neural adhesion molecule L1 for improving the biocompatibility of chronic neural probes:
in vitro characterization. Acta Biomater. 4(5), 1208–1217 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2008.02.028
137. Lemmon, V., Burden, S.M., Payne, R.H., Elmslie, G.J., Hlavin, M.L.: Neurite growth on
different substrates: permissive versus instructive inﬂuences and the role of adhesive strength.
J. Neurosci. 12(3), 818–826 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-13-97.
138. Wiertz, R.W.F., Marani, E., Rutten, W.L.C.: Neural cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion
through N-cadherin, N-CAM and L1. J. Neural Eng. 8(4) (2011). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1741-2560/8/4/046004.
139. Azemi, E., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: The surface immobilization of the neural adhe-
sion molecule L1 on neural probes and its effect on neuronal density and gliosis at
the probe/tissue Interface. Biomaterials. 32(3), 681–692 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2010.09.033
140. Eles, J.R., Vazquez, A.L., Snyder, N.R., Lagenaur, C., Murphy, M.C., Kozai, T.D.Y., Cui,
X.T.: Neuroadhesive L1 coating attenuates acute microglial attachment to neural electrodes as
revealed by live two-photon microscopy. Biomaterials. 113, 279–292 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.054
141. Sorribas, H., Braun, D., Leder, L., Sonderegger, P., Tiefenauer, L.: Adhesion proteins for a
tight neuron–electrode contact. J. Neurosci. Methods. 104(2), 133–141 (2001). https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0165-0270(00)00333-2.
142. Collazos-Castro, J.E., Hernández-Labrado, G.R., Polo, J.L., García-Rama, C.: N-cadherin-
and L1-functionalised conducting polymers for synergistic stimulation and guidance
of neural cell growth. Biomaterials. 34(14), 3603–3617 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2013.01.097

176
K.P Olczak et al.
143. Maness, P.F., Schachner, M.: Neural recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin superfam-
ily: signaling Transducers of axon guidance and neuronal migration. Nat. Neurosci. 10(1),
19–26 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1827
144. Widge, A.S., Jeffries-El, M., Cui, X.T., Lagenaur, C.F., Matsuoka, Y.: Self-assembled
monolayers of polythiophene conductive polymers improve biocompatibility and electrical
impedance of neural electrodes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 22(8), 1723–1732 (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2006.08.011
145. Sridar, S., Churchward, M.A., Mushahwar, V.K., Todd, K.G., Elias, A.L.: Peptide mod-
iﬁcation of polyimide-insulated microwires: towards improved biocompatibility through
reduced glial scarring. Acta Biomater. 60, 154–166 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2017.07.026
146. Massia, S.P., Rao, S.S., Hubbell, J.A.: Covalently immobilized laminin peptide Tyr-Ile-Gly-
Ser-Arg (YIGSR) supports cell spreading and co-localization of the 67-Kilodalton laminin
receptor with??-Actinin and Vinculin. J. Biol. Chem. 268(11), 8053–8059 (1993)
147. Huang, E.J., Reichardt, L.F.: Neurotrophins: roles in neuronal development and function.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 677–736 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.677
148. Lu, B., Pang, P.T., Woo, N.H.: The yin and yang of neurotrophin action. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
6(8), 603–614 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1726
149. Kishino, A., Katayama, N., Ishige, Y., Yamamoto, Y., Ogo, H., Tatsuno, T., Mine, T., Noguchi,
H., Nakayama, C.: Analysis of effects and pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously admin-
istered BDNF. Neuroreport. 12(5), 1067–1072 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-
200104170-00040
150. Philip, R.: Kennedy. The cone electrode: a long-term electrode that records from Neurites
grown onto its recording surface. J. Neurosci. Methods. 29, 181–193 (1989)
151. Jun, S.B., Hynd, M.R., Dowell-Mesﬁn, N.M., Al-Kofahi, Y., Roysam, B., Shain, W., Kim,
S.J.: Modulation of cultured neural networks using neurotrophin release from hydrogel-coated
microelectrode arrays. J. Neural Eng. 5(2), 203–213 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-
2560/5/2/011
152. Evans, A.J., Thompson, B.C., Wallace, G.G., Millard, R., O’Leary, S.J., Clark, G.M.,
Shepherd, R.K., Richardson, R.T.: Promoting neurite outgrowth from spiral ganglion neuron
explants using polypyrrole/BDNF-coated electrodes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 91(1),
241–250 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.32228
153. Thompson, B.C., Richardson, R.T., Moulton, S.E., Evans, A.J., O’Leary, S., Clark, G.M.,
Wallace, G.G.C.P.: Dual neurotrophins and pulsed electrical stimulation – dramatic effects
on Neurite outgrowth. J. Control. Release. 141(2), 161–167 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2009.09.016.
154. Achyuta, A.K.H., Cieri, R., Unger, K., Murthy, S.K.: Synergistic effect of immobilized
laminin and nerve growth factor on PC12 neurite outgrowth. Biotechnol. Prog. 25(1), 227–
234 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1002/btpr.58
155. Han, N., Rao, S.S., Johnson, J., Parikh, K.S., Bradley, P.A., Lannutti, J.J., Winter, J.O.:
Hydrogel–electrospun ﬁber mat composite coatings for neural prostheses. Front. Neuroeng.
4(March), 1–8 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2011.00002
156. Kim, D.-H., Richardson-Burns, S.M., Hendricks, J.L., Sequera, C., Martin, D.C.: Effect of
immobilized nerve growth factor on conductive polymers: electrical properties and cellular
response. Adv. Funct. Mater. 17(1), 79–86 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200500594
157. George, P.M., Lavan, D.A., Burdick, J.A., Chen, C.Y., Liang, E., Langer, R.: Electrically
controlled drug delivery from biotin-doped conductive polypyrrole. Adv. Mater. 18(5), 577–
581 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200501242
158. Kelamangalath, L., Smith, G.M.: Neurotrophin treatment to promote regeneration after
traumatic CNS injury. Front. Biol. (Beijing). 8(5), 486–495 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11515-013-1269-8
159. Thompson, B.C., Moulton, S.E., Ding, J., Richardson, R., Cameron, A., O’Leary, S., Wallace,
G.G., Clark, G.M.: Optimising the incorporation and release of a neurotrophic factor using
conducting polypyrrole. J. Control. Release. 116(3), 285–294 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2006.09.004.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Biological and Mechanical Considerations
177
160. Richardson, R.T., Thompson, B., Moulton, S., Newbold, C., Lum, M.G., Cameron, A.,
Wallace, G.G., Kapsa, R., Clark, G., O’Leary, S.: The effect of polypyrrole with incorporated
neurotrophin-3 on the promotion of neurite outgrowth from auditory neurons. Biomaterials.
28(3), 513–523 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.09.008
161. Karumbaiah, L., Norman, S.E., Rajan, N.B., Anand, S., Saxena, T., Betancur, M., Patkar,
R., Bellamkonda, R.V.: The upregulation of speciﬁc interleukin (IL) receptor antago-
nists and paradoxical enhancement of neuronal apoptosis due to electrode induced strain
and brain micromotion. Biomaterials. 33(26), 5983–5996 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2012.05.021
162. Harris, J.P., Capadona, J., Miller, R.H., Healy, B.C., Shanmuganathan, K., Rowan, S.J.,
Weder, C., Tyler, D.J.: Mechanically adaptive intracortical implants improve the proximity
of neuronal cell bodies. J. Neural Eng. 8(6), 066011 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-
2560/8/6/066011.
163. Subbaroyan, J., Martin, D.C., Kipke, D.R.: A ﬁnite-element model of the mechanical effects
of implantable microelectrodes in the cerebral cortex. J. Neural Eng. 2(4), 103 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/2/4/006
164. Lee, H., Bellamkonda, R.V., Sun, W., Levenston, M.E.: Biomechanical analysis of silicon
microelectrode-induced strain in the brain. J. Neural Eng. 2(4), 81–89 (2005). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/2/4/003.
165. Luan, L., Wei, X., Zhao, Z., Siegel, J.J., Potnis, O., Tuppen, C.A., Lin, S., Kazmi, S., Fowler,
R.A., Holloway, S., Dunn, A.K., Chitwood, R.A., Xie, C.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes
form reliable, glial scar–free neural integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601966
166. Rousche, P.J., Pellinen, D.S., Pivin, D.P., Williams, J.C., Vetter, R.J., Kipke, D.R.: Flexible
polyimide-based intracortical electrode arrays with bioactive capability. I.E.E.E. Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 48(3), 361–370 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1109/10.914800
167. Wester, B.A., Lee, R.H., LaPlaca, M.C.: Development and characterization of in vivo ﬂexible
electrodes compatible with large tissue displacements. J. Neural Eng. 6(2), 024002 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/6/2/024002.
168. Jorﬁ, M., Roberts, M.N., Foster, E.J., Weder, C.: Physiologically responsive, mechanically
adaptive bio-nanocomposites for biomedical applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 5(4),
1517–1526 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1021/am303160j
169. Lee, H.C., Ejserholm, F., Gaire, J., Currlin, S.W., Schouenborg, J., Wallman, L., Bengtsson,
M., Park, K., Otto, K.J.: Histological evaluation of ﬂexible neural implants; ﬂexibility limit for
reducing the tissue response? J. Neural Eng. 14(3), 036026 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1741-2552/aa68f0.
170. Spencer, K.C., Sy, J.C., Ramadi, K.B., Graybiel, A.M., Langer, R., Cima, M.J.: Characteri-
zation of mechanically matched hydrogel coatings to improve the biocompatibility of neural
implants. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 1952 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-02107-2
171. Köhler, P., Wolff, A., Ejserholm, F., Wallman, L., Schouenborg, J., Linsmeier, C.E.: Inﬂuence
of probe ﬂexibility and gelatin embedding on neuronal density and glial responses to
brain implants. PLoS One. 10(3), e0119340 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0119340
172. Bentil, S.A., Dupaix, R.B.: Simulations of hydrogel-coated neural microelectrodes to assess
biocompatibility improvement using strain as a metric for micromotion. Biomed. Phys. Eng.
Express. 4(3) (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/2057-1976/aab990.
173. Gilletti, A., Muthuswamy, J.: Brain micromotion around implants in the rodent somatosensory
cortex. J. Neural Eng. 3(3), 189–195 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/3/3/001
174. Nguyen, J.K., Park, D.J., Skousen, J.L., Hess-Dunning, A.E., Tyler, D.J., Rowan, S.J., Weder,
C., Capadona, J.: Mechanically-compliant intracortical implants reduce the neuroinﬂamma-
tory response. J. Neural Eng. 11(5), 056014 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/11/5/
056014.
175. Sridharan, A., Nguyen, J.K., Capadona, J., Muthuswamy, J.: Compliant intracortical implants
reduce strains and strain rates in brain tissue in vivo. J. Neural Eng. 12(3), 36002 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/12/3/036002.

178
K.P Olczak et al.
176. Dhote, V., Skaalure, S., Akalp, U., Roberts, J., Bryant, S.J., Vernerey, F.J.: On the role
of hydrogel structure and degradation in controlling the transport of cell-secreted matrix
molecules for engineered cartilage. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 19, 61–74 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2012.10.016
177. Lin-Gibson, S., Bencherif, S., Cooper, J.A., Wetzel, S.J., Antonucci, J.M., Vogel, B.M.,
Horkay, F., Washburn, N.R.: Synthesis and characterization of PEG dimethacrylates and their
hydrogels. Biomacromolecules. 5(4), 1280–1287 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1021/bm0498777
178. Moon, T., Ghovanloo, M., Kipke, D.R.: Buckling strength of coated and uncoated silicon
microelectrodes. In: Proc. 25th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (IEEE Cat.
No.03CH37439), pp. 1944–1947 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1109/iembs.2003.1279821
179. Goldstein, S.R., Salcman, M.: Mechanical factors in the design of chronic recording
intracortical microelectrodes. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. BME-20(4), 260–269 (1973)
https://doi.org/260-9
180. Singh, A., Zhu, H., He, J.: Improving mechanical stiffness of coated Benzocyclobutene (BCB)
based neural implant. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 4, 4298–4301 (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1080/09583157.2016.1182619.
181. Kil, D., Bovet Carmona, M., Ceyssens, F., Deprez, M., Brancato, L., Nuttin, B., Balschun, D.,
Puers, R.: Dextran as a resorbable coating material for ﬂexible neural probes. Micromachines.
10(1), 61 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/mi10010061
182. Lo, M., Wang, S., Singh, S., Damodaran, V.B., Ahmed, I., Coffey, K., Barker, D., Saste,
K., Kals, K., Kaplan, H.M., Kohn, J., Shreiber, D.I., Zahn, J.D.: Evaluating the in vivo glial
response to miniaturized parylene cortical probes coated with an ultra-fast degrading polymer
to aid insertion. J. Neural Eng. 15(3), 036002 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/
aa9fad.
183. Lewitus, D., Smith, K.L., Shain, W., Kohn, J.: Ultrafast resorbing polymers for use as carriers
for cortical neural probes. Acta Biomater. 7(6), 2483–2491 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2011.02.027
184. Khilwani, R., Gilgunn, P.J., Kozai, T.D.Y., Ong, X.C., Korkmaz, E., Gunalan, P.K., Cui,
X.T., Fedder, G.K., Ozdoganlar, O.B.: Ultra-miniature ultra-compliant neural probes with
dissolvable delivery needles: design, fabrication and characterization. Biomed. Microdevices.
18(6), 97 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10544-016-0125-4.
185. Suderman, N., Isa, M.I.N., Sarbon, N.M.: The effect of plasticizers on the functional
properties of biodegradable gelatin-based ﬁlm: a review. Food Biosci. 24(July), 111–119
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2018.06.006.
186. Agorelius, J., Tsanakalis, F., Friberg, A., Thorbergsson, P.T., Pettersson, L.M.E., Schouen-
borg, J.: An array of highly ﬂexible electrodes with a tailored conﬁguration locked by gelatin
during implantation – initial evaluation in cortex cerebri of awake rats. Front. Neurosci.
9(September), 1–12 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00331.
187. Suzuki, T., Mabuchi, K., Takeuchi, S.: A 3D ﬂexible parylene probe Array for multichannel
neural recording. In: First International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering,
2003. Conference Proceedings, vol. 2003-Janua, pp. 154–156. IEEE (2003). https://doi.org/
10.1109/CNE.2003.1196780
188. Wu, F., Im, M., Yoon, E.: A ﬂexible ﬁsh-bone-shaped neural probe strengthened by
biodegradable silk coating for enhanced biocompatibility. In: 2011 16th International Solid-
State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Conference, pp. 966–969. IEEE (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1109/TRANSDUCERS.2011.5969356
189. Tien, L.W., Wu, F., Tang-Schomer, M.D., Yoon, E., Omenetto, F.G., Kaplan, D.L.:
Silk as a multifunctional biomaterial substrate for reduced glial scarring around brain-
penetrating electrodes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 23(25), 3185–3193 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201203716
190. Wu, F., Tien, L.W., Chen, F., Berke, J.D., Kaplan, D.L., Yoon, E.: Silk-backed structural
optimization of high-density ﬂexible intracortical neural probes. J. Microelectromech. Syst.
24(1), 62–69 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2014.2375326

