510
Quantization (Systematic)
of the formalism of second quantization into the language of conventional quantum
mechanics, which helped making the method more acceptable.
Primary Literature
1. P. A. M. Dirac: The Quantum Theory of the Emission and Absorption of Radiation. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London A 114, 243–265 (1927)
2. P. Jordan: ¨Uber eine neue Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 44, 1–25
(1927)
3. V. Fock: Konﬁgurationsraum und zweite Quantelung. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 75, 622–647 (1932)
Secondary Literature
4. O. Darrigol: The origin of quantized matter waves. Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences
16, 197–253 (1986)
5. H. D. Zeh: There Is no “ﬁrst” quantization. Physics Letters A 309, 329–334 (2003)
Quantization (Systematic)
N.P. Landsman
The term quantization (in the sense described here) refers to attempts to con-
struct a mathematical description of a quantum system from its formulation as a
classical system (which is supposed to be known). Such attempts go back to the
pioneers of the old quantum theory (Planck, Einstein, Bohr, Sommerfeld); see [16]
and  Quantization: (First, Second). (The opposite procedure is the subject of the
 quasi-classical limit.)
The modern era of quantization theory started with Heisenberg’s famous paper
[5] from 1925, in which he proposed the idea of a ‘quantum-theoretical reinterpre-
tation (Umdeutung) of classical observables.’ All later work on quantization may be
said to consist of various different implementations of this idea.
The ﬁrst successful such implementation consisted of the position and momen-
tum  operators introduced by Schr¨odinger [9], i.e. ˆqj = xj and ˆpj = −iℏ∂/∂xj,
seen (in modern parlance) as unbounded operators on the  Hilbert space L2(R3).
Substituting these expressions into the classical Hamiltonian yields the left-hand
side of the  Schr¨odinger equation. These operators satisfy the so-called canonical
commutation relations
[ ˆpj, ˆqk] = −iℏδk
j,
(1)
along with [ ˆpj, ˆpk] = 0 and [ˆqj, ˆqk] = 0. This fact formed the basis of the various
equivalence proofs of  matrix mechanics and  wave mechanics that were given

Quantization (Systematic)
511
Q
at the time by Schr¨odinger, Dirac, and Pauli; the ﬁrst genuine mathematical proof
of this equivalence is due to von Neumann [8].
Approaches to quantization that are based on the canonical commutation rela-
tions are usually called canonical quantization. Dirac [3, 4] made the important
observation that the canonical commutation relations resemble the Poisson brackets
in classical mechanics. He suggested that a quantization map f →Q(f ) (in which
a function f on phase space, seen as a classical observable, is replaced by some
operator on a Hilbert space interpreted as the corresponding quantum observable)
should satisfy the condition
i
ℏ[Q(f ), Q(g)] = Q({f, g}).
(2)
This is indeed the case for f (p, q) = pj or qk and g(p, q) likewise, provided we
follow Schr¨odinger in putting Q(pj) = ˆpj and Q(qj) = ˆqj. For more complicated
observables, however, Dirac’s condition turns out to hold only asymptotically as
ℏ→0. For example, in the ﬁrst systematic account of the quantization of a particle
moving in ﬂat space, Weyl [11] proposed that a function f on classical phase space
R2n corresponds to the operator
Q(f )(x) =

R2n
dnpdnq
(2πℏ)n eip(x−q)/ℏf

p, 1
2(x + q)

(q).
(3)
on L2(Rn). This reproduces Schr¨odinger’s position and momentum operators, but
satisﬁes (2) only if f and g are at most quadratic in p and q (and according to the
so-called Groenewold–van Hove theorem prescriptions different from Weyl’s will
not fare better). This violation of Dirac’s condition is well understood now, since is
has been recognized that the essence of the process of quantization is that it yields
a deformation of the classical algebra of  observables [1, 2]. The idea of deforma-
tion quantization is particularly relevant to physics in the framework of  algebraic
quantum theory [14, 17] (see also [13] for other aspects of Weyl quantization).
The quantization problem on phase spaces other than R2n (or, more generally,
cotangent bundles of Riemannian manifolds, to which Weyl’s quantization method
is easily generalized [14]) has to be treated by different means. In fact, even on ﬂat
space one can sympathize with Mackey’s lamentation that ‘Simple and elegant as
this model [i.e. canonical quantization] is, it appears at ﬁrst sight to be quite arbitrary
and ad hoc. It is difﬁcult to understand how anyone could have guessed it and by
no means obvious how to modify it to ﬁt a model for space different from Rn.’
([15], p. 283). Mackey himself explained and generalized canonical quantization on
the basis of symmetry arguments that apply whenever a symmetry group G acts on
conﬁguration space Q (with associated phase space T ∗Q); for ﬂat space Q = R3
ones takes G = E(3) = SO(3) ⋉R3, the Euclidean symmetry group of rigid
translations and rotations. Mackey’s generalization of the canonical commutation
relations (1) consists of his notion of a system of imprimitivity. Given an action of
a group G on a space Q, such a system consists of a Hilbert space H, a unitary

512
Quantization (Systematic)
representation U of G on H, and a projection-valued measure E →P(E) on Q
with values in H, such that
U(x)P(E)U(x)−1 = P(xE),
(4)
for all x ∈G and all (Borel) sets E ⊂Q. One notices that position and momentum
are assigned a quite different role in this procedure: the former are replaced by
the projection-valued measure E →P(E), whereas the latter are treated as the
(inﬁnitesimal) generators of symmetries. Each irreducible system of imprimitivity
provides a valid quantization of a particle moving on Q. Mackey’s imprimitivity
theorem classiﬁes all possibilities; for example, for Q = R3and G = E(3) one ﬁnds
that each irreducible representation of SO(3) yields a possible quantization. This is
Mackey’s explanation of  spin. More generally, if Q = G/K is a homogeneous
G-space with stability group K, then each irreducible representation of K induces
a system of imprimitivity and hence a quantization of the system (and vice versa).
Let us note that the modern way of understanding this method involves groupoids
and their C∗-algebras, which not only lead to a vast generalization of Mackey’s
approach but in addition put it under the umbrella of deformation quantization [14].
Geometric quantization is a method that starts from the symplectic (or, in
old-fashioned language, ‘canonical’) structure of phase space. This method was in-
dependently introduced by Kostant [6] and Souriau [10] and is still being developed;
cf. [12, 18]. Although its formalism is quite general, geometric quantization is most
effective in the presence of a Lie group acting canonically and transitively on phase
space. If successful, the method then yields a representation of the Lie algebra of
this group, whose elements play the role of quantum observables.
The procedure starts with a phase space M (i.e. a symplectic manifold), and as
a ﬁrst step towards a quantum theory one constructs a map f →Qpre(f ) from
functions on M to operators on the Hilbert space L2(M). This map turns out to
satisfy Dirac’s condition (2) exactly. In the special case M = R2n, it is given by
Qpre(f ) = −iℏ{f, } +
⎛
⎝f −

j
pj
∂f
∂pj
⎞
⎠,
(5)
where {f, } is the Poisson bracket (which makes sense if  ∈L2(R2n) is as-
sumed differentiable). Unfortunately, the Hilbert space is wrong and the ensuing
representation of the canonical commutation relations Qpre(qk) = qk + iℏ∂/∂pk
and Qpre(pj) = −iℏ∂/∂qj is highly reducible: it contains an inﬁnite number of
copies of the Schr¨odinger representation on L2(Rn). The second step of the method
therefore involves a procedure to cut down the size of the Hilbert space L2(M) by
a certain geometric technique, but through this step only some of the operators (5)
remain well deﬁned. Those that are still satisfy (2), however, which fact lies at the
basis of the construction of Lie algebra representations from geometric quantization.
Despite some successes in that direction, with considerable impact on mathematics,

Quantization (Systematic)
513
Q
the method of geometric quantization remains unﬁnished and somewhat unsatisfac-
tory for physics.
Like geometric quantization, phase space quantization starts with the Hilbert
space L2(M), but instead of (5) one constructs a quantization map f →Qp(f ) by
Qp(f ) = pfp,
(6)
where p is a suitable projection operator on L2(M) (so that the operator Qp(f )
effectively acts on pL2(M)). This projection is constructed from a so-called re-
producing kernel K on L2(M), and has the form p(z) = 
M dw K(z, w)(w).
This kernel, in turn, comes from a family of  coherent states - here construed
as maps z →z from M to the set of unit vectors in an auxiliary Hilbert
space H - by means of K(z, w) = (z, w) (the inner product in H). See [12,
14]. The best-known example is M = R2n with coherent states ℏ
(p,q)(x) =
(πℏ)−n/4 exp((−(x −q)2 +ip(2x −q))/2ℏ) in H = L2(Rn), yielding what is often
called Berezin quantization QB on R2n. It has the advantage over Weyl quantization
and geometric quantization of being positive (in the sense that (, QB(f )) ⩾0
for all  whenever f ⩾0) and bounded (i.e. QB(f ) is a bounded operator if f is a
bounded function on M).
Quantization theory remains a very active area of research in physics and math-
ematics [12]. See also  Functional integration; path integrals.
Primary Literature
1. F. Bayen, M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, A. Lichnerowicz & D. Sternheimer: Deformation theory and
quantization I, II. Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 110, 61–110, 111–151 (1978).
2. F.A. Berezin: General concept of quantization. Commun. Math. Phys. 40, 153–174 (1975).
3. P.A.M.Dirac: The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A109,
642–653 (1926).
4. P.A.M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (The Clarendon Press, Oxford 1930).
5. W. Heisenberg: ¨Uber die quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen. Z. Phys. 33, 879–893 (1925).
6. B. Kostant: Quantization and unitary representations. Lect. Notes Math. 170, 87–208 (1970).
7. G.W. Mackey: Induced Representations of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (W. A. Benjamin,
New York 1968).
8. J. von Neumann: Die Eindeutigkeit der Schr¨odingerschen Operatoren. Math. Ann. 104,
570–578 (1931).
9. E. Schr¨odinger: ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis der Heisenberg-Born-Jordanschen Quantenmechanik zu
der meinen. Ann. Phys. 79, 734–756 (1926).
10. J.-M. Souriau: Structure des syst`emes dynamiques (Dunod, Paris (1969). Translated as: Struc-
ture of Dynamical Systems: A Symplectic View of Physics (Birkh¨auser, Boston 1997).
11. H. Weyl: Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (S. Hirzel, Leipzig 1928). Translated as: The
Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (Dover, New York 1931).

514
Quantum Chaos
Secondary Literature
12. S.T. Ali & M. Englis: Quantization methods: a guide for physicists and analysts. Rev. Math.
Phys. 17, 391–490 (2005).
13. D.A. Dubin, M.A. Hennings & T.B. Smith: Mathematical Aspects of Weyl Quantization and
Phase (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2000).
14. N.P. Landsman: Mathematical Topics Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer,
New York 1998).
15. G.W. Mackey: The Scope and History of Commutative and Noncommutative Harmonic Anal-
ysis (American Mathematical Society, Providence 1992).
16. J. Mehra & H. Rechenberg: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory. Vol. 1: The Quan-
tum Theory of Planck, Einstein, Bohr, and Sommerfeld: Its Foundation and the Rise of Its
Difﬁculties (Springer, New York 1982).
17. M.A. Rieffel: Quantization and C∗-algebras. Contemp. Math. 167, 66–97 (1994).
18. J. ´Sniatycki: Geometric Quantization and Quantum Mechanics (Springer, Berlin 1980).
Quantum Chaos
Stefan Weigert
The term Quantum Chaos designates a body of knowledge which has been estab-
lished in an attempt to understand the implications of Classical Chaos for quantum
systems. Classical Mechanics successfully describes many aspects of the macro-
scopic world in a phenomenological way. Chaotic behaviour being ubiquitous, its
presence begs for an explanation in terms of (non-relativistic) quantum mechanics,
the fundamental theory to describe matter. Only the deterministic part of the quan-
tum time evolution generated by  Schr¨odinger’s equation is of interest here while
the probabilistic element introduced by quantum  measurements is ignored.
An autonomous classical Hamiltonian system with N ⩾2 degrees of freedom
is either integrable or non-integrable. The time evolution of integrable systems is
quasi-periodic, hence simple: N global constants of motion exist which force tra-
jectories in phase space to evolve on tori of dimension N. The distance between
initially close trajectories increases at most linearly with time; the Lyapunov expo-
nent, a measure for the rate of divergence of nearby trajectories, is equal to zero.
In the vast majority of cases, however, fewer than N constants of motion exist and
the system is non-integrable. A typical trajectory now may explore a larger part of
phase space while still evolving deterministically. Due to their highly complicated –
apparently chaotic – time evolutions, trajectories with similar initial conditions tend
to diverge at an exponential rate. This property makes long-term predictions of the
system’s dynamics unreliable if not effectively impossible.
A considerable amount of studies relevant to Quantum Chaos revolve around
three questions: (1) Is it possible to (approximately) quantize classically chaotic

