766
Superluminal Communication in Quantum Mechanics
29. W. Keesom, M. Wolfke: Two different liquid states of helium. CPL 190b, 17–22 (1927)
30. A. Kozhevnikov: Piotr Kapitza and Stalin’s government: a study in moral choice. Historical
Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 22, 131–163 (1992)
31. L. D. Landau: The theory of superﬂuidity of helium II. Journal of Physics (USSR), 5, 71–90
(1941); On the hydrodynamics of helium II, Ibid. 8, 1–3 (1944)
32. L. D. Landau: On the theory of superﬂuidity of Helium II. Journal of Physics (USSR), 11, 9–92
(1947)
33. L. D. Landau: On the theory of superﬂuidity. Physical Review 75, 884–885 (1949)
34. E. M. Lifshitz: Radiation of sound in helium II. Journal of Physics 8, 110–114 (1944)
35. E. Maxwell: Isotope effect in the superconductivity of mercury. Physical Review 78, 477
(1950)
36. L. Tisza: The theory of liquid helium. Physical Review 72, 838–854 (1947)
Superluminal Communication in Quantum
Mechanics
Daniel J. Gauthier
One consequence of the special theory of relativity is that no information can be
transmitted between two parties in a time shorter than it would take light, propagat-
ing through vacuum, to travel between the parties. That is, the speed of information
transfer is less than or equal to the speed of light in vacuum c. Hypothetical faster-
than-light (superluminal) communication is very intriguing because causality would
be violated [8]. Causality is a principle where an event is linked to a previous cause;
superluminal communication would allow us to change the outcome of an event af-
ter it has happened. I’m sure all of us at one point in our lives would like a cell-phone
with superluminal capabilities!
Soon after Einstein published the theory of relativity, scientists began the search
for examples where objects or entities travel faster than c. There are many known
examples of superluminal motion [8], yet explaining, in simple terms, why such mo-
tions do not violate the special theory or allow for superluminal communication can
be exceedingly difﬁcult. Also, approximations used to solve models of the physical
world can lead to subtle errors, sometimes resulting in predictions of superluminal
signaling. For these reasons, studying superluminal signaling can be an interesting
exercise because it often reveals unexpected aspects of our universe or the theories
we use to describe its behavior.
The possibility of superluminal motions in classical physics have been known
for over a century. For example, the group velocity of a pulse of light propagat-
ing through a dispersive dielectric can exceed c, where the group velocity gives
(approximately) the speed of the peak of the pulse [10]. There exists a simple math-
ematical proof demonstrating that such behavior cannot be used for superluminal

Superluminal Communication in Quantum Mechanics
767
S
communication, but this proof sheds little insight on recent experiments that re-
port clear evidence fast group velocities. One current explanation is that points of
non-analyticity are created on the optical waveform at each moment when new in-
formation is encoded on the optical carrier, and that these points travel precisely at
c [6]. Other points on the waveform (such as the pulse peak) convey no new infor-
mation that cannot already be determined from the non-analyticity point and hence
fast motion of the waveform in between points of non-analyticity do not violate the
special theory. Another example of apparent superluminal motion occurs in certain
expanding galaxies, known as superluminal stellar objects [12]. This motion can
be explained by considering motions of particles whose speed is just below c (i.e.,
highly relativistic) and moving nearly along the axis connecting the object and the
observer. Hence, these are not superluminal motions after all.
Quantum mechanics also appears to provide a mechanism for superluminal com-
munication because of its nonlocal characteristic. A measurement performed on a
system  wave function collapse at all locations simultaneously [11], an effect that
does not occur in classical physics and hence deserves further consideration with
regards to superluminal communication.
One gedanken experiment that has received recent attention involves correlated
particles generated by an Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen ( EPR problem) source. For
concreteness, let’s consider a system that generates two correlated photons ( light
quantum) that travel in opposite directions and have zero total angular momentum.
Furthermore, two observers, Alice and Bob, are located on opposite sides and at
large distances from the source. They are equipped with optical components that
can analyze the state of polarization of the arriving photons. Bob is slightly further
away from the source than Alice, and we want to establish a one-way superluminal
communication link from Alice to Bob.
In one scenario, Alice places a special type of polarizing beam splitter that spa-
tially separates one state of linear polarization (say vertical, V) from the other state
of polarization (horizontal, H). The output ports of the polarizing beam splitter
are directed to single-photon detectors. Bob has an identical apparatus, which is
at a great distance from Alice, and he aligns the axis of his polarizing beam split-
ter the same as Alice’s. Because of the fact that their total angular momentum of
the photons is zero, whenever Alice measures V, the wavefunction collapses and
Bob is assured of measuring H essentially instantaneously after Alice performs her
measurement. Similarly, Bob will measure V whenever Alice measures H. In this
conﬁguration, the polarization beam splitters and single-photon detectors perform
measurements in the “linear” basis.
Alice and Bob can also perform measurements in the “circular” basis, where the
analysis apparatus will determine whether the photons are left circular (LC) polar-
ized or right circular (RC) polarized. This measurement can be performed by placing
a birefringent plate – known as a quarter-wave plate – in front of the polarizing beam
splitters, where the optical axis of the plate is orientated at 45 degrees to the axis
of the linear polarizing beam splitter. The birefringent plate converts incident circu-
larly polarized light into either H or V linearly polarized light, which is subsequently

768
Superluminal Communication in Quantum Mechanics
analyzed by the polarizing beam splitter and detectors. With the waveplate in the
system, Bob is assured to measure LC (RC) whenever Alice measures RC (LC).
The communication scheme is based on a change of measurement basis. By in-
serting the waveplate in the setup or not, Alice can force Bob’s photon to be either
linear or circular polarized. Thus, Alice can transmit binary information to Bob by
inserting – or not – the waveplate in her apparatus. All he has to do is to deter-
mine with certainty whether Alice was using the linear or circular basis. The ﬁrst
hitch with this scheme is a well known classical result – the only way to measure
whether a optical beam is linear or circular polarized is to analyze it both with linear
and circular polarizers. In other words, Bob would have to send the photon through
the linear-basis apparatus and the circular-basis apparatus. Unfortunately, one ap-
paratus destroys the incident photon as a result of the measurement and hence it is
unavailable to send on the other.
A clever way to get around this problem is for Bob to “clone” the incident photon
so there are two copies, where one copy will be sent to a linear-basis apparatus and
the other is sent to a circular-basis apparatus. The process of stimulated emission of
radiation is thought to clone an incident photon, so scientists ﬁrst considered plac-
ing an optical ampliﬁer in the path of the photon (an optical ampliﬁer increases the
number of photons via the stimulated emission process) [5, 9]. Unfortunately, an op-
tical ampliﬁer adds additional photons – via the process of spontaneous emission –
to the beam path and these additional photons have an arbitrary state of polarization
[4]. These “junk” photons destroy the beneﬁts of the ampliﬁer and hence prevent
Alice from communicating with Bob via the nonlocal characteristics of quantum
mechanics.
The problem with the superluminal communication scheme is much deeper that
it appears from the discussion above. The very linearity of quantum mechanics pre-
vents the cloning of an arbitrary quantum state, a result of the  no-cloning theorem.
Thus, any device – not just an optical ampliﬁer – fails to clone the incident photon
and hence the communication scheme fails [2, 4, 7].
Other researchers have wondered whether an imperfect copy of the incident
photon would be sufﬁcient for superluminal communication. The best or optimal
quantum copying machine has been identiﬁed [1]; even with the best possible copy-
ing apparatus, the quantum communication scheme just barely fails. This failure is
nicely summarized by Gisin [3] in his 1998 paper: “Once again, quantum mechanics
is right at the border line of contradicting relativity, but does not cross it. The peace-
ful coexistence between quantum mechanics and relativity is thus re-enforced.” See
also  Einstein locality; locality; nonlocality.
Primary Literature
1. V. Buˇzek, M. Hillery: Quantum copying: Beyond the no-cloning theorem. Phys. Rev. A 54,
1844 (1996)
2. D. Dieks: Communication by EPR devices. Phys. Lett. 92A, 271 (1982)
3. N. Gisin: Quantum cloning without signaling. Phys. Lett. A 242, 1 (1998)

Superposition Principle (Coherent and Incoherent Superposition)
769
S
4. R.J. Glauber: Ampliﬁers, attenuators, and Schr¨odinger’s Cat,’ in New Techniques and Ideas in
Quantum Measurement Theory, ed. by D. M. Greenberg, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 480, 336 (1986)
5. N. Herbert: FLASH – A superluminal communicator based upon a new type of quantum mea-
surement. Found. Phys. 12, 1171 (1982)
6. M. D. Stenner, D. J. Gauthier, M. A. Neifeld: The speed of information in a ‘fast light’ optical
medium. Nature 425, 695 (2003)
7. W. K. Wootters, W. H. Zurek: A single quantum cannot be cloned. Nature 299, 802 (1982)
Secondary Literature
8. M. Fayngold: Special Relativity and Motions Faster Than Light (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim 2002, Sect. 6.15)
9. N. Herbert: Faster Than Light (New American Library Books, Penguin Inc., New York, 1998)
10. P. W. Milonni: Fast Light, Slow Light, and Left-Handed Light (Institute of Physics Publishing,
Bristol 2005, Chap. 3)
11. H. Paul: Introduction to Quantum Optics, From Light Quanta to Quantum Teleportation
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004, Sect. 11.5)
12. J. A. Zensus, T. J. Pearson (eds.): Superluminal Radio Sources (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1987)
Superposition Principle
(Coherent and Incoherent Superposition)
Marianne Breinig
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the state of a physical system at a ﬁxed time
t is deﬁned by specifying a ket |ψ(t)⟩belonging to the space ε. ε is a complex,
separable  Hilbert space, a complex linear vector space in which an inner product
is deﬁned and which possesses a countable  orthonormal basis. Every measurable
physical quantity is called an observable and is described by a Hermitian opera-
tor acting in ε. The only possible results of a measurement are the eigenvalues of
the Hermitian operator associated with the measurement, and immediately after the
measurement the state ket is a corresponding eigenstate. Every Hermitian operator
has at least one basis of orthonormal eigenvectors. Every state vector |ψ(t)⟩can
therefore be written as a linear superposition of eigenvectors of any observable. If
two Hermitian operators commute a common eigenbasis can be found. If they do
not commute, then no common eigenbasis exists.
Let {|an⟩} be an orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of the operator A,
A |an⟩= an| an⟩.
(1)

