Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
Joshua M. Brown(B)
and Terry Bossomaier
Charles Sturt University, Panorama Avenue, Bathurst, NSW 2795, Australia
jbrown@csu.edu.au
Abstract. The Standard Vicsek Model and a popular variant—using
topological neighbour interactions—are widely used models for studying
ﬂocking phenomena in the natural world. It is capable of demonstrating
the ordered and disordered states of real world ﬂocks by tuning a tem-
perature variable η, where high η corresponds to the disordered state.
Here we show that the ordered state attained at low η is not stable over
indeﬁnite time periods raising implications for simulations and settling
times. Additionally, we show that the loss of coherency in the metric case
is reversible, while it is permanent in topological case.
Keywords: Vicsek model · Metric interactions · Topological interac-
tions · Flocking
1
Introduction
The motions of bird ﬂocks are impressive in their grace and grandeur. Birds
ﬂy in complex interweaving paths that seem chaotic, yet lead to the formation
of coherent ﬂocks. Flocking behaviour is not just restricted to birds, either.
Many species display similar movements, from schools of ﬁsh [12] to colonies of
bacteria [9]. The behaviours that lead to this phenomenon are subject to much
research [15].
One of the most widely used models for studying ﬂocking phenomena was
introduced in 1995 by Vicsek et al. [14]. This minimal model approximates ﬂock
members as simple point particles with position and heading, moving with con-
stant speed in discrete time steps. At each time step, a given particle will adjust
its heading to match the average direction—with some random perturbation,
η—of its neighbouring particles, including itself. By adjusting the magnitude of
the perturbation, one can observe the ﬂock in ordered (η = 0) or disordered
states (η = 2π), or any state in between, including the phase transition at the
critical noise ηc.
The use of just an alignment rule in the Vicsek model is in contrast to the
earlier model by Reynolds [11] which combines three rules to achieve ﬂocking
phenomena: alignment, as above, dispersion where ﬂock members steer to avoid
ﬂock mates, and cohesion in which ﬂock members steer towards the centre of
local ﬂock mates.
c
⃝Springer International Publishing AG 2017
J.O. Berndt et al. (Eds.): MATES 2017, LNAI 10413, pp. 89–102, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-64798-2 6

90
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
Many studies have been performed using the Vicsek Model (VM), from low
level analysis of criticality [2,7,14] to high level comparisons with real world ﬂock
data [1,4]. Studies investigate either some speciﬁc noise value—generally at or
around criticality—or the whole noise range [0, 2π], relying on the assumption
that as η →0 the ﬂocking behaviour becomes increasingly stable. This is further
reinforced by work showing that when η = 0 the Vicsek model will converge to
a single stable ﬂock [8,13]. In this paper, we question this assumption and show
that for the low noise regime, permanent stability—that is, over suﬃciently large
time scales—is not guaranteed.
In Sect. 2 we formally introduce the Vicsek model followed by a demonstra-
tion of ﬂock instability in both the metric and topological cases in Sect. 3. We
then provide a detailed analysis of the mechanics that give rise to these results
in Sect. 4 and show that over large time scales, these states are unavoidable. We
conclude in Sect. 5 with some discussion on managing the models to minimise
instability.
2
Methods
In the Standard Vicsek Model (SVM ) N particles move continuously in a two
dimensional square space of linear size L with periodic boundary conditions. The
model is updated with a time interval Δt = 1. Positions for each particle are
updated according to:
x i(t + Δt) = x i(t) + v i(t)Δt,
(1)
where the velocity v i(t) is constructed to have constant magnitude, s, and head-
ing, θi(t). This method of position update—using v i(t) instead of v i(t+Δt)—is
known as Backwards Update.
Heading angles are updated according to:
θi(t + Δt) = ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k + η
2ξi(t),
(2)
where ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k denotes the average direction of k neighbours of particle i (includ-
ing itself) that ﬁt the neighbourhood criterion. In the Standard—or Metric—
model the neighbourhood of particle i is all particles within radius r = 1. The
Topological variant (TVM) instead uses the neighbourhood of the nearest kT
particles, regardless of distance. We use the deﬁnition from [14] for average
angle—⟨θ(t)⟩i,k = arctan[⟨sin(θ(t))⟩i,k/⟨cos(θ(t))⟩i,k]. ξi(t) is a realisation from
the uniform interval [−1, 1] and 0 ≤η ≤2π. Where convenient, the shorthand
Δθi(t) = η
2ξi(t) will be used to refer to the noise term.
This work deals solely with the low noise regime, 0 < η ≤0.5, outside of the
phase transition regime. Here—after a settling period—large ﬂocks are expected
to predominate. As we are considering only ﬂocks far from criticality, we will
not broach the topic of the precise nature of the phase transition in the Vicsek
Model.

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
91
We denote the order, ϕ, of the ﬂock with
ϕ(t) =
1
sN

N

i
v i(t)
 ,
(3)
which deﬁnes the overall alignment of particles at time t, with ϕ(t) = 1 signalling
all particles pointing in the same direction and ϕ(t) = 0 indicating complete
disorder. Fluctuations of the order parameter are given by the susceptibility
χ = ⟨ϕ2⟩−⟨ϕ⟩2,
(4)
where a peak in χ indicates a phase transition [16].
When analysing the topological case, we construct swarm signalling net-
works (SSN) from our simulations as described by Komareji and Bouﬀanais
in their investigation into consensus and its resilience in topological systems
[10]. The SSN shows the directed connectivity between particles—as topological
interactions are not symmetric. Komareji and Bouﬀanais demonstrate that for
a system to reach consensus the SSN must be a strongly connected super set
during most—not necessarily all—time steps, and to achieve this, kT should be
6 or more, in agreement with bird ﬂocking studies [3]. We use these SSNs to
analyse consensus over longer time scales.
Simulations were performed and visualised in C++, with post processing done
in Matlab. Where statistics were collated, we performed 100 repetitions to calcu-
late standard error. Free variables—ρ, N, s, kT , r—were all varied over common
values in the literature and behaved analogously to the results presented below.
3
Results
We simulated both metric and topological ﬂocks, using a range of values for
the free parameters, and found that in all cases—except degenerate cases such
as r →L or kT →N—ﬂock stability was not permanent and ﬂocks would
eventually split apart for long periods of time at low η where cohesive ﬂocks
are expected to predominate the system. In this section, we give an overview of
these results, while a detailed mathematical analysis will follow in the Sect. 4.
We start with the metric case, with Fig. 1 showing the evolution of a ﬂock
from a completely ordered, singular ﬂock into seven sub-ﬂocks of varying sizes,
demonstrating that an aligned metric ﬂock can split apart into disjoint sub-
ﬂocks from just thermal ﬂuctuations. At later time steps, this ﬂock coalesces
into fewer sub-ﬂocks, before returning to a single ﬂock at t = 99, 000, repeating
ad inﬁnitum.
While the particles are still mostly ordered in Fig. 1b, with ϕ(t) = 0.99,
this does not necessarily have to be. Sub-ﬂocks can diverge completely to π
radians from each other. However, due to the periodic boundary conditions of
the system, as divergence increases so too does the chance of the sub-ﬂocks
colliding and merging into a single ﬂock, thus—temporarily—restoring stability
to the ﬂock.

92
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
a
b
Fig. 1. Metric—Snapshots of an SVM ﬂock at (a) t = 10 and (b) t = 24, 000 with
ϕ = 1.0 and 0.99 respectively, demonstrating instability behaviours in the metric model.
Flock parameters were N = 500, ρ = 0.25, s = 0.1, η = 0.1, with all particles initialised
facing right (θi(0) = 0 ∀i ∈N), in a box of local density, ρ = 5.0, to force a ﬂocking
event at t = 0. This ﬂock behaves no diﬀerently to a ﬂock achieved more naturally
via a settling regime whereby particles are given random positions and headings and
simulated for time series of at least order t = 1 × 105. Particles are positioned at the
base of each arrow, with arrow direction indicating heading. Arrow colour conveys the
same information as in Fig. 6 although is unnecessary here. Extra ﬂock information
included in Fig. 6 is stripped here for clarity. Large black arrows indicate centre of
sub-ﬂock and average ﬂock heading. (Color ﬁgure online)
The topological ﬂock also suﬀers from instability, as shown in Fig. 2. Komareji
and Bouﬀanais [10] show consensus for topological systems with kT = 6 neigh-
bours, which we recreate in Fig. 2a with N = 1, 000, ρ = 1.6 at t = 3, 000.
Figure 2b shows the same system at a future time step, t = 7, 000, where it has
devolved to a quasi-disordered state of many ﬂock fragments. Similar behaviours
are seen for all kT tested, kT ∈{3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 20, 40} at ρ ∈{0.25, 1.6}. The size of
the fragmented ﬂocks scales with kT , while the time taken to devolve scales pro-
portional to kT , and inversely with ρ. Komareji and Bouﬀanais [10] also shows
the case of kT = 3, exhibiting similar behaviour as observed in Fig. 2b, indicating
that with low enough kT fragmentation sets in before consensus can be achieved.
Simulations with other starting conditions—including those seen in Fig. 1a—all
exhibited the same behaviour.
While the ﬂocks can merge in the metric case we show later that this is
not the case for the topological model. Sub-ﬂocks continue to fragment, with a
minimum bound of kT particles per sub-ﬂock, with no ability to merge into larger
ﬂocks for any meaningful length of time. Entering the quasi-disordered state is
a one way transition for the topological ﬂock. Figure 3 shows ϕ and χ of one set
of simulations at low η, for a large time frame. The peak in χ and behaviour of

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
93
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
a
b
360
270
180
90
Fig. 2. Topological—Snapshots of the one ﬂock at (a) t = 3, 000 (ϕ = 0.97) and (b)
t = 7, 000 (ϕ = 0.75). System was initialised facing right (θi(0) = 0 ∀i ∈N), with
parameters N = 1, 000, ρ = 1.6, s = 0.05, η = 0.1π, kT = 7 as per [10], where (a)
matches Fig. 1 of [10]—noting their initial state of θi(0) = π
2 . Particle colour indicates
heading angle, such that the colour of θ = θ + π. Note that the only headings not
represented in (b) are
π
2 < θ < π indicating signiﬁcant fragmentation between sub-
ﬂocks. (Color ﬁgure online)
ϕ indicates the system does indeed experience a quasi-phase transition from an
ordered state to a not-quite-disordered one while η remains constant.
4
Discussion
In this section, we give detailed analysis of the mechanics leading to instability
showing that it is inevitable in both cases.
We begin with analysis of a minimal two particle metric ﬂock and introduce
the term drift, ˙d, to explore how the distance between particles changes at a
subsequent time step when noise is or is not applied. Speciﬁcally, ˙d < 0 indicates
convergence at the future step when noise is applied than if it is not, while ˙d > 0
indicates the addition of noise leads to separation. The main result of Sect. 4.1 is
to show that the probability of ˙d < 0 and ˙d > 0 is approximately equal in both
neighbour and non-neighbour cases, while the probability of converging between
time steps is 0.5 only in the neighbour case.
We extend this argument in Sect. 4.2 to show that drift plays a vital role in
the instability of metric ﬂocks and is able to explain the behaviour in Fig. 1.
Notably, this instability is reversible, allowing reformation of a stable ﬂock. This
argument holds in the topological case, however does not adequately cover the
phenomena in Fig. 2.
To understand the topological case we analyse a small ﬂock and its SSN in
Sect. 4.3. We show that due to a lack of dispersion rule in the Vicsek model and
the asymmetric nature of topological interactions, a quasi-phase transition takes

94
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
Fig. 3. Topological—Plot of order (left axis) and susceptibility (right axis)—measured
over a sliding window of 3 × 104 time steps. All particles were initialised facing right
(θi(0) = 0 ∀i ∈N), using the parameters N = 1, 000, ρ = 0.25, s = 0.05, η = 0.2, kT =
7. ρ and η were reduced to increase the time taken for fragmentation to occur to
better visualise χ. The peak in χ at t = 7 × 104 indicates the ﬂocks fragmenting into
the quasi-disordered state described in text. Additionally, the non-zero χ after the
peak demonstrates that the quasi-disordered state is maintained for the remainder of
the simulation. Measurements repeated 100 times to calculate standard error (shaded
regions).
place whereby particle ﬂocks devolve to the fragmented clusters seen in Fig. 2b.
We also show that this instability is irreversible unlike the drift instability.
4.1
Two Particle Metric Flocks
We begin with a minimal metric ﬂock of just 2 particles, pi and pj, well within
interaction radius—such that they remain neighbours—with centre of mass x f(t)
and velocity v f(t) (with heading θf(t)). For notational convenience, we will
construct the ﬂock with pi always above pj—i.e., xi,x ≈xj,x and xi,y > xj,y.
Note that by rotational symmetry, this is equivalent to any orientation of a 2
particle ﬂock.

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
95
The beneﬁt of this construction is that pi is to the “left” of x f, that is, the
z-component1 of (x i −x f) × v f is positive (i.e. pointing up) and thus positive
rotation of vf points towards pi, while pj corresponds with negative rotations.
Since the particles are neighbours2, ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k = ⟨θ(t)⟩j,k, resulting in three
possibilities when updating the headings in Eq. 2:
1. Δθi(t) = Δθj(t) - Both particles will move (at the next time step, since we are
backward updating) in parallel to each other—i.e. |x i(t+Δt)−x j(t+Δt)| =
|x i(t + 2Δt) −x j(t + 2Δt)|.
2. Δθi(t) > Δθj(t) - pi experiences a more positive (or less negative) rotation
from noise than pj, meaning either one or both of pi, pj is turning away from
vf. In all three possibilities, this leads to an increase in distance between
x i(t + 2Δt) and x j(t + 2Δt) than otherwise would have been the case if
Δθi(t) = Δθj(t) = 0.
3. Δθi(t) < Δθj(t) - pi experiences a more negative (or less positive) rotation
than pj and results in decreased distance at t + 2Δt.
Since the noise is uniformly distributed, the second two items have equal
likelihood giving the relation
P[Δθi(t) < Δθj(t)] = P[Δθi(t) > Δθj(t)],
(5)
with P[Δθi(t) = Δθj(t)] being negligible—both in terms of chance of occurrence
as well as the consequences when it does occur.
Before continuing, we need to distinguish that the above relates to a gradient-
esque term for the distance between two particles. That is, will they be closer at
t + 2Δt with Δθi(t), Δθj(t) than they would have been with no noise. We will
describe this comparative gradient property as drift, or ˙d(x i, x j), with d(x i, x j)
referring to the actual distance. Equation 5 can be rewritten in two ways:
P[dt(x i, x j) < dt+Δt(x i, x j)] = P[dt(x i, x j) > dt+Δt(x i, x j)],
(6)
to denote that the distance is equally likely to increase or decrease, or
P[ ˙d(x i, x j) < 0] = P[ ˙d(x i, x j) > 0],
(7)
to denote that the probability of the drift being positive (diverging) or negative
(converging) is equally likely. When the two particles are neighbours the two
equalities are equal since the average angle for each particle is equal at each
time step via neighbourhood averaging.
Additionally, we note the above does not quite hold for all values of ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k,
speciﬁcally, when ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k approaches parallel to the vector between the two
particles—⟨θ(t)⟩i,k →± π
2 in this case—Eq. 7 breaks, giving a bias towards
divergence, as seen in Fig. 4. This bias increases as the distance decreases between
the two particles. When the distance between the two particles is suﬃciently
small the bias appears for all ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k, with P[ ˙d(x i, x j) < 0] →0.
1 We obtain a z-component by treating the simulation plane as existing in 3D, with
z = 0 for all positions and velocities.
2 Note that the metric case is symmetric. If pi is a neighbour of pj, then pj is a
neighbour of pi. This does not necessarily hold in the topological case.

96
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
〈θ(t)〉i,k = 〈θ(t)〉j,k
Convergence Ratio
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
d(xi, xj) = 0.0002
d(xi, xj) = 0.02
d(xi, xj) = 0.1
d(xi, xj) = 1.0
Fig. 4. Metric—Drift convergence proﬁle for interacting two particle case described in
text, where d(x i, x j) ≤r. The 100 linearly spaced points are the ratio of convergence
events occurring over every permutation of Δθi(t) and Δθj(t) for 100 linearly spaced
noise values between ±0.25—i.e. η = 0.5. Distance convergence follows exactly.
When the particles are not neighbours however the distinction between drift
and distance is pertinent. Here Eq. 7 holds for most values—with biases occurring
at four singularities as above, shown in Fig. 5a—while Eq. 6 does not. Speciﬁcally,
since they are no longer neighbours, the ﬁrst term in Eq. 2 diﬀers for each particle.
At low η, θ(t)i and θ(t)j can dominate such that there is no Δθi(t) or Δθj(t)
that changes the relationship between dt+2(x i, x j) and dt(x i, x j) and thus the
particles, regardless of noise, must get closer or must separate. Figure 5b shows
the dominance of θ(t)i and θ(t)j over the noise.
Thus when discussing drift, we can see that—aside from four singularity
points—P[ ˙d(x i, x j) < 0] ≈P[ ˙d(x i, x j) > 0] while Eq. 6 completely breaks, with
one side of the equality approaching 1 for most heading combinations.
4.2
Drift in Large Metric Flocks
We can extend this to the multiple particle single ﬂock case (multiple ﬂocks
follows on exactly by treating ﬂocks as locally singular) by setting aside pj and
instead considering pl, the imaginary particle representing the local neighbour-
hood of pi, with x l as the centre of mass of pi’s neighbours, and v l representing
the velocity vector of the neighbourhood. Let Ωl represent the change of v l aris-
ing from neighbour changes rather than from uniform noise. By the central limit
theorem, Ωl will approximately follow a Gaussian distribution with μ = 0. Due
to the symmetrical nature of both distributions, Eq. 7 still holds (with x l). That
is, pi is equally likely to drift away from or towards pl. In fact, as ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k = v l
we have the neighbour case from above, meaning Eqs. 6 and 7 both hold for x i
and x l.

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
97
θi
θj
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
a)
θi
θj
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
b)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fig. 5. Metric—(a) Drift convergence proﬁle for non-interacting two particle case
described in text at η = 0.5, with d(x i, x j) = 2. Measurements same as Fig. 4, extended
for diﬀering θi, θj. Singularities exist at ± π
2 , parallel to x i−x j. When signs match, both
particles move together, with slight biases—converging and diverging. With opposite
signs, particles face away from or towards each other, resulting in complete convergence
or divergence, respectively. This can only occur once ﬂocks have lost coherency how-
ever, thus is dismissed from discussion on losing coherency. Lower η sharpens peaks
and ﬂattens all other values. (b) Distance convergence proﬁle, approaching equality
only at θi ≈θj and sgn(θi)π −θi ≈θj. Decreasing η increases the steepness between
extremes.
This does not extend to the overall ﬂock—i.e., x i and x f—for similar rea-
sons to the non-neighbour two particle case, meaning only P[ ˙d(x i, x f) < 0] ≈
P[ ˙d(x i, x f) > 0] holds true. That is, pi is equally like to drift away from or
toward pf (the imaginary ﬂock centre particle), however at low η, v l constrains
pi such that equality of Eq. 6 breaks and completely favours either convergence
or divergence.
In the case of a perfectly ordered ﬂock (i.e., v i = v l = v f ∀i, l), we have
symmetry in ﬂuctuations about v f (even though the symmetry of particle head-
ings is broken). This will quickly change as thermal noise is introduced unless
nj
j ξj(t) = 0 for all local neighbourhoods. Any case of v l(t + Δt) ̸= v l(t) will
constrain all connected particles, even if slightly, towards a converging or diverg-
ing trajectory—the probabilities in Eq. 6 are no longer equal. Furthermore, when
particles on the boundary diverge from their neighbourhoods, they also freely
diverge from the ﬂock, while those near the centre move towards other particles
and are more likely to keep v l,i ≈v f.
Even though noise is uniform, for v l(t + Δt) to return to v f an equivalent
but opposite set of noise realisations is required for each connected particle. As
discussed above however, particles connected to pl will have a noise distribution
centred about v l, leading to v l staying steady. Additionally, when pl is along
the border of the overall ﬂock, the outermost particles of pl will have their own

98
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
D=-1025
D=553
D=1086
D=3588
D=3436
a
b
c
d
Fig. 6. Metric—Headings of particles at (a) t = 692, (b) t = 782, (c) t = 946, and (d)
t = ts = 947, coloured according to neighbourhood divergence, that is, if a particle is
diverging, how many of its neighbours are also diverging. Red = 0%, green = 50% of
neighbours are also diverging, purple = 100%. Black circles indicate minimum spanning
circle of connected diverging sub-ﬂocks, where each particle in the connected set has
a neighbourhood divergence >80%. Number near ﬂock represents sum of each neigh-
bourhood divergence D = nj
j
δ(i, j), where δ(i, j) = 1 if both particles are diverging
from vf and −1 otherwise. Black vector indicates xf and vf for each ﬂock. Note the
lack of divergence in (c)—the inertia has dissipated with the ﬂock split happening in
the next time step in (d). Black dashed line in (d) indicates the demarcation between
the two ﬂocks. Flock presented here is the same ﬂock presented in Fig. 1. (Color ﬁgure
online)
smaller neighbourhoods, allowing for their own v l to diverge with more ease as
they only partially reset to the inner v l at each time step.
This inertia in the heading of each v l is what ultimately leads to a ﬂock
split event at some future time step ts. The inertia need not even exist at ts
and could have dissipated many time steps earlier, with the ﬁnal split occurring
due to minor ﬂuctuations in the few particles linking the sub-ﬂocks together.
Figure 6 shows such a case with inertia almost completely dissipated at ts −1
and ts.
This has implications for the symmetry breaking of the system. Typically, we
have an unstable state where particles are disordered3 and stable states of just
one ﬂock from which the system has trouble escaping giving a state space similar
to Fig. 7a. However, as argued above, we have other stable states—those with
more ﬂocks—which can be reached via thermal ﬂuctuations. This also creates
additional unstable states between the stable states—diﬀerent thermal ﬂuctua-
tions in Fig. 6c could cause a collapse back to the 1 ﬂock stable state instead.
Figure 7b shows a cross section of one possible potential function with this behav-
iour. Note that moving between these states is reversible, with the jump to fewer
ﬂocks being more achievable as it can also be achieved by the ﬂocks explicitly col-
liding, which becomes increasingly likely the further the ﬂock directions diverge.
3 Remembering that we are dealing exclusively with the η ≪ηc regime in which
particles “want” to clump together.

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
99
a
b
States
Energy
Fig. 7. Metric—(a) Goldstone’s [6] Mexican hat potential function. The peak is anal-
ogous to the unstable disordered state of the SVM with the trough representing the
single rotationally symmetric stable ﬂock state. (b) Proposed cross section of state
space for SVM. Each higher local minimum represents more ﬂocks, with the global
minimum indicating a single ﬂock. Note that where thermal ﬂuctuations would not
return the system to the peak in (a) they could push the system up into higher buckets
in (b).
4.3
Topological Flocks
We now turn our attention to the topological variant of the Vicsek model and
begin by noting that the above analysis holds true here as well, with the exception
that the two particle neighbour-less case is not possible. However, the subsequent
distinction between the local neighbourhood and overall ﬂock and Eqs. 6 and 7
remains valid.
As the drift analysis holds true for both cases, and explains a reversible
ﬂock instability, something else must explain the behaviour seen in Figs. 2 and
3, where the topological ﬂock permanently enters a quasi-disordered state. The
issue, in fact, stems from an interplay between the lack of dispersion rule in the
Vicsek model and the asymmetric nature of topological neighbours. This allows
groups of particles to contract around a local centre of mass such that they
disconnect from the rest of the ﬂock. For example, in a system with kT = 6, a
small ﬂock fd of just 6 particles can be internally connected—for each pi ∈fd, all
kT neighbours pj ∈fd—creating only unidirectional connections between fd and
f. In practice, these disconnected ﬂocks are usually larger than the minimum kT
particles4.
The lack of dispersion rule naturally leads to this outcome, as particles will
move—within thermal ﬂuctuation—in the direction of ⟨θ(t)⟩i,k. As with the met-
ric case, pi has equal likelihood of diverging or converging with pl. Here how-
ever, at best, divergence leads to the status quo, local density is roughly constant
4 The minimum is kT and not kT + 1 since particles are always neighbours to them-
selves, such that the neighbourhood is never empty in the metric case.

100
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
just with new neighbours, while convergence leads to a positive feedback loop
cementing the current kT neighbours as the permanent neighbours for pi.
This eventually reduces the ﬂock to a weakly connected super set. That
is, a path exists from particle pi /∈fd to particle pj including those pj ∈fd,
however, no path exists from pi ∈fd to pj /∈fd. The result is that no alignment
information can transfer from the overall ﬂock to the disconnected ﬂock fd. Since
fd is only inﬂuenced by members of fd, it can proceed in directions unrelated to
the ﬂock. If fd is near the boundary of f this can quickly lead to splitting apart.
During this process, neighbours to fd can be stripped away from f, where
they either disconnect from f and trail fd, or exist in a no-man’s land between
them. The disconnected ﬂock can be compact enough that it can approach f
without inﬂuence as shown in Fig. 8.
Once ﬂocks start exhibiting these behaviours the only way for them to inter-
act again is for the ﬂocks to collide rather than brush near each other. However,
such mergers are only temporary, as the new ﬂock is constructed of even closer
particles. Figure 9 shows two ﬂocks merging and disbanding in under 200 time
steps, resulting in two new denser ﬂocks. Thus it is clear that once the quasi-
disordered state is reached, the system will not return to an ordered state without
some dispersion rule preventing contained islands of particles.
For systems with larger kT , the above mechanism still occurs, just at a slower
rate as it takes longer for the requisite islands to contract enough for fragmen-
tation to arise.
a
b
c
Fig. 8. Topological—Snapshots of small ﬂock, N = 30 (15 shown), ρ = 0.25, kT =
3, s = 0.1, demonstrating the eﬀect of contraction. SSN super-imposed where dashed
purple lines indicate asymmetric neighbours—i.e., pi is one of pj’s kT neighbours, but
not vice versa—and full orange lines indicate symmetric neighbours. Self-connections
are implicit and not drawn. Arrow colour denotes sub-ﬂock membership as established
in (a). (a) t = 4, 655: The three red particles are connected only to themselves, while
a green particle has one red neighbour. (b) t = 4, 693: Sub-ﬂock moves in front of the
main ﬂock. Both ﬂocks are tight enough that no connection occurs between red and
blue particles. (c) t = 4, 710: Both ﬂocks continue with no changes to heading. (Color
ﬁgure online)

Flock Stability in the Vicsek Model
101
a
b
c
d
Fig. 9. Topological—Snapshots of two ﬂocks merging then disbanding at (a) t = 4, 812,
(b) t = 4, 821, (c) t = 4, 969, (d) t = 4, 986. Note in (b) the tight core of 3 particles—
originating from both original ﬂocks—occupying almost the same space—and that in
(d) the two ﬂock are made up of both red and blue particles. See Fig. 8 for colour
legend. (Color ﬁgure online)
5
Conclusion
By careful inspection of how particles interact at each time step, we have demon-
strated that when consensus is reached in the Vicsek Model, it is not permanent
for η > 0, regardless of metric or topological interactions. The topological case
is the more troublesome of the two as it clearly exhibits a state in which the
original stable ﬂock is no longer reachable, while the metric case can return to
stability more easily than escaping from it in the ﬁrst place.
In extensions to the SVM or TVM, such behaviour may potentially disap-
pear, even without a rule explicitly addressing the ﬂock instability. One such
extension is the Inertial Spin Model (ISM) by Cavagna et al. [5]. The ISM intro-
duces a spin component which inﬂuences the velocity component of particles,
leading to an inertia in a particle’s direction. This would invalidate Eq. 5 and
would likely result in long term ﬂock stability. Furthermore, the spin component
could potentially interfere with the contraction behaviour in the topological case
preventing islands from forming.
For the Vicsek model as it stands however, instability is inescapable. The
key respite is that both sets of instability mechanics do require moderate time
scales to occur meaning that with careful consideration of observation windows,
particularly when settling time is required, data collection regimes can be struc-
tured such that ﬂock instability is avoided. However, we note that the Vicsek
model is one of the simplest ﬂocking models available—which leads to its popu-
larity in many numerical analyses of collective behaviour—and while it is quite
informative for applied ﬁelds, it should perhaps be replaced altogether in prac-
tical applications with a more robust model rather than adjusting observation
windows.

102
J.M. Brown and T. Bossomaier
Acknowledgments. Joshua Brown would like to acknowledge the support of his
Ph.D. program and this work from the Australian Government Research Training Pro-
gram Scholarship.
References
1. Attanasi, A., Cavagna, A., Del Castello, L., Giardina, I., Melillo, S., Parisi, L.,
Pohl, O., Rossaro, B., Shen, E., Silvestri, E., et al.: Collective behaviour without
collective order in wild swarms of midges. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10(7), e1003697
(2014)
2. Baglietto, G., Albano, E.V., Candia, J.: Criticality and the onset of ordering in
the standard Vicsek model. Interface Focus 2(6), 708–714 (2012)
3. Ballerini, M., Cabibbo, N., Candelier, R., Cavagna, A., Cisbani, E., Giardina, I.,
Lecomte, V., Orlandi, A., Parisi, G., Procaccini, A., et al.: Interaction ruling animal
collective behavior depends on topological rather than metric distance: evidence
from a ﬁeld study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105(4), 1232–1237 (2008)
4. Cavagna, A., Conti, D., Giardina, I., Grigera, T.S., Melillo, S., Viale, M.: Spatio-
temporal correlations in models of collective motion ruled by diﬀerent dynamical
laws. Phys. Biol. 13(6), 065001 (2016)
5. Cavagna, A., Del Castello, L., Giardina, I., Grigera, T., Jelic, A., Melillo, S., Mora,
T., Parisi, L., Silvestri, E., Viale, M., et al.: Flocking and turning: a new model for
self-organized collective motion. J. Stat. Phys. 158(3), 601–627 (2015)
6. Goldstone, J.: Field theories with superconductor solutions. Il Nuovo Cimento
(1955–1965) 19, 154–164 (1961)
7. Gr´egoire, G., Chat´e, H.: Onset of collective and cohesive motion. Phys. Rev. Lett.
92(2), 025702 (2004)
8. Jadbabaie, A., Lin, J., Morse, A.S.: Coordination of groups of mobile autonomous
agents using nearest neighbor rules. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 48(6), 988–1001
(2003)
9. Keller, E.F., Segel, L.A.: Traveling bands of chemotactic bacteria: a theoretical
analysis. J. Theor. Biol. 30(2), 235–248 (1971)
10. Komareji, M., Bouﬀanais, R.: Resilience and controllability of dynamic collective
behaviors. PLoS one 8(12), e82578 (2013)
11. Reynolds, C.W.: Flocks, herds and schools: a distributed behavioral model. In: SIG-
GRAPH 1987 Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques, vol. 21, pp. 25–34. ACM, New York (1987)
12. Shaw, E.: Schooling ﬁshes: the school, a truly egalitarian form of organization in
which all members of the group are alike in inﬂuence, oﬀers substantial beneﬁts to
its participants. Am. Sci. 66(2), 166–175 (1978)
13. Tahbaz-Salehi, A., Jadbabaie, A.: On recurrence of graph connectivity in Vicseks
model of motion coordination for mobile autonomous agents. In: American Control
Conference, pp. 699–704 (2007)
14. Vicsek, T., Czir´ok, A., Ben-Jacob, E., Cohen, I., Shochet, O.: Novel type of phase
transition in a system of self-driven particles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1226–1229 (1995)
15. Vicsek, T., Zafeiris, A.: Collective motion. Phys. Rep. 517(34), 71–140 (2012)
16. Wicks, R.T., Chapman, S.C., Dendy, R.: Mutual information as a tool for
identifying phase transitions in dynamical complex systems with limited data.
Phys. Rev. E. 75, 051125 (2007). https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/
PhysRevE.75.051125

