Chapter 2 
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible? 
Daniel Nettle and Thom Scott-Phillips 
D. Nettle (✉) 
Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études Cognitives, École Normale Supérieure, 
Université PSL, EHESS, CNRS, Paris, France 
Institute for Logic, Cognition, Language, and Information, San Sebastian, Spain 
e-mail: daniel.nettle@ens.psl.eu 
T. Scott-Phillips 
Institute for Logic, Cognition, Language, and Information, San Sebastian, Spain 
e-mail: thom.scottphillips@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
A. du Crest et al. (eds.), Evolutionary Thinking Across Disciplines, Synthese Library 
478, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33358-3_2
Abstract The last 30 years has seen the emergence of a self-styled ‘evolutionary’ 
paradigm within psychology (henceforth, EP). EP is often presented and critiqued as 
a distinctive, contentious paradigm, to be contrasted with other accounts of human 
psychology. However, little attention has been paid to the sense in which those other 
accounts are not also evolutionary. We outline the core commitments of canonical 
EP. These are, from least distinctive to most: mechanism, interactionism, function-
alism, adaptationism, and functional specialization. We argue that the minimal 
requirement for an approach to psychology to qualify as evolutionary in an important 
sense is functionalism. This is because the notion of functional design in organismal 
structures presupposes a history of evolution by natural selection. On this criterion, 
we argue, most, perhaps all of psychology qualiﬁes as evolutionary, either implicitly 
or explicitly. We review several approaches that are typically contrasted with EP, 
showing that these are all evolutionary too by our criteria. We suggest that the EP/ 
non-EP dichotomy be retired. However, though all psychology is evolutionary, 
psychologists do not always need to foreground evolution in their research, just as 
is true for biologists. At the same time, more space for evolution does not mean any 
less space for environment, context, culture, meaning or agency. 
21

22
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
2.1 
Introduction 
The last 30 years has seen the emergence of a self-styled ‘evolutionary’ paradigm 
within psychology (henceforth, EP; Confer et al., 2010; Cosmides & Tooby, 1987; 
Lewis et al., 2017; Tooby & Cosmides, 1989). Whilst EP has been somewhat 
successful—judging by the appearance of textbooks, conferences and dedicated 
journals—it also continues to attract scepticism and critique. The claims of EP are 
often compared either unfavourably (by critics) or favourably (by adherents) to those 
of alternative paradigms in particular domains. These debates are sometimes 
presented, mistakenly as we shall argue, as pitting the merits of the ‘evolutionary 
perspective’ or ‘evolutionary thinking in psychology’ against those of some other 
perspective or type of thinking. However, it is not clear in what sense those other 
perspectives or types of thinking are not evolutionary too. We assume almost all 
scientists are committed to naturalism and accept that humans are organic creatures 
phylogenetically connected to other animals. Given these commitments, what it 
would mean for a psychology to be non-evolutionary is obscure. Would it sufﬁce 
for the authors to not explicitly mention evolutionary principles, whilst not actually 
denying that humans are evolved creatures either, or is a non-evolutionary psychol-
ogy something stronger than that? 
In this chapter, we develop an account of what an account of psychology would 
have to look like to qualify as non-evolutionary, but we doubt that any actual 
productive exemplars exist. Though accounts of the mind vary enormously in detail, 
they tend to draw on a common set of ideas: that the mind contains mechanisms; that 
these are characteristic of humans and many are different from those of other species; 
and that they are loosely organized with respect to some notions of organismal 
function. These ideas are at least implicitly grounded in, and made coherent by, the 
fact that minds and brains are biological structures with evolutionary histories. Thus, 
a great variety of accounts of human psychology, including those drawn on by social 
scientists who would shudder to self-identify as evolutionary psychologists, are in 
some real sense evolutionary. 
Canonical EP, the approach particularly associated with the work of Cosmides 
and Tooby (e.g. 1987) has more speciﬁc commitments than just appealing to 
evolution. We review these in detail below, but, brieﬂy, canonical EP is strongly 
adaptationist; it takes a particular view of the granularity of adaptive problems; and, 
relatedly, sees psychological mechanisms as functionally specialized as a direct 
result of genetic evolution. These are important and distinctive commitments, but 
they are ancillary to taking an evolutionary perspective per se. We shall show that 
supposed alternatives to EP take different views on some of these ancillary commit-
ments, particularly the one related to functional specialization. This does not, 
however, make them ‘non-evolutionary’. 
We ﬁnd ourselves in constant danger of denotational confusion in this chapter. 
We seek to argue, in essence, that many accounts of psychology that are not EP are 
in fact EP, but that they differ from EP in important ways. To try to navigate through 
this thicket, where helpful we try to stick to the following terminological rules: we

use canonical EP to refer to the approach of Cosmides and Tooby (Cosmides & 
Tooby, 1987; Tooby & Cosmides, 1989); ‘non-EP’ with scare quotes to refer to 
approaches that, in discussions of the ﬁeld, would commonly be considered 
non-evolutionary (erroneously, in our view); and implicit EP to refer to approaches 
to psychology that are meaningfully dependent on evolution, but do not draw 
attention to this fact. Hence, our central argument becomes the slightly more 
comprehensible claim that many ‘non-EP’ accounts of psychology are in fact 
implicit EP, but differ from canonical EP in important ways. The term explicit EP, 
and remaining uses of EP with no modiﬁer, refer to work that self-identiﬁes as 
evolutionary whether or not it exactly ﬁts the canonical pattern. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
23
In what follows, in Sect. 2.2, we brieﬂy sketch the commitments of canonical 
EP. In Sect. 2.3, we raise and address a common misconception, which is that being 
‘evolutionary’ in psychology leads to the expectation that human behaviour is 
inﬂexible, or controlled by genes, while being ‘non-evolutionary’ implies that 
humans are malleable and responsive to context. This has to be removed from the 
table before any serious analysis can begin. In Sect. 2.4, we consider what would 
have to be true of a psychology for it to be non-evolutionary. We do this by undoing 
ever more of the commitments of canonical EP, until the point where all the 
evolution is gone. We conclude that a non-evolutionary psychology could exist in 
principle, though it would be strange and unattractive. Moreover, we see scant 
empirical evidence of its actual representation in the various approaches to psychol-
ogy. In Sect. 2.5, we examine some speciﬁc examples of ‘non-EPs’, or alternatives to 
canonical EP. We show that these are, implicitly and sometimes explicitly, evolu-
tionary, and hence all qualify as broad sense EP. Section 2.6 concludes. 
2.2 
The Commitments of Evolutionary Psychology 
Canonical EP is founded on the commitments listed below. We review them only 
brieﬂy as they have been very clearly stated elsewhere (Cosmides & Tooby, 1987; 
Kurzban & Haselton, 2006). 
C1. Mechanism. Human cognitive contents and manifest behaviours are outputs of 
psychological mechanisms. These mechanisms have properties. 
C2. Interactionism. Psychological mechanisms process environmental inputs in 
order to create cognitive contents and manifest behaviour. Because of this, neither 
cognitive contents nor manifest behaviours are invariant within or between 
humans. Patterns of environmental input explain variation in cognitive contents 
and manifest behaviours, but only do so satisfyingly when considered in con-
junction with the characteristic ways that the psychological mechanisms detect, 
process and transform those inputs. 
C3. Functionalism. Psychological mechanisms can be usefully viewed as exhibiting 
some kind of functionality for the whole organism. For example, in much the way 
that the immune system can be viewed as having the organismically-useful

24
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
function of ﬁghting infection, the visual perception system can be viewed as 
having the organismically-useful functions of detecting and recognizing things, 
and permitting movement around the environment. 
C4. Strong adaptationism. Functional design arises from natural selection, and 
acknowledging this explicitly is epistemically useful. Because natural selection 
is a powerful force, we can assume, at least as an initial gambit, that the properties 
of many psychological mechanisms represent highly efﬁcient design solutions to 
adaptive problems. This allows these mechanisms to be both ‘forward 
engineered’ (predicting as yet unobserved properties from a prior consideration 
of adaptive function) and ‘reverse engineered’ (inferring adaptive function from 
observed properties of the mechanism). 
C5. Functional specialization. Psychological mechanisms are specialized in the 
functions they serve (for example, ‘detecting cheaters in exchange relationships’ 
or ‘choosing a suitable mate’, rather than ‘learning about the world’). This 
adaptive specialization drives the kinds of inputs that they respond to and the 
processing principles they employ. For a core set of human psychological 
mechanisms, this specialization is directly genetically speciﬁed. 
Given these commitments, there is a sense in which the agenda of canonical EP was 
misnamed from the beginning. A more precise term would have been ‘Adaptationist 
Cognitive Science’; the ‘Evolutionary’ is potentially quite misleading. To see why, it 
is worth considering Tinbergen’s famous four-question typology for the explanation 
of behaviour (Ariew & Panchanathan, this volume; Tinbergen, 1963): 1. proximate 
causation; 2. ontogeny or development; 3. adaptive value or function; and 4. phy-
logeny or evolutionary history. Since it was only the fourth of these questions to 
which Tinbergen applied the term ‘evolutionary’, the reader might take that to be the 
one EP is addressing. Hence, the concern critics of canonical EP show for the paucity 
of veriﬁable information about behaviour of extinct hominins, and the lack of 
comparative evidence in many cases. However, this is a red herring, since canonical 
EP is not primarily concerned with Tinbergen’s question 4. 
If not question 4, readers might assume that canonical EP addresses Tinbergen’s 
question 3, since this is a more obviously ‘evolutionary’ question than 1 and 2. In 
this case, since adaptive value or function is about the relationship of behaviour to 
ﬁtness, canonical EP’s lack of interest in counting babies or measuring life expec-
tancies again seems anomalous. But again, this is a false friend. Although canonical 
EP uses theories or axioms concerning the relationships between behaviour and 
ﬁtness, these relationships are not the explanatory target. Indeed, the assumptions 
made about them are generally uncontentious (in ancestrally-relevant human envi-
ronments, there was gravity, objects were solid, there were males and females, 
animals and plants, social relationships, threats, allies, etc.). Canonical EP is actually 
concerned with question 1, ﬁguring out how proximate psychological mechanisms 
work. Its distinctive approach to this task is to assume that explicit consideration of 
adaptive function will help guide the project of understanding proximate mecha-
nism. That is, canonical EP claims that to progress in answering Tinbergen’s 
question 1, it can be epistemically useful to bear in mind the possible answers to

Tinbergen’s question 2. Tinbergen’s questions are distinct, but not completely 
irrelevant to one another. Nonetheless, the explanatory target for canonical EP is 
question 1, just as it is for any other kind of psychology. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
25
Commitments C4 and C5 are worthy of some further comment. The scope of 
psychological mechanisms is a priori unknown. For example, is learning which 
foods are good to eat delivered by the same mechanisms as learning which people to 
trust, or are they delivered by two distinct mechanisms? Is ﬁguring out how to build a 
ﬁre the same kind of problem as ﬁguring out how to comfort a friend, or are they 
both outputs of the capacity to reason? A very similar grain problem applies to 
adaptive problems: is avoiding predation the same adaptive problem as ﬁnding a 
mate, or are they both just instances of trying to maximize ﬁtness (Sterelny & 
Grifﬁths, 1999)? In the decades prior to the development of EP, evolutionary 
biologists had found it useful to carve the problem of maximizing ﬁtness into a set 
of sub-problems that could be speciﬁed somewhat independently of one another. 
This led to the generation of a number of important middle-level models: parental 
investment theory (Trivers, 1972), starvation-predation trade-off theory (Lima, 
1986), reciprocal altruism theory (Trivers, 1971), and so on. Each of these models 
delineated a particular sub-part of the general problem of surviving and reproducing, 
showing that speciﬁc environmental or somatic factors would be especially relevant, 
and particular kinds of responsiveness to context might be favoured by selection in 
that domain. 
Canonical EP made the gambit of assuming that the scope of psychological 
mechanisms corresponded one-to-one with to the scope of mid-level evolutionary 
biological theories (Cosmides & Tooby, 1987). For example, there was a body of 
evolutionary theory concerning social exchange, the cooperation of unrelated indi-
viduals for mutual ﬁtness beneﬁt (Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981; Trivers, 1971). 
Canonical EP assumed there would be psychological mechanisms specialized in 
making the computations required to implement such social exchange successfully: 
recognizing and remembering exchange partners, detecting cheating, calculating 
costs and beneﬁts appropriately and so on (Cosmides & Tooby, 1989). Now, there 
is no necessary reason this correspondence in scope has to hold: evolutionary 
biologists might not have carved up the problem space of ﬁtness in the same way 
natural selection has carved up the computational space of the mind. The scope 
correspondence assumption was just a starting point: if it did not lead to novel 
predictions or insights about the mind, it could be revised, either globally or for a 
speciﬁc case. But, it was a distinctive programmatic offering for how one might 
begin the difﬁcult business of studying psychological mechanisms by delineating the 
problem space in a way that was not totally arbitrary. In particular, it meant that 
mid-level theories from evolutionary biology became resources for generating 
testable hypotheses about what kinds of inputs psychological mechanisms would 
respond to and in which ways. 
One consequence of the scope correspondence gambit is that the number of 
distinct proximal psychological explanations needed to account for the human 
mind is large: (at least) one for mate choice, one for social exchange, one for food 
selection, and so on. It is also necessitates some speciﬁcation of how the otherwise

distinct mechanisms that perform these specialized tasks are integrated together (the 
‘architecture’ of the mind). This architectural project has been less thoroughly 
pursued within canonical EP than the project of trying to identify and study the 
individual specialized mechanisms (though see Barrett, 2015; Sperber, 2005; Tooby, 
2020). The assumption, because of C5, that there is a multiplicity of functionally 
distinct mechanisms stands in contrast to other approaches in psychology, where a 
small number of broad-grain explanations (associative learning, Bayesian updating, 
social learning strategies, the need for routine) is proffered as sufﬁcient. 
26
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
There are two more points to make in this section. First, much research in 
psychology effectively adopts all of C1-C5 without self-designating as EP. A great 
deal of research in cognitive development, for instance, aims to describe the func-
tionally specialized cognitive processes that emerge in a robust and reliable way in 
typically developing children. As a speciﬁc example, when items are perceived as 
physical objects, this triggers in infants assumptions that the item is physically 
cohesive, bonded, rigid, and cannot be acted on at a distance (Spelke, 1990). 
‘Core knowledge’ such as this spans multiple domains extending well beyond object 
recognition, also including knowledge about human sociality (Carey, 2009). Theo-
rizing in cognitive development is strongly informed by assumptions about the 
potential function of cognitive processes (C3/C4), and there is a corresponding 
focus on specialization to fulﬁll that function (C5). 
Second, it is possible for accounts of some phenomenon to each follow all of 
C1-C5, and yet end up with quite different substantive claims. For instance, indi-
vidual performance in reasoning tasks is modulated by the mode of presentation, and 
there are competing EP explanations of this (Cosmides, 1989; Sperber & Girotto, 
2002; Sperber et al., 1995; Fiddick et al., 2000). Both sides of this debate adopt all of 
C1-C5, but they differ in their claims of what speciﬁc cognitive processes generate 
the empirically observed phenomena. Thus, the relationship between ‘adopting an 
EP perspective’ and actual hypotheses about psychological mechanisms is deﬁnitely 
one-to-many. There can be multiple overtly EP accounts, even if they are all of the 
canonical EP ﬂavour. Between them there is epistemic competition and a need for 
inference to the best explanation, on the usual kinds of grounds of plausibility, 
parsimony, consistency with a range evidence, generativity of novel predictions, and 
so forth. Thus, EP, even in its canonical form, is not strictly a theory. It is more like a 
meta-theory; or, even looser than that, a framework for how to set about generating 
and improving theories. 
2.3 
EP Does Not Privilege Genetic Over Environmental 
Control of Behaviour 
As evolutionary psychologists have been at pains to point out (Al-shawaf et al., 
2020; Cosmides & Tooby, 1987; Kurzban & Haselton, 2006), nothing in C1-C5 
implies ﬁxity or uniformity about human manifest behaviour or cognitive contents.

On the contrary, mid-level theories from evolutionary biology show that the optimal 
strategy for solving an adaptive problem usually depends on the environment, on the 
individual’s own somatic state, and the available alternatives. The point of having a 
psychology is to be able to process these contextual variables and respond appro-
priately to them. Thus, a rather general meta-expectation arising from EP is that 
evolved organisms, including humans, should be highly sensitive to context 
(by which is meant, broadly, features of the social and non-social environment), 
and also to their own somatic state. Individuals that persisted in doing or believing 
just the same thing regardless of the environment or their own state would have very 
poor ﬁtness prospects indeed. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
27
Thus, as a ﬁrst-order generalization, in many cases we should expect manifest 
behaviour and cognitive contents to be changed by environmental inputs, broadly 
deﬁned. Hence behaviour and cognitive contents should be different for individuals 
who have different experiences. However, as a second-order generalization, this 
responsiveness to context should be somewhat systematic. That is, the same com-
binations of environmental inputs should affect all humans in similar ways. For 
example, people the world over should tend not to be sexually attracted to others 
who grew up in close proximity or in association with the same mother, even if those 
others are otherwise compatible mates. There is considerable cross-cultural evidence 
for this and like claims. There is no tension between the claim and that facts that who 
grows up in close proximity varies a lot (for example, because of polygamy or 
institutions like kibbutzim), and that other features of the social environment can 
moderate the consequences of this tendency. 
The most important claims of EP concerns not responsiveness to context (which it 
is compatible with), but the causal relevance of evolution and adaptation in 
explaining responsiveness to context. That is, humans are responsive to context in 
large part because they possess genetically evolved psychological mechanisms to 
detect those contextual features and respond to them in characteristic ways. Despite 
clear and repeated statements that EP is compatible with responsiveness to context 
(Al-shawaf et al., 2020; Cosmides & Tooby, 1987; Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2007), EP 
continues to be held up as incompatible with responsiveness to context. For exam-
ple, Levy writes ‘if EP is correct, we should [predict] that our preferences remain 
stable across different environments’ (Levy, 2004, 461). Hence, EP is often seen as 
opposed to, and possibly refuted by, the basic insight of social science (the idea that 
context is what determines behaviour has been described as ‘the central dogma of all 
social sciences’, (Glass & Bilal, 2016, 246). Though this misunderstanding has often 
been clariﬁed, our informal impression is that it persists in the ﬁeld. We brieﬂy give 
several possible reasons that it does. 
The ﬁrst is that although EP is in principle compatible with responsiveness to 
context, some presentations describe cross-cultural recurrence of the same behav-
iours and ideas as the decisive evidence in EP’s favour (Pinker, 2002). Empirical EP 
studies have looked for universal patterns of sex differences (Schmitt and Interna-
tional Sexuality Description Project, 2003), or universals in the content of moral 
systems (Curry et al., 2019). It is thus easy to infer from tokens that concern 
universals in manifest behaviour or cognitive contents that the EP type can only

account for these, not for systematic variation. It is also true that many of the simple 
universal accounts inspired by EP are context-deaf and manifestly inadequate. For 
example, a simple EP account of the prevalence of obesity in the Western world 
might claim that humans, universally, have an unregulated appetite for sweet and 
fatty food, because these were scarce in ancestral environments, and hence there was 
no selection pressure for a regulatory mechanism to exist. This account fails: 
(a) because the existence of psychological mechanisms that regulate sugar consump-
tion has been known about for decades (Cabanac et al., 1971; Fantino et al., 1983); 
and, more importantly, (b) it fails to account for the fact that obesity in the West 
mainly afﬂicts the poor, especially poor women; people who have the resources to 
choose just whatever foods they like are much more likely to be slim (McLaren, 
2007). These patterns are in fact compatible with a more sophisticated EP account, in 
which food choice and metabolic mechanisms take food availability and predict-
ability as an important environmental input (Nettle et al., 2017). Nonetheless, the 
simple, context-deaf accounts have had sufﬁcient airtime to get taken as represen-
tative of the potential of the type. 
28
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
Second, it is very easy to mistake the claim that genetic evolution and adaptation 
are highly causally relevant to how manifest behaviour responds to environmental 
context, for the more direct claim that genetic evolution and adaptation are directly 
causally relevant to manifest behaviour itself. Cosmides and Tooby (1987) are very 
careful to distinguish between these two claims, but other commentators are not. For 
example, Smith (2020, 39) writes: ‘evolutionary psychologists believe that they have 
an inferential strategy that allows them to give accurate evolutionary explanations 
for contemporary human behavior’. Once this conﬂation has been made, it leads to 
an intuition of simple zero-sum competition for explanatory relevance: more for 
genes and adaptation means less for context and culture (for example ‘the debate 
between [standard social science] and EP concerns, not whether behaviour is the 
product of genes or the environment, but the relative importance of each’ (Levy, 
2004, 461)). This zero-sum view is a fallacy, since the explanatory target of EP 
(canonical EP at any rate) is not manifest behaviour, but the design features of 
psychological mechanisms, those design features including sensitivity to context. 
Nonetheless, it is an easy fallacy to fall prey to. Moreover, scholars often need to 
invoke straw ﬁgures to deﬁne the conceptual space in which they want to position 
their ﬁndings. The rather ubiquitous social science observation that context 
(or culture) matters has more impact when set against some kind of null hypothesis 
that context (or culture) should not matter, and EP gets cast, wrongly, in this role. 
2.4 
What Would Constitute a Non-evolutionary 
Psychology? 
In this section, we tackle the question of what the concept of a non-evolutionary 
psychology could possibly represent. We can think of commitments C1 to C5 as 
deﬁning a series of nested subsets of accounts of psychology (Fig. 2.1). Any account

committed to all of them would be in the same subset as canonical EP, and 
henceforth, by our logic, would be a form of canonical EP, even if it disagreed 
with the approach of Cosmides and Tooby in matters of detail. The question of this 
section is: how many of C5 to C1 have to be abandoned before the account is not 
evolutionary any more? 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
29
Fig. 2.1 Typology of possible psychologies based on which subsets of commitments C1 to C5 they 
adhere to. For explanation see text 
C5 could be relaxed without the approach becoming remotely non-evolutionary. 
We have already pointed out that canonical EP’s correspondence assumption (one 
adaptive problem is subserved by one suite of mechanisms, and one suite of 
mechanisms solves one adaptive problem) is a gambit, a gambit that could turn 
out to be wrong. One could instead hypothesize, or discover, that evolution by 
natural selection has produced a small number of powerful, super-mechanisms 
whose computations help solve multiple adaptive problems (see e.g. Bolhuis et al., 
2011). Examples might include associative learning, reasoning ability or social 
learning strategies (see Sect. 2.5). We are not endorsing such an account: it is unclear 
that such devices, without further constraints, would be computationally adequate 
for achieving all the things that minds achieve (Sperber, 2005). Our point is that such 
an account could still be adaptationist. The super-adaptations, one could argue, have 
evolved precisely because they provide great adaptive ﬂexibility in a relatively 
simple way, and do so highly efﬁciently. The term ‘domain general’ is often used 
for the mechanisms posited in such approaches, but it is somewhat misleading: 
mechanisms always have restrictions of domain. ‘Generality’ is at most a relative 
term. No-one seriously believes that the mechanisms involved when one acquires a 
suntan or immunity to a virus are the same ones with which one learns to dance. 
Thus, every mechanism has an input domain, deﬁned by the kinds of representa-
tional content that can activate its processes, and the classes of operation it performs 
on that content. Given this, though, it makes sense to distinguish between more 
specialized mechanisms with narrower domains, and those whose domains are 
broader. Psychological mechanisms having broader domains than envisaged by 
canonical EP is a perfectly evolutionary proposal. 
A more promising proposal is that a psychology would not be evolutionary if it 
were not committed to C4. As we suggested above, canonical EP might have been

better named ‘Adaptationist Cognitive Science’, implying that adaptationism is a 
constitutive feature. Explicit appeal to the design-producing powers of natural 
selection, and to the procedures of forward- and reverse-engineering based on 
adaptive considerations, are deeply embedded in the EP literature. We concede 
that to qualify as an explicitly evolutionary approach in psychology, some reference 
to, or use of, adaptationist principles is required (though note that this does require 
evolutionary psychologists to claim that every mechanism is an adaptation; 
exaptations, by-products and constraints are also recognized within a broadly adap-
tationist framework (Buss et al., 1998)). Since much of the literature in psychology 
makes no such explicit appeal, one might be tempted to conclude that much 
psychology is ‘non-EP’. 
30
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
However, we can distinguish here between explicit EP and implicit EP. The 
former speciﬁcally invokes C4. The latter does not do so. However, if the account 
makes any appeal to notions of function in respect of psychological mechanisms 
(i.e. C3), then we would still dub it implicitly evolutionary, because the ultimate 
source of functional design is evolution by natural selection. Why do organisms have 
visual perception systems that are functionally organized to deliver object recogni-
tion and safe spatial navigation? They do because ancestral organisms that could 
better recognize objects and navigate their environments were more likely to survive 
and reproduce. Without a history of natural selection, there is no good reason that 
organisms should be so conveniently equipped to achieve such purposes. A claim 
about organismal function presupposes, and relies on, a claim about evolution by 
natural selection, even if the authors do not make this plain. C3 is in effect a weaker 
and covert version of C4. 
One possible objection here is to claim that functional organization of minds can 
stem from other sources than natural selection: for example, ontogenetic processes, 
or cultural transmission (see Wertz & Moya, 2019). As we shall see in Sect. 2.5, 
though, claims that other processes produce functional organization turn out to be 
built on a bedrock of assumed genetic adaptations that allow this to happen. That is, 
an organism can be organized by environmental inputs within its lifetime because it 
has particular kinds of plasticity. That plasticity is in turn the outcome of natural 
selection on genes: ancestors that were plastic in this way outcompeted those that 
were less plastic, or plastic in different ways (Dickins & Rahman, 2012; Nettle & 
Bateson, 2015). Relatedly, some psychological mechanisms can become function-
ally organized in certain ways through training and practice, without a history of 
natural selection on that function. The ability to read is an obvious example. 
However, reading is a derived function (Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2007), made possible 
by scaffolding on a set of mechanisms such as language processing and visual object 
recognition. Those mechanisms in turn have evolved functions. It is the functional 
organization of the constituent mechanisms with respect to their evolved functions 
that makes the derived function possible: you couldn’t learn to read unless you were 
already predisposed to parse human language and be good at detailed visual dis-
criminations. Thus, we argue, grounding the idea that a psychological mechanism 
fulﬁlls a function always leads to an invocation of the functionally organizing power 
of natural selection, either directly via evolved functions, or more indirectly via

derived functions that depend on evolved functions. As such, we insist that any 
psychology making the slightest use of C3 is implicitly evolutionary. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
31
The next possibility is that a psychology would count as non-evolutionary if it 
made no use of C3. A psychology would be non-evolutionary if posited that there are 
psychological mechanisms, but claimed that these mechanisms have no function and 
are not organized towards delivering any particular outcome for the organism. This 
seems to us to be right—this is what a non-evolutionary psychology would look like. 
We just doubt that any such approach to psychology actually exists, and can’t see 
that it would be at all generative if it did. Every subﬁeld of psychology is deeply and 
pervasively imbued with informal functional notions, whether it concerns the func-
tion of perceptual abilities, of memory, of concepts, of conformity, or of stereotypes. 
Thus, on our typology, most or even all of psychology is implicitly evolutionary. 
At this point, psychologists might be tempted to distinguish between peripheral 
psychological processes and central ones (versions of this distinction are to be found 
in Fodor (1983) and dual-process accounts of cognition (E. R. Smith & DeCoster, 
2000)). Peripheral processes such as hunger, thirst and object recognition are 
obviously homologous to those in other animals; for those processes, a notion of 
function, and a link to evolutionary history, is uncontentious. Thus, no-one would 
have a problem with the notion that the study of these peripheral processes is 
implicitly an evolutionary study. However, central processes, such as reasoning, 
meaning-making, and identity, feel different. Perhaps those processes are somehow 
unshackled from any simple function. Hence, they must be studied in some 
non-evolutionary way. We think this argument is unproductive. Peripheral and 
central processes might feel phenomenologically different, but they are all just 
psychological processes delivered by brains. The chain that begins with sound 
waves being transduced by the ear and ends with the symbolic meaning of the call 
to prayer being recognized is unitary and continuous. Any attempt to split it into two 
parts of different kinds, one peripheral and evolved, the other central and 
non-evolved, causes many more difﬁculties than it solves (Pietraszewski & Wertz, 
2021). 
Moreover, even accounts of ‘central’ human mental life also draw on some tacit 
notion of organismal function when it suits them to do so. In the Freudian scheme, 
for example, the unconscious or id is the obviously animal-like part, fulﬁlling the 
function of getting mates and attacking rivals. However, the moralistic, human-
speciﬁc superego is also conceived in functional terms. The superego functions to 
allow humans to live together with one another in harmony by providing internal 
controls on interpersonal behaviour (Freud, 2002). A human with no superego 
would, through conﬂict, lose the beneﬁts of sociality, and thus be worse off. This 
can be translated into a claim about the ﬁtness of ancestral humans who had less 
developed superegos. 
We could multiply examples. It is hard to give an account of any psychological 
process that does not somehow draw at least implicitly on some idea of the function 
of the mechanism for the purposes of the organism. They might differ widely with 
respect to which functions are supposed most relevant—being a competent member 
of a social group, making the world comprehensible through a coherent system of

meaning or a predictable set of routines, or acquiring individual material beneﬁts— 
but these are all in some sense organismal functions. Thus, the ﬁeld of psychology 
does in practice lean on at least C3 (as well as C1 and C2, which we take to be 
respectively a minimal requirement for an enquiry to count as psychology, and a 
truism). Although a non-evolutionary psychology could exist in theory, we don’t see 
any evidence of it in practice. 
32
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
2.5 
Alternatives to Evolutionary Psychology? 
In this section, we brieﬂy examine several paradigms that have been or could be 
considered competitors to EP, in an attempt to characterize which commitments they 
share with canonical EP, and where they differ. In the examples we discuss, the 
difference generally resides in C5, functional specialization. Our choice of alterna-
tive candidates is not meant to be exhaustive: our goal is rather to consider just a 
sufﬁciently diverse range of candidates, as a way to illustrate the general theses that 
any psychology can be considered at least implicitly evolutionary. 
2.5.1 
Social Role Theory 
Social role theory (Eagly & Wood, 2012) offers an account of the origins of sex 
differences in personality and social behaviour that is at least sometimes explicitly 
presented as an alternative to an EP account (e.g. ‘Sex differences in social behaviour: 
comparing social role theory and evolutionary psychology’ (Eagly, 1997)). Social role 
theory accounts for sex differences in social behaviour in the following ways. First, 
society distributes individuals of the two sexes differently into economic roles. Exactly 
how it does this depends on the ecology – exactly what kinds of productive activities 
are required – but also on men’s greater size, physical strength, and speed, and 
women’s inherently greater involvement in pregnancy and lactation. The role special-
ization thus produced is an efﬁcient division of labour given the economic need and 
the physical and reproductive sex differences. Second, individuals of both sexes 
observe the distribution of men and women across roles, and from this, develop 
gender role beliefs, such as that men are intrinsically more agentic and dominant, 
and women intrinsically more communal and caring. These gender role beliefs face 
two ways: into the self, and out toward others. Self-facing, they become internalized, 
and become standards toward which the individual self-regulates, generating in effect 
a self-fulﬁlling prophecy: women behave more communally in part because they 
believe women are more communal. Outward-facing, gender role beliefs lead people 
to negatively sanction, or at least not reward, role-atypical behaviour in other people. 
Adults also use gender role beliefs in the socialization of children, in part preparing 
them for the set of expectancies that they will in fact face as adults. 
Eagly and Wood are explicit that their account has an ultimate evolutionary 
component (Eagly & Wood, 2012). In particular, they discuss the adaptive basis of

sex differences in physical traits, such as size, strength and ability to gestate and 
lactate. However, they see psychological sex differences (in personality or motivation) 
as not the direct result of adaptive evolution, but rather as indirect products of the 
division of labour, and the ability of humans to infer and internalise role beliefs. 
However, the ability of humans to infer and internalise role beliefs, and also the ability 
of humans to create an efﬁcient division of labour, must themselves depend on 
psychological mechanisms (albeit, ones that do not themselves differ by sex). It 
would be possible to be adaptationist about those mechanisms too. For example, 
one could model the evolutionary dynamics of under what circumstances it is bene-
ﬁcial to accept and internalize a socially deﬁned role. An individual able to do so 
would gain beneﬁts of coordination and smooth, conﬂict free membership of groups, 
though possibly at the expense of accepting roles with lower ﬁtness prospects than 
they could forge alone. Such questions have been explored, for example by reproduc-
tive skew theorists (Kokko & Johnstone, 1999; Vehrencamp,  1983). They ﬁnd that 
voluntary submission to limiting roles (or subordinate positions) is adaptive under 
some conditions, but not under others. For example, outside options, costs of conﬂict, 
and relative power matter. The predictions of such models could nuance the account of 
social role psychology considerably: psychological mechanisms for role internaliza-
tion should not be expected to produce complete, unconditional compliance. Instead, 
the mechanisms might be designed to respond (with role rejection or questioning) to 
certain kinds of contextual cues. Both the foundational observations of social role 
theory (that sex-typical behaviours change as the division of labour changes), and the 
political aspiration (to free women from oppressive gender role expectancies) would 
ﬁt well with the  ‘vigilant role-internalizing’ psychology that such evolutionary models 
would help understand (see also related discussion in Sect. 2.5.4). 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
33
Social role theory is already, by its own admission, evolutionary, and is adapta-
tionist about physical sex differences. There is no reason that it could not also be 
adaptationist about its postulated role-internalising mechanisms. The real difference 
from the canonical EP accounts to which it gets contrasted is only the functional 
specialization assumed. For social role theory, the adaptive problem is something 
like ‘ﬁguring out how to socially coordinate given the local ecology’, and the 
proposed solution is role-internalizing psychological mechanisms. This is distinct 
from the adaptive problems being obtaining resources from males (for women), and 
access to fertile women (for men), and the solution being evolved preferences that 
intrinsically differ by sex. Thus, even if social role theory is right, it is not a challenge 
to the broad project of evolutionary, even adaptationist, analysis. 
2.5.2 
Cultural Evolutionary Psychology and Dual 
Inheritance Theory 
Cultural evolutionary psychology has been presented by Heyes (2018) as a compet-
itor to canonical EP, though she also acknowledges the shared commitments of the 
two approaches. Heyes argues that key psychological mechanisms seen by many

evolutionary psychologists as genetic adaptations (for example, theory of mind) are 
in fact created through patterns of teaching and cultural transmission. These mech-
anisms are thus not direct products of genetic evolution. Although this appears a 
strong challenge to canonical EP, the differences are perhaps less profound than 
might be imagined. First, canonical EP admits of psychological abilities that do not 
directly represent evolved adaptations, but rather, are derived abilities built up 
through socialization practices. Reading was mentioned above as an obvious exam-
ple. Such abilities must build on the mechanisms that are innately there: object 
recognition, plus the capacity to process language. Heyes concurs with this view, 
speciﬁcally describing a ‘starter kit’ of evolved abilities, such as social motivations, 
attentional biases for faces and voices, associative learning, and capacities for 
inhibitory control and working memory. Heyes is apparently happy to be adapta-
tionist about this starter kit. Thus, both Heyes and canonical EP agree that there is a 
set of evolved psychological adaptations, and then a set of derived abilities that are 
built up, through pedagogy and social transmission, scaffolding on the evolved adap-
tations, in particular societies. They simply disagree about which abilities belong in 
the two sets. Both would put literacy in the derived set. Heyes but not canonical EP 
would put theory of mind in the derived set too (see Jacob & Scott-Phillips, 2021 for 
discussion). These are substantive differences, but they do not make cultural evolu-
tionary psychology either non-evolutionary or non-adaptationist. 
34
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
Again, the key difference resides in the type of functional specialization commit-
ted to. For Heyes, the evolved adaptations, such as associative learning, have a broad 
domain. Concomitantly, the granularity of adaptationist analysis is broad too (the 
causally relevant adaptive problem is ‘acquiring the best things to do in the local 
environment’, rather than canonical EP’s ﬁner-grained parsing of adaptive prob-
lems). This broad parsing is similar to that of dual inheritance theory (Boyd & 
Richerson, 1985; Richerson & Boyd, 2005), a distinct tradition of cultural evolu-
tionary thinking that predates Heyes and differs in some ways. The notable claim in 
this tradition is that humans have a second system of inheritance, culture, which 
allows human societies to achieve complex non-genetic adaptations to their envi-
ronment, thus explaining human success in developing technologies, institutions and 
skills suitable for many environments. We will not review this approach in detail 
here. We note, however, that at its heart lies a claim that humans possess a set of 
genetically evolved adaptations for learning from others (these are known as social 
learning strategies; examples include conformist learning, prestige-biased learning, 
and so on). Dual inheritance theorists are explicitly adaptationist about the evolution 
of these mechanisms, viewing them as near-optimal solutions to ﬁguring out what to 
do in variable environments (Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Henrich & McElreath, 
2003). 
Again, the difference from canonical EP is in the domain breadth of the mech-
anisms, and hence, relatedly, in the implied breadth of the causally relevant adaptive 
problem. Social learning strategies are used equipotentially to acquire a great variety 
of different cognitive contents, because they are beneﬁcial overall. Indeed, this is one 
of the important claims of the approach, because it means that certain behaviours that 
are in fact not genetically adaptive (such as altruism) can ‘hitch-hike’, getting

transmitted as a side-effect of the ﬁtness beneﬁts across other domains of learning 
socially (Boyd & Richerson, 2009; Henrich, 2004). Thus, the parsing of the adaptive 
problem, in dual inheritance theory, is ‘ﬁguring out good ways to live in the current 
environment’, rather than narrow, separate parsing for each content domain that we 
ﬁnd in canonical EP. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
35
2.5.3 
Bayesian Cognitive Science 
Bayesian inference is a method of statistical inference used to calculate and update 
probabilities under uncertainty. In the past three decades, roughly concomitant with 
the emergence of canonical EP, Bayesian inference has been used to formally model 
many cognitive processes, from perception to planning, language comprehension to 
learning (Anderson, 1991; Jones & Love, 2011; Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Zednik & 
Jäkel, 2016). As one example, consider communication and other forms of social 
interaction. Here, both production and comprehension are subject to uncertainty. On 
the production side: what behaviour will most likely trigger the intended inference in 
this audience? On the comprehension side: what inference could have been intended, 
given this behaviour? Bayesian inference provides the formal tools with which to 
approach such questions as inter-related planning problems over others’ mental 
states (e.g. Goodman & Frank, 2016; Ho et al., 2019; Shafto et al., 2014). 
The generality and ﬂexibility of this approach has led some researchers to 
describe Bayesianism as an overarching framework for cognitive science: “a unify-
ing framework for. . .  perception, learning, reasoning, language comprehension and 
production, social cognition, action planning and motor control, as well as innumer-
able real-world tasks that require the integration of these capacities” (Chater et al., 
2011, 194). Cognitive processes are modelled as problems of inference under 
uncertainty, with model speciﬁcation (for example, prior structure, representational 
formats) tailored to speciﬁc problems. Optimal performance is often calculated as a 
benchmark for actual human performance, but in general Bayesian cognitive science 
prospers without explicit reference to the conceptual tools of EP. Does it therefore 
offer a potential non-evolutionary psychology? 
On the contrary, Bayesian cognitive science adopts strong versions of at least 
four, and arguably all ﬁve of the commitments we described in §2. In particular, in 
practice it defaults to a great deal of narrow functional specialization (C5), because 
separate computational models are developed for each speciﬁc task, as necessary. 
Bayesian cognitive science also tends to be adaptationist (C4). Optimal performance 
is routinely used as a benchmark for actual human performance. The expectation that 
humans might perform near-optimally must, in the end, be grounded in some appeal 
to natural selection, either directly or through some process of learning or plasticity 
that is itself evolved. These analyses are thus adaptationist in practice, whether or not 
they make the connection to genetic evolution explicit. As such, Bayesian cognitive 
science is in fact complementary to canonical EP (Pietraszewski & Wertz, 2011). 
Whereas canonical EP aims to describe the speciﬁc adaptive tasks that human minds

have been selected to solve, Bayesian cognitive science provides formal tools with 
which to describe possible computational solutions to such problems. 
36
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
2.5.4 
Giddens’ Social Theory 
Here, we extend our analysis, as a proof of principle, to a framework that comes from 
the social sciences, and as such would be seldom thought of evolutionary. This is the 
account of human psychology given by Anthony Giddens in The Constitution of 
Society (Giddens, 1984). This is a work of sociology, not psychology. Giddens’ 
purpose in sketching an outline of what he assumes about human psychology is to 
identify the set of human capacities or dispositions that make human social practices 
and social structures possible. 
Giddens admits of a range of human motivations and tendencies. He sees people 
as having some (relatively unspeciﬁed) unconscious motivations, a general ability to 
build up practical knowledge of how to function in their environments, and also a 
discursive ability which allows them to articulate, reinterpret, communicate, chal-
lenge and discuss, the activities of their lives. Distinctively, Giddens claims that 
most of the time, the social practices we perform are only diffusely motivated. That 
is, humans have a need for predictability, and hence will acquire routines from their 
environment and reproduce them, because in so doing they create predictability in 
daily life. This is without those routines satisfying any more speciﬁc personal need. 
He attributes this to a psychological mechanism, the ‘basic security system’, that 
ﬁnds unpredictability costly and threatening (p. 41ff). He does concede that the 
desire for predictability is not the only human motivation. Thus, even though the 
need for routine may be key in explaining the stability of many arbitrary-seeming 
social practices, people also reshape, and sometimes reject, these in accordance with 
their purposes. More speciﬁcally, in ‘moments of crisis’, where routines are not 
doing their job, people bring their practices into the focus of discursive conscious-
ness, and may bid to change them in fundamental and self-conscious ways. 
The basic security system by no means exhausts human psychology, in Giddens’ 
view, but it is a distinctive claim and we focus on it here. The basic security system is 
a psychological mechanism seen as functional for the individual. Hence, it would be 
possible to be adaptationist about it: under what circumstances would a general 
tendency to acquire and reproduce routines be adaptive? Indeed, a speciﬁc adapta-
tionist account of the adoption of arbitrary routine and convention has recently been 
provided by Theriault et al. (2021). Drawing on the large literature on ‘predictive 
processing’, they point out that the brain responds to differences between what it 
expects and what transpires. This prediction error is, ex hypothesi, metabolically 
costly, and learning can be seen as the process by which the organism minimises it, 
by revising its internal models, and/or by changing its environment. Theriault et al. 
(2021) argue that there are a wide variety of circumstances where, within tolerances, 
it is individually beneﬁcial to follow conventions and routines, exactly because the 
metabolic cost of prediction error is thereby reduced. Roughly speaking, if I do what

you expect, your behaviour in response is closer to what I expect, and both your and 
crucially my prediction error cost is lower. As they put it: “ﬂuent social interactions 
are metabolically efﬁcient social interactions” (p. 118). Since metabolic cost is a 
ﬁtness-related quantity, managing it is ﬁtness-enhancing, and hence this is an 
adaptationist account. According to Theriault et al. (2021), we should expect 
human societies to contain a substantial quantity of routine that is fairly arbitrary 
in its content and not directly motivated by any consideration other than achieving 
predictability itself, exactly as Giddens claims. Like Giddens, Theriault et al. (2021) 
do not claim that predictable routine is the only human motivation. Rather, people 
have a plethora of other motivations, but these need to be quite strong to overcome 
the metabolic cost and social dysﬂuency of breaking routine. They thus surface when 
conventions are very costly with respect to other goals, in something like Giddens’ 
moments of crisis (see also discussion of role-internalizing psychology in 
Sect. 2.5.1). 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
37
Our aim here has been to show that a social science account apparently light years 
from EP still assumes notions of organismal functionality, and thus is at least implicit 
EP. Indeed, the abilities postulated in this account can be subject to explicit adap-
tationist analysis, making it explicit EP without doing violence to the key claims. 
Again, a key difference from canonical EP resides in the functional specialization of 
the assumed mechanisms. For Giddens, and presumably for Theriault et al. (2021), 
the functional domain of the routinizing mechanisms is broad: prediction-error-
minimizing routines will appear equipotentially across many domains of life, and 
be explained in the same way. This is contrast to the multiplicity of narrow adaptive 
problems, met by multiplicity of distinct functionally specialized mechanisms, and 
hence multiplicity of different proximal explanations, that we ﬁnd in canonical EP. 
2.6 
Conclusions 
We have hunted high and low for a real example of a non-evolutionary psychology, 
and not obviously found one. Accounts of human psychology generally rely on some 
claims about human psychological mechanisms, which they see characterize, even if 
inchoately, as functional with respect to some set of organismal goals. This notion of 
functionality presupposes, directly or indirectly, a history of natural selection. Thus, 
accounts of human psychology are at least implicitly evolutionary. Hence, we 
suggest that the distinction between EP and ‘non-EP’ should be retired. Theories 
in psychology differ in substantive ways, but the dichotomy ‘evolutionary or not’ is 
not especially useful. Every theory should be scrutinized based not on a distinction 
of type, but on the content of its character: what are the mechanisms implied; are they 
computationally adequate for the task; what are the grounds for positing them; what 
predictions does the theory make, and how well are those predictions supported? 
Some readers may be alarmed to discover that they have been evolutionary 
psychologists all this time. We would like to reassure them with some conclusions. 
First, as we have argued, the class of evolutionary psychologies is a very broad one.

Accepting that one is, after all, an evolutionary psychologist does not force one to 
accept the exact arguments of canonical EP, either in general or for any speciﬁc case. 
Second, although all psychology is evolutionary psychology, this doesn’t mean that 
all psychologists have to talk about evolution all the time. Biology is often said to be 
a discipline uniﬁed by the theory of evolution (Dobzhansky, 1973). Certainly, few 
biologists to our knowledge identify what they do as ‘non-evolutionary biology’. 
However, this does not mean that all biologists talk about evolution explicitly in their 
research programmes. Biology mostly consists in ﬁguring out how biological mech-
anisms work. Much of this ﬁguring out goes on through the usual cycle of proximal 
hypothesis and test, with the theory of evolution as no more than a background 
presence. There is no reason to think that psychology should be different. Explicitly 
adaptationist reasoning will prove useful at appropriate points, perhaps to differing 
extents in different research topics, but the admission that all psychology is evolu-
tionary psychology does not mean that evolution should always be explicitly 
foregrounded. We would see greater acceptance of the importance of evolution as 
an enrichment—the conceptual resources of evolutionary biology provide an addi-
tional source of theory and hypothesis, without taking anything away—rather than a 
constraint on what kinds of concerns should be pursued. 
38
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
Having said that, we believe that the explicit link to evolution and adaption is 
very useful for psychology. This is because of psychology’s characteristic level of 
analysis, what David Marr called the computational level (Marr, 1982). The com-
putational level abstracts from much of the detail of physical implementation, to 
focus on what problems the mechanism solves and the processes by which it does 
this. For a psychological mechanism, the question of what the problem the system 
solves has a privileged conceptual connection to important organismal outcomes: 
staying alive, gaining information about the environment, avoiding threats, ﬁnding 
food, maintaining social relationships and so on. These in turn have a privileged 
connection to ﬁtness and evolution. The moment one adopts the computational level 
of analysis, one necessarily confronts issues of function for the organism in a very 
obvious way. This means that the claim ‘nothing in psychology makes sense except 
in the light of evolution’ might be at least as true as the claim ‘nothing in biology 
makes sense except in the light of evolution’. Similarly, the claim ‘all psychology 
must be evolutionary psychology’ has perhaps more force than the (also true) claim 
that ‘all psychology must be quantum psychology’. You could not have a psychol-
ogy inconsistent with the principles of quantum mechanics, but considerations of 
quantum mechanics obtrude much less directly when studying psychological mech-
anisms than considerations linked to evolutionary history do. 
Some readers may still be concerned that explanatory layers of great value are 
necessarily lost once we admit the relevance of genetic evolution to the human mind. 
These layers might be (variously) the layer of meaning; the layer of agency; the layer 
of culture; or the layer of social structure or context. A full answer to this lingering 
concern is beyond the scope of this paper, but we believe it to be misplaced (see 
Boyer, 2018; Nettle, 2018; Sperber, 2006 for further discussion). There is no zero-
sum competition between the importance of evolution and the importance of mean-
ing, society, agency or environment (see Sect. 2.3). Taking an evolutionary

perspective is more than just compatible with believing these layers to be important. 
These layers arise from humans, with all their attributes and capacities, interacting 
and communicating in speciﬁc material, social and symbolic contexts over time. 
Thus, the layers can only be understood naturalistically by including enquiry into the 
evolved attributes and capacities that humans have as part of the overall project. 
2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
39
References 
Al-shawaf, L., Lewis, D. M. G., Wehbe, Y. S., & Buss, D. M. (2020). Context, environment and 
learning in evolution psychology. In Encyclopedia of evolutionary psychological science. 
Springer Nature. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16999-6 
Anderson, J. R. (1991). Is human cognition adaptive? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14(3), 
471–485. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00070801 
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of cooperation. Science, 211, 1390–1396. 
Barrett, H. C. (2015). The shape of thought. Oxford University Press. 
Bolhuis, J. J., Brown, G. R., Richardson, R. C., & Laland, K. N. (2011). Darwin in mind: New 
opportunities for evolutionary psychology. PLoS Biol, 9(7), e1001109. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pbio.1001109 
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the evolutionary process. University of Chicago 
Press. 
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (2009). Culture and the evolution of human cooperation. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences, 364(1533), 
3281–3288. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0134 
Boyer, P. (2018). Minds make societies: How cognition explains the world humans create. 
Yale University Press. 
Buss, D. M., Haselton, M. G., Shackelford, T. K., Bleske, A. L., & Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1998). 
Adaptations, exaptations, and spandrels. American Psychologist, 53(5), 533–548. https://doi. 
org/10.1037/0003-066X.53.5.533 
Cabanac, M., Duclaux, R., & Spector, N. H. (1971). Sensory feedback in regulation of body weight: 
Is there a ponderostat? Nature, 229(5280), 125–127. https://doi.org/10.1038/229125a0 
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford University Press. 
Chater, N., Goodman, N., Grifﬁths, T. L., Kemp, C., Oaksford, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011). The 
imaginary fundamentalists: The unshocking truth about Bayesian cognitive science. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 34(4), 194–196. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X11000239 
Confer, J. C., Easton, J. A., Fleischman, D. S., Goetz, C. D., Lewis, D. M. G., Perilloux, C., & Buss, 
D. M. (2010). Evolutionary psychology: Controversies, questions, prospects, and limitations. 
American Psychologist, 65(2), 110–126. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018413 
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how humans 
reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31(3), 187–276. 
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1987). From evolution to behavior: Evolutionary psychology as the 
missing link. In J. Dupré (Ed.), The latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality 
(pp. 276–306). The MIT Press. 
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1989). Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture, part 
II. Case study: A computational theory of social exchange. Ethology and Sociobiology, 10, 
51–97. 
Curry, O. S., Mullins, D. A., & Whitehouse, H. (2019). Is it good to cooperate? Testing the theory 
of morality-as-cooperation in 60 societies. Current Anthropology, 60,  47–69. https://doi.org/10. 
1086/701478

40
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
Dickins, T. E., & Rahman, Q. (2012). The extended evolutionary synthesis and the role of soft 
inheritance in evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 279(1740), 
2913–2921. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012.0273 
Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. The 
American Biology Teacher, 35(3), 125–129. https://doi.org/10.2307/4444260 
Eagly, A. H. (1997). Sex differences in social behavior: Comparing social role theory and 
evolutionary psychology. American Psychologist, 52, 1380–1383. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
9781444390933.ch15 
Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W. (2012). Social role theory. In Handbook of theories of social psychology 
(pp. 458–476). Sage Publications. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446249222.n49 
Fantino, M., Baigts, F., Cabanac, M., & Apfelbaum, M. (1983). Effects of an overfeeding 
regimen—The affective component of the sweet sensation. Appetite, 4(3), 155–164. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0195-6663(83)80028-2 
Fiddick, L., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). No interpretation without representation: The role of 
domain-speciﬁc representations and inferences in the Wason selection task. Cognition, 77(1), 
1–79. 
Fodor, J. (1983). The modularity of mind: An essay in faculty psychology. MIT Press. 
Freud, S. (2002). Civilization and its discontents. Penguin. 
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Outline of the theory of structuration. Polity Press. 
Glass, T. A., & Bilal, U. (2016). Are neighborhoods causal? Complications arising from the? 
Stickiness? Of ZNA. Social Science and Medicine, 166, 244–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
socscimed.2016.01.001 
Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2016). Pragmatic language interpretation as probabilistic 
inference. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(11), 818–829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016. 
08.005 
Henrich, J. (2004). Cultural group selection, coevolutionary processes and large-scale cooperation. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 53(1), 3–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-
2681(03)00094-5 
Henrich, J., & McElreath, R. (2003). The evolution of cultural evolution. Evolutionary Anthropol-
ogy, 12, 123–135. https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.10110 
Heyes, C. M. (2018). Cognitive gadgets: The cultural evolution of thinking. Harvard University 
Press. 
Ho, M. K., Cushman, F., Littman, M. L., & Austerweil, J. L. (2019). People teach with rewards and 
punishments as communication, not reinforcements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 148(3), 520–549. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000569 
Jacob, P., & Scott-Phillips, T. C. (2021). Is mindreading a gadget? Synthese, 199, 1–27. 
Jones, M., & Love, B. C. (2011). Bayesian fundamentalism or enlightenment? On the explanatory 
status and theoretical contributions of Bayesian models of cognition. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 34(4), 169–188. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X10003134 
Kokko, H., & Johnstone, R. A. (1999). Social queuing in animal societies: a dynamic model of 
reproductive skew. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 
266(1419), 571–578. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1999.0674 
Kurzban, R., & Haselton, M. G. (2006). Making Hay out of straw: Real and imagined controversies 
in evolutionary psychology. In J. H. Barkow (Ed.), Missing the revolution. Oxford University 
Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195130027.001.0001 
Levy, N. (2004). Evolutionary psychology, human universals, and the standard social science 
model. Biology and Philosophy, 19(3), 459–472. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:BIPH. 
0000036111.64561.63 
Lewis, D. M. G., Al-Shawaf, L., Conroy-Beam, D., Asao, K., & Buss, D. M. (2017). Evolutionary 
psychology: A how-to guide. American Psychologist, 72(4), 353–373. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
a0040409 
Lima, S. L. (1986). Predation risk and unpredictable feeding conditions: Determinants of body mass 
in birds. Ecology, 67(2), 377–385.

2
Is a Non-evolutionary Psychology Possible?
41
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational approach. Freeman & Co. 
McLaren, L. (2007). Socioeconomic status and obesity. Epidemiologic Reviews, 29(1), 29–48. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxm001 
Nettle, D. (2018). Hanging on to the edges: Essays on science, society and the academic life. 
OpenBook Publishers. 
Nettle, D., & Bateson, M. (2015). Adaptive developmental plasticity: What is it, how can we 
recognize it and when can it evolve? Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
282(1812), 20151005. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.1005 
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity in humans: 
The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40, e105–e105. https://doi.org/10. 
1017/S0140525X16000947 
Pietraszewski, D., & Wertz, A. (2011). Reverse engineering the structure of cognitive mechanisms. 
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34(August), 209–210. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S0140525X11000380 
Pietraszewski, D., & Wertz, A. E. (2021). Why evolutionary psychology should abandon modu-
larity. Perspectives on Psychological Science., 17, 465–490. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1745691621997113 
Pinker, S. (2002). The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. Penguin. 
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005). Not by genes alone: How culture transformed human 
evolution. University of Chicago Press. 
Schmitt, D. P., & International Sexuality Description Project. (2003). Universal sex differences in 
the desire for sexual variety: Tests from 52 nations, 6 continents, and 13 islands. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(1), 85–104. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.1.85 
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Grifﬁths, T. L. (2014). A rational account of pedagogical reasoning: 
Teaching by, and learning from, examples. Cognitive Psychology, 71(June), 55–89. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2013.12.004 
Smith, S. E. (2020). Is evolutionary psychology possible? Biological Theory, 15(1), 39–49. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s13752-019-00336-4 
Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual process models in social and cognitive psychology: 
Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 4, 108–131. 
Spelke, E. S. (1990). Principles of object perception. Cognitive Science, 14, 29–56. 
Sperber, D. (2005). Modularity and relevance: How can a massively modular mind by ﬂexible and 
context-sensitive? In P. Caruthers, S. Laurence, & S. Stich (Eds.), The innate mind. Structure 
and contents (pp. 53–68). Oxford University Press. 
Sperber, D. (2006). Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Blackwell. 
Sperber, D., & Girotto, V. (2002). Use or misuse of the selection task? Rejoinder to Fiddick, 
Cosmides, and Tooby. Cognition, 85(3), 277–290. 
Sperber, D., & Hirschfeld, L. (2007). Culture and modularity. The Innate Mind: Culture and 
Cognition, 2, 149–164. 
Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance theory explains the selection task. Cognition, 
57(1), 31–95. 
Sterelny, K., & Grifﬁths, T. (1999). Sex and death: An introduction to the philosophy of biology. 
University of Chicago Press. 
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Grifﬁths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: 
Statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science, 331(6022), 1279–1285. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1192788 
Theriault, J. E., Young, L., & Barrett, L. F. (2021). The sense of should: A biologically-based 
framework for modeling social pressure. Physics of Life Reviews, 36, 100–136. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.plrev.2020.01.004 
Tinbergen, N. (1963). On aims and methods of ethology. Zeitschrift Fur Tierpsychologie, 20, 
410–433.

42
D. Nettle and T. Scott-Phillips
Tooby, J. (2020). Evolutionary psychology as the crystalizing Core of a uniﬁed modern social 
science. Evolutionary Behavioral Sciences, 14(4), 390–403. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
ebs0000250 
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1989). Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture, part 
I. Ethology and Sociobiology, 10(1–3), 29–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(89)90012-5 
Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 
35–57. https://doi.org/10.1086/406755 
Trivers, R. (1972). Parental investment and sexual selection. In B. Campbell (Ed.), Sexual selection 
and the descent of man, 1871–1971 (pp. 136–179). Aldine. 
Vehrencamp, S. L. (1983). A model for the evolution of despotic versus egalitarian societies. 
Animal Behaviour, 31(3), 667–682. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-3472(83)80222-X 
Wertz, A. E., & Moya, C. (2019). Pathways to cognitive design. Behavioural Processes, 161, 
73–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2018.05.013 
Zednik, C., & Jäkel, F. (2016). Bayesian reverse-engineering considered as a research strategy for 
cognitive science. Synthese, 193(12), 3951–3985. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1180-3

