Rutherford Atom
671
R
Russell–Saunders Coupling
Klaus Hentschel
The  vector model provides various ways of calculating the vectorial sum of all
the contributing angular momenta li and  spins si = 1/2 for atoms with more than
one  electron. ( Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model). Either all the
li are ﬁrst summed up to one L, and then combined with S = 
i si, or all the li
and si are ﬁrst summed up separately to ji with J = 
i ji. The noncommutativ-
ity of  operators makes these two procedures in general non-equivalent, yielding
different combinatorics, and thus different energy levels and transitions. The ﬁrst
possibility is called Russell–Saunders coupling (also referred to as L-S coupling or
strong coupling because it assumes that the interaction of L and S to form a joint
J for each electron is much stronger than between different  electrons). For mag-
netic dipole radiation, the  selection rules are: J = ±1 or 0, and similar for
L and M with the additional constraint that a transition from M = 0 to M = 0
is forbidden for J = 0. The selection rule S = 0 leads to a prohibition of in-
tercombinations. Russell-Saunders coupling is valid for the lighter, hydrogen-like
atom  Bohr’s atom model, for which the multiplet splitting is small compared to
the energy difference of the levels with the same electron conﬁguration but different
L. For heavier atoms and for the energetically higher terms,  jj-coupling yields the
better approximation. Transition cases between the two couplings also occur (see,
e.g. [2], 175f.).
Literature
1. G. Herzberg: Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure (New York: Prentice-Hall 1937, 2nd
ed. New York: Dover Publications 1944) (http://wwwchem.uwimona.edu.jm:1104/courses/
RScoupling.html; accessed July 20, 2006)
2. C. Candler: Atomic Spectra and the Vector Model (Princeton: Van Nostrand 1937, esp. chaps.
11, 16–18)
Rutherford Atom
J.L. Heilbron
The identiﬁcation of the “corpuscle” (later renamed  “electron”) by J.J. Thomson
(1856–1940) in 1897 inspired the design of atomic models by the British school of
mechanistic physics. The obvious initial assumption, based on relative weights, was

672
Rutherford Atom
that atoms consisted of thousands of elementary particles whose measured ratio of
charge to mass (e/m) was about 2000 times that of the hydrogen atom  Bohr’s
atom model (e/m)H as known from electrolysis. Further information came from the
spontaneous emission of rays from radioactive substances. These were the alpha and
beta rays distinguished by Rutherford in 1898 and identiﬁed as material particles
through bending in a magnetic ﬁeld: by 1900 it was known that (e/m)β = (e/m),
and therefore that the beta ray probably was identical with the corpuscle, and by
1904 that (e/m)α = (1/2)(e/m)H and therefore (if eα was not smaller than e) that
the alpha particle was heavier than a hydrogen atom.
Around 1900 physicists began to direct alpha and beta particles from naturally
radioactive substances onto various targets to see what would happen. Thomson
evaluated the results for beta particles on the assumption that the observed devi-
ations in their paths arose from a large number of very small pushes exerted on
them by individual corpuscles constituting the target atoms. However, observation
did not agree with theory on the original assumption that the number of  elec-
trons n in an atom of relative atomic weight A (AH = 1) was around 1000A. By
1906 Thomson had discovered that to bring his theory of multiple scattering into
approximate agreement with the facts, he had to assume that n ≈3A.
This result was important, for two reasons. For one, it gave the positive charge
in or on the atom a more substantial role than it had in  Thomson’s atom model,
where it was merely a property of the assembled electrons. Then he had ascribed
the entire weight of the atom to its electrons; by reducing their number by three
orders of magnitude, he had necessarily to ascribe most of the weight of the atom
to its positive charge. Still, there should be many electrons even in very light atoms.
Rutherford had proved by 1908 that eα = −2e and that the alpha particle is a helium
atom minus two electrons. It followed from these results and the previous ﬁndings
e ≈3A and (e/m)α = (1/2)(e/m)H that AHe ≈4 and nα ≈10, that is, that
the alpha particle retained some ten electrons and, presumably, was a structure of
atomic dimensions.
Against this background, Thomson’s former student Ernest Rutherford (1871–
1937), by then (1910) professor of physics at the University of Manchester, inves-
tigated the scattering of alpha particles  large-angle scattering. He took up the
subject not from a desire to devise a better atomic model, but in order to improve
his method of deducing the charge carried by an alpha particle. The experiments
were not entirely reproducible owing, in Rutherford’s opinion, to the scattering of
alpha particles from the walls of the tubes that conﬁned them. He assigned two of
his assistants, Hans Geiger (1882–1945) and Ernest Marsden (1889–1970),to deter-
mine the extent of the scattering in order to be able to correct for it.  Large-angle
scattering; scattering experiments.
Geiger and Marsden showed that one of every 8000 alpha particles was turned
through more than 90 degrees by collisions on a platinum or gold target. Ruther-
ford’s intuition refused to accept that Thomson’s atoms could reﬂect alpha particles,
supposed to be of atomic size, by a series of collisions with atomic electrons. There
were not nearly enough of them (n ≈3A!). In his ﬁrst efforts to calculate the proba-
bility of a reﬂection, Rutherford drew the alpha particle as if it were an atom; but as

Rutherford Atom
673
R
S
O
S
A
P
P
N
θ
Fig. 1 Rutherford’s diagram for large-angle single scattering (Source: Wikimedia Commons). The
force centre, considered at rest, is at S; the hyperbola PAP′, of which S is the external focus, is the
path of the alpha particle; p, the “impact parameter,” is the perpendicular dropped from the focus
to the original direction of the incoming particle. If the force between the particle and the nucleus
is attractive, the same trajectory can be produced with the internal focus S′ as force centre. For a
time Rutherford thought that the nucleus might be negative, and the force on the alpha particle an
attraction. (Rutherford’s draftsman erred in making the distance OA, where O is the crossing of
the asymptotes, less than OS; S′ lies to the right of A at a distance OS′ = OS.)” Source: Wikipedia
Commons
he progressed, he seems to have assimilated it to a beta particle, that is, to a charged
mass point. This tacit assumption in effect introduced the  nuclear model for the
helium atom; for, if an alpha particle was a point with a double positive charge, the
helium atom, evidently of atomic dimensions, must have two electrons in orbits very
large in comparison with the central charge.
Assuming that a platinum or gold target had the same structure as a helium atom,
but with a central point charge of 100e, Rutherford could derive the Geiger-Marsden
result on the further supposition that the widely scattered alpha particles received
their entire deviation in a single stroke from a large central charge occupying a
very small volume, and not from many slight deﬂections in encounters with the
atomic electrons. That recovered at the high end of the periodic table the relation
n ≈A/2 required for helium in order that the alpha particle be a point charge in the
scattering calculation (APt ≈200). Thus the primary evidence Rutherford offered
for his nuclear model rested not only on the Geiger-Marsden experiments but also
on a novel “single-scattering” approach opposed to the “multiple scattering” theory
developed by Thomson.

674
Rutherford Atom
The difference in atomic weight between elements in a row in the periodic ta-
ble of the elements averages about two units; hence, according to Rutherford’s
approximation n ≈A/2, n ≈A/2 ≈1. That deduction inspired and anchored
the concept of atomic number. Assigning then to each element an atomic number Z
equal to its place in the table, and assuming that chemists had not missed any ele-
ments (or had left the right number of spaces for ones unknown), Z = 1 ≈n. In
Rutherford’s theory, Ze represents the central atomic charge or, as it soon was called,
nucleus; the charge on the hydrogen nucleus ZHe should be e if no fractional elec-
tronic charge exists. Apparently chemists had succeeded in arranging the elements
by their weight only by luck, only because, in general, the sequence of A is usually
that of Z. Anomalies occur at K/A, Ni/Co, and I/Te, where arrangement by A in-
verts the chemical order. In the nuclear model, Z, which numbers the electrons in a
neutral atom, indicates chemical properties. Organizing the table by Z rather than A
removed the three anomalies and brought the discovery that atomic weight does not
control chemistry. A given chemical behaviour might be compatible with a range of
atomic weights. Hence the coeval discovery of the principle of isotopy in the exis-
tence of radioactive elements with the same chemistry and different atomic weights
found a perfect representation in the Rutherford atom. The electronic structure and
Z determined chemical behaviour, the weight of the nucleus its radioactivity.
Rutherford’s group at Manchester included several people who worked out the
consequences of isotopy and atomic number, particularly Henry Moseley (1887–
1915), George de Hevesy (1885–1960), and Niels Bohr (1885–1962). Bohr also
made good use of a consequence of the nuclear atom that most physicists thought
its chief demerit. The hydrogen atom with a single orbiting electron is radically
unstable: if obliged to follow the ordinary laws of mechanics and electrodynamics,
the electron would either fall into the nucleus by radiating away its energy or be
driven out of the atom by any passing electromagnetic disturbance. Bohr insisted
on this plain fact, which the plenary atoms of Thomson disguised, to ground his
argument that microphysics required a principle foreign to ordinary physics in order
to account for the stability of atoms. His dictum that atomic electrons whose mo-
tions satisﬁed a certain condition incorporating Planck’s quantum would be stable
against radiation loss and mechanical perturbations made it possible to bring the
precise measurements of  spectroscopy to bear on the nuclear model and thereby
to open up the subatomic quantum world. See also  Atomic models, Bohr’s atom
model.
Primary Literature
1. E. Rutherford: The scattering of alpha and beta particles by matter and the structure of the atom.
Philosophical magazine 21, 669–88 (1911), in J. Chadwick, ed., The collected papers of Lord
Rutherford of Nelson. Vol. 2 (George Allen and Unwin, London 1963, 238–54). This volume
contains all of Rutherford’s published papers concerning the invention of the nuclear atom.

Rutherford Atom
675
R
Secondary Literature
2. J.L. Heilbron: The scattering of alpha and beta particles and Rutherford’s atom. Archive for
History of Exact Science 4, 247–307 (1968)
3. J.L. Heilbron: H.G.J. Moseley: The life and letters of an English physicist (University of
California Press, Berkeley 1974)
4. J.L. Heilbron: Ernest Rutherford and the explosion of atoms (Oxford University Press, New
York 2003)
5. F. Weinert: Theories, Models and Constraints. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
30/2, 303–333 (1999)

