Nonlocality
405
N
with quantum teleportation ( quantum communication) since the unknown input
state is destroyed irretrievably once the process has been completed.
Quantum cloning machines have been devised to produce one or more approx-
imate copies of an unknown quantum state [4]. To achieve optimal cloning the
devices take into account the number N of identically prepared (unknown) input
states, the number M of desired output copies, whether pure or mixed states are to
be duplicated, and whether the cloner is required to work for arbitrary input states,
i.e. universally, or for a limited set of input states only. Optimal cloning machines
are conceptually linked to  quantum state reconstruction and the impossibility to
use quantum correlations ( correlations in quantum mechanics) for signaling.
Primary Literature
1. W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek: A single quantum cannot be cloned. Nature 299, 802–803
(1982)
2. D. Dieks: Communication by EPR devices. Phys. Lett. A 92, 271 (1982) 271–272
3. H. Barnum, C. Caves, C. Fuchs, R. Jozsa, and B. Schumacher: Noncommuting mixed states
cannot be broadcast. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2818–2821 (1996)
4. V. Buˇzek and M. Hillery: Quantum copying: Beyond the no-cloning theorem. Phys. Rev. A 54,
1844–1852 (1996)
Secondary Literature
5. A. Peres: How the no-cloning theorem got its name. Fortschr. Phys. 51, 458–461 (2003)
6. N. D. Mermin: Quantum Computer Science. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2007,
39–40)
7. V. Scarani, S. Iblisdir, N. Gisin, and A Ac´ın: Quantum cloning. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1225–1256
(2005)
Nonlocality
Henry Stapp
Nonlocality: In quantum mechanics the term “nonlocality” refers to an apparent
failure of a certain relativity-theory-based  locality assumption. This assumption
is that no information about which experiment is freely chosen and performed in
one space-time region can be present in a second space-time region unless a point
traveling at the speed of light (or less) can reach the second region from the ﬁrst.
This assumption is valid in relativistic classical physics. Yet quantum theory per-
mits the existence of certain experiments in which this locality assumption seems to
fail. Einstein called the faster-than-light effect evidently entailed by conventional
(Copenhagen) quantum theory “spooky action at a distance”. (For Copenhagen

406
Nonlocality
interpretation, see  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Metaphysics in Quantum Me-
chanics; Orthodox Interpretation; Schr¨odinger’s Cat; Transactional Interpretation.)
The simplest of the experiments pertinent to this issue involve two measurements
performed in two space-time regions that lie so far apart that nothing traveling at
the speed of light or less can pass from either of these two regions to the other.
The experimental arrangements are such that an experimenter in each region – or
perhaps some device that he has set up – is able to choose between two alternative
possible measurements. The locality assumption then demands, for each region, that
the truth of statements exclusively about the outcomes of the possible measurements
performed in that region be independent of which experiment is “freely chosen” in
the other (faraway) region.
The ﬁrst actual experiment exhibiting these features was carried out by Aspect,
Grangier, and Roger [1]  Aspect Experiment. Dozens of other such experiments
have been carried out since, and the validity of the quantum predictions appears to
be borne out.
The signiﬁcance of this nonlocality property of quantum theory is clouded by
several considerations. The ﬁrst is that although the conventional quantum precepts
do appear to entail the need for some sort of sub rose, behind-the-scenes, faster-
than-light transfer of information ( Einstein Locality), this effect cannot be used
to send a superluminal signal: no one can use this effect to transfer, superluminally,
information that he or she possesses to a faraway colleague  superluminal commu-
nication. This limitation on signal velocity, together with other relativistic features
of the actually veriﬁable predictions of the theory, allows relativistic quantum ﬁeld
theory to be called “relativistic” in spite of the apparently entailed faster-than-light
transfer of information.
It might seem contradictory to assert ﬁrst that locality fails, and hence that infor-
mation about which experiment is freely chosen and performed in a ﬁrst region is
present in a second region, yet then to assert that the experimenter in the ﬁrst region
cannot use this feature to send information to a colleague in the second region. The
resolution of the puzzle is that the dependence of faraway measurable properties
on the choice made by the nearby experimenter arises only via nature’s choice of
the outcome of the nearby experiment. The faraway colleague, lacking all knowl-
edge about which outcome occurs in the sender’s region, must treat that outcome as
unknown. This leads to a quantum theoretical averaging over these outcomes that
exactly eliminates all dependence upon the sender’s free choice of anything that the
receiving colleague can observe.
A second clouding consideration is this: in order to analyze the consequences of
the non-dependence of some property upon a free choice one must consider, theo-
retically, or logically, within one argument, the consequences of various alternative
choices. But, in the cases of interest, only one of the alternative possibilities can
actually occur in any one existing empirical/experimental situation. Thus the argu-
ment needed to demonstrate the existence of faster-than-light transfer of information
requires some sort of counterfactual reasoning that involves considering in one ar-
gument the predictions about outcomes of several experiments that cannot all be
actually performed.

Nonlocality
407
N
A logical opening to counterfactual argumentation is provided by the precepts of
quantum theory themselves. Bohr often emphasized the freedom of experimenters
to choose which experiment is actually performed. This freedom to choose is im-
portant in quantum theory for the following reason: the quantum state ( wave
function) of a physical system provides the basis for predictions about outcomes
of whichever experiment is freely chosen and performed: predictions for various
alternative possible choices are given by the theory, even though only one of the al-
ternatives can be realized physically. On the other hand, the structure of the quantum
mathematics entails that the outcomes of certain pairs of measurements, between
which the experimenter is considered free to choose, cannot be simultaneously rep-
resented within this mathematics. This theoretical limitation upon the theoretically
representable outcomes is reconciled with the claim of the pragmatic or epistemo-
logical completeness of quantum theory by noting that whenever the outcomes of
the two measurements cannot be theoretically represented simultaneously then the
two experiments also cannot be physically performed simultaneously. Hence the
theoretical and physical limitations match, and completeness can be claimed.
The validity of this way of arguing for the completeness of the theory was
brought into question by a 1935 paper by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen  EPR
Problem. Because these authors were endeavoring to prove an internal inconsis-
tency of the quantum precepts, they were careful not to assume that, contrary to the
precepts of quantum theory, the outcomes of mutually incompatible measurements
were simultaneously well deﬁned. On the contrary, they used the quantum prohibi-
tion on well deﬁned values of mutually incompatible properties to deduce that they
could inﬂuence by their nearby choice which of two faraway mutually incompatible
properties was real. Thus what they actually proved was that Copenhagen precepts
entailed the existence of faster-than-light transfer of information, though not faster-
than-light signaling.
In 1964 John Bell published a follow-up to the 1935 paper of Einstein et al.
Because it was, speciﬁcally, the Copenhagen prohibition against well deﬁned val-
ues for the outcomes of mutually incompatible measurements that allowed Einstein
et al. to deduce the need for faster-than-light transfer of information, Bell [2] in-
quired whether dropping that Copenhagen precept could extinguish the need for
faster-than-light information transfer. Bell forthrightly contravened the Copen-
hagen ban on determinate outcomes of mutually incompatible measurements by
introducing “deterministic hidden variables”. These  hidden variables specify,
simultaneously, the outcomes of all of the alternative possible experiments under
consideration. Bell then showed [ Bell’s Theorem] that, within this deterministic
hidden variable structure, one cannot reconcile the validity of the predictions of
quantum theory (in these experiments) with the locality assumption that the out-
comes in each region be independent of which experiment is performed in the other
(faraway) region.
The hidden-variable machinery introduced by Bell is actually superﬂuous: all
that is really needed is the assumption that in any given empirical instance, prior to
the independent choices made by the experimenters in the two far-apart region, any
one of the allowed pairs of choices could occur, and that for each such pair of choice

408
Nonlocality
(of which pair of measurement is performed) some long sequence of N pairs of num-
bers represent outcomes that could occur in the pair of regions if N repetitions of the
selected pair of measurements were performed. The existence of such sequences of
pairs of numbers specifying possible outcomes follows from Bell’s hidden-variable
machinery. But they refer only to performable actions and observable outcomes.
Thus they can be stated without bringing in any notions of “microscopic”, “invisi-
ble”, or other “hidden” variables. The assumption that such a set of pairs of numbers
specifying outcomes exists is called “counterfactual deﬁniteness”. This assumption
cannot be consistently reconciled with the assumed validity of the predictions of
quantum theory for each of the measurement possibilities available to the experi-
menters, if one demands also that outcomes in each region be independent of which
experiment is chosen and performed in the faraway region [3].
Bell [4] and others [5] went on to consider, instead of deterministic local hidden-
variable theories, rather probabilistic local hidden variable theories. But, as shown
by Stapp [6], and independently by Fine [7], this change does not substantially
change the situation, because the two detailed formulations are, from a logical point
of view, essentially equivalent.
The locality assumption fails, therefore, under either of these two opposing con-
ditions on outcomes: either the Copenhagen prohibition of well deﬁned values of
outcomes of mutually incompatible measurements, or the counterfactual deﬁnite-
ness assumption that for each of the two times two, or four, possible combinations
of measurements available to the experimenters, some set numbers represents out-
comes that could occur if that pair of measurement were to be selected by the
experimenters.
In both of these two cases some special conditions pertaining to outcomes are
imposed.
The question thus naturally arises whether locality fails also under the weaker
assumptions that, for some selected experimental situation, the predictions of quan-
tum theory are valid and the two choices (one made in each of two very far apart
regions, and determining which measurement will be performed in that region) can
be treated as two independent free variables.
The answer is afﬁrmative! Under experimental conditions described by Hardy [8]
there are again two far apart experimental space-time regions, labeled R and L, and
in each region an experimenter chooses between a ﬁrst or second possible measure-
ment and he observes and records there whether the ﬁrst or second possible outcome
of the single measurement that he performs occurs. In some speciﬁc frame of refer-
ence the space-time region L will be earlier than the space-time region R. Quantum
theory makes four pertinent predictions. The ﬁrst two prediction combine with the
locality condition that “the outcome observed and recorded in the earlier space-time
region does not depend upon which measurement is chosen and performed later” to
prove, under the condition that the ﬁrst of the two alternative possible measurements
is chosen in the earlier region, the truth of the following statement [9]:
SR: If performing the ﬁrst measurement in the later region gives the ﬁrst of the
two possible outcomes, then performing, instead, the second measurement would
(necessarily) give the ﬁrst of the two possible outcomes of that second experiment.

Nonlocality
409
N
Under the condition that the ﬁrst measurement is performed in the earlier region,
the ﬁrst two predictions of quantum theory in the Hardy case are:
1. If the ﬁrst measurement is performed in the later region and the ﬁrst possible
outcome appears there, then the ﬁrst possible outcome must have appeared in the
earlier region.
2. If the second measurement is performed in the later region and the ﬁrst possi-
ble outcome appeared in the earlier region, then the ﬁrst possible outcome must
appear in the later region.
Notice that the ﬁrst of these two predictions is analogous in form to the predic-
tions used by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, in their argument, except that here the
possible outcomes are just two in number, rather that a continuum. But the second
prediction, which is again a prediction with certainty (probability unity), in the ide-
alized limit that is being considered here, pertains to the case in which the pairing of
measurements in the two regions is different from what it was for the ﬁrst prediction.
This crossing of the pairings creates a potent new logical situation.
Combining these two predictions with the assumption that changing the choice
of which experiment was performed in the later region cannot affect what already
happened earlier in the faraway region entails the truth of SR.
The second two predictions hold under the condition that the second measure-
ment is performed in the earlier region. They are:
3. If the ﬁrst possible outcome appears in the earlier region and the ﬁrst measure-
ment is performed in the later region, then the ﬁrst possible outcome will appear
in the later region
4. If the ﬁrst possible outcome appears in the earlier region and the second mea-
surement is performed in the later region, and then the second possible outcome
will sometimes occur in the later region,
Quantum theory predicts that no matter which of the measurements under con-
sideration is performed, each possible outcome will occur half the time. Thus the
common premise of (3) and (4) is sometimes satisﬁed. Combining these two pre-
dictions with the assumption that changing the choice of which experiment was
performed in the later region cannot affect what already happened earlier in the
faraway region entails that SR. sometimes fails: the assertion SR is false.
The fact that statement SR about outcomes of measurements performable in the
later region is true if the ﬁrst possible measurement is chosen and performed in
the earlier region but is false if the second possible measurement is chosen and
performed in that earlier region means that information about which experiment is
performed in the earlier region must be present in the later region. This conclusion
contradicts the locality condition that information about which choice is freely made
by an experimenter in one region cannot be present in a second region unless the
second can be reached from the ﬁrst by traveling no faster than light.
David Mermin [10] gives a rather compelling argument that the predictions
of quantum theory are very mysterious if one tries to deny the existence of su-
perluminal information transfer. Shimony [11] and Jarrett [12], like most other
contributors to the nonlocality issue, tie their analyses to Bell’s theorem, and hence

410
Nonlocality
to hidden-variable reality” assumptions that conﬂict with the precepts of quantum
theory. Hence it is not clear that it is the locality assumption, rather than the reality
assumption, that fails.
Jarrett and Shimony call by the names “locality” and “parameter independence”,
respectively, a certain property that is satisﬁed by the predictions of quantum theory,
and that is entailed by the requirement of no superluminal signaling. Using Jarrett’s
weak deﬁnition (i.e., weak locality requirement) one would call quantum theory
“local”. However, Shimony emphasizes that because entangled states of well sepa-
rated bodies exist “there is a peculiar kind of quantum nonlocality in nature. To get
to the crux of the matter I have deﬁned locality to be the requirement of no superlu-
minal transfer of information about which measurements are chosen and performed
by experimenters, and taken nonlocality to be the failure of that condition. Accord-
ing to this deﬁnition, conventional (Copenhagen) quantum theory and relativistic
quantum ﬁeld theory are nonlocal, though in a way that does not allow superlumi-
nal signaling.
Primary Literature
1. A. Aspect, P. Grangier, G. Roger: Experimental tests of realistic local theories via Bell’s The-
orem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 460–463 (1981)
2. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox. Physics 1, 195–200 (1964)
3. H. P. Stapp: Whiteheadian approach to quantum theory and generalized Bell’s theorem. Found.
Phys. 9, 1–25 (1979)
4. J. S. Bell: Introduction to the hidden variable question. Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
Proceedings of the International School of Physics ‘Enrico Fermi’, Course II (Academic, New
York 1971, 279–81)
5. J. F. Clauser, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, R. A. Holt: Proposed experiment to test local hidden-
variable theories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880–884 (1969)
6. H. P. Stapp: Non-local character of quantum mechanics. Epistemological letters (June 1978)
(Association F. Gonseth, Case Postal 1081, Bienne, Switzerland)
7. A. Fine: Hidden variables, joint probabilities, and Bell inequalities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 48,
291–295 (1982)
8. J. Hardy: Nonlocality for two particles without inequalities for almost all entangled states.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1665–1668 (1993)
9. H. P. Stapp: A Bell-type theorem without hidden variables. Am. J. Phys. 72, 30–33 (2003)
10. N. D. Mermin: Quantum mysteries for anyone, in Philosophical consequences of quantum
theory, eds. J.T. Cushing, E. McMullin (Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame 1987,
49–59)
11. A. Shimony: Our world view and microphysics, in Philosophical consequences of quantum
theory, eds. J.T. Cushing, E. McMullin (Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame 1987,
25–37)
12. J. P. Jarrett: Bell’s theorem: a guide to the implications, in Philosophical consequences of
quantum theory, eds. J.T. Cushing and E. McMullin (Notre Dame University Press, Notre
Dame 1987, 60–79)
Secondary Literature
13. J.T. Cushing, E. McMullin eds: Philosophical consequences of quantum theory (Notre Dame
University Press, Notre Dame 1987)

