434
Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
23. X. Y. Zou, L. J. Wang, L. Mandel: Induced coherence and indistinguishability in optical inter-
ference. Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 318–321 (1991)
24. L. J. Wang, J. -K. Rhee: Propagation of Transient Quantum Coherence. Phys. Rev. A 59,
1654–1657 (1999)
25. C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, L: Mandel: Measurement of Subpicosecond Time Intervals Between
Two Photons by Interference. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2044–2046 (1987)
26. A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, R. Y. Chiao: Measurement of the Single-Photon Tunneling Time.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 708 (1993)
27. C. H. Bennett, et al.: Teleporting an Unknown Quantum State Via Dual Classical and Einstein–
Podolsky–Rosen channels. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1895–1899 (1993)
28. D. Bouwmeester, J. -W. Pan, K. Mattle, M. Eibl, H. Weinfurther, A. Zeilinger: Experimental
Quantum Teleportation. Nature 390, 576–579 (1997)
29. J. D. Franson: Bell Inequality for Position and Time. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2205–2208 (1989)
30. J. Brendel, E. Mohler, W. Martienssen: Experimental Test of Bell’s Inequality for Energy and
Time. Europhys. Lett. 20, 575–580 (1992)
31. P. G. Kwiat, A. M. Steinberg, R. Y. Chiao: High-Visibility Interference in a Bell-Inequality
Experiment for Energy and Time. Phys. Rev. A, 47, R2472–R2475 (1993)
32. W. Tittel, J. Brendel, H. Zbinden, N. Gisin: Quantum Cryptography Using Entangled Photons
in Energy-Time Bell States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4737–4740 (2000)
33. I. Marcikic, et al.: Distribution of Time-Bin Entangled Qubits over 50 km of Optical Fiber.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,180502 (2004)
Secondary Literature
34. D. M. Greenberger, M. A. Horne, A. Zeilinger: Multiparticle interferometry and the superpo-
sition principle. Phys. Today 46, 22–29 (1993)
35. L. Mandel: Quantum effects in one-photon and two-photon interference. Rev. Mod. Phys. 71,
S274–S282 (1999)
36. A. Zeilinger, G. Weihs, T. Jennewein, M. Aspelmeyer: Happy Centenary, Photon. Nature 433,
230–238 (2005)
37. A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, R. Y. Chiao: Quantum Optical Tests of the Foundations
of Physics. In Springer Handbook of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, ed by
G. W. F. Drake (Springer, Berlin 2006, 1185–1207)
38. R. Hillmer, P. Kwiat: A Do-It-Yourself Quantum eraser. Sci. Am. 296, 90 (2007)
Operational Quantum Mechanics,
Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
Diederik Aerts
Operational quantum mechanics and quantum axiomatics have their roots in a work
of John von Neumann in collaboration with Garett Birkhoff, that is almost as old as
quantum mechanics itself [1]. Indeed already during the beginning years of quantum

Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
435
O
mechanics, the formalism that is now referred to as standard quantum mechanics [5],
was thought to be too speciﬁc by the founding fathers themselves. One of the ques-
tions that obviously was at the origin of this early dissatisfaction is: ‘Why would
a complex  Hilbert space deliver the unique mathematical structure for a com-
plete description of the microworld? Would that not be amazing? What is so special
about a complex Hilbert space that its mathematical structure would play such a
fundamental role?’
Let us turn for a moment to the other great theory of physics, namely general rel-
ativity, to raise more suspicion towards the fundamental role of the complex Hilbert
space for quantum mechanics. General relativity is founded on the mathematical
structure of Riemann geometry. In this case however it is much more plausible that
indeed the right fundamental mathematical structure has been taken. Riemann de-
veloped his theory as a synthesis of the work of Gauss, Lobatsjevski and Bolyai on
non-Euclidean geometry, and his aim was to work out a theory for the description
of the geometrical structure of the world in all its generality. Hence Einstein took
recourse to the work of Riemann to express his ideas and intuitions on space time
and its geometry and this lead to general relativity. General relativity could be called
in this respect ‘the geometrization of a part of the world including gravitation’.
There is, of course, a deﬁnite reason why von Neumann used the mathematical
structure of a complex Hilbert space for the formalization of quantum mechanics,
but this reason is much less profound than it is for Riemann geometry and gen-
eral relativity. The reason that Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics and Schr¨odinger’s
 wave mechanics turned out to be equivalent is that the ﬁrst made use of l2, the
set of all square summable complex sequences, and the second of L2(R3), the set of
all square integrable function of three variables, and the two spaces l2 and L2(R3)
are canonical examples of a complex Hilbert space. This means that Heisenberg and
Schr¨odinger were working already in a complex Hilbert space, when they formu-
lated matrix mechanics and wave mechanics, without being aware of it. This made
it a straightforward choice for von Neumann to propose a formulation of quantum
mechanics in an abstract complex Hilbert space, reducing  matrix mechanics and
wave mechanics to two possible speciﬁc representations.
One problem with the Hilbert space representation was known from the start.
A (pure) state of a quantum entity is represented by a unit vector or ray of the
complex Hilbert space, and not by a vector. Indeed vectors contained in the same
ray represent the same state or one has to renormalize the vector that represents the
state after it has been changed in one way or another. It is well known that if rays
of a vector space are called points and two dimensional subspaces of this vector
space are called lines, the set of points and lines corresponding in this way to a
vector space, forms a projective geometry. What we just remarked about the unit
vector or ray representing the state of the quantum entity means that in some way
the projective geometry corresponding to the complex Hilbert space represents more
intrinsically the physics of the quantum world as does the Hilbert space itself. This
state of affairs is revealed explicitly in the dynamics of quantum entities, that is built
by using group representations, and one has to consider projective representations,
which are representations in the corresponding projective geometry, and not vector
representations [6].

436
Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
The title of the article by John von Neumann and Garett Birkhoff [1] that we
mentioned as the founding article for operational quantum axiomatics is ‘The logic
of quantum mechanics’. Let us explain shortly what Birkhoff and von Neumann do
in this article. First of all they remark that an operational proposition of a quantum
entity is represented in the standard quantum formalism by an orthogonal projection
operator or by the corresponding closed subspace of the Hilbert space H. Let us de-
note the set of all closed subspaces of H by L(H). Next Birkhoff and von Neumann
show that the structure of L(H) is not that of a Boolean algebra, the archetypical
structure of the set of propositions in classical logic. More speciﬁcally it is the dis-
tributive law between conjunction and disjunction
(a ∨b) ∧c = (a ∧c) ∨(b ∧c)
(1)
that is not necessarily valid for the case of quantum propositions a, b, c ∈L(H).
A whole line of research, called  quantum logic, was born as a consequence of
the Birkhoff and von Neumann article. The underlying philosophical idea is that, in
the same manner as general relativity has introduced non-Euclidean geometry into
the reality of the physical world, quantum mechanics introduces non-Boolean logic.
The quantum paradoxes ( errors and paradoxes in quantum mechanics) would be
due to the fact that we reason with Boolean logic about situations with quantum
entities, while these situations should be reasoned about with non-Boolean logic.
Although fascinating as an approach [7], it is not this idea that is at the origin
of quantum axiomatics. Another aspect of what Birkhoff and von Neumann did in
their article is that they shifted the attention on the mathematical structure of the
set of operational propositions L(H) instead of the Hilbert space H itself. In this
sense it is important to pay attention to the fact that L(H) is the set of all oper-
ational propositions, i.e. the set of yes/no experiments on a quantum entity. They
opened a way to connect abstract mathematical concepts of the quantum formalism,
namely the orthogonal projection operators ( projection) or closed subspaces of
the Hilbert space, directly with physical operations in the laboratory, namely the
yes/no experiments.
George Mackey followed in on this idea when he wrote his book on the mathe-
matical foundations of quantum mechanics [2]. He starts the other way around and
considers as a basis the set L of all operational propositions, meaning propositions
being testable by yes/no experiments on a physical entity. Then he introduces as an
axiom that this set L has to have a structure isomorphic to the set of all closed sub-
spaces L(H) of a complex Hilbert space in the case of a quantum entity. He states
that it would be interesting to invent a set of axioms on L that gradually would make
L more and more alike to L(H) to ﬁnally arrive at an isomorphism when all the
axioms are satisﬁed. While Mackey wrote his book results as such were underway.
A year later Constantin Piron proved a fundamental representation theorem. Starting
from the set L of all operational propositions of a physical entity and introducing
ﬁve axioms on L he proved that L is isomorphic to the set of closed subspaces L(V )
of a generalized Hilbert space V whenever these ﬁve axioms are satisﬁed [3]. Let us
elaborate on some of the aspects of this representation theorem to be able to explain
further what operational quantum axiomatics is about.

Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
437
O
We mentioned already that Birkhoff and von Neumann had noticed that the set
of closed subspaces L(H) of a complex Hilbert space H is not a Boolean alge-
bra, because distributivity between conjunction and disjunction, like expressed in
(1), is not satisﬁed. The set of closed subspaces of a complex Hilbert space forms
however a lattice, which is a more general mathematical structure than a Boolean
algebra, moreover, a lattice where the distributivity rule (1) is satisﬁed is a Boolean
algebra, which indicates that the lattice structure is the one to consider for the
quantum mechanical situation. To make again a reference to general relativity, the
lattice structure is indeed to a Boolean algebra what general Riemann geometry is
to Euclidean geometry. And moreover, meanwhile it has been understood why the
structure of operational propositions of the world is not a Boolean algebra but a
lattice. This is due to the fact that measurements can have an uncontrollable inﬂu-
ence on the state of the physical entity under consideration [4]. Hence the intuition
of Birkhoff and von Neumann, and later Mackey, Piron and others, although only
mathematical intuition at that time, was correct.
Axiomatic quantum mechanics is more than just an axiomatization of quantum
mechanics. Because of the operational nature of the axiomatization, it holds the po-
tential for ‘more general theories than standard quantum mechanics’ which however
are ‘quantum like theories’. In this sense, we believe that it is one of the candidates
to generate the framework for the new theory to be developed generalizing quantum
mechanics and relativity theory [4]. Let us explain why we believe that operational
quantum axiomatics has the potential to deliver such a generalization of relativ-
ity theory and quantum mechanics. General relativity is a theory that brings part
of the world that in earlier Newtonian mechanics was classiﬁed within dynamics to
the geometrical realm of reality, and more speciﬁcally confronting us with the pre-
scientiﬁc and naive realistic vision on space, time, matter and gravitation. It teaches
us in a deep and new way, compared to Newtonian physics, ‘what are the things that
exists and how they exist and are related and how they inﬂuence each other’. But
there is one deep lack in relativity theory: it does not take into account the inﬂuence
of the observer, the effect that the measuring apparatus has on the thing observed.
It does not confront the subject-object problem and its inﬂuence on how reality is. It
cannot do this because its mathematical apparatus is based on the Riemann geom-
etry of time-space, hence prejudicing that time-space is there, ﬁlled up with ﬁelds
and matter, that are also there, independent of the observer. There is no fundamental
role for the creation of ‘new’ within relativity theory, everything just ‘is’ and we
are only there to ‘detect’ how this everything ‘is’. That is also the reason why gen-
eral relativity can easily be interpreted as delivering a model for the whole universe,
whatever this would mean. We know that quantum mechanics takes into account in
an essential way the effect of the observer through the measuring apparatus on the
state of the physical entity under study. In a theory generalizing quantum mechan-
ics and relativity, such that both appear as special cases, this effect should certainly
also appear in a fundamental way. We believe that general relativity has explored
to great depth the question ‘how can things be in the world’. Quantum axiomatics
explores in great depth the question ‘how can things be acted in the world’. And
it does explore this question of ‘action in the world’ in a very similar manner as

438
Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
general relativity theory does with its question of ‘being of the world’. This means
that operational quantum axiomatics can be seen as the development of a general
theory of ‘actions in the world’ in the same manner that Riemann geometry can
be seen as a general theory of ‘geometrical forms existing in the world’. Of course
Riemann is not equivalent to general relativity, a lot of detailed physics had to be
known to apply Riemann resulting in general relativity. This is the same with op-
erational quantum axiomatics, it has the potential to deliver the framework for the
theory generalizing quantum mechanics and relativity theory.
We want to remark that in principle a theory that describes the possible actions
in the world, and a theory that delivers a model for the whole universe, should not
be incompatible. It should even be so that the theory that delivers a model of the
whole universe should incorporate the theory of actions in the world, which would
mean for the situation that exists now, general relativity should contain quantum
mechanics, if it really delivers a model for the whole universe. That is why we
believe that Einstein’s attitude, trying to incorporate the other forces and interactions
within general relativity, contrary to common believe, was the right one, globally
speaking. What Einstein did not know at that time was ‘the reality of  nonlocality
in the micro-world’. Nonlocality means non-spatiality, which means that the reality
of the micro-world, and hence the reality of the universe as a whole, is not time-
space like. Time-space is not the global theatre of reality, but rather a crystallization
and structuration of the macro-world. Time-space has come into existence together
with the macroscopic material entities, and hence it is ‘their’ time and space, but it
is not the theatre of the microscopic quantum entities. This fact is the fundamental
reason why general relativity, built on the mathematical geometrical Riemannian
structure of time-space, cannot be the canvas for the new theory to be developed.
A way to express this technically would be to say that the set of events cannot be
identiﬁed with the set of time-space points as is done in relativity theory. Recourse
will have to be taken to a theory that describes reality as a kind of pre-geometry, and
where the geometrical structure arises as a consequence of interactions that collapse
into the time-space context. We believe that operational quantum axiomatics can
deliver the framework as well as the methodology to construct and elaborate such a
theory.
Mackey and Piron introduced the set of yes/no experiments but then immedi-
ately shifted to an attempt to axiomatize mathematically the lattice of (operational)
propositions of a quantum entity, Mackey postulating right away an isomorphism
with L(H) and Piron giving ﬁve axioms to come as close as possible to L(H).
Also Piron’s axioms are however mostly motivated by mimicking mathematically
the structure of L(H). In later work Piron made a stronger attempt to found oper-
ationally part of the axioms [8], and this attempt was worked out further in [9], to
arrive at a full operational foundation only recently [4].
Also mathematically the circle was closed only recently. There do exist a lot of ﬁ-
nite dimensional generalized Hilbert spaces that are different from the three standard
examples, real, complex and quaternionic Hilbert space. But since a physical entity
has to have at least a position observable, it follows that the generalized Hilbert
space must be inﬁnite dimensional. At the time when Piron gave his ﬁve axioms

Operational Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Axiomatics and Quantum Structures
439
O
that lead to the representation within a generalized Hilbert space, there only ex-
isted three examples of generalized Hilbert spaces that ﬁtted all the axioms, namely
real, complex and quaternionic Hilbert space. Years later Hans Keller constructed
the ﬁrst counterexample, more speciﬁcally an example of an inﬁnite dimensional
generalized Hilbert space that is not isomorphic to one of the three standard Hilbert
spaces [10]. The study of generalized Hilbert spaces, nowadays also called ortho-
modular spaces, developed into a research subject of its own, and recently Maria
Pia Sol`er proved a groundbreaking theorem in this ﬁeld. She proved that an inﬁnite
dimensional generalized Hilbert space that contains an orthonormal base is isomor-
phic with one of the three standard Hilbert spaces [11]. It has meanwhile also been
possible to formulate an operational axiom, called ‘plane transitivity’ on the set of
operational propositions that implies Sol`er’s condition [12], which completes the
axiomatics for standard quantum mechanics by means of six axioms, the original
ﬁve axioms of Piron and plane transitivity as sixth axiom.
An interesting and rather recent evolution is taking place, where quantum struc-
tures, as developed within this operational approach to quantum axiomatics, are
used to model entities in regions of reality different of the micro-world [13–20].
We believe that also this is a promising evolution in the way to understand deeper
and more clearly the meaning of quantum mechanics in all of its aspects. See also
 algebraic quantum mechanics; relativistic quantum mechanics.
Primary Literature
1. Birkhoff, G., von Neumann, J.: The logic of quantum mechanics. Annals of Mathematics. 37,
823–43 (1936).
2. Mackey, G.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Benjamin, New York (1963).
3. Piron, C.: Axiomatique quantique. Helvetica Physica Acta. 37, 439–68 (1964).
4. Aerts, D., Aerts, S.: Towards a general operational and realistic framework for quan-
tum mechanics and relativity theory. In A. C. Elitzur, S. Dolev, N. Kolenda (Eds.), Quo
Vadis Quantum Mechanics? Possible Developments in Quantum Theory in the 21st Century.
153–208. Springer, New York (2004).
Secondary Literature
5. von Neumann, J. V.: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Springer, Berlin
(1932).
6. Wigner, E. P.: Group Theory and its Applications to Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra.
Academic, New York (1959).
7. Mittelstaedt, P.: Philosophische Probleme der Modernen Physik. Bibliographisches Institut,
Manheim (1963).
8. Piron, C.: Foundations of Quantum Physics. Benjamin, Massachusetts (1976).
9. Aerts, D.: Description of many physical entities without the paradoxes encountered in quantum
mechanics. Foundations of Physics. 12, 1131–70 (1982).
10. Keller, H.: Ein nicht-klassischer Hilbertscher Raum. Mathematische Zeitschrift. 172, 1432–
1823 (1980).
11. Sol`er, M. P.: Characterization of Hilbert spaces by orthomodular spaces. Communications in
Algebra. 23, 219–43 (1995).

440
Operator
12. Aerts, D., Van Steirteghem, B.: Quantum axiomatics and a theorem of M. P. Sol`er. International
Journal of Theoretical Physics. 39, 497–502, archive ref and link: quant-ph/0105107 (2000).
13. Eisert, J., Wilkens, M., Lewenstein, M.: Quantum games and quantum strategies. Physical
Review Letters. 83, 3077–080 (1999).
14. Schaden, M.: Quantum ﬁnance: A quantum approach to stock price ﬂuctuations. Physica A.
316, 511–38 (2002).
15. Widdows, D., Peters, S.: Word vectors and quantum logic: Experiments with negation and
disjunction. In Mathematics of Language 8. 141–54. Bloomington, Indiana (2003).
16. Aerts, D., Czachor, M.: Quantum aspects of semantic analysis and symbolic artiﬁcial intelli-
gence. Journal of Physics A, Mathematical and Theoretical. 37, L123–L132 (2004).
17. Aerts, D., Gabora, L.: A theory of concepts and their combinations I & II. Kybernetes. 34,
167–91; 192–221 (2005).
18. Bruza, P. D., Cole, R. J.: Quantum logic of semantic space: An exploratory investigation of
context effects in practical reasoning. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. S. d’Avila Garcez,
L.C. Lamb, J. Woods (Eds.): We Will Show Them: Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay.
College Publications (2005).
19. Bagarello, F.: An operatorial approach to stock markets. Journal of Physics A. 39, 6823–840
(2006).
20. Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z., Townsend, J. T.: Quantum dynamics of human decision making.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology. 50, 220–41 (2006).
Operator
Werner Stulpe
Operator, a technical term that is used for a mapping associating elements of some
more or less abstract space uniquely with elements of the same or some other ab-
stract space. If X and Y are such spaces (e.g., vector spaces or spaces of functions),
an operator from X to Y (or from X into Y) assigns exactly one element ψ ∈Y to
every element φ belonging to some speciﬁed subset DA of X; one writes ψ = Aφ.
The set DA is called the domain of A, the set of all elements ψ ∈Y of the form
ψ = Aφ, φ ∈DA, is called the range of A. If B is a second operator from Y to Z
such that RA ⊆DB, then the product BA is deﬁned by the successive application of
A and B, i.e., BAφ = B(Aφ) where DBA = DA and RBA ⊆RB. An operator A
from X into Y is called invertible if Aφ1 = Aφ2, φ1, φ2 ∈DA, implies φ1 = φ2; in
this case the inverse operator A−1 is deﬁned to be that operator that takes ψ ∈RA,
ψ = Aφ, back to the uniquely determined φ ∈DA. So DA−1 = RA, RA−1 = DA,
and A−1ψ = φ for ψ = Aφ; furthermore, A−1Aφ = φ and AA−1ψ = ψ.
In quantum physics, linear operators acting in a complex  Hilbert space H play
a dominant role [1–7]. An operator A in H, i.e., from H to H, is called linear if (i)
DA is a linear submanifold of H, (ii) A(φ + χ) = Aφ + Aχ for all φ, χ ∈DA,
and (iii) A(λφ) = λAφ for all complex numbers λ ∈C and all φ ∈DA. As
a consequence, the range RA is also a linear submanifold of H. An operator in

