Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation (Indeterminacy Relations)
281
H
The Heisenberg picture leads to equations similar to the classical equations of
motion and is often used to explore general properties of quantum systems and the
formal analogy between classical and quantum theory.
One can switch from the  Schr¨odinger picture to the Heisenberg picture at any
time t by applying a unitary transformation. The transformation
|ψH⟩= U(t0, t)|ψS(t)⟩= UT(t, t0)|ψS(t)⟩= |ψS(t0)⟩
yields the state vectors |ψH⟩in the Heisenberg picture given the state vector |ψS(t)⟩
in the Schr¨odinger picture, and the transformation
H(t) = UT(t, t0)SU(t, t0)
yields the operator H(t) in the Heisenberg picture given the operator S in the
Schr¨odinger picture. This is a change of representation. The matrix elements of any
operator, , are independent of the representation.
Primary Literature
1. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics, Volume 1 (Wiley, New York
1977, 312–314)
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation
(Indeterminacy Relations)
Paul Busch and Brigitte Falkenburg
The term Heisenberg uncertainty relation is a name for not one but three distinct
trade-off relations which are all formulated in a more or less intuitive and vague
way in Heisenberg’s seminal paper of 1927 [1]. These relations are expressions and
quantiﬁcations of three fundamental limitations of the operational possibilities of
preparing and measuring quantum mechanical systems which are stated here in-
formally with reference to position and momentum as a paradigmatic example of
canonically conjugate pairs of quantities:
(A) It is impossible to prepare states in which position and momentum are simulta-
neously arbitrarily well localized. In every state, the probability distributions
of these  observables have widths that obey an uncertainty relation.

282
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation (Indeterminacy Relations)
(B) It is impossible to make joint measurements of position and momentum. But it
is possible to make approximate joint measurements of these observables, with
inaccuracies that obey an uncertainty relation.
(C) It is impossible to measure position without disturbing momentum, and vice
versa. The inaccuracy of the position measurement and the disturbance of the
momentum distribution obey an uncertainty relation.
Of these three statements, only (A) was immediately given a precise formula-
tion. Heisenberg only proved (Q, ϕ)(P, ϕ) = ℏ/2 for the standard deviations
of position Q and momentum P in a Gaussian state ϕ; this was successively gen-
eralized soon afterwards by Weyl, Kennard, Robertson and Schr¨odinger, and the
most general form for two observables represented as  selfadjoint operators A, B
is given by
(A, T )2(B, T )2 ⩾1
4|⟨[A, B]⟩T |2 + 1
4[⟨{A, B}+⟩T −2⟨A⟩T ⟨B⟩T ]2.
(1)
Here the notation ⟨X⟩T := tr[T X] is used for the expectation value of an operator
X in a state T , and (X, T )2 := ⟨X2⟩T −⟨X⟩2
T ; further, [A, B] = AB −BA and
{A, B}+ = AB + BA. Relation (1) holds for all states T for which all expectation
values involved are well-deﬁned and ﬁnite. For an account of the early formal and
conceptual developments of the uncertainty relation the reader is referred to the
monograph [9].
It should be noted that uncertainty relations can be formulated in terms of other
measures of the widths of the relevant probability distributions; these are sometimes
more stringent than the above, particularly in cases where the standard deviation is
inﬁnite or otherwise an inadequate representation of the width.
The Heisenberg uncertainty relation (1) is commonly called indeterminacy rela-
tion, reﬂecting the interpretation that this relation expresses an objective limitation
on the deﬁnition of the values of noncommuting quantities and not just a limitation
to accessing knowledge about these values. Successful tests of the uncertainty rela-
tion in single-slit and interferometric experiments with neutrons and recently with
fullerenes have been reported in [2–5].
The other two uncertainty relations, (B) and (C), have proved signiﬁcantly harder
to make precise and prove. Heisenberg only illustrated their validity by means of
idealized thought experiments, such as the  γ -ray microscope experiment and the
single- or  double-slit experiment. Other authors, notably Einstein, Margenau and
Popper, proposed experiments which were intended to demonstrate that the uncer-
tainty relations are only statistically relevant and have no bearing on the properties
of the individual quantum system.
In recent quantum optics, a which way thought experiment was proposed in order
to show that Niels Bohr’s  complementarity principle is more fundamental than the
uncertainty relation (C) [6]. A polemic debate arose about this question [7]. Finally,
a  which way experiment with single atoms showed that for the “complementary”
observables D (path distinguishability) and V (visibility of interference fringes) a

Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation (Indeterminacy Relations)
283
H
duality relation holds, which is indeed a generalized type (A) uncertainty relation
[7,8,11]. Hence, a debate on (C) could be settled in terms of (A).
A general proof of both (B) and (C) (assuming that these relations are in fact
valid) requires the development of a theory of approximate joint measurements
( observable) of noncommuting observables, which has become possible on the
basis of the generalized notion of an  observable represented as a positive operator
measure (POM) and the corresponding extended measurement theory. The quality
of the approximation of one observable by means of another can be assessed and
quantiﬁed by comparing the associated probability distributions. Similarly, the dis-
turbance of one observable, B, due to the measurement of another one, A, can be
quantiﬁed by a comparison of the probability distributions of B immediately before
and after the measurement of A. In the case of position and momentum, the theory
of approximate joint measurements is well developed and has led to rigorous formu-
lations of trade-off relations in the spirit of (B) and (C). The conceptual development
that has led to this result is reviewed in [10]. Work on obtaining formalizations of
(B) and (C) for general pairs of noncommuting observables is still under way.
Primary Literature
1. Heisenberg, W.: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927).
2. Shull, C.: Single-slit diffraction of neutrons, Physical Review 179, 752–754 (1969).
3. Kaiser, H., S.A. Werner, E.A. George: Direct measurement of the longitudinal coherence length
of a thermal neutron beam. Physical Review Letters 50, 560–563 (1983).
4. Klein, A.G., G.I. Opat, W.A. Hamilton: Longitudinal coherence in neutron interferometry.
Physical Review Letters 50, 563–565 (1983).
5. Nairz, O., M. Arndt, A. Zeilinger: Experimental veriﬁcation of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle for fullerene molecules. Physical Review A 65, 032109/1-4 (2002).
6. Scully, M.O., B.G. Englert, H. Walther: Quantum optical tests of complementarity. Nature 351,
111–116 (1991).
7. Storey, E.P., S.M. Tan, M.J. Collet, D.F. Walls: Path detection and the uncertainty principle.
Nature 367, 626–628 (1994). Complementarity and Uncertainty. Nature 375, 368 (1995).
8. D¨urr, S., T. Nonn, G. Rempe: Origin of quantum-mechanical complementarity probed by
‘which-way’ experiment in an atom interferometer. Nature 395, 33–37 (1998). D¨urr, S., G.
Rempe: Can wave-particle duality be based on the uncertainty relation? American Journal of
Physics 68, 1021–1024 (2000).
Secondary Literature
9. Jammer, M.: The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1974).
10. Busch, P., T. Heinonen, P.J. Lahti: Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. arXiv:quant-ph/
0609185.
11. Falkenburg, B.: Particle Metaphysics (Springer, Berlin, 2007) 296–311.

