96
Cluster States
Secondary Literature
3. J. Butterﬁeld: Stochastic Einstein Locality Revisited. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 58, 805–67 (2007)
4. N. Cartwright, M. Jones: How to Hunt Quantum Causes. Erkenntnis, 35, 205–231 (1991)
5. O. Costa de Beauregard: Time Symmetry and the Einstein Paradox. Nuovo Cimento, 42B,
41–64 (1977)
6. A. Fine: Do Correlations Need to Be Explained?, in J. T. Cushing, E. McMullin (eds.), Philo-
sophical Consequences of Quantum Theory (Notre Dame University Press 1989, 175–194)
7. Grasshoff et al.: Minimal Assumption Derivation of a Bell-type Inequality. The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 56, 663–680 (2005)
8. R. Healey: Chasing Quantum Causes: How Wild is the Goose. Philosophical Topics, 20,
181–204 (1992)
9. G. H¨ofer-Szabo, M. Redei, L. Szabo: On Reichenbach’s Common Cause Principle and
Reichenbach’s Notion of Common Cause. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
50, 569–589 (1999)
10. T. Maudlin: Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity (Blackwell, Oxford 1995)
11. H. Price: Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1997)
12. M. Su´arez: Causal Inference in Quantum Mechanics: A Reassessment, in F. Russo,
J. Williamson (eds.), Causality and Probability in the Sciences (London College Texts 2007,
65–106)
Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt (CHSH) –
Theorem
See  Bell’s theorem; Loopholes in Experiments.
Cluster States
Hans J. Briegel
1
Introduction
Cluster states [1] form a class of multiparty entangled quantum states with surprising
and useful properties. The main interest in these states draws from their role as a
universal resource in the one-way quantum computer [2, 3]: Given a collection of
sufﬁciently many particles that are prepared in a cluster state, one can realize any
 quantum computation by simply measuring the particles, one by one, in a speciﬁc
order and basis (see Fig. 1). By the measurements, one exploits  correlations in
quantum mechanics which are rich enough to allow for universal logical processing.

Cluster States
97
C
Fig. 1 A collection of N particles in an entangled cluster state can serve as a quantum computer:
A quantum computation can be realized by simply measuring the particles, one by one, in a speciﬁc
order and basis [2]
Owing to this property, the cluster state has attracted considerable attention in recent
foundational studies on the power of quantum computation. It has also become an
interesting object from the perspective of multipartite entanglement theory and the
study of quantum mechanical  nonlocality.
Cluster states belong to the larger set of so-called graph states [4], which
comprise many of the entangled states known in quantum information theory
and foundations. Examples include the Bell or Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen (EPR)
states, the Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger ( GHZ) states, and states that appear in
quantum error correction. Graph states have been providing a playground for the
study of multipartite  entanglement, and investigating their role as resources in
measurement-based quantum computation has revealed connections to other ﬁelds,
including quantum many-body physics, graph theory, topological codes, statistical
physics, and even mathematical logic. For a recent review of these developments
see e.g., [5].
2
Entangled Clusters of Qubits in Randomly Occupied Lattices
The study of cluster states was initially motivated by experimental developments
with cold atomic gases in optical lattices. In optical lattices, standing laser ﬁelds are
used to create a periodic potential, in which atoms can be trapped by electric dipole
forces. It had been shown theoretically in [6] that, by tuning the laser parameters,
one could realize collision-type interactions between neighboring atoms to create
entanglement with respect to their internal atomic states. This meant that simple
lattice manipulations would allow one to entangle entire arrays of atoms with the
control of a few laser parameters. However, it was not clear what kind of entangled
states would be created and what they could be used for.
On the experimental side, a realization of these ideas required, ﬁrst, to ﬁll the
lattice with exactly one atom per lattice site and, second, to entangle them, both of
which were a formidable challenge. Regarding the ﬁrst point, early experiments [7]
achieved a situation where about 44% of all sites were occupied with exactly one
atom, with the other sites empty. In such randomly occupied lattices, one obtains

98
Cluster States
a
b
Fig. 2 (a) Quantum mechanical particles (red ﬁlled circles) are trapped at different sites of a
2-dimensional lattice. If each site is either occupied with one particle or left empty, with site-
occupation probability p, (0 ⩽p ⩽1), then one will observe clusters C ⊂Z2 of neighboring
particles, as indicated in the ﬁgure. Suppose that each particle has two internal states |0⟩and |1⟩
deﬁning a spin or a qubit, and that each particle is initially brought in a superposition |0⟩+ |1⟩of
the two states. A simple Ising-type interaction (red arrows between the circles), switched on for a
certain time, will then create entanglement between all particles that belong to one and the same
cluster. The resulting entangled state is called a “cluster state” [1]. (b) Images of individual atoms
(not entangled) trapped in an optical lattice. The ﬁgure is taken from [9] (courtesy D.S. Weiss).
Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Physics 3, 556–560; copyright
(2007)
clusters of neighboring atoms, as shown in Fig. 2b. Randomly occupied lattices
play an important role in statistical physics, e.g., in the context of percolation theory
and phase transitions.
In [1], we studied the quantum states that can be generated in such clusters of
two-level atoms (qubits) with an Ising-type interaction. Such an interaction can be
realized by simple interferometric lattice manipulations, inducing state-dependent
collisions as proposed in [6]. An entangled state can be created (see Fig. 2a) by ﬁrst
bringing ﬁrst each atom into a  superposition state – which can be achieved with a
simple laser pulse – and subsequently switching on the Ising interaction for a certain
time span. By this operation, each cluster of atoms can be brought into a joint entan-
gled state, which we called “cluster state” in [1]. We showed that such entangled
clusters of atoms would have distinct entanglement properties: Their entanglement
would be remarkably robust and, furthermore, any pair of atoms in such a cluster
could be brought into a maximally entangled Bell state by simple measurements
on other particles of the cluster (see Fig. 4a). Simple operations would thus allow
one to maximally entangle arbitrary two atoms in a cluster. This could thus be used
to establish arbitrary “teleportation channels” within a cluster, and it also provided
perspectives for encoding and quantum error correction in random clusters [8].
Later experiments [10] used different techniques, based on the superﬂuid-to-Mott
phase transition of a  Bose–Einstein condensate as predicted in [11]. By using this
method, it was possible to realize, in effect, large “atomic crystals” where each of
the lattice sites was occupied by exactly one atom. This corresponded to a situation

Cluster States
99
C
where a single cluster of atoms would extend over the entire lattice (or at least over
large parts thereof). In these experiments, it was also possible for the ﬁrst time to
entangle the atoms using cold controlled collisions [6, 12] and to create the cluster
states as predicted in [1]. Today, the word “cluster state” is often used referring to
the completely ﬁlled lattice in 1, 2, or 3 dimensions.
For a detailed exposition of the ideas how to generate cluster states and to study
multiparty entanglement in the speciﬁc context of ultracold atoms in optical lat-
tices, see [8]. For a review of recent experimental work in this area, see [13]. More
recently, there has also been signiﬁcant progress in the experimental realization of
cluster states using photons ( light quanta) [28–30].
The notion of cluster states can be straightforwardly generalized to so-called
graph states, which will be described in the next section.
3
Mathematical Description of Cluster and Graph States
For the clusters shown in Fig. 2a, the entangling interactions occur between neigh-
boring particles, whereby the neighborhood relation is deﬁned by the underlying
lattice. These clusters can be regarded as special instances of graphs with a more
general interaction pattern, giving rise to a larger class of states.
Let G = (V, E) by a simple mathematical graph, where V = {1, ..., N} denotes
a set of vertices, and E ⊆[V ]2 denotes the set of edges that connect pairs of vertices.
In the present context, each vertex is associated with a qubit, while each edge is
associated with an interaction. The graph state |G⟩associated with graph G is a
(pure) quantum mechanical state of N qubits, i.e. |G⟩∈
#
C2$⊗N, described by the
following set of linear equations:
K(a) |G⟩= |G⟩,
∀a = 1, ..., N
(1)
where K(a) = σ (a)
x
⊗
{a,b}∈E σ (b)
z
denotes a correlation operator that acts nontrivially
on qubit a and all of its neighboring qubits, see Fig. 3a. In the language of quantum
physics, the N (hermitean) correlation operators K(a), a = 1, ..., N form a com-
plete set of commuting observables (CSCO) [14]. The graph state |G⟩associated
with the graph G is then, by convention, the common eigenstate of these observ-
ables with all eigenvalues equal to +1. In general, the CSCO describes properties
of a system that can be observed simultaneously without disturbing the state [14].
Here, they give rise to strict quantum correlations, such as

K(a)
= +1.
In Fig. 3, we see examples of graphs representing speciﬁc quantum states. These
pictures can be interpreted in two ways. First, they indicate the interaction pattern
under which the graph state can be created, if the vertices represent qubits and the
edges represent Ising-type interactions. Second, they give a concise graphical encod-
ing of the correlation operators (CSCO) that stabilize the state according to eq. (1).

100
Cluster States
Fig. 3 (a) Graph G = (V, E) with a selected vertex a ∈V and its neighbors b, b′, b′′ ∈V high-
lighted. Vertices correspond to qubits and edges to speciﬁc (interactions or) quantum correlations
(see text). (b) Graph corresponding to the 2D cluster state |CN×M⟩. (c) Star graph, corresponding
to the N-particle Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger state |GHZN⟩
An explicit formula for the graph state |G⟩is given by an expansion into the
computational basis
|G⟩= 2−N/2

s∈{0,1}N
(−1)sT s |s⟩
wherein  is the adjacency (or neighborhood) matrix of the graph G, the summa-
tion multiindex s = s1s2s3...sN ∈{0, 1}Nruns over all binary strings of length
N, and sT s is understood as the matrix multiplication of matrix  with a col-
umn s and a row sT . The summation as written above involves exponentially many
terms. For some families of graph states a more compact basis expansion – with
a fewer number of terms – can be found by a suitable choice of local basis for
each qubit. For example, for the family of N-qubit GHZ states, represented by
the star graph in Fig. 3c, a more compact representation is given by |Gstar⟩≡
|GHZN⟩= 2−1/2 #|0⟩z |0⟩⊗N−1
x
+ |1⟩z |1⟩⊗N−1
x
$, where by |0⟩z = σz |0⟩z and
|0⟩x = σx |0⟩x are eigenstates of the Pauli spin operators σz and σx (“spin up”
in z and x direction), respectively. For most families, however, including the clus-
ter states, even the most compact expansion still requires an exponential number
of terms, which makes calculations with explicit expansions often cumbersome and
inefﬁcient.
Graph and in particular cluster states exhibit a number of remarkable proper-
ties, some of which we are going to describe in the following. For example, all
graph states violate local realism, that is, they exhibit certain correlations that can-
not be explained by any local hidden variable model (see  nonlocality). At the
same time, the fragility of their entanglement under the inﬂuence of decoherence
depends strongly on the speciﬁc state. It is quite different for the GHZ and the
cluster state, which can be considered as two extreme representatives of graph
states.
Graph states were ﬁrst mentioned in [3] as a natural generalization of cluster
states, which were introduced in [1]. The similar notion of “graph codes” was

Cluster States
101
C
studied independently by Schlingemann and Werner in the context quantum error
correction [15]. A classiﬁcation of graph states in terms of their entanglement was
ﬁrst systematically investigated in [16]. A comprehensive exposition of the theory
of graph states can be found in the Varenna Lecture Notes [4].
4
Physical Properties
Measurements play an important role, both in studies of quantum correlations and
nonlocality, and in studies of  decoherence, ( experimental observation of deco-
herence). A question that turned out to be very fruitful in the studies of cluster states
was this: What is the effect of measurements on individual particles, regarding the
state of the remaining, unmeasured particles? How robust is the entanglement under
measurements? It is, for example, known that a measurement (in a suitable basis)
on a single qubit of an N-qubit GHZ state is sufﬁcient to destroy all entanglement
in the state. Is the same true for the cluster state? Suppose that each qubit of a 1D
cluster state of N qubits is held by a different party, and each party can measure its
qubit in an arbitrary basis. How many measurements are needed if the parties seek
to destroy all entanglement in the state? How persistent is its entanglement against
such destructive attempts?
In [1] we showed that for the cluster state this number grows linearly with N
(more precisely, it is given by the largest integer smaller or equal to N
"
2): About
half of all parties have to measure their qubit to completely destroy all entanglement
in the state. Thus, compared to the GHZ state, the entanglement in a cluster state is
rather robust.
Taking a more constructive point of view, one may ask which type of states can
be created out of the cluster state by local measurements. As was shown in [1], the
cluster state is not only highly persistent, it is also entangled in such a way that a
Bell state can be created between any two qubits belonging to the same cluster, by
measurements on other qubits of the cluster (see Fig 4a). These two properties make
the cluster state an interesting candidate for applications in quantum computation
and communication. The ﬁrst property (high persistency) indicates the possibility
of applying various measurements on the state, without immediately destroying its
entanglement. The second property tells us that cluster states are useful to establish
“teleportation channels” between arbitrary qubits that belong to a given cluster.
Entanglement resource: These properties carry over to higher dimensions and
provide the two dimensional cluster state with a large degree of ﬂexibility; they
also indicate that the cluster state can be seen an entanglement resource which
can be used to create other interesting entangled states. In Fig. 4, examples of this
resource property are shown. The cluster is there used as a resource from which
one can obtain collections of Bell states or GHZ states. An interesting question is,
which other states can be obtained from this resource? Are the Bell and the GHZ
states special? The answer is both surprising and profound, namely any other state
can be obtained from this resource – if it is sufﬁciently large – by single-particle

102
Cluster States
Fig. 4 Cluster states serve as a resource for other highly entangled states, such as the Bell or GHZ
states. Left: Measurements on the gray qubits allow one to project qubits labeled j and k into a
maximally entangled Bell state. Right: Measurements on the gray qubits allow one to project the
unmeasured (red) qubits into (a) 4 Bell states (b) 5 GHZ states of 5 qubits (c) one GHZ state of
16 qubits. (Figures adapted from [1])
measurements, as was shown in [2]. The resource is indeed universal for arbitrary
state preparation! This last property makes the cluster state the basis of an entirely
new concept of quantum computation, the one-way quantum computer, which will
be described in the last section.
Decoherence: How fast quantum do states become classical? The persistency of
the entanglement in a cluster state under measurements is closely related to another
fundamental property, namely its robustness under decoherence. Decoherence is an
effect that arises from interactions of the system’s degrees of freedom with (usually
a vast number of) uncontrolled degrees of freedom of the environment. One can
view decoherence as the result of “environment-induced measurements” [17] on the
system. If the cluster state has a high persistency of entanglement, it should there-
fore also be robust against decoherence. This is indeed the case, as was shown in the
papers [19,20]. These investigations have also led to a new perspective on the life-
time of entanglement in macroscopic bodies and thus the concept of the Schr¨odinger
cat [18]. The lifetime of entanglement in a state of a system, given a speciﬁc inter-
action with its environment, can be deﬁned as the time it takes until the resulting
(mixed) state of the system becomes completely separable, that is, all correlations
are classical [19]. A lower bound on this lifetime is found by showing that after cer-
tain time, given many copies of the  mixed state, one can distil again the original
state. ( Entanglement, puriﬁcation and distillation) This analysis was carried out
in [19,20]. It was found that, under a wide class of system–environmentinteractions,
the lifetime of (multipartite) entanglement of the cluster state is largely independent
of the number N of particles, i.e., the size of the system. For the GHZ state, in con-
trast, this time goes to zero for N →∞. One conclusion of these investigations
is that, given any generic interaction between the system and the environment, a
macroscopic GHZ state cannot exist. In contrast, the lifetime of the entanglement
in a cluster state is largely independent of its size and does not vanish in the macro-
scopic limit. Besides implications for the idea of “macroscopic entanglement” and
 Schr¨odinger cat, this has also practical implications regarding the realization of a
fault-tolerant quantum computation based on cluster states [26,27].
In the next section, we will review this most striking and important application
of cluster states for universal measurement-based quantum computation.

Cluster States
103
C
5
One-Way Quantum Computer
Quantum computers are devices that use quantum mechanical properties of their
information carriers for enhanced ways of information processing [21]. It has been
shown [22] that certain mathematical problems, such as factoring a large integer into
primes, which plays an important role in modern data encryption schemes, can be
solved much faster on a quantum computer ( quantum communication) than with
any known algorithm on a classical computer. A standard model of a quantum com-
puter resembles the Boolean circuit representation of a classical computation, and
consists of a sequence of quantum gates – a quantum circuit – applied to a few qubits
at a time. Such quantum gates are elementary unitary operations that take over the
role of Boolean gates, e.g., AND, OR, NOT (or their reversible counterparts). The
computation is thereby a coherent process which creates entangled superpositions
of different states of the quantum register.
In the one-way quantum computer, introduced by Raussendorf and Briegel in [2],
a quantum computation is instead realized by a sequence of simple measurements
on an entangled resource state of many qubits. A universal resource state is the clus-
ter state in two (or three) dimensions, and the measurements act on single qubits
at a time. In contrast to the quantum circuit model, here the elementary building
blocks are not quantum gates but single-qubit measurements. A quantum algorithm
then corresponds to a pattern of measurement directions on the cluster (see Fig. 5),
together with the classical processing of the measurement results. While the result
of an individual measurement is random – owing to the entanglement of the re-
source – the quantum computation is nevertheless deterministic, and the random
outcome of a measurement is compensated by the choice of basis for subsequent
measurements. The measurements are thus adaptive, introducing a temporal order
into the scheme, which determines the run time of a quantum algorithm. It has been
shown in [2, 3] that any quantum algorithm, for which an efﬁcient quantum circuit
description exist, can also be run efﬁciently on the one-way quantum computer, i.e.,
by single-qubit measurements on a cluster state of sufﬁcient size.
Fig. 5 Scheme of the one-way quantum computer. A quantum computation is realized by a se-
quence (t0, t1, . . . ) of adaptive measurements M on single qubits, here arranged on a lattice,
exploiting the entanglement of the cluster state. Any quantum algorithm corresponds to a speciﬁc
(spatial and temporal) pattern of measurement directions

104
Cluster States
One of the main features of the one-way model lies in the clear separation be-
tween the preparation of the quantum resource (the cluster state) and its processing.
This has practical advantages, in that the resource can be prepared off-line, inde-
pendent of the quantum algorithm one wants to perform, which is preferential for
certain implementations. It is also conceptual appealing and has opened new per-
spectives in the study of fundamental questions e.g., regarding the computational
power of a quantum computer: Whatever the computational power of a (one-way)
quantum computer is, it must originate in the entanglement of the resource state!
From this perspective, a quantum computation may also be regarded as a process-
ing of quantum correlations. Starting with a set of basic, but universal, correlations
carried by the initial cluster state, it is an unfolding of more and more complicated
correlations in the course of the computation. This viewpoint puts the fundamental
notion of quantum correlations at the focus of the theory.
While the one-way quantum computer is an abstract concept, a variety of pro-
posals exist for its concrete physical implementation (for a review see e.g., [5]).
Laboratory experiments using cold atoms in optical lattices have a great practical
potential, even though up-to-date the addressing of individual atoms remains a chal-
lenge. More recently, experiments using polarization-entangled photons have been
reported [31–34], demonstrating the principles of one-way quantum computation.
For a detailed exposition of the one-way quantum computer, the reader is referred
to [3]. Reviews that treat the one-way model and other formats of measurement-
based computation from various perspectives are given in [23–25]. Recent investiga-
tions have related the computational power of resource states to their entanglement
and revealed interesting connections of measurement-based quantum computation
to other ﬁelds such as graph theory, classical statistical physics, and even mathemat-
ical logic. For a review of these developments, and for further references, see [5].
Literature
1. H.J. Briegel, R. Raussendorf: Persistent entanglement in arrays of interacting particles. Physi-
cal Review Letters 86, 910–913 (2001).
2. R. Raussendorf, H.J. Briegel: A one-way quantum computer. Physical Review Letters 86,
5188–5191 (2001).
3. R. Raussendorf, D.E. Browne, H.J. Briegel: Measurement-based quantum computation using
cluster states. Physical Review A 68, 022312 (2003).
4. M. Hein, W. D¨ur, J. Eisert, R. Raussendorf, M. Van den Nest, H.J. Briegel: Entanglement in
graph states and its applications. In International School of Physics Enrico Fermi (Varenna,
Italy), Course CLXII, Quantum computers, algorithms and chaos, eds. G. Casati et al. (2006).
E-print available at http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0602096.
5. H.J. Briegel, D.E. Browne, W. D¨ur, R. Raussendorf, M. Van den Nest: Measurement-based
quantum computation, Nature Physics 5, 19–26 (2009).
6. D. Jaksch, H.J. Briegel, J.I. Cirac, C.W. Gardiner, P. Zoller: Entanglement of atoms via cold
controlled collisions. Physical Review Letters 82, 1975–1978 (1999).
7. M.T. De Pue, C. McCormick, S. Lukman Winoto, S. Oliver, D.S. Weiss: Physical Review
Letters 82, 2262–2265 (1999).

Cluster States
105
C
8. H.J. Briegel, R. Raussendorf, A. Schenzle: Optical lattices as a playground for studying mul-
tiparticle entanglement. In Laserphysics at the limit, ed. by H. Figger et al. (Springer, Berlin,
2002, 236–261).
9. K. Nelson, X. Li, D.S. Weiss: Imaging single atoms in a three-dimensional array. Nature
Physics 3, 556–560 (2007).
10. M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T.W. H¨ansch, I. Bloch: Quantum phase transition from a
superﬂuid to a Mott insulator in a gas of ultracold atoms. Nature 415, 39–44 (2002).
11. D. Jaksch, C. Bruder, J.I. Cirac, C.W. Gardiner, P. Zoller: Cold Bosonic atoms in optical lat-
tices. Physical Review Letters 81, 3108–3111 (1998).
12. O. Mandel, M. Greiner, A. Widera, T. Rom, T.W. H¨ansch, I. Bloch: Controlled collisions for
multi-particle entanglement of optically trapped atoms. Nature 425, 937–940 (2003).
13. I. Bloch: Ultracold quantum gases in optical lattices. Nature Physics 1, 23–30 (2005).
14. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e, Quantum Mechanics, Vol. I (Wiley, 1977).
15. D. Schlingemann, R.F. Werner: Quantum error-correcting codes associated with graphs. Phys-
ical Review A 65, 012308–012315 (2002).
16. M. Hein, J. Eisert, H.J. Briegel: Multi-party entanglement in graph states. Physical Review A
69, 062311–062330 (2004).
17. W. Zurek: Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Reviews of
Modern Physics 75, 715–775 (2003).
18. E. Schr¨odinger, Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantenmechanik, Naturwissenschaften 23
(1935).
19. W. D¨ur, H.J. Briegel: Stability of macroscopic entanglement under decoherence. Physical Re-
view Letters 92, 180403—180406 (2004).
20. M. Hein, W. D¨ur, H.J. Briegel: Entanglement properties of multipartite entangled states under
decoherence. Physical Review A 71, 032350–032375 (2005).
21. M.A. Nielsen, I.L. Chuang: Quantum computation and quantum information (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 2000).
22. P.W. Shor: Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring. In Pro-
ceedings, 35th Annual Symposium on Fundamentals of Computer Science (IEEE Press, Los
Alamitos, California, 1994.
23. D.E. Browne, H.J. Briegel: One-way quantum computation - a tutorial introduction. Preprint
available at http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0603226
24. M.A. Nielsen: Cluster-state quantum computation. Preprint available at http://arxiv.org/abs/
quant-ph/0504097.
25. R. Jozsa: An introduction to measurement-based quantum computation. Preprint available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0508124.
26. R. Raussendorf, S. Bravyi, J. Harrington: Long-range quantum entanglement in noisy cluster
states. Physical Review A 71, 062313 (2005).
27. R. Raussendorf, J. Harrington, K. Goyal, Topological fault-tolerance in cluster state quantum
computation, New Journal of Physics 9, 199 (2007).
28. N. Kiesel, C. Schmid, U. Weber, G. Toth, O. G¨uhne, R. Ursin, H. Weinfurter: Experimental
analysis of a four-qubit photon cluster state. Physical Review Letters 95, 210502 (2005).
29. C.Y. Lu, X.Q. Zhou, O. G¨uhne, W.B. Gao, J. Zhang, Z.S. Yuan, A. Goebel, T. Yang, J.W. Pan:
Experimental entanglement of six photons in graph states. Nature Physics 3, 91–95 (2007).
30. G. Vallone, E. Pomarico, F. De Martini, P. Mataloni, V. Berardi: Realization and characteriza-
tion of a 2-photon 4-qubit linear cluster state. Physical Review Letters 98, 180502 (2007).
31. P. Walther, K.J. Resch, T. Rudolph, E. Schenck, H. Weinfurter, V. Vedral, M. Aspelmeyer, A.
Zeilinger: Experimental one-way quantum computing. Nature 434, 169–176 (2005).
32. R. Prevedel, P. Walther, F. Tiefenbacher, P. Bohl, R. Kaltenbaek, T. Jennewein, A. Zeilinger:
High-speed linear optics quantum computing using active feed-forward. Nature 445, 65–69
(2007)
33. K. Chen, C.-M. Li, Q. Zhang, Y.A. Chen, A. Goebel, S. Chen, A. Mair, J.-W. Pan: Experimental
realization of one-way quantum computing with two-photon four-qubit cluster states. Physical
Review Letters 99, 120503 (2007).
34. G. Vallone, E. Pomarico, F. De Martini, P. Mataloni: Active one-way quantum computation
with 2-photon 4-qubit cluster states. Physical Review Letters 100, 160502 (2008).

